Is Palaeolithic Man  a Reality of the Past, or a Myth Of the Present 
======================================================================

256
Art. IV.?IS "
By N. WHITLEY, C.E.
Hon. Secretary of the Royal Institution o? Cornwall.
No. 2.?TIIE BONE CAVES.
In a paper published in the first part of the present volume of
this journal we examined the nature and cogency of the
evidence which had been adduced in support of the high
antiquity of man, derived from the beds of ancient Drift gravel,
so widely spread like a mantle over the lands of the east of
England and the west of continental Europe ; and I endeavoured
to show that from these beds, which had been so fully explored
by excavations to obtain road and building materials, not a
bone of man's frame, not a shred of his clothing, not a fragment
of his pottery, or any other relic indicative of his presence had
been found, except numerous supposed implements of stone, and
these of a form unlike any genuine implements known to have
been used by man. Thus the evidence in support of the former
existence of palaeolithic man rested on the simple and tangible
inquiry;?were these so-called implements made by human
hands ?
But when we turn to consider the further evidence in
support of the early advent of man derived from the cavern
deposits, we pass at a bound from the region of conjecture,
supported by authority, to a region of obvious fact, where the
whole of the elements of the case are reversed, where the proof
of the presence of man is multiform and decisive, and is certified
by the discovery of his undoubted tools of stone, bone, and
bronze, by his ornaments, his sculpture, and his bones; and
thus archaeological research confirms the records of history,
that man in the past has made both natural and artificial caves
his home as well as his tomb. The single issue here to be tried
is, what is the age of these relics ; do they belong to the pre-
historic or to the neolithic age, or must we conclude from their
evidence that man existed as a bestial savage full 200,000 years
back in the past?
The evidence, however, mainly from the abundance or the
facts, is of so complicated a nature, and is surrounded by such
entanglements, that the most careful investigators have been
led to very conflicting results.
IS cc PALAEOLITHIC MAN " A REALITY OF THE PAST, ETC. 257
Dr Buckland, Professor of Geology at Oxford, who devoted
much time and labour to the exploration of caverns both in
England and in Germany, published in 1823 his famous work,
" Reliqui? Diluvianae," in which he contended that the deposits
in the caverns, and the diluvial gravel on the surface of the
land, belonged to the same age?that of the Noachian deluge,
but that the human bones are not of the same antiquity with
those of the antediluvian animals that occur in the same beds
with them. In like manner the exploration of the gravel beds
of the Valley of the Somme led M. Boucher de Perthes to the
conclusion that he had found the relics of the flood which
destroyed the antediluvians.
Then came a period of doubt arising from the magnitude
and extent of the beds of Drift, indicating long continued
action; and lastly the discovery of a virgin cavern at Brixliam,
where flint implements were said to be found under a layer of
stalagmite, mingled with the bones of the cave bear and the
extinct rhinoceros?a discovery of which it is said that it
revolutionised Europe on the question of man's antiquity; and
this discovery is supposed to be confirmed by the cavern
researches of M. Dupont, in Belgium, and by those of Messrs.
Christy and Lartet in the south of France.
My contention is, that most of the so-called flint imple-
ments found in the bone caves are naturally-formed flakes; that
the true implements obtained from the cavern beds, both of
stone and bone, belong to the neolithic age; that in fact the
larger number of these, and other relics of man found with
them, are in use among savage tribes at the present day; and
that the exhumed human bones from the caverns, instead of
indicating any bodily or mental degradation when compared
with existing races of men, rather testify to greater bodily
powers, and to at least equal intellectual capacity.
In such an investigation it is not possible, nor indeed is it
necessary, to examine all the evidence in detail which has been
brought forward in support of the palaeolithic hunters of the
caves. I therefore purpose to limit this inquiry to two cases
which have been most fully explored, the details of which are
within our reach, and which have been affirmed and relied on
by the highest archaeological authorities.
First, the caverns, or rather the rock-shelters of the Dordogne,
so fully examined by Messrs. Christy and Lartet, and the results
published under the able supervision of Professor Rupert Jones,
in " Reliquiae Aquitanicae"?a magnificent quarto volume of
300 pages of somewhat detached essays, and 200 additional
pages descriptive of the tinted plates of the relics produced in
the highest style of art.
PART II. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. T
258 IS " PALAEOLITHIC MAN " A REALITY OF THE PAST,
Second, the " famous" cavern of Windmill Hill, Brixham,
explored by a joint committee of the Royal and Geological
Societies, and reported on in the Philosophical Transactions
by Professor Prestwich.
If these two leading cases fail to support the reality of
palaeolithic man, then the minor and desultory explorations
can count for but little in this contention.
The Dordogne Caves.?The natural formation of these
cavernous recesses results from the geological structure of a
large portion of the south of France. From Gourdon on the
east, to Rochefort on the west, over a distance of 150 miles
in length and about 40 miles in width, an area of 6,000
square miles, there is a well-developed mass of cretaceous rocks,
from the lower greenstone upwards, which assume the form of
a compact limestone, more or less arenaceous in its different
subdivisions, but the different beds vary considerably in hard-
ness. Through these rocks the rivers have cut gorges, rather
than valleys, forming high cliffs and broken slopes on alternate
sides of the winding of the streams.
In the secondary Valley of the Vezere (which joins that of
the Dordogne, about 10 miles below Les Eyzies) these cliffs are
in places from 200 to 300 feet in height, and at various
elevations above the river the caverns are situated. Owing to
the different degrees of hardness of the various limestone beds,
the weathering of the face of the river bluffs has been very
unequal, the softer beds perish much faster than the harder
beds above and below them, and thus grooves are formed along
the face of the cliffs often from 20 to 30 feet deep, and in some
places continuous for hundreds of yards. These natural
recesses have been made use of by the inhabitants of the country
in pre-historic times, and at the present day numbers of cottages
along the sides of the valley consist merely of front and side
walls, the native rock serving for floor, back and roof. " The
whole valley teems with the remains of these rock habitations."*
The relics found in the caverns are:?
1. Flint Implements,?These, whether describable as
arrow-heads, lance-heads, knives, or scrapers, are mainly simple
flakes, some so very minute as to be useless for any practical
purpose; others, from six to eight inches long, so thin and curved
that it is difficult to suggest to what use they could have been
applied. In the caverns the flakes are found by thousands.
There is a piece of the stalagmitic floor in the British Museum
from the cave at Les Eyzies, about two feet square and
eight inches deep, in which I estimated that there were at
* Beliqucs Aquitaniea, p. 164.
OR A MYTH OF THE PRESENT P 259
least 400 flint flakes. At Le Moustier the flakes and
calcareous breccia fill the cavern almost to the roof. The
surface of the ground on the outside of the cave of Badegoule
is literally strewn with flakes, and in the bed of the Valley of
the Vezere they are imbedded at depths of from four to five feet
in the alluvium. In short, flakes, with other shattered flints,
are abundantly found on the surface of the land throughout
the departments of the Dordogne and Upper and Lower
Charente. Again, further north, where the chalk formation is
largely developed in the provinces of Poitou and Touraine,
these shattered flints are found thickly scattered over the
surface of the soil, so as in many places to impede the culti-
vation of the land. Near Le Grand Pressigny I gathered in
a short time more of such " implements " than I could take
away, and of flakes, cores, and scrapers, I might in a few hours
have collected a cartload.
These shattered flints are found on the surface of the Great
Sahara, the Lybian Desert, the Desert of the Tyh, and on that
" great and terrible " desert between Syria and the Euphrates.
The Egyptian archaeologists are almost unanimous in pronounc-
ing them to have been formed by natural causes; and Mr. J.
Milne, F.G.S., who had examined the flints in situ on the
Desert of the Tyh, concludes that the flakes there are " broken
by expansion and contraction occasioned by the great variations
in temperature."* It is also now well known that flints crushed
by machinery for road metalling will yield, among the fragments,
perfectly formed flakes and scrapers.
The natural formation of simple flint-flakes, which are so
abundantly found in all bone caves, has been clearly shown by
some of our best geologists to be the result of the natural fracture
of the flint nodule. Thus Professor McKenny Hughes, F.K.S.,
says, in a paper on true and false flint implements, communi-
cated to the Society of Antiquaries: " That as nature produces
many forms exactly similar to some of those which, from other
evidence, we know were fashioned by man, man probably used
the natural forms first, and even then the more highly-finished
instruments which, from the evidence of design which they
exhibit, we now without hesitation refer to human agency,
might have been suggested by simpler forms to be referred to
fortuitous fracture."! Thus also the greatest cavern explorer of
the present time, Mr. Pengelly, F.R.S., says: " It seems in the
highest degree probable that men were first led to employ flint
tools by observing that natural flakes were capable of being
* Journal of Geological Society, Vol. xxxi. p. 26.
f Proceedings of Society of Antiquaries. Second Series, Vol. iv. p. 96.
t 2
2f>0 IS " rAL^EOLITIIIC MAN" A REALITY OF THE PAST,
utilised; that, in fact, the first flint implements were selected,
not made, and that even after the art of fashioning more useful
forms had been acquired, natural flakes continued to be occa-
sionally used in comparatively humble work."*
But even if some of the flakes found in the caverns of the
Vezere were made by human hands?and this is very probable?
they would afford no proof of the former existence of palaeolithic
man, but would rather indicate a neolithic origin. One witness
will suffice to settle this point. Lyell says of the very imperfect
flakes of Brixham cavern: " Such knives, considered apart from
the associated mammalia, afford in themselves no safe criterion
of antiquity, as they might belong to any part of the age of
stone, similar tools being sometimes met with in tumuli pos-
terior in date to the era of the introduction of bronze."f
Further, in Plates A 4 and a 6, in " Reliquiae Aquitanicae,"
perfect representations of carefully chipped flint arrow and
lance heads of the " leaf-shaped " and barbed types extracted
from these caverns are given, and these are similar in every
respect to others of undoubted neolithic age found in the grave-
mounds of England.
Plate A 33 also shows fragments of crescent-shaped knives,
counterparts of which may be seen in the British Museum,
obtained, with other beautifully chipped neolithic implements,
from Denmark. A few polished celts of the neolithic age have
also been found in similar caverns in the south of France.
Thus the whole bearing of the flint evidence from these
caverns points to the neolithic, and not to the palaeolithic stone
age.
2. The Bone Implements.?These consist of fishing har-
poons, most cleverly and artistically cut, of sewing needles most
delicately formed, of batons de commandement, symbols of
authority or of social position, and of holed ornaments of
animal teeth and shells. The whole of these undoubtedly
belong to a class of relics used in neolithic and even in very
modern times. Similar harpoons have been found in the
peat bogs of Scandinavia, and they have been generally used
by the Esquimaux in historic times, and by the Fuegians at the
present day. Bone Needles.?Eyed needles of bone have been
discovered in several of the ancient lacustrine habitations in
Switzerland, and have been found in considerable numbers at
the Gaulish stations of Alise, Corent, and Grergovia in Auvergne,
and are even now in use among northern savage tribes.
A bone needle was found in a tumulus at Porth Dafarch, near
Holyhead, and presented to the Archaeological Institute by the
* Transactions of the Devon Association, Vol. vi. p. 848.
t Antiquity of Man. First edition, p. 100.
OR A MYTII OP TIIE PRESENT? 261
Hon. W. 0. Stanley.* Batons of authority are at present in
use among American Indians and other savages. Perforated
shells and teeth, as ornaments, have been used in all ages and
places; they are found with neolithic relics in Denmark, in
the lake habitations of Switzerland, and are still in use among
existing tribes who remain in a low state of civilisation. In
New Guinea "necklaces are generally made of small shells
strung together. They are worn alike by men and women. A
necklace much worn by young women is made of pigs' or dogs'
teeth strung together."f Thus all these bone implements
undoubtedly belong to a modern epoch, and do not indicate,
but testify against a palaeolithic age for the cave dwellers of the
Dordogne.
3. Human Bones.?In the cave of Cro-Magnon was found
the skull of an old man on a level with the surface, and other
human bones referable to four other skeletons were found near
it. Amidst the human remains lay a number (about 300) of
marine shells, each pierced with a hole, and some perforated
teeth. Professor Dawkins considers it to be a case of cave-
burial, so common in the neolithic age; and this appears to be
indicated by the perforated shells, which probably formed a
necklace, for a similar ornament was found in a burial urn in a
tumulus in Ireland, and is figured in the catalogue ot the
antiquities of the Museum of the Royal Irish Academy, p. 183.
Of the bones we have a description given by M. Paul Broca. In
an address delivered before the French Association for the
Advancement of Science, he says: " The troglodytes of Cro-
Magnon were savages, but savages of intelligence, and capable
of improvement. We find among them certain signs of a
powerful cerebral organisation. The skulls are large in diameter,
curve, and capacity, and surpass the mean of those of existing
races. They are very elongated in form, such as are called
dolichocephales (long-headed), but this shape of the head is not
due, as with the Australian negroes, to the narrowness of the
skull; on the contrary, the transversal dimensions are well
developed The forehead is wide, not receding, and
describes a beautiful curve. The amplitude of the frontal com-
partment denotes a great development of the anterior cerebral
lobes, which are the seat of the most noble faculties of the
mind."}
Again, Virchow says : " The old troglodytes, pile-villagers,
and bog people prove to be quite a respectable society. They
have heads so large that many a living person would be only
* Athenceum, December 11, 1875.
f Journal of the Anthropological Institute, May 1878.
Smithsonian Report, 1872, p. 340.
2G2 IS " PALAEOLITHIC MAN " A REALITY OF THE PAST,
too happy to possess such." .... "Nay, if we gather
together the whole sum of the fossil men hitherto known, and
put them parallel with those of the present time, we can
decidedly pronounce that there are among living men a much
greater number of individuals who show a relatively inferior
type than there are among the fossils known up to this time.
Whether it is just the highest geniuses of the quaternary
period that have had the good luck to be preserved to us, I will
not venture to surmise!" *
4. In the art of drawing, says M. Paul Broca, "the
inhabitants of Perigord had reached a state of civilisation and
of artistic development altogether surprising. It is hard to
conceive how men destitute of the use of metals were able to
fabricate of bone, ivory, and the antlers of the reindeer an
infinite variety of very delicate utensils; to carve, I had almost
said to chisel, elegant forms, and to represent by designs
engraved in line on the handles of their instruments the figures
of different animals. These figures are distinguished by an
exactness and artistic skill truly remarkable, and to find in an
equal degree the sentiment of art it would be necessary to
revert through many centuries to the better times of Greece."
This description of palaeolithic art is certainly somewhat over-
drawn, and it represents a strong contrast to that of Lyell, who,
from the rough chippings of the Somme tools, both of the
" higher " and " low level" gravels," separated by a vast distance
of time," came to the conclusion " that the state of the arts in
those early times remained stationary for almost indefinite
periods.''^
We have, however, in the implements brought home by the
Arctic explorers samples of Esquimaux carvings and drawings
but little inferior to those from the Dordogne. Such are the
harpoons in the British Museum, which are almost identical in
shape and design with those from the caves of Aquitaine and
Kent's Hole, and the drawings of the reindeer, and hunting
scenes on bone indicate similar attempts to depict the pursuits
of savage life, and on a similar material.
The engraved figure of an elephant from the rock-shelter of
LaMadelaine is, however, very roughly drawn : it may, of course,
have been sketched from life on the spot, or it may have been
brought from a distance. I have by me a far better representa-
tion of an elephant engraved on the tooth of a walrus obtained
from one of the crew of a whaler by a gentleman who presented
it to me. If it should happen to be found in a kitchen heap
* The Freedom, of Science in the Modern State, pp. 60?1.
f Smithsonian Iirpnrt, 1868, pp. 388-9.
j Antiquity of Man. First edition, p. 376.
OR A MYTH OP THE PRESENT? 2G3
some few hundred years hence it would be considered very
unsound logic to infer from the discovery that the walrus
formerly frequented the coast of Cornwall, and that the
elephant at the same period browsed on its granite hills.
In the adjoining department of Charente there are similar
caverns to those of the Dordogne. They have been carefully
examined by M. de Rochebrune, a member of the Geological
Society of France, and he published his discoveries in a well
illustrated volume in 1866. In those caverns the leaf-shaped
arrow and spear heads are by far more abundant and more
perfectly formed than in those of the Vezere, and are fully
equal in form and chipping to beautifully chipped and finished
leaf arrow heads of Denmark belonging to the neolithic age,
and figured by Nilsson. From these caves also fragments of
pottery and polished stone implements have been exhumed. He
concludes: " Lastly, the polished objects are found in the same
stratum (not remixed) as the remains of the bear and reindeer,
and they are contemporaneous ivith these animals
From the whole of the facts which we have now so fully
reviewed, we may venture to infer that the former existence of
" palaeolithic man " is not proved by the human relics found in
the Vezere caverns, but, on the contrary, that they testify to an
occupation of the country by a pre-historic or a neolithic race of
men.
To a great extent this is admitted by those who have most
fully examined the evidence. Thus, Professor Rupert Jones, who
inspected these caves with Sir John Lubbock and Dr Evans,
under the guidance of Mr. Christy, says of the cave-period:
"The task of indicating their antiquity Mis mainly on the
palaeontologist, and the fauna is his only certain guide; the more
so as some of the types of the implements found on the same
spot take a wide range, from those until lately supposed peculiar
to the Drift, down to those hitherto assigned to the earlier part
of the Surface-period."f
On this point also Sir John Lubbock adds : " So far as the
positive zoological evidence is concerned, the antiquity of the
liuman remains found in these gi'ottoes rests mainly on the
presence of the reindeer, as regards which the evidence is
conclusive."^
But not only is the evidence of the presence of the reindeer,
from its numerous bones in the caverns, conclusive as to its
contemporaneous existence with man in ancient Aquitaine,
* Memoires sur les restcs d'Industrie appartenant aux temps primordiaux de la
race humaine, recueillis dans le departement de la Charente, p. 51.
f Reliquiae Aquitaniece, p. 13.
X Prehistoric Times, p. 247.
264 IS " PALAEOLITHIC MAN " A REALITY" OF THE PAST,
but we have historical evidence of the time when its range
extended probably as far south as the Pyrenees. Caesar men-
tions the reindeer as inhabiting the great Hercynian forest,
supposed to be situated in central and southern Germany ; yet
some of the earlier authors place it near the Pyrenees. And we
know, from the description given by Virgil, that the winter
climate in Western Europe, in the same latitude as that of the
Vezere, was in his days very severe:
With axes first they cleave the wine ; and thence
By weight the solid portions they dispense.
From locks uncomb'd, and from the frozen beard,
Long icicles depend, and crackling sounds are heard.
Meantime perpetual sleet and driving snow
Obscure the skies and hang on herds below.
The starving cattle perish in the stalls;
Huge oxen stand inclosed in wintry walls
Of snow congeal'd ; whole herds are buried there
Of mighty stags, and scarce their horns appear.
" The recent discoveries (says Mr. Anderson) not only
corroborate the fact that the reindeer (or rheno) existed in
localities where they are now extinct, but prove that they at
one time existed in a region far to the south of the locality
where Caesar describes them as existing in his time?an the
interior of Gaul namely, and up to the slopes of the
Pyrenees." *
Again, Dr John Evans, after an examination on the spot,
sums up the palaeontological evidence as, " though apparently
fixing a limit in one direction, as tending to show the deposits
to be more recent than the Post-Pleocene period, does not
afford us any very precise indications in the other, though
suggestive of what, historically regarded, must be considered a
very high antiquity." And he adds that the archaeological
objects of human workmanship " might well be relics of a tribe
subsisting by the chase, who, if not themselves acquainted
with metal, may have lived at a period when in some not
very distant but more favoured part of France the use of
metal was already known ."f
Thus the present zoological and archaeological evidence of
the caverns of the Vezere blend with the historical records of
the past, and the whole leads to the conclusion that these
caverns were used by a race of men living mainly by hunting
and fishing, and at a period somewhat anterior to the conquest
of Gaul by the Romans.
It may, however, be said that though in the caverns of the
Vezere, the remains of the extinct animals are fragmentary,
* Rcliquitn Aquitnnica;, p. 45.
f Ibid,, pp. 170-77.
OR A MYTII OF TIIE PRESENT? 265
and even their presence with the Cave-men, doubtful, yet in
other caverns, notably in those of Brixham and Kent's Hole,
the remains of the mammoth, the Tichorine rhinoceros, and
the cave-bear have been found in direct association with the
works of man, and therefore stamp an antiquity on the cavern
implements which in themselves they do not possess. Now,
assuming that all which has been said on this point can be
absolutely confirmed, the facts cut both ways, and rather tend
to bring the mammoth (for instance) down to a modern period,
than to take man with neolithic implements back to a palaeo-
lithic age. But as this mixture of relics is found only in cavern
deposits, there is absolute proof that such beds, after beino-
coated with a thick crust of stalagmite, have been broken up,
probably by violent floods, and redeposited with more modern
materials; and cavern deposits have in all ages been disturbed
by burials, and by the burrowing of animals; and thus we oft en
find in caverns relics of a modern age under those which are
considered to be more ancient. For instance, in Kent's Hole, a
well-made bone pin, similar to those of the neolithic, or even
Koman age, " was met with in the fourth- foot level below the
stalagmite?the greatest depth to which the excavation had
been carried?and in immediate contact with the crown of a
molar of Rhinoceros tichorhinus."' The reporter adds: " Though
the Committee abstain from drawing any inferences from the
fact, since it applies to a limited number of objects only, it may
be worthy of remark that the most highly-finished implements,
whether of flint or of bone, are those which have been found at
the lowest levels."* Further, on this vital point of the mixture
of relics, we have the weighty opinion of Dr John Evans, who
says: " For it must never be forgotten that the occupation of
caves by man is not confined to any definite period, and that
even in the case of the discovery of objects of human workman-
ship in direct association with the remains of the pleistocene
extinct mammals, their contemporaneity cannot be proved
without careful observation of the circumstances under which
they occur, even if then."f
Brixham Cavern.?Turning now to the consideration of
the bone-caves of Britain, there are special considerations why
that of Windmill Hill, Brixham, should be selected as a repre-
sentative case. It is a recently discovered virgin cavern, in
Avhich the beds were undisturbed by former diggings; it has
been thoroughly explored by a joint committee of the Jvoyal
and Geological Societies; the relics exhumed are now deposited
* Third Report on Kent's Cavern, p. 8.
f Ancient Stone Implements, p. 440.
266 IS "PALAEOLITHIC MAN " A REALITY OF THE PAST,
in the Christy Museum, London, and an exhaustive report, by
Professor Prestwich, has been published in the Transactions of
the Royal Society.
The work of exploration was commenced in July 1858, and
proceeded with such celerity that it was completed within
twelve months; and Mr. Pengelly, who had superintended the
excavation, then " forwarded to the Geological Society of
London all the flint implements and the remains of animals
which had been found, together with a considerable number of
the typical specimens of the stalagmite, as well as samples of
the beds of mechanical origin, and a register briefly descriptive
of the whole."* It was not, however,until May 16, 1872, that
the report of the Committee was presented to the Royal Society;
nor until the latter part of 1874 that the exhumed flints were
deposited for public inspection in the Christy Museum, in
accordance with the stipulation on which ?200 of the Royal
donation was given by the Society towards the expense of the
exploration.
Thus for fifteen years the relics from the cavern were not
accessible to outsiders, and during that long period these rubble
pieces of shattered flint were persistently described as flint
knives, relics of man, and manufactured tools. Thus, " a
sudden change of opinion " (says Sir Charles Lyell) " was brought
about in England respecting the probable coexistence, at a
former period, of man and many extinct mammalia, in con-
sequence of the results obtained from a careful exploration of a
cave at Brixham, near Torquay, in Devonshire. . . . The
new views very generally adopted by the English geologists
had no small influence on the subsequent progress of opinion in
France.")"
So much stress has been laid on the evidence derived from
this cavern?such strong statements were early put forward of
the human manufacture of the exhumed flints, that I resolved
to make a careful survey of the cavern and of its surroundings,
and to test the bearing of the evidence on the antiquity of man.
On the 2nd of October 1874 I first visited the cavern, and found
a glass case within the entrance, in which some relics from the
cave were placed, and shown to visitors by the proprietor.
Among other things were some plaster casts of a very perfect
flint-flake 3f inches long and well adapted to be used as a knife.
I was told by the proprietor that these casts were models of one
of the flint knives found in the cavern and deposited with the
Geological Society of London. The case also contained the
cast of a chipped stone axe of neolithic form. I purchased
* Transactions of the Devon Association, Vol. vi. p. 776.
f Antiquity of Man. First edition, p. 96.
OR A MYTH OF TIIE PRESENT P 267
three of the casts of the knife and one of the axe, and suspecting
that they were spurious, I forwarded one of each to the secre-
taries of the Royal Society, and ventured, in a letter, to entreat
the Council to put an end to this deception of the public by
depositing the real flints in the British Museum, as stipulated
by the engagement entered into so far back as 1858. The false
casts were laid before the Council and the genuine flints deposited
for inspection in the Christy Museum at the end of 1874. The
subject was brought before the British Association for the Advance-
ment of Science at the Bristol meeting in 1875, and the history
of these spurious casts made known, when it was acknowledged
that the cast of the flake-knife Avas not taken from any flint
found in the cave, but from a neolithic flake-knife found in a
barrow in the north of Ireland.
Thus for probably fifteen years these casts of neolithic
implements were exhibited and sold to visitors in the cavern
as evidence of the former existence of palaeolithic man.
An inspection of the flints from this cavern in the museum
will show that fully one-half of them are undefinable pieces of
broken flint no larger than the top of a man's finger; they are
neither flakes, nor cores, nor scrapers ; they are without any
regularity of form, exhibit no evidence of design, and are unlike
any implements known to have been used by man. To call
these bits of rubble flint implements, undistinguisliable as they
are from the gravel which we tread on on a footpath, seems to
be an abandonment of common sense, and without any confir-
matory evidence to rely on, the judgment revolts from the
inference that they are manufactured tools. Again, some four
or five of the other flints are simple pebbles or water-worn
pieces of broken flint, such as might be picked up from a beach
or from the newly spread metalling of a road ; and most men of
intelligence who (to use the words of Dr Carpenter) " have
that trained and organised common sense which we call scien-
tific method," would reject the conclusion that they are human
implements. The remainder of these cavern flints are flakes
and splinters of flint; the flakes are few, fragmentary, and most
imperfect in size and form, and as " knives" far inferior to
some of the subsoil flakes, the natural origin of which is now
generally admitted. To persist in calling these pieces of frac-
tured flint " thirty-six rude flint implements of indisputable
human workmanship,"* not only without evidence, but against
evidence, is a delusion, a deception, and a snare.
The "round-pointed lanceolate implement" (so called by
Dr Evans) found in this cavern has a curious history. It is
* Cave Hunting, p. 320.
268 is " PALAEOLITHIC MAN " A REALITY OF THE PAST,
formed of two pieces of flint discovered some distance apart, and
fitting so completely together as to show that they are parts of
the same stone; it is, however, as yet incomplete as an imple-
ment, and the part required to perfect the form is assumed to be
lost. The butt end appears to have been, in the first place,
described by Sir C. Lyell as a " core, from which flint-flakes
had been struck off on every side," leading to the inference
that the flake knives had been made in the cavern. But this
flint does not appear in the report as a rejected core, but as the
most important part of a lance head. The metamorphosis being
in this manner completed, it is now said to " resemble one type
of the pointed instruments from the valley gravels."* The claim
of such rough flints to be implements I have examined in the
former paper.
The " remarkably symmetrical Scraper."?This flint, figured
by Dr Evans, said to have been found in the cavern, and
described as having been " dexterously trimmed into a horse-
shoe form, and well adapted to have been held in the hand,"f
has one blot on its evidence as a witness in this case?it was
not found in the cavern, but in the soil of Windmill Hill, and
about forty-four feet above the cavern level,^ and it thus tends
to confirm the opinion which I had formed from finding many
pieces of shattered flint in the soil of the high ground of
Windmill Hill, that the flints in the cavern had not been
carried there by man, but had been washed into the cave with
the loam and gravel in which they were embedded.
The evidence of work and use on the Cavern Flints.?Mr.
Prestwich, in the report to the .Royal Society, ? expresses his
opinion that fifteen of the flints show unmistakable evidence
of having been artificially worked, that on nine others the
workmanship is very rude or doubtful, while there are seven
which he thinks show no trace of having been worked at all.
Dr Evans, however, is of opinion that the whole of the flints
discovered present these signs of human workmanship or use
upon them.
Figure No. 410 in " Ancient Stone Implements" || has these
marks of use the most pronounced. By the aid of a lens it will
be seen that a succession of regular and minute scallops, with
sharp points at their junctions, are shown on both sides of the
engraving of this flint; and they are more distinctly exhibited
on the side view of the same. They are throughout similar in
size and form, and are so regular that they look like the links
* Ancient Stone Implements, p. 469.
?f Ibid., p. 470.
X Transactions of the Devon Association, Vol. vi. p. 835.
? Report, pp. 561-2.
|| Ancient Stone Implements, p. 471.
OR A MYTH OP THE PRESENT? 269
of a delicate chain traced along the edge of the flint; and most
persons, from this pictorial representation, would be inclined to
accept the statement that this flint at least had been trimmed
bv secondary chipping on its edges. On examining a full-size
photograph of the same flint in a strong light and in the same
manner, we are surprised to find that no such minute trimming
or secondary chipping as that shown by the engraving can be
found on the edges of this flint. The rough fractures on the
surface run boldly out to the edges, the minute chipping shown
on the edges of the flint in the drawing wholly disappear, the
sharp angular points of the scallops cannot be found, and we
must come to the conclusion that while the drawing in general
outline and artistic merit is admirably done, yet in the vital
point of secondary chipping, indicative of workmanship, it is
wholly and entirely untrue. It is said that a true portrait is
best defined as a shadow of a shade ; the soul of the man should
be seen in his face. And it may be that in this case the artist,
in a somewhat indiscreet endeavour to carry out the principles
of high art, has made the dumb to speak and bestowed an
intelligent sold on a senseless piece of silex.
Mistaken identity.?One of the so-called thirty-six imple-
ments?No. 3 in Table IV. of the Ileport?has since been found
to be " merely a fragment of slate, nearly covered on one side with
stalagmite."* But this slight mistake of a piece of slate for a
flint implement is happily balanced by an opposite error, by
which a piece of flint has been mistaken for a bone, and
described as " a fine small tibia."+ The care with which this
examination has been made is indicated by the difficulty in
determining the animal to which it belonged, a note of interro-
gation being put to show that there was doubt on that point.
The Ivory Rod.?We are informed by Dr Evans, " that a
portion of a cylindrical pin or rod of ivory was found in the
cave, being the only object wrought from an animal substance." :j:
An ivory rod was found with the " red lady" in Paviland Cave,
by Dr Buckland; and "a cylindrical piece of ivory, about
three-eighths of an inch in diameter, in a cavern in the south of
France, and is now in the Christy Collection."? In former days
a rod was an emblem of authority; therefore we are led to infer,
without much effort of the imagination, that the ivory rod of
Brixliam might have been the sceptre of a palaeolithic prince,
or the baton of command of an ancient chieftain; and as no
doubt can be cast on the human origin of such a relic, it must,
* Report, p. 562. Footnote.
f Ibid., p. 506. No. cxvi. in Tabic.
J Ancient Stone Implements, p. 471.
? Ibid., p. 471.
270 IS " PALiEOLITIIIC MAN " A REALITY OP THE PAST,
if verified, be the most important piece of evidence obtained
from the cavern. We are, however, left in complete ignorance
of all the vital points of the case; we are not told by whom it
was found, or when, or where. Mr. Prestwich mentions it in
the report to the Royal Society, and dismisses it with one sen-
tence : " The position of this is not certain."* Mr. Pengelly
says: " I have no recollection of this specimen. ... I am
inclined to suspect that it does not belong1 to the cavern series
of specimens. It may, I believe, be safely stated that every
object forwarded to the Committee was numbered by myself,
and that its position was duly recorded in the register."f It is
not placed amongst the relics in the Christy Museum, and
Mr. Philp, the proprietor of the cavern, writes to me: " As to the
ivory rod you asked me about, I am sure I never saw it, nor do
I know anything about it." In this matter Mr. Evans has pro-
bably been imposed on, but he should either confirm or with-
draw this mythic wand.
A Cut Bone.?We are informed, in the Report to the
Royal Society, that "Dr Falconer alludes to part of a reindeer's
horn which has an apparently artificial incision," but we are
told in a footnote " that Mr. Busk sees reason to question this
conclusion." On referring to that part of the Report prepared
by Mr. Busk, we find that this scratch was not on the horn of a
reindeer, but on the rib of a bear, and is thus described : " On
one of the ribs is a small notch which, Dr Falconer observes,
might have been made by means of a flint or stone implement.
Of course this may be so; but upon close inspection I am
inclined to think that it is not an incision or scratch at all, but
a mere indentation by some blunt edge which has simply
depressed the soft texture of the bone without breaking the
surface. The bottom and sides therefore of this very trifling
mark appear rounded, smooth, and under a magnifying glass
exactly like the surrounding surface; but the appearance of
antiquity which would thence attach to the indentation, were it
really an incision, may, as it seems to me, be readily explained
on the presumption of its being merely an accidental impres-
sion." f Thus the artificial incision on the horn of a reindeer
turns out to be an accidental impression on the rib of a bear.
" The Charcoal Bed."?Mr. Bristow, in his notes on the
survey of the cavern, tells us that for some distance from the
entrance (33 to 34 feet) a dark-coloured deposit rests upon the
bed just noticed (the cave-earth); it is composed of small
angular fragments of limestone, with a white powder embedded
* Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol. clxiii. p. 564.
| Transactions of the Devon Association, Vol. vi. p. 636.
J Report, p. 537.
OR A MYTH OF TIIE PRESENT? 271
in a brown loamy base. From the circumstance of its being
darkly stained with carbonaceous matter (apparently) the name
of " charcoal bed " has been conferred upon it; its thickness is
very variable. Dr Percy, however, who saw it in situ, says "that
it did not contain anything entitling it to this appellation." *
It is well known that buried wood becomes carbonised by
age. Bog-oak and the timber of submarine forests are con-
verted into ebony, and even the stray pieces of wood cast up by
the tide have the outward appearance of charcoal; a few
rootlets of the common fern washed into a cavern to an incautious
observer would be reported as charcoal. On this point greater
caution should be exercised and less weight attached to the
reported presence of bits of charcoal in cavern deposits.
I have now noticed all " the slight indications of man's
presence " mentioned in the Keport, in addition to the so-called
flint, implements, and there are none of them which can be
relied on as witnesses to give any support to the evidence of
the flints; these stand alone, and in the expressive language of
the reporter, "are without any corroborative adjuncts."f
As to the evidence of human manufacture which flint knives
should present, Sir Charles Lyell quotes Mr. Evans, who says
that there is a uniformity of shape, a correctness of line, and a
sharpness about the cutting edges and points which cannot be
due to anything but design." J We desire no better rule than
this by which to test the claim of these Brixham flints to be
knives or implements. It is now obvious, from an inspection of
flints, that they present no such uniformity of shape, no such
correctness of outline or sharpness about the cutting edges and
points as would, in accordance with this test, justify the
inference that they are manufactured tools or " knives."
The association of the Bones of the Extinct Mammalia
ivith the Works of Man.?This vital point, which is the substance
of the whole contention, the issue of the whole debate, is thus
stated by Sir Charles Lyell: "The anteriority of those (the
knives) at Brixham to the extinct animals is demonstrated not
only by the occurrence at one point in overlying stalagmite of
the bone of a cave-bear, but also by the discovery at the same
level in the bone-eartli, and in close proximity to a very perfect
flint tool, of the entire left hind leg of a cave-bear .... Every
bone was in its natural place, the femur, tibia, fibula, ankle
bone, or astragalus, all in juxta-position. Even the patella, or
detached bone of the knee-pan, was searched for, and not in vain.
? ? . If they were not all of contemporary date it is clear from
* Report, p. 400.
f Ibid., p. 565.
+ Antiquity of Man. First edition, p. 117.
272 IS "PALAEOLITHIC MAN" A REALITY OF TIIE TAST,
this case, and from the humerus of the Ursus sjpelceus (cave-
bear) before cited, as found in a floor of stalagmite, that the
bear lived after the flint tools were manufactured, or, in other
words, that man in this district preceded the cave-bear."* The
whole of this statement is now found to be loaded with erroneous
and mistaken facts. Thus the bone described as the fibula
proves to be the radius, and that said to be the patella is in
reality the detached end of the radius; the " flint tool" was
not in close proximity to the bear's leg, but twelve feet from it;
the " tool" was not at the same level in the bone-earth as the
leg, but fifteen inches above it, and the leg of the extinct cave-
bear, the most famous specimen of the cavern, we are now told
by Mr. Pengelly, is probably that of Ursus arctos, the common
brown bear which lived in England in post-Eoman times, and
still inhabits Central Europe.f
Considering the large number of errors which thus cluster
around this once important specimen, it is not surprising to
find that in the fourth edition of the " Antiquity of Man " the
whole of the evidence founded on it, and indeed on the very
presence of the cave-bear, is wholly omitted, the antler of the
reindeer found on the surface of the stalagmite taking the
vacant place ; and the result of the exploration of this " famous
cavern," which Mr. Pengelly more than once has told us
" revolutionised the scientific world on the question of human
antiquity,has been toned down by Sir Charles Lyell to the
more moderate conclusion that man in Devon preceded the
reindeer.?
But, further, I have shown that the whole of the evidence
adduced in support of the presence of man completely breaks
down under a searching examination, and that this cavern
affords no proof of the reality of paljeolithic man, no chrono-
logical scale by which to estimate the date of his early appear-
ance.
But in order that I may not shirk the very gist of this
inquiry, let it be admitted that a considerable portion of untested
cavern evidence goes to show that the works, if not the very
bones of man, are found in complete association with the
remains of the mammoth, Tichorine rhinoceros, cave-bear,
and the reindeer. What, then, is the strictly logical inference
to be drawn from such a mixture of relics ? That man lived in
the palaeolithic age with the extinct mammals, says the
* Antiquity of Man. First edition, pp. 100-1.
f Transactions of the Devon Association, Vol. vi. p. 826.
t Ibid., Vol.iv. p. 73. Journal of London Institution, January 1873, p. 5.
? Antiquity of Man. Fourth edition, p. 102.
OR A MYTH OF TIIE PRESENT P 273
anthropological archaeologist. Nay, It is equally logical to say
that these now extinct animals lived down to the neolithic age
with semi-civilised man, and the evidence of the facts, as at
present known, tends strongly to sustain this aspect of the case
rather than the former.
Let the facts speak.
M. JRegnole explored some seventy caverns in the mountains
of Northern Italy. In the Grotta all' Onda, at the foot of Mount
Matanna, he found instruments in bone, barbed arrow-heads of
stone, polished stone implements, two axes?one of diorite, and
one of jade?a polisher of serpentine, and bones and teeth of the
cave-bear, bearing traces of human work, and unworked bones
of the cave-bear belonging to at least four individuals. The
other animal remains were stag, hare, wild boar, badger, ox,
sheep or goat, &c.
The Grotto of the Gotlis, in the mountain called Colle
Maggiore, yielded arrow-heads of stone, pottery, charcoal, and
bones of the cave^bear, with implements ot the neolithic age.
In the caverns of Velo, in the province of A erona, there was
found a complete skull of the cave-bear, and among the numer-
ous bones belonging to the same animal, he (M. Iiegnole) dug
up a very fine (polished) axe of porphyry and another ot ser-
pentine. In the caverns of Byciskala and of Shap, in Moravia,
Dr Wankel has discovered a great number of polished stone
hatchets, worked bones, and pottery, in the same beds with the
bones of the cave-bear and cave-lion. The bones of the rein-
deer were found with bronze objects, and bones of the ox, stag,
and wild boar, in the Valley of Tardoir, France. They were
found again with the bronze spear-heads, arrow-heads, knives,
&c. in the shell marl of Walthamstow marshes, with the bones
of man, wolf, fox, beaver, and wild deer. In one of the cran-
noges of Ireland, in Lough Crea, the head of the great Irish
elk was dug up from a depth of thirteen feet, with the bones of
the ox, sheep, goat, wolf; with these animal remains were found
iron implements, a crozier of brass, a battle-axe, a cast for a
coin, bone and stone implements, &c. Two perfect heads of
the mammoth were found at Holyhead, in a bed of peat which
passed under the sea, and is exposed at low water. The lie v.
I). Fisher found the remains of a mammoth in a bog near Col-
chester. Mr. G. S. Poole says that the remains of the mam-
moth and the Tichorine rhinoceros were found in the turbaries
of Somersetshire, above the bones of man and pieces of pottery.*
On the other hand, not a single genuine bone of man
has been found in ancient gravel beds of the drift period.
* Extracted from The Epoch of the Mammoth, by James C. Southall, A.M.,
LL.D.
PART II. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. U
274 IS " PALAEOLITHIC MAN " A REALITY OF THE PAST,
Thus tlie balance of the geological evidence is greatly in
favour of bringing the extinct mammalia forward on the
course of time to an approximately known epoch, rather than
that of taking man backward to an unknown and unmeasurable
distance from the present. There is, however, a more probable
solution of the difficulties which cluster around this portion of
the case. The quaternary beds of surface drift gravel contain
pebbles derived from rocks ranging from the primary to the
tertiary formations, with fossils of the oolite and chalk, shells
of existing species, and bones of the extinct animals, all mingled
together in the greatest confusion. And as much of the mate-
rials swept into caverns are derived from the denudation of these
surface beds, we should of necessity find there the same mixture
of relics. This in fact we do find : in cavern deposits the
remains of the extinct and recent animals are mingled together
in the same confused manner, and comparatively modern bones
are mixed with others presenting all the characters of the most
remote antiquity. Further, the caves of Brixham and Kent's
Hole appear to have been at first nearly filled with diluvial
gravel, then coated with a layer of stalagmite from two to
twelve feet thick, and the whole afterwards broken up by a
violent land-flood, mixing large blocks of stalagmite with the
cave-earth, and sweeping much of the materials out of the
caverns. " This filling up, re-excavating, and re-filling" (says
Mr. Dawkins) " are phenomena which considerably complicate
the problems offered, not merely by Brixham Cave, but also by
those of Kent's Hole."*
Again, at the termination of the glacial age, and through
much of the succeeding pluvial period, animal life must have
been comparatively scanty, but with the gradual return of a
higher temperature, and the formation of alluvial soil, the
beasts of the field would multiply and greatly abound, of which
we might expect to find indications in the accumulative
abundance of their remains in more modern cavern deposits;
and this in fact we also do find.
In the lower gravel beds of the caverns there are com-
paratively few animal bones. The bottom gravel bed at
Brixham was probed in places to the depth of twenty feet, and
found to be barren of fossils.f In the overlying cave-eartli
1,537 bones were found, and of these more than one-half lay on
its surface.^
During this period of excessive rainfall, extraordinary land-
floods would sweep the drift beds from the hill side, re-excavate
* Cavr Hunting, pp. 323-4.
f Antiquity of Man. First edition, p. 99. Seven bones, however, are said
to have been found.
I Report, p. 4'J3.
OR A MYTH OF TIIE PRESENT? 275
tlie drift-filled valleys, and mingling the animal remains of the
past with the recent hones, sweep them both together into the
clefts of the rock and into caverns.
Conclusions.?1. That the reality of the palaeolithic man of
the past, as deduced from the evidence of the surface-drift
gravel, rests solely on the genuineness of the assumed flint
implements, for not a single authentic relic of man has been
found to corroborate the opinion that they are implements. I
have shown that these flints have a geological and not an archaeo-
logical origin. That there is a gradation in the form and frac-
ture of the " implements " from the most perfect into that of
the angular drift gravel in which they are found, and that not a
single specimen has been produced showing the same conclu-
sive marks of use as are found on the true neolithic axes.
2. That " the palaeolithic hunters of the Dordogne" (so
described by Mr. Dawkins*) are proved by the evidence of the
cavern relics to have been a tribe inhabiting the valleys of the
South of France in the neolithic age, and that the human bones
and skulls indicate a race of men having a large bodily frame
and great intellectual capacity.
3. That the evidence of palaeolithic man, derived from " the
famous cavern of Brixham," melts away piece by piece under
the ordeal of a searching investigation, that it is not a demon-
stration of the existence of a savage of the past, but a delusion
of the present, and that the apparition of this palaeolithic
" virgin" fades from our view like that of the maid of Corinth
from Alp the renegade :
" Hath she sunk in the earth, or melted in air ?
Ho saw not?he knew not; hut nothing is there."
4. That even assuming that true implements, and even the
bones of man (for this is probable) are, or will be, found in
direct and complete association with the remains of the extinct
animals, it would rather tend to bring the animals forward in
time than to take man back ; and further, considering the origin
of the relics, and the mode of their deposition, such a case,
even if confirmed, affords no proof whatever of the contem-
poraneous existence of man and the extinct mammalia.
* Cave Hunting, p. 25G.
u 2
