Brain
=======

REVIEWS.
a Journal of Neurology. Edited by Drs. Bucknill,
Criciiton Browne, Ferrier, and Hugiilings-Jackson.
London : Macmillan & Co., 1878.

Since the publication of the last number of the Journal of
Psychological Medicine, two parts of our new contemporary,
Brain, have appeared. With such contiibutors as Crichton
Browne, Lockhart Clarke, Kesteven, Moxon, &c., the journal
cannot fail to secure the support of the profession. With the
exception of one or two articles, those which have already ap-
peared are of an essentially practical and valuable character.

We are sorry to find that Dr Bucknill, in his review of Dr.
Bateman's " Darwinism tested by Language," in the first
number of Brain, has allowed his odium anti-theologicum to
bias his judgment. It is an unpardonable offence to him that
the book should be ushered in with a preface by Dr Goulburn,
the Dean of Norwich. If Dr Bateman's views are sound, as we
hope to prove them to be, surely it cannot matter whether the
preface be written by Dean Goulburn, Mr. Gladstone, or the Pope
of Eome; and we are at a loss to understand how the cor-
roborative testimony of a distinguished theologian can in any
way detract from the merits of Dr Bateman's researches. The
chief editor has thereby thrown down the gauntlet of defiance
to the theologians, and proclaimed to the world that psychology
will have no connection with her sister science, theology. Why
should he fear the theologian ? Let Truth be welcomed from
whatever quarter she comes. Dr Bucknill seems to have for-
gotten the long roll of distinguished scientific men connected
with the clerical profession who are some of our greatest dis-
coverers, such as Seth Ward, Bishop of Exeter, and afterwards
of Salisbury, author of" Astronomie Geometrica Roger Bacon;
Wallis, a celebrated mathematician, second only to Sir Isaac
Newton; Bradley, discoverer of aberration and nutation ; Pascal;
Barron ; Brinkley, the astronomer; Dean Buckland; Canon
Sedgwick ; Conybeare ; Gilbert White; Peacock, distinguished
for his original views on algebra; Whewell ; Mosely, known
for his valuable contributions to engineering science ; and Zecclii,
the astronomer.

Dr Bucknill, with questionable taste, calls Dr Bateman's
book "a bolus of incongruities." This is not just towards one
who, as a cerebral pathologist, ranks equal to Dr Bucknill
himself, and who is looked up to as an authority on aphasia in
England, and still more on the Continent. In Ziemssen's
" Cyclopaedia of the Practice of Medicine," Dr Bateman is
referred to six times in the volumes on " Diseases of the
Brain and its Membranes," and on the " Diseases of the Nervous
?System." In the latter, Kussmaul speaks in the following
complimentary terms of Dr Bateman's monograph on aphasia:

He (Dr Bateman) " shows in an astounding manner how badly
the materials bearing upon disturbances of speech had been
dealt with up to that time [1869] from an anatomical and, un-
fortunately, also from a clinical point of view." With this
impartial testimony we cannot refrain from observing incident-
ally that it does appear somewhat invidious that neither Drs.
Ferrier nor Althaus have made the slightest allusion to Dr.
bateman's researches in their recent works on the " Diseases of
the Brain and Nervous System." Dr W. A. F. Browne, however,
did not omit to mention him as an authority in his interesting
article on the " Impairment of Language," published in the
second volume of the " West Eiding Lunatic Asylum Medical
Iveports." It would almost appear as if the materialistic
psychologists could not forgive Dr Bateman for the active part
he has taken in demolishing their pet theory and last strong-
hold?the localisation of language in the third left frontal
convolution of the brain. Alas ! their hypothesis has met with
the same fate as Gull and Sperzheim's, and the independence of
the human mind stands out in as bold relief as ever.

The dictatorial and off-hand manner in which Dr Bucknill
has attempted to confute Dr Bateman's arguments, is so un-
fair, that those readers of Brain who have not read his work
themselves, but rely on the infallibility of Dr Bucknill, would
rise from the perusal of his criticism with the notion that Dr.
Bateman's opinions are altogether ridiculous and untrustworthy.
We will now proceed to consider the propositions of Dr Bate-
man?that articulate speech is a distinctive attribute of man,
and that the faculty of speech is immaterial. If these two
points can be fully established, they offer, as Dr Bateman
contends, a strong argument against the theory of evolution.

Dr Bucknill remarks that articulate speech is not an at-
tribute confined to man, because a parrot can speak?yes, and
so can a phonograph repeat sentences without intelligence ; but
no one for a moment supposes that Dr Bateman speaks of
language in that sense. Every schoolboy knows that words are
articulate sounds, formed by the organs of speech, and used as
signs of our ideas. Dr Bucknill refers to deaf mutes, as a
proof that speech is not essentially an attribute of man. But
they talk with their fingers (as it is commonly expressed), and
their digital language interprets their ideas as clearly as speech
does, and separates them equally far from the brute creation.
This fact cannot he denied, and proves that Darwinism cannot
stand the test of language. Milton must have felt the force of
its truth when he wrote:?

The first at least of these I thought deny'd
To boasts, whom God in their creation day,
Created mute to all articulate sounds.

Dr Bucknill dismisses in a very summary manner the
troublesome facts which militate against the materialisation of
the facidty of speech, and its localisation in the third left
frontal convolution of the brain He selects only one of the
three cases adduced by Dr Bateman, that recorded by Velpeau.
He is evidently imperfectly acquainted with the celebrated
discussion on aphasia at the Academie de Medecine of Paris,
in which the most distinguished men in Paris admitted this
case of Velpeau's to be a crucial test, and he claimed the prize
of 500 francs, offered by Bouillaud, for his well-authenticated
case, in which the two anterior lobes were destroyed without
speech being affected. (See Gazette des Ilopitaux, from April 6
to June 8, 1865.) The patient exhibited unusual loquacity
up to the time of his death. On opening the cranium, a
cancerous tumour was found, which had taken the place of the
two anterior lobes of the brain. Nothing can be more con-
clusive ; yet Dr Bucknill, being unable to dispute the fact,
takes refuge in ridicule, and says: " These are the kind of facts
which are expected to refute Broca and Ferrier." Most decidedly
they are ! Facts are stubborn things; and neither Broca, nor
Ferrier, nor Bucknill, nor the greatest authorities that ever
lived, can upset them. Dr Bucknill, in the worst possible taste,
goes on to say, " The missing link himself" . . . "could not have
been expected to use worse arguments" than Dr Bateman. This
is one of tlie most curious and novel specimens of criticism we
ever met with. It is neither logical nor courteous, and we expected
better things from an alienist holding a high place in his pro-
fession. There are two other cases which Dr Bucknill has
thought fit to ignore, which must not be lost sight of in a
question of such vital importance. One, recorded by M. Peter,
was that " of a man who fractured his skull by a fall from a
horse ; after recovering from the initial stupor, there succeeded
a remarkable loquacity, although after death it was found that
the two frontal lobes of the brain were reduced to a pulp (reduits
en bouillie)." The other case is related by Professor Trousseau :
" Two officers, quartered at Tours, quarrelled, and satisfied their
honour by a duel, as a result of which one of them received a
ball, which entered at one temple and made its exit at the other.
The patient survived six months without any sign of lesion of
articulation, nor was there the least hesitation in the expression
of his thoughts till the supervension of inflammation of the central
substance, which occurred shortly before his death, when it was
ascertained that the ball had traversed the two anterior lobes
at their centre." * In addition to these instances we may refer
to another to which we drew attention in an article on " Ma-
terialistic Psychology," published in the Journal of Psycho-
logical Medicine. The case occurred at St. Mary's Hospital,
and was one of softening of the brain, induced by syphilitic disease
of the frontal bones. During the week the patient was in the
hospital his mental faculties were not impaired ; after death
hoth the anterior lobes were found to be entirely disorganised.
Dr Bateman has justly observed that "if Professor Broca's
theory could be proved to be correct?that the third frontal
convolution is the seat of human speech?a strong argument
could be adduced in favour of Darwinism. It might be said
that the ape possessed the rudiments of speech in an undeveloped
form, and that in subsequent generations, by the process
of evolution, this fold could become more developed, and
the ape would speak; in fact would become a man! As,
however, this fold has not been found to be the seat of speech
in man, the Darwinian argument from analogy of structure falls
to the ground, and speech remains a barrier the brute is not
destined to pass."

Dr Bucknill, whose odium anti-tlieologicum has so warped
his judgment that he cannot see the slightest merit in Dr.
Bateman's work, has not deigned to notice a valuable chapter
on the popular belief that there are tribes of savages who do not
possess the faculty of speech. This assumption has been
quoted as an argument against the proposition, that language
is an attribute universally belonging to mankind. Since the
days of Herodotus travellers have told strange stories about
speechless races. Dr Bateman has been at great pains to
investigate the subject, and has instituted inquiries which have
set the matter at rest. Dr Moffat, Sir Samuel Baker, and Sir
Bartle Frere?all competent judges, who have had intercourse
with some of the most savage tribes?have severally informed
him they never met with any race who had not sufficient
power of speech to communicate their ideas.

The air of superior intelligence assumed by some of the evo-
lutionists would scarcely be credited by those who are un-
acquainted with the contempt with which they speak of those
who differ from them in opinion. Dr Bucknill, from the lofty
pedestal on which he has placed himself, says that for the
probability of evolution, " Darwin has collected an amount of
evidence which must be quite immeasurable, inconceivable, and
incomprehensible to any mind capable of compounding the
incongruous bolus of theology, metaphysics, and science, which
is presented to us in this book (' Darwinism tested by Lan-
guage As we, in our ignorance, think that Dr Eateman has
given an extremely lucid exposition of the Darwinian hypothesis
in the first chapter of his book, we are necessarily in the same
category with him. We, too, are so benighted as to believe that
science, metaphysics, and theology are compatible, and that
scientific theology is quite as much in accord with reason as
evolution and scientific materialism.

Dr Bucknill having inferred that he is in possession of an
amount of evidence in favour of evolution so overwhelming as
to be inconceivable to ordinary minds, we should be very thankful
if he would tell us how he reconciles the following facts with
this theory: They appear to our limited intelligence to prove
most clearly that Darwinism has no claim to be considered an
established law of nature. How is it that the forms and features
of men and animals are the same now as they were thousands of
years ago as depicted on the Egyptian monuments ? That the
intellect of man has never been developed in a higher degree
than it was in the days of the Hebrew Prophets and Greek
poets? That the fruits and seeds discovered in ancient lake
dwellings are the same as those which still exist ? That the
cellular alga) preceded the vascular cryptogams ; that these were
speedily followed by monocotyledons, and at a much later period
by dicotyledons ? That a number of genera of the small sea shells
called " brachiopoda" have continued to be represented with
the same characters during the entire sequence of geological
strata ? That if that myth, the ape-like man and all the other
missing links could be discovered, the period required by evolu-
tionists for the development of one species into another would
be infinitely longer than the time, as calculated by physicists,
which has elapsed since life first appeared on the face of the
earth? In addition to these scientific objections to evolution
we must add the sterility of hybrids ; the fact that the fossil
trilobite crops up abruptly at the close of the carboniferous
epoch with the eye perfectly developed; that no breeding has
been able to produce by selection two species so distinct that
they can generate hybrids, and that there is a limit to the
variability of species. If Dr Bucknill, Darwin, or Huxley can
give satisfactory answers to these objections we will lower our
colours and join the ranks of the evolutionists.

Dr Bucknill thinks that the Darwinian explanation of the
creation of man ought to be accepted on account of its being
more probable than any other that has been given. On this
the British Quarterly pertinently observes: " It by no means
follows that an improbable hypothesis ought to be accepted
because its opponents are unable or unwilling to propose a new
hypothesis several degrees less improbablebut we trust that
enough has been said to prove that it is impossible to find one
that is less improbable.

Dr Bucknill, in his review, has not brought forward a tittle
of evidence to shake Dr Bateman's proposition. His criticism
is nothing more than a tissue of abuse. Instead of being a care-
ful analysis, it is only an illiberal and sweeping denunciation of
all his arguments. He seems to have adopted the advice once
&iven to a young barrister, " If you have no arguments to
sujiport your case, abuse your opponent." This may do very
Well for a jury, but will not satisfy the educated public, and is
calculated to injure a journal whose pages should be devoted
to scientific research, and which has the support of some of the
most eminent neurologists of the day.

The editor of Nature, who never loses an opportunity of
showing his hostility to religion, has expressed his animus by
implying that Dr Bucknill, in his criticism of Dr Bateman's
work, has given him a well-merited castigation ! for daring,
fts we suppose, to vindicate religion ; but we think it has been
shown that there has been no chastisement at all, as only
blank cartridges have been fired at him.

We think that the editors of Brain have erred in admitting
into their first part a contribution by G. II. Lewes. The pro-
fession do not need to be enlightened by mere theorists of the
stamp of Gr. H. Lewes or Herbert Spencer, who get their know-
ledge at second-hand, and who are not known as practical
workers in the field of science. They have done little
more than encumber the English language with a jargon of
new and pedantic words. In the "Physical Basis of Mind" the
author spoke of animality, vegetality, and psychoplasm; and in
his article in Brain he uses an anomalous and contradictory
term?motor-feelings?to express the idea of a muscular sense,
which is diametrically opposed to the discoveries of Sir Charles
Bell and Marshall Hall, who proved that the nerves of sensation
and motion have totally different functions. Mr. Lewes
believes that as the cylinder axis of the motor-nerves is of a
semi-liquid character, it will as readily conduct a wave in one
direction as another. But it is a petitio principii to assume
that motion and sensation are caused by waves.

The promulgation of fanciful speculations is the bane of
modern science, and the Press teems with crude theories, many
of which are accepted as established truths. The result is, that
the most extravagant notions, based on flimsy hypotheses, are
exercising the public mind. Timid clergymen are endeavouring
to harmonise evolution with religion and morality. The Rev.
J. W. Fowle, in the Nineteenth Century for July, labours hard
to find a place for conscience in evolution ! Another poor
bewildered writer in the North-American Mevieiv, styling him-
self an evolutionist, cries aloud for a new religion. Theories are
all very well in their way, but just now we have a glut of them.
In the second part of Brain, Dr Bucknill again* indidges
in haphazard and uncourteous remarks. He says : " This term
[Will], which is more often used as a veil for ignorance than any
other in the language, this abstruse tertium quid, this undis-
covered element, this inconceivable residuum which divines use
to explain sinfulness, legists to stamp the character of crime,
and mental physicians to hide the insanity of their conceptions,
Dr Glanville boldly declares to be desire. He would have hit
the mark more in the midst if he had qualified his statement
the ' Will is desire,' by saying that ' Will is a desire strong
enough to produce effort.'" But Dr Bucknill cannot by his
ipse dixit destroy a faculty of the mind which has been so
regarded by some of the greatest philosophers who ever lived.
If man has not a will of his own, he is no longer a free agent
nor responsible for his actions.

Brain has adopted the modern fashion of affixing the name
of the reviewer to his criticism. The practice has its value and
its disadvantages. The name of a well-known writer will give
undue support to a weak article, and a good paper may be
passed over without attention because the writer is unknown to
fame. One advantage is that it may serve as a check to ill-
natured criticism from those who are afraid to express themselves
openly.

J. M. Winn.
* In his review of Dr Granville's Mind and Moods.
