Catalepsy Consequent Upon an Attack of Acute Mania? Recovery
==============================================================

106
Art. VIII.?
In tlie last number of Lunier and Baillarger's excellent Annates
Medico-psychologiques, Dr. Lagardelle, the chief of the
Marseilles Lunatic Asylum, gives some very interesting details
of a case of catalepsy consequent upon an attack of acute mania.
I)r. Lagardelle points out in his introductory remarks, "that
catalepsy, although of rare occurrence, has been known ever
since the most remote times. Ccelius Aurelianus gave a very
early and detailed description of it, and even at the present time
this description is correct in the main; in other words, the clinical
history of this disease is even now very incomplete. Most authors
consider it to be essentially a neurotic affection. Considering at
present the immense progress which has recently been made in
the study and knowledge of nervous diseases, we are almost
justified in predicting that in a very short time both the nature
and the immediate cause of the cataleptic state will be known.
In 1856 Dr. Puel, who in a remarkable memoir quoted no
less than 150 cases of catalepsy which he had collected in
very different localities, defined this disease as " an intermittent
neurose, without any notable modification in the functions of
respiration and of circulation, with a special perturbation of all
the functions of relation, essentially characterised by the inability
of the patient to extend or to contract voluntarily the muscles of
animal life, while another person may easily cause these same
muscles to pass through all the stages intermediate between the
limits of contraction and extension." This definition is contest-
able, but we think that those which have been given since that
time are not much better. The definition of Coelius Aurelianus
might be opposed to them, and the pathognomonic symptom
might be characterised thus : neque extenta recolligunt membra,
neque conducta distendunt. The muscles of animal life pre-
serve during a variable period the attitudes which have been
given to them.
It has been said that catalepsy was generally a complication
of hysteria, but then how could it be explained that out of 148
cases Dr. Puel found 68 to refer to male patients and only 80
to women.
CATALEPSY CONSEQUENT UPON ACUTE MANIA. 107
According to Dr. Lagardelle's views catalepsy is a special
disturbance of central innervation, and he points out that this
view explains in a most natural manner why this malady is
often combined with certain forms of mental disease. He then
gives the following description of a case in point, and remarks
that it adds a new form of mania to those which have hitherto
been considered susceptible of being complicated with catalepsy.
Gr. A., a young man of 19 years of age, of nervous-
sanguinic temperament, good constitution, without hereditary
antecedents, was an employe in a branch of Government
administration; his apparent conduct was very regular and
irreproachable, but there existed secret habits of masturbation.
On April 15, after a restless night, he declared to his family in
an arrogant tone of voice and a strange expression in his face,
that he was not going to work ; he locked himself up in his
room, and covered the walls and the floor with drawings repre-
senting balloons with large wings. He then became imperious
and excited, spoke with volubility of fortunes, of balloons which
he was going to conduct, of birds flying in the air, &c. The
following night he was extremely restless, had auricular and
visual hallucinations, became more and more excited and at
last dangerous. On the 16th the delirium had got worse and
general; he assaulted his mother, who wanted to calm him and
reason with him, and struck her violently. His father then
entered the room, and the patient, upon seeing him, suddenly
rushed to the window and threw himself out. The room was on
the third floor, and he fell into a yard. It may be asked
whether this young man obeyed a sentiment of fear upon
seeing his father ; whether he mistook the window for the door ;
whether he had an idea of committing suicide ; or whether he
was merely following some irresistible instinctive impulse.
Dr. Lagardelle inclines to the latter view, and remarks that he
had occasion to observe that in this case there was a special
alteration of volition. Strange to say, the patient, who might
have been killed by the fall, fell upon his back and slightly
upon the arm, and received only an insignificant contusion upon
the latter. He got up without much difficulty, and his agita-
tion in consequence became only more violent. He was imme-
diately removed to the Marseilles Lunatic Asylum. The mania
of the patient was characterised by insomnia, excessive mobility,
irrational and eccentric actions (which necessitated his being
closely and uninterruptedly watched), personal illusions, auri-
cular and visual hallucinations, an animated facial expression,
excessive volubility, and greatly dilated pupils; he spoke in-
cessantly of birds, of flying balloons, gave no reply to questions
addressed to him, and behaved in a most insolent manner.
108 CATALEPSY CONSEQUENT UPON
On April 20th, upon seeing another patient come into the
apartment where he was kept, he rushed upon him and tried
to strangle him; the attendant, however, succeeded soon in
parting them. This act was incontestably an impulsive one.
On the 24th, during the day, the patient ceased to speak; he
shut his eyes, let his head fall forward, and, reclining upon a
bench, remained motionless, letting the saliva run out of his
mouth. In the evening the patient awoke, and proceeded like
an automaton to sit at the table.
During the night he remained calm, made no noise, and in
the morning, when the attendant tried to make him get up, he
remained motionless, with a haggard look in the eyes. At eight
o'clock Dr. Lagardelle visited him, and found him extended
upon his back, with an expression of stupidity in his face,
pupils very dilated, and almost normal pulse. He was then
pricked with a pin upon various parts of his body, but he
remained perfectly insensible, motionless, and his facial expres-
sion was unchanged. The four extremities were then succes-
sively placed into different positions, and they remained so for
nearly a quarter of an hour.
The patient was then carried into the hydro-therapeutical
hall, and a powerful douche was applied for two minutes to the
whole posterior part of his body. The skin was not sensitive,
and showed no redness, but the patient seemed to wake a little.
He was then rubbed energetically, and, after having been dressed,
was made to walk up and down quickly for the space of half an
hour.
The cataleptic state had ceased, but it returned the same
evening and then lasted for about an hour. The next morning
a short attack of but slight intensity occurred; the patient was
again placed under the douche, and the skin reddened a little.
On the third day of this treatment the skin became red
after half a minute ; the patient was no longer delirious, but
related what happened during the second attack of catalepsy.
He saw that he was being pricked with pins, but he felt nothing;
he was perfectly conscious of the various positions into which
his limbs were placed, but he could neither move them nor
speak.
During the following eight or ten days the patient was per-
fectly conscious of all that happened, and stated that he felt a
strange sensation in all his nerves, and under the influence of
the continued douches these sensations disappeared gradually.
On May 10 they had quite left him, and he left the hospital
perfectly cured.
Dr. Lagardelle then continues: "This case should give
rise to considerations which it seems to us premature to
AN ATTACK OF ACUTE MANIA. 100
develop; however, we will recapitulate the questions it calls
forth, without wishing to discuss them, nor to decide them
finally. The cataleptic state just described differs considerably
from the descriptions of catalepsy hitherto given by authors
on the subject, and quite upsets certain definitions. Con-
sciousness and memory are retained, while volition is destroyed
after having first been perverted. Must the cause of these
attacks be ascribed to the acute mania or to the fall from the
window ? Masturbation produced a functional disturbance in
the cerebro-spinal nervous system. If during the acute mania
the brain was affected, we may be allowed to suppose that the
medulla was not in its normal state, and that the fall from the
window could produce upon these predisposed organs either a
general disturbance or at least a shock sufficient to bring about
these cataleptic attacks.
A sane person falling from a third floor window would at
least be seriously injured, if not killed. How could this young
maniac fall from that height and then get up as if nothing had
happened? Were the cataleptic fits beneficial to the maniacal
delirium in the same way as certain intermittent and acute
diseases cure mental disease ? The disturbance in his general
sensibility was accompanied by a relative cessation of the
functions of the skin.
The recovery proceeded gradually, and in the same measure
as the skin became more sensitive and impressible.
