Prevention of Disease, Insanity, Crime and Pauperism
======================================================

208
Art. II.? *
By NATHAN ALLEN, M.D., Lowell, Massachusetts, Commissioner in Lunacy to the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Upon a subject so large and important as the above title
indicates, only a few brief suggestions can be made in a short
essay. The topics mentioned cover the whole ground of
public charity and involve the most essential agencies in its
administration. No community or people can be found so
advanced in civilisation, or so perfect in morals, as to be free
from these terrible evils; and notwithstanding the immense
labour bestowed and expense incurred to check or prevent them,
still as a whole they seem to increase, certainly in some
directions. The agencies employed to check them do not
appear very successful, nor do the ends attained correspond to
the amount of labour and expense which have been put forth.
In all attempts at reform, or for the removal of great evils,
it is the dictate of wisdom to select those agencies which are
most likely to bring about the greatest results with the least
labour or sacrifice of means ; in other words, to nip the evil in
the bud, or to dig up and destroy its roots, rather than to lop
off only its branches. A great amount of time, labour and
cost are consumed in dealing with the affects of evils, without
reducing or removing their chief sources or primary causes.
Thus in the history of disease and insanity, while there has
been an immense expenditure of labour and means to cure
these evils, little comparatively has been done to 'prevent- them;
The same holds true in respect to crime and pauperism.
No truth in history is more self-evident than that if we
would remove evils, whatever may be their nature, their
primary causes must first receive attention. And in order
to do this successfully, their origin, or roots, must be made
our careful study, and be exposed and set before the public
in such a variety of ways, that proper means will be employed
to eradicate them. The greater the evil and the more de-
structive its influence, the more important is its removal.
Having had occasion for many years to visit, in an official
capacity, almshouses, prisons, and lunatic hospitals, we have
* Read at the Conference of Charities connected with the meeting of the
American Social Science Association, at Cincinnati, May 22, 1878.
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 209
been profoundly impressed not only with the magnitude of the
evils which they present, but with the conviction that there
is great need of reforms, which reforms may be indicated under
the following heads :?
1.?PREVENTION OF DISEASE.
Nowhere, perhaps, can we find better illustration of these
principles than in the history and treatment of diseases. Once
they were thought to be some distinct entities, some evil
spirits, or mysterious agencies, affecting the human body, and
to expel or subdue them resort must be had to the art of
divination, appeals to supernatural or divine power, or the
application of some strange artificial means or mysterious
medication. As the structure and laws of the human system
became better understood, in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, these delusions began to disappear, and more correct
views of disease to be entertained.
By discoveries in anatomy and physiology ; by the use of
the microscope and the application of chemical science; by
careful observation and experiment, a flood of light has
been shed upon the nature and causes of disease. Amid all
these discoveries and improvements the main inquiry has
hitherto been how to cure disease. Scarcely anything can be
found in medical books and journals till within half a century
on the subject of preventing disease. The first two writers
(living in advance of their times) who started some important
inquiries in this direction were Dr John Forbes, in Great
Britain, and Dr Elislia Bartlett, in the United States?men
distinguished for their independence and originality of
thought.
While attending medical lectures in Philadelphia, in 1840,
the writer became particularly interested in hygiene, and from
the first day of entering upon the practice of medicine his
interest has constantly increased in all matters pertaining to
the preservation of health, and especially in the prevention of
disease. All writings on the subject, like those of Dr John
Forbes, Dr Andrew Combe and others, attracted his attention ;
and a personal acquaintance with Dr Elisha Bartlett served to
increase this interest.
In the British and Foreign Medical Review, for January
1846, Dr John Forbes, in his celebrated article on "Young
Physic," speaking of the importance and results of certain
changes in medical practice, said : " Redoubled attention should
be directed to hygiene public and private, with the view of
preventing diseases on a large scale, and individually in our
PART II. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. Q
210 PREVENTION OF DISEASE, INSANITY,
sphere of practice. Here the surest and most glorious triumphs
of medicine are to be achieved."
About the same time, Dr Elisha Bartlett published a work
in this country on the " Philosophy of Medicineand in
urging upon the profession a more thorough knowledge of the
causes and nature of disease, said : " The next thing to be
done is to find out the best methods of modifying and
preventing disease. This is the great mission which now lies
immediately before us; this is to constitute the great work of
the next and succeeding generations."
Both of these writers were fully impressed with the truth
and importance of the sentiments contained in these para-
graphs. They predicted with much positiveness that a great
reform was soon to take place in the treatment of diseases,
and their predictions have proved true. At no period in the
history of medicine have there been such discoveries and
improvements as within the last thirty years.
Great advances have been made in ascertaining the primary
causes of disease, as originating in filth, bad air, impure water,
foul gases, poison from decaying animal and vegetable matter,
&c. It has been found, moreover, that the spread and fatality
of infectious and contagious diseases can be very much con-
trolled by isolation, by disinfectants, and by a resort to sanitary
laws. To carry out these measures in a community, or ex-
tensively among a people, it becomes necessary to employ some
public agency and enlist legislation for enacting laws and
establishing boards of health. In this way has arisen what is
called "sanitary legislation," or "State medicine," the chief
object of which is to prevent diseases.
The leading agency in carrying on this work in Great
Britain has been the Registrar-General's department, requiring
regular returns of births and deaths from every part of the
kingdom, with a bureau of health connected with Government.
For thirty years or more, sanitary interests have been frequently
discussed in Parliament; stringent laws on health have been
enacted; cities and counties have been divided into districts,
and an officer of health appointed to each. Instructions and
reports on the subject have multiplied, together with discussions
in journals and newspapers. The object of all this legislation
and labour is to prevent disease?not cure it.
The inquiry naturally arises, What is the result or fruit of
these sanitary operations ? It is not time yet to obtain the
full benefits of such means; for while the advantages of
observing some sanitary laws may be seen very soon, it will take
many years to reap the complete benefits of others. In certain
localities in Great Britain, where these laws have been only
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 211
partially applied for a few years, there has been witnessed a
marked decrease in the amount of sickness and rate of
mortality, From careful investigations it is estimated that
this diminution will already range from one-fourth to one-third;
but it is the opinion of the best judges on the subject that,
when sanitary science is faithfully applied, there will be a
decrease of more than one-third of the sickness and mortality
which formerly occurred. The immense advantage, or value,
which will be gained by this prevention of disease, in the
saving of time and expense, in the prevention of pain and
distress, in the general improvement of health and prolongation
of life, cannot be estimated in figures or described in language.
The more extensively and thoroughly these principles are
applied, the greater good will they accomplish, and the more
perfectly we shall find the laws of the external world adapted
to the human system, showing that man has a far greater
control of those laws than has generally been supposed.
Another important consideration is, that the more thoroughly
sanitary agencies are applied on a large scale, they not only
serve directly to prevent disease but furnish essential aids in
curing it. Thus the more you improve ventilation and the
quality of water, drainage and sewerage, and have regard to
dietary habits and physical exercise, &c., the more successful
will be the operation of all therapeutical agencies.
Again, the general application of sanitary science must tend
to diffuse among all classes a more thorough knowledge of the
principles of physiology, so that they will possess better and
more correct views of the laws of health and life. Thus every
individual will be able to take far better care of himself, to
understand his own peculiar weaknesses and predispositions to
disease, so that in process of time, by care and watchfulness, the
constitution itself will become very much strengthened. Let
this course be continued through two or three generations, and
one of the most fruitful sources of disease, by means of heredity,
will be diminished. Heredity is a powerful agency in the pro-
duction of disease, which has been too much overlooked, and
should receive greater attention than it has hitherto.
In the inheritance of morbid tendencies we have one of the
most fruitful sources of disease. This will become more patent
in proportion as the principles of physiology shall become
better understood in their connection with hereditary influences.
Without attempting to describe the various ways in which the
seeds of disease are transmitted from parent to child, we may
say they are manifold, in organisation and function, in defective
and abnormal structure, in the weak or excessive development
of this or that organ, in the general want of balance in the
Q 2
212 PREVENTION OF DISEASE, INSANITY,
organs, and of harmony of function ; in tlie quality of the
blood and the marked predisposition to certain diseases, like
scrofula and consumption.
If it be said that sanitary agencies do not reach directly
this class of diseases, yet their influence will gradually help to
prevent them by improving the general health and constitution
of people. Besides, they will direct attention to certain sources
of disease in heredity, and show that these should be avoided in
forming matrimonial alliances. If legislation cannot be brought
to bear directly upon this point, self-interest and public opinion
can. The time will come when good health and a sound con-
stitution will be better appreciated, when the duties and
responsibilities of matrimony will be regarded in altogether a
different light from what they have been. This change may be
slow in progress, but when it comes a great amount of disease
from hereditary sources will be prevented.
This sanitary movement has certain advantages over all
other reforms. Its success does not depend upon the medical
profession alone, nor upon Government support, nor upon any
one body of men, but upon all classes, both men and women.
In carrying on this reform, the parties become at once par-
takers in its rewards?in improved health and strength; and
its benefits become everywhere so manifest that the work must
go on with accumulated power. What is the testimony of one
of the best judges in the country on this subject? Says Dr.
H. I. Bowditch, in his work just published upon " Public
Hygiene in America": " We stand now at the very dawn of
the grandest epoch yet seen in the progress of medicine.
While philosophically, accurately, and with the most minute
skill studying, by means of physiology, pathological anatomy,
chemistry, the microscope, and, above all, by careful clinical
observation, the natural history of disease and the effects of
remedies, our art at the present day looks still higher, viz.: to
the prevention of as well as to the cure of disease. And this is
to be done by sanitary organisation throughout each State?the
nation, the laity and the profession heartily joining hands in this
most noble cause."
If by such means one-third or more of the sickness and the
suffering consequent thereto can be averted, if the rate of
mortality can be very sensibly diminished, public health
everywhere greatly improved and human life prolonged, " the
glorious triumphs " predicted by Dr John Forbes, it may truly
be said, " are being achieved."
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 213
2.?PREVENTION OF INSANITY.
The idea that insanity can be prevented may surprise some
persons. The impression entertained among people generally
has been, that it arises from causes obscure and mysterious, or
is the visitation of evil and supernatural spirits, so that it
cannot be fully comprehended or easily cured. It is certain
that no intelligent and systematic attempts have ever been
made for its general prevention. But, on the other hand,
there has been an immense expenditure of time, labour, and
means to cure the insane.
What are the facts in the case? In all civilised and
Christian countries this unfortunate class in large numbers have
been gathered into asylums with two objects in view, vi^.
safety and cure. Once, it was thought, if the treatment of
insanity was commenced in its first stages from 80 to 90 per
cent, of all such cases could be cured ; but now the cures are
less than half that per cent. If the great majority of the
insane?say 9 out of 10?were cured, their number would
surely be diminished. But if only from 30 to 40 out of every
hundred new cases are cured, and 8 to 10 annually die, we have
certainly one-half of all the persons becoming insane to add
every year to the chronic insane.
The question whether insanity is increasing faster than
population is one upon which there is difference of opinion ;
but the evidences, we believe, lean strongest in favour of the
relative increase. For a long time it has been apparent that
the number of the insane was everywhere rapidly increasing,
that lunatic hospitals were crowded, and large, new establish-
ments were frequently being erected. It has come to this, that
the support of this class, and the management of such institu-
tions, are becoming very burdensome, and to all appearance are
likely to be still more so. The impression is becoming general,
that the multiplication of lunatic hospitals is doing but little
to check insanity, and that if this evil is ever to be checked,
some different means must be provided. The fact that these
hospitals do not cure more of the insane, nor serve to check
insanity, suggests the question whether the fault is in the
nature and treatment of the disease, or in the management of
these institutions. The explanation generally given is, that
proper treatment was not received in its first stages. What is
the testimony of experts upon the subject? Says the Super-
intendent of the McLean Asylum?the oldest institution in
New England, and admitted to be one of the best-managed in
the United States?in a late report: "For the treatment of
214 PREVENTION OF DISEASE, INSANITY,
insane persons, we could wish some practice more encouraging
in its remedial effects might be devised. As now administered,
asylums for such unfortunates afford little more than a place
where they may be isolated from society, kindly treated, and a
watchful oversight maintained to prevent them from committing
injury upon themselves or their attendants."
Says another expert, who was superintendent for many years
over the next oldest hospital in Massachusetts: " Lunatic
liDspitals do not prevent insanity, because they do not, by the
intercourse of their officers with society at large, published reports,
and by their general relations to the public, seek to enlighten the
people on the subject of insanity?its predisposing causes, its
hereditary tendencies, its relations to intemperance, poverty and
crime ; and therefore they do not improve the community in this
respect, except in removing from its care some of its great
burdens."
Says another expert, who was long superintendent of one of
the largest hospitals in New England, in his report: " The more
we see of mental disease in its various forms, the more we are
convinced that the study of its 'prevention is infinitely more
important than even the study of its cure, and that the dissemi-
nation of more correct views of the true way of living and a
more rigid observance of the laws of health and nature would
greatly diminish its frequency."
What is the testimony of still higher authority on the
subject? The Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland, in a late
report, state that?" It is impossible to come to any other
opinion than that insanity is, to a large extent, a preventible
malady, and it appears to us that it is in the direction of
preventing its occurrence, and not through the creation of
institutions for its treatment, that any sensible diminution can
be effected in its amount. Lunacy is always attended with
some bodily defect, or disorder, of which it may be regarded as
one of the expressions or symptoms. We must therefore
attempt to prevent its occurrence in the same way as we attempt
to prevent the occurrence of what are called ordinary bodily
diseases; and if it be admitted that to a large extent preventible
diseases exist among us in consequence of the ignorance of the
people, it is clear that we can only convert the preventible into
the prevented by the removal of that ignorance through a
sounder education. In short, we can only hope that preventible
diseases will be diminished in amount, when the education of
men is so conducted as to render them both intelligent and
dutiful guardians of their own physical, intellectual and moral
health. To this, and not to any machinery, however good it
may be, for the treatment and cure of insanity, can we reasonably
look for a diminution in its amount."
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 215
Let us cite another witness on this point, who may he
considered as high authority as can be found. Last year a
select committee was appointed by Parliament to inquire into
the operations ot the " Lunacy Law." In the testimony given
before this committee by Sir James Coxe, is this statement:
" That ' prevention is better than cure' is a saying familiar to
every one; but it does not seem to have been sufficiently
considered that it would be possible to take measures to stop
the occurrence of insanity. The fact is that we have allowed a
terrible evil to grow up among us, and that we have been
content to lop the branches, leaving the growth as luxuriant as
ever, instead of directing our efforts to destroy it at the roots."
Sir James Coxe, in speaking of the results of hospital
treatment in the cure of insanity, says only " about 40 per cent,
of the admissions prove recoveries." " The fact is indisputable
that, as the case actually stands, asylums are places of curative
treatment for only 10 per cent, of their inmates, and mere
places of detention or safe custody for the remaining 90 per
cent." The statement here made respecting the asylums in
Great Britain will apply, we fear, with equal force to the insane
in this country. It is a sad thought that 90 per cent, of all the
inmates of these institutions are incurable, and hence the rapid
increase of chronic insanity. What a powerful argument does
this fact present in favour of using all possible means for the
prevention of the malady !
Within a few years more careful investigations have been
made than ever before respecting the cure of insanity. As a
result of these inquiries, much surprise has been expressed at
the large proportion considered incurable. After the disease
has continued a year or so without improvement the case is
regarded as chronic, and the chance of recovery is small.
Inasmuch as many new cases have no proper treatment, and
others receive no permanent benefit from treatment, large
numbers are constantly passing into the chronic state. Nearly
all the insane now found in private families and almshouses are
composed of this class, and who are by far the largest proportion
in the lunatic hospitals. As society grows older, the greater is
the proportion of the chronic insane. Thus in New England
this class would be larger than in the Western States.
So rapidly and extensively have the insane increased that
their support has become very burdensome. Individuals and
families have expended money liberally, year after year, upon
some friend, looking in vain for improvement. States, cities
and towns have been called upon to increase from time to time
their appropriations for this class. So oppressive has this burden
become in some quarters, that the question is now often raised,
216 PREVENTION OF DISEASE, INSANITY,
" What can we do with the chronic insane ? " How much wiser
and more pertinent the question, " What can be done to prevent
insanity ? "
Wherever in society any abuses or evils exist, in order to
check or eradicate them we must understand distinctly what
they are and what are their primary causes : and not the mere
results or effects of an evil, but its chief sources, or constituent
elements, must be clearly apprehended. Thus, in regard to
insanity, its results or fruits in certain aspects have been pretty
well understood, but much less its causes. What, then, is
insanity ? And can it, to any extent, be prevented ? All admit
that it is a disease, and like all other diseases a violation of some
law?it may be a physical, mental, or moral. Says one of the
highest authorities on the subject: " Insanity is a disease of
ignorance?ignorance of the human organism and the laws which
regulate it; and the only way to check its growth is by a general
diffusion of a knowledge of these laws, and the use of all those
means necessary for the preservation of good health. Insanity
originates in some form of disease?in a deterioration of the
body rather than in an exclusive affection of the nervous
system. The six leading factors are : dissipation in various forms,
overwork, meagre fare, lack of ventilation, and neglect of moral
culture." In these few words we have much truth expressed.
For the prevention of insanity, then, the same course must
be pursued as with reference to other diseases. Ascertain its
causes?diffuse information on the subject. This may be
accomplished in a variety of ways: by enlisting the press,
through journals and books ; by family and educational training,
by legislation and associated action. For illustration: if
intemperance is one of the leading causes of insanity, it is high
time the fact should be generally known and the warning
brought home to all. If ill-health is adjudged a more fruitful
source of the malady, let us understand that. If hereditary
influences, in all their diversified forms, constitute another
fruitful source, let us understand better the laws that regulate
these influences; or, if fast living or high-pressure in our
educational systems are steadily swelling the ranks of the insane,
the sooner these truths are brought home to the public mind
the better.
Some may say that the causes of insanity are involved in so
much obscurity and mystery that they cannot be found out.
Fifty years ago this remark might have been made respecting a
great many diseases which are now correctly understood. Let
the same means be as carefully and thoroughly employed here
as upon other diseases and the causes and treatment of insanity
will be far better known.
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 217
It has been remarked that within a few years there have
been great advances made in a better understanding of the laws
of life and health; special pains have been taken to diffuse in
the community a knowledge of physiology as connected with
sanitary and hygienic agencies. To such an extent has this
knowledge been diffused that the inquiry is beginning to be
raised on all sides, not merely how to cure, but how to prevent
disease. In many States boards of health have been formed,
and legislation has commenced in earnest in devising plans
and providing on a large scale the means for the prevention of
disease.
But how is it with insanity ? What progress has there been
made towards its prevention ? How much do people at large
understand about its causes? How can the increase of this disease
be stayed unless proper means are employed to make people
acquainted with its causes ? The medical profession itself
should give this subject far more consideration and be better
prepared, not only to treat the disease, but to counsel the public
wisely in respect to it.
There has been a large accumulation of facts expressed in
tables and figures, in hospital reports and books, which, if
brought together and analysed, would throw much light on the
subject. But there has been no demand on the part of the
public for such services, and no inducements offered by legis-
latures or trustees of institutions. Any amount of money can
be expended in building and managing lunatic hospitals, but
nothing comparatively to prevent insanity. If one-tenth of
the means now so lavishly bestowed upon this unfortunate class
in large institutions was expended in different ways, to prevent
insanity? in cutting off the supplies?what a vast difference it
would make in diminishing the number of the insane and
reducing the amount of suffering ! How long will it take the
public, and legislative bodies particularly, to learn the truth of
the proverb?" An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of
cure " ? If, by a general diffusion of a knowledge of hygiene
and the application of sanitary laws, one-third or more of the
sickness and premature mortality can be prevented, certainly
one-third of the existing insanity should be prevented by similar
means, especially as preventing disease and improving the
general health will aid essentially in checking the first
approaches of insanity.
It should be the settled policy of all legislative bodies and
the executive officers of every State to carry on some systematic
measures for the prevention of insanity; and unless such pro-
vision is made by legislative action, the work, we fear, will
never be done. The number of the insane and of lunatic hos-
218 PREVENTION OP DISEASE, INSANITY,
pitals, together with the burdens of their expense, will increase
more and more. Let prevention receive some attention as
well as cure. The claims of humanity and public economy
demand it. So does a higher state of civilisation. It is not
wise to build great institutions and make large appropriations
for carrying them on without doing something to remove the
causes which necessitate such measures.
3.?PREVENTION OF CRIME.
A little more than one hundred years ago John Howard
published his celebrated work on the Prisons of England
and Wales. From that period a new element entered
into the treatment of prisoners. They began to be treated
more like human beings, with the possibility of reforma-
tion. The principles of humanity and philanthropy prior
to that time had scarcely been recognised in dealing with
this class of persons. But during the first half century?from
1778 to 1830?the reform made very slow progress. About
this latter period commenced two great experiments in prison
discipline, denominated the " congregated system " and that of
" solitary confinement." These experiments created much dis-
cussion, which gave a new impulse to the reform.
Daring the last half century, and especially within twenty-
five years, many changes have been made. New questions in
prison discipline have continually arisen and experiments of
various kinds have been tried. While some nations have
shown more interest and made, perhaps, farther advances in
reform than others, each has had its own system of discipline
with its peculiar merits. In our own country important
improvements have been made, but still many defects exist;
we fail to reap the results which ought to be obtained, especially
in the reformation of prisoners and the prevention of crime.
The leading objects of prison discipline may be expressed
under these three heads : 'punishment, safety, and reform. As
to the importance of securing these three objects all, we believe,
are agreed, however they may differ in the modes of doing it,
or on minor points. These objects are here placed in the order
in which each has come up in history and in accordance with
the prominence which many persons seem to attach to the
whole subject; but really reformation should be the main
object of confinement and punishment, for it is more important
than both of the others.
The true test of such discipline is in the proportion of
prisoners discharged, improved or reformed on the one hand,
aod, on the other hand, of those released unimproved and per-
haps made worse. If the former object was generally secured
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 219
there would be few re-committals and far less increase of
criminals. But unfortunately statistics show that crime is
constantly increasing, that prisons of all kinds are everywhere
crowded, and that nearly one-fourth of their inmates are
re-committals. It is very evident that there is something'
wrong in the present methods of dealing with criminals?that
the ends attained do not correspond to the means employed
that reformation in the prisoner is not generally effected.
Without attempting anything like a full discussion of the sub-
ject, we propose to notice it briefly from a single point of view,
viz. the prevention of crime.
There are two standpoints from whence facts and arguments
may be brought to show how crime can be prevented : First, we
may check crime in criminals, and secondly, keep persons from
becoming criminals.
While, in the present state of society, it may be impossible
for human means to prevent some persons from entering upon a
criminal career, much may be done to break up such habits
when once formed, and to produce a radical change for life. It
is an encouraging fact that wherever the proper means have
been brought to bear, the character of prisoners has been
improved and the number of criminals reduced. Unfortu-
nately this part of prison discipline has been altogether under-
rated or neglected, while confinement and punishment have
received relatively too much attention. Keform in habits and
character has been considered of minor consequence. In fact,
such has been, not unfrequently, the treatment of criminals
both in spirit and manner, as to produce anything but a refor-
matory influence upon them. There are laws of mind as well
as of body which, if violated, serve to make the individual more
of a criminal. Let the animal and selfish nature in the prisoner
be mainly exercised, without developing his moral and intel-
lectual powers, and no reformation in his habits or character
takes place or can be expected. As this treatment of prisoners
involves laws which lie at the foundation of all reform and, of
course, of correcting criminal habits, it should receive the most
scrupulous attention. The criminal is a human being and
governed by law. Crime is a violation of law?not merely
civil, but moral?a law of nature. The criminal has all the
faculties of other persons, but not well balanced or properly
enlightened and trained. While the safety of the community
and the principles of justice require that the criminal should be
confined and punished, it should be done in harmony with laws
which develope his higher and better nature. No criminal was
ever reformed by being treated in a brutish manner, nor by
appeals only to his animal and selfish nature. The conscience
must be enlightened and the intellect instructed. Hence
220 PREVENTION OP DISEASE, INSANITY,
educational, moral and religious influences ought to be brought
into requisition far more than they are. No prisoner should
ever be discharged without being improved if possible in his
habits and character. This reform must be an individual work
?the treatment varied or adapted to every case. Eeform
seldom if ever occurs in classes or large numbers at once.
Such a work requires time, labour, and means, but its results
will abundantly pay.
It is in this respect that prison discipline fails?its subject
is not reformed, neither is crime checked. It is in this direc-
tion that improvements should be made, which woidd have a
powerful influence in the prevention of crime.
The most important reform in prison discipline that has
anywhere occurred is in Ireland. This is based upon a system
of improved classification of rewards and promotions, as well as
of encouragement and assistance to prisoners after being re-
leased. This reform commenced some thirty-five years ago, and
has resulted in a great decrease of crime as well as of the
number of convicts. Improvements of a similar character have
been introduced into the English prisons, and have been attended
with decidedly beneficial results.
We regret that we cannot report favourably in this respect
of prison discipline in our own country. Since the Civil War,
crime has everywhere rapidly increased, and in some States it
is estimated that it has doubled. No thorough and systematic
measures are taken to reform prisoners; the old ranks are kept
good, and new recruits are constantly being added. Great pains
are taken to provide prisoners with labour, to make contracts
and obtain as much money as possible out of their work. If we
had the same amount of effort expended in reforming their
habits and character, crime and criminals would decrease. There
is great need of legislation on this particular point, and that the
managers of prisons have the power and be specially instructed
to adopt efficient measures for the reform of prisoners.
The second means of preventing crime, viz. keeping per-
sons from becoming criminals, opens up a very important field
of inquiry. It may be convenient to discuss both those agencies
that shape and mould human life after birth, and those that
beget and fashion the constituent elements of the body prior to
birth.
All history proves that the criminal class as a body originate
from a peculiar stratum or type in society?sometimes from the
middle or common walks of life, but more generally from the
lowest orders, especially from the ignorant, the shiftless, the
indolent and dissipated. Occasionally we find some from high
life, from those in good circumstances, from well-trained farni-
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 221
lies, from good homes. But these are altogether the excep-
tions. In such cases, any new or additional means to reform
them would be comparatively useless. If our object, then, is to
prevent crime on a large scale, we must direct attention to its
main sources?to the materials that make criminals ; the springs
must be dried up, the supplies must be cut off. This fruitful
source or fountain head of crime is found among children of
poor or miserable parentage, surrounded by bad influences and
exposed to all manner of temptation, with no one disposed or
qualified to train and educate them. Such are the liot-beds of
vice and crime. On account of indolent, shiftless, and dissi-
pated habits, such people continue poor and dependent, the
children stray away from their homes, large numbers also
become orphans and fall upon the public for support, or become
pests to society. All such children should be picked up and
gathered into reformatories, or find homes in good private
families, which are the best reformatory institutions in the
world.
Again, in such low communities, abounding with children,
and where the children are not separated from their parents,
compulsory education should be enforced ; the State or munici-
pality should see to it that every child is brought into the
public school and educated. Efforts in various other ways
should be used to bring moral and religious influences to bear
upon such families and neighbourhoods. Children become
vicious and criminal frequently on account of their surroundings
and immediate exposures. The sooner children can be removed
from such localities and circumstances the better. The public
are not sufficiently awake to these upas-trees of poison, these
pests and hot-houses of vice. All legal and moral means should
be employed to reform such classes. Every State and city
should adopt systematic measures for this purpose. The saving
in taxation alone will pay for it. In no other way can crime be
so effectually prevented.
More prolific than any other in the production of crime is
the vice of intemperance. This operates in so many ways that
it is impossible to trace out all its pernicious effects. It im-
poverishes people and brings them into circumstances of tempta-
tion ; it corrupts the morals and poisons the blood ; it excites
the evil propensities and developes the animal nature; it
stupefies conscience and destroys the moral sentiments; it im-
pairs in man the powers of free-agency and converts him into
a brute. "Whatever produces such effects upon the human
system must have a powerful influence in the production of
crime. The evidences come from all quarters (and without
contradiction from any) that intemperance is the cause or occa-
222 PREVENTION OF DISEASE, INSANITY,
sion of three-fourths of all the crime committed?some estimat-
ing it even higher. The habit commences early and more
readily with individuals and families who are predisposed to
idleness and to a low, animal life. The natural instincts of
such persons flow in one direction, and drinking becomes a
master-passion. If intoxicating drinks can be withheld from
this class of persons, their habits and character become gradually
improved. Total abstinence would do much to save them from
a life of vice and crime. By this means more than half of the
crime committed would be prevented.
But the primal and principal cause of crime exists in a
state of things prior to birth. That the " child resembles the
parent," and " like begets like," are acknowledged truisms. It
is also true that this resemblance or likeness extends to all parts
of the brain, and, of course, to every faculty of the mind. If
the lower and posterior part of the brain is predominant and
continuously active, the animal propensities and selfish faculties
will take the lead in character. If the parents are addicted to
habits of dissipation and sensuality, the children will be predis-
posed to the same. If these habits are inveterate, the propen-
sities are transmitted in an intensified form.
These transmitted qualities are more marked and have a
much wider range than is generally considered. The blood
itself may be tainted and affect the structure and function of
every organ in the body. Such may be the physical develop -
ment as to incline one to lead an idle, low, and dissolute life,
without ambition or self-respect. A living or means of support
must be obtained without work or rendering an equivalent.
There may be a strong will and an overmastering passion of
selfishness, so that the individual is not inclined to be governed
by the principles of justice or to regard the rights of others.
Such persons become an easy prey to temptation.
The now celebrated " Margaret, mother of criminals," re-
ported in New York two years since, furnishes a striking illus-
tration of hereditary crime. An investigation was made through
the New York Prison Association in the gaols and prisons of the
State, extending back six generations, which resulted in tracing
out nearly 300 criminals descended from one wicked woman!
If a thorough inquiry were made on this subject, doubtless other
similar illustrations would be found. If the truth could be
known, we believe a large amount of crime would be traced
back to hereditary influences.
How much crime might be prevented if certain classes of
vicious persons could be hindered from propagation! What
right have such individuals to bring upon the public so much
misery, shame and cost ? Within a few years laws have been
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 223
passed for the forcible removal of nuisances and other evils,
either injurious to health and life or detrimental to the welfare
of the community. With the rapid progress of sanitary science
and the great advances in legislation, some means, we believe,
will yet be devised for preventing, at least to some extent, the
evils growing out of criminal heredity. Let the public mind
be enlightened on this subject, let parental responsibility be
placed on high ground, and the evils of improper marriages be
pointed out, and within two or three generations a great
amount of crime would be in this way prevented.
4. PREVENTION OF PAUPERISM.
The term pauperism applies to that class in the community
which is more or less dependent upon the public for support.
It includes large numbers of the diseased, the insane, and the
criminal, and therefore all efforts made to prevent their
increase will go far to prevent pauperism. If these widespread
and terrible evils?disease, insanity and crime?can be greatly
checked by human agencies, so can those of pauperism. But
to do this successfully, its primary causes or sources must be
first understood. As the expense of pauperism constitutes at
the present day the heaviest single burden which the public
has to bear, the subject has been very fully discussed in a
variety of ways and by a great many writers. The manner
and extent of supporting paupers have received far more
attention than the precise means of reducing their numbers.
Pauperism will never be diminished by small or large alms-
houses, by loose or general statements, nor by dealing with it
in the mass. The history and characters of paupers as in-
dividuals must be carefully studied ; the precise causes and
influences that made them such must be ascertained, and then
we must inquire what can be done to remove these causes or
modify their influences. Who are paupers? What is their
history and character ? What caused or made paupers ? Care-
Tul observations show that large numbers have certain charac-
teristics in common, making what may be called a pauper class,
and continue as such for generations. In every large alms-
house are found, to some extent, a permanent set of inmates
who have connections in the same or in other almshouses,
and whose parents or ancestors have been frequent inmates in
such establishments. There is such a thing as families breeding
pauperism and perpetuating it for generations. It is found
that they have peculiarities in organisation and character,
which can be traced back to the same or similar causes.
224 PREVENTION OF DISEASE, INSANITY,
Another striking fact is developed by extended inquiry in
almshouses, viz. that the number of really ivorthy poor, who
started well in life, with good habits and characters, is quite
small in these establishments. It is only now and then that
one of this class by a series of misfortunes becomes a pauper.
An impression prevails in some communities that there are
large numbers of this class in almshouses; but it is not so.
Careful inquiries prove that such an impression is erroneous.
This fact, as will be seen, is very important, when we come to
look at the primary causes of pauperism?its starting-points
and leading agencies.
In our attempts to prevent pauperism, it becomes us to
inquire where, how, and by what means it can be best done.
Like some other evils, it is very difficult to eradicate or check
when once started. When an individual once becomes a
pauper, he loses that pride and self-respect which have kept
him a long time from a position of want and dependence.
Then such are the associations and influences that surround
this class of persons, that when they once become paupers, it is
for life. Only occasionally, by the help of some friend or
fortunate circumstance, the inmate of an almshouse gets away
from the establishment and finds a support elsewhere, and never
returns. Again, sometimes by improvement in health, or the
assistance of friends, paupers leave an almshouse for a season,
but when their means fail they return to their old quarters.
There is still another class of paupers who for various reasons
get out of an almshouse, thinking they can and shall in some
way take care of themselves, but who, by their indolent and
dissipated habits, soon come to want and are returned to the
almshouse. So powerful are the influences forcing the pauper
downward that he seldom becomes self-supporting.
Thus, in the prevention of pauperism, very little can be
done in reclaiming those once paupers and making them
permanently self-supporting.
Ignorance has always been considered a leading cause of
pauperism. In a careful examination lately of some ten
thousand paupers, over 16 years of age, in the city and country
almshouses of the State of New York, it was found that 32 per
cent, could neither read nor write; 14^ per cent, could read
only, and 24 per cent, read and write, while 29^ per cent, had
received a fair common-school education. The last class?
comprising less than one-third of the ten thousand?is the only
portion whose education could be considered of much service
in enabling them to take care of themselves.
Intemperance is a fruitful source of pauperism. In the ten
thousand paupers examined in the almshouses of the State of
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 225
New York, almost four thousand males and a little over two
thousand females were found of intemperate habits, making 62
1-2 per cent, of the whole. The same line of inquiry was
extended to the parents of the twelve thousand paupers in these
almshouses; and though nothing definite could be ascertained
in respect to large numbers, yet more than four thousand of
the fathers and mothers were found to have been intemperate.
This fact shows that the law of inheritance may have a powerful
agency in the production of pauperism.
It is presumed the same proportion of ignorance and in-
temperance found in New York will apply to the paupers in
other States. In Massachusetts, attempts have been made by
its boards of health and State charities to ascertain, through
overseers of the poor, just how far intemperance was the cause
of pauperism. The results of these inquiries cannot be given
in figures, but in the opinion or testimony of the best judges
on the subject. The report from Boston says about 80 per
cent.; from the other cities in the State, from 50 to 70 per
cent.; and in country towns, from 30 to 60 per cent. In the
larger institutions?the State prison, almshouse and workhouse
?the estimate is 75 per cent., and in the lunatic hospitals,
confining the estimate to the class who become paupers, the
percentage must range from 20 to 30 and perhaps higher. The
average estimate for the whole State must be about 67 per
cent. Thus intemperance is the cause of two-thirds of the
pauperism in Massachusetts.
In making this statement there should be some qualification,
by saying that intemperance may not be the sole or exclusive
cause. It is sometimes very difficult to separate cause and
effect. We may have idleness, poverty, and dissipation, each
aggravating the other; but after all, the latter is by far the
most active and powerful. Intemperance is therefore called
the cause, the chief cause, the occasion of pauperism, as the
other agents alone would never bring about such a result.
But ignorance and intemperance are not the only causes of
pauperism. Indolence, improvidence, and licentiousness con-
tribute also their share. These vices very generally go together
and enter early into the habits and character of children. Such
influences beget paupers ; they are the materials that make
them. Wherever individuals, families, and neighbourhoods are
slaves of these vices, pauperism has its strongest foothold and
will rapidly increase.
Now, such a state of things can be accounted for only in two
ways : First, The environments or surroundings ; and second,
the conditions of birth. These two agencies constitute the
primary causes or sources of much pauperism. Here the anti-
PART II. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. R
226 PREVENTION OF DISEASE, INSANITY,
dote of prevention should come in, to change these surroundings.
Education, temperance, and other good habits cannot be forced
upon, or easily grafted upon such individuals and communities.
Children so situated should be removed, if possible, from such
surroundings and placed in good families or industrial schools.
Families living in this way should be separated and scattered ;
such neighbourhoods should be reformed or broken up. By
such changes a vast amount of pauperism would be prevented.
Let public opinion be enlightened upon this point and legisla-
tion take hold of it; let proper systematic measures be employed
for this purpose, and the reform will come.
One of the most encouraging agencies for preventing pau-
perism is a wise provision for poor children. The gathering up
of homeless and orphan children, and removing all found in
almshouses?placing them in schools and finding homes for
them in private families?is doing much to prevent pauperism.
Within a few years Massachusetts and New York, by legislation
and other means, have nobly taken hold of this work, and
immense good is being accomplished. Let this reformatory
movement be vigorously carried on for a series of years and it
cannot fail to prevent a large amount of pauperism.
The second primary source of pauperism, viz. conditions
of birth (including the laws of inheritance), is in some respects
more important than all the rest. This is the beginning?the
fountain-head?where the streams start. If the seed were good,
the stock sound, it would not bear so much poor fruit. It is
rare that a person born into the world under favourable condi-
tions, from sound, healthy stock, and early trained in a well-
ordered family, ever becomes a pauper. Such is the design of
Providence, such is the law of nature. So far as pauperism
arises from violation of natural law, its origin should be better
understood. The most thorough and extended investigation
ever made in this country as to the primary causes of pauperism
was the one already referred to, in New York. Near the close
of that report is found this statement:
" The examination has made it clear that by far the greater
number of paupers have reached that condition by idleness,
improvidence, drunkenness, or some form of vicious indulgence.
It is equally clear that these vices and weaknesses are very
frequently, if not universally, the result of tendencies which are
to a greater or less degree hereditary. The element of heredity
enters so largely into the problem of pauperism that it should
receive special attention. Few persons who have not given
detailed attention to the subject realise how much of vice
and pauperism, idiocy, and insanity is hereditary. It is a
subject to which little attention has hitherto been given, at least
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 227
outside of treatises on physiology; but the time is rapidly
approaching when its importance will compel the attention of
the moralist as well as the law-maker."
The time has already come, we believe, when this subject
should receive special attention, and in no other way can the
same amount of pauperism be prevented than by a better
observance of these laws. Let us examine a little into the nature
and operation of hereditary agencies in their relations to
pauperism; the better these are understood the more import-
ance will be attached to them.
If idleness, improvidence, intemperance, and licentiousness
are prime factors in the production of pauperism, these have
their germs or springs in physical organisation. The desire,
the craving, the predisposition for such vices were transmitted
from parent to child. A poor physical development throughout
or a predominance of the animal nature, characterised un-
doubtedly the ancestry for two or three generations. A feeble,
sickly body may have been inherited, impregnated with disease,
it may be scrofula or some other poison. The diseases thus
generated are of the worst type, the most difficult to cure, and
the most destructive to industry and self-support.
Disease, in all its diversified forms and attendant conse-
quences, is productive of more pauperism probably than any
other one cause. It is not the disease so much found in
hospitals and public institutions as that everywhere scattered
in the common walks of life, and especially in the lower orders
of society. Sanitary measures and boards of health will, in the
course of time, do a noble work in the prevention of pauperism ;
but if, then, the hereditary diseases which are generally more
prevalent in that class of the community most likely to become
paupers, could be prevented or abridged, it would save an untold
amount of pauperism, especially in the course of two or three
generations.
If this prevention of disease, or improvement in hereditary
agencies, could be extended to the defective classes?to the
idiotic and feeble-minded, to the deaf and dumb, to the blind,
and the insane?it would make a notable difference in the
amount of pauperism. The cause of our finding so large a
number of paupers in these defective classes, is violated physical
laws, either on the part of the individuals themselves or their
ancestors. While we cannot determine just what proportion of
these evils are of hereditary origin, nor point out exactly the
line of causation in their production, there is no question but
that a great deal can be done, by proper means, towards prevent-
ing them.
In the condition of these several classes there is one feature
B 2
228 PREVENTION OF DISEASE, INSANITY,
bearing on pauperism which should be alluded to. Whenever
they once become paupers, it is generally for life. The expense
of supporting such paupers is very large and becomes every year
more and more burdensome. Private means gradually become
exhausted, and the public is constantly being burdened with a
larger and larger proportion of these dependents. Striking
illustrations of this might be cited in the case of chronic
insanity. And we can see no reasons why pauperism from these
sources should not continue to increase, unless some systematic
measures are adopted to prevent the filling up of the ranks of
these defective classes.
Within a few years great advances have been made in the
knowledge of the laws of inheritance; and there are reasons to
believe that we have only entered upon the threshold of
researches in this direction. When more extended observations
are brought to bear upon this point, and when the quality of the
blood and pathological anatomy, in their relations to heredity,
shall become more thoroughly inspected by the microscope,
these laws of hereditary descent will be far better understood.
Besides, it will be found that these laws all have their origin in
a general law of propagation, which is based upon a normal
standard of physiology, perfect in structure and healthy in
function; and that marked deviations from this standard
predispose the subject, it maybe, to disease, or insanity, or crime,
or pauperism. When these deviations or violations of law are
continued through two or three generations, their effects become
more marked or intensified. As all these changes are brought
about by human agency, the cure or remedy is lodged in the
same hands. When these hereditary laws shall become correctly
and generally understood, it will be seen that the public at large
has the power to modify or avert evils which are terribly
oppressive and burdensome. Prevention in this way is infinitely
better than cure.
In closing this paper, it is unnecessary to enlarge upon the
magnitude of the evils here mentioned. Our aim has been to
adhere strictly to a line of thought, fact and argument, which
is practical and commends itself to the common sense, as well as
intelligence, of the community. The indications are marked
that, in the treatment of disease, certain agencies have been set
in motion which must result in great reform. If the next
twenty years shall witness as much improvement as the past,
there will be found at the close of this century a marked dimi-
nution of disease, as well as improved rate of mortality and
prolongation of human life. The principles of physiology and
hygiene in their hearings on health will become far better
understood, enabling individuals to take better care of themselves
CRIME AND PAUPERISM. 229
and to ward off tlie first approaches of disease. As about one-
third of all insanity can be traced to hereditary sources, the
general improvement of the constitution and health of a people
will go far to prevent insanity; and in case persons become
insane, this same knowledge will afford essential help in its
treatment.
It may be said, that while this improvement in physical
organisation and extension of knowledge may serve to prevent
disease and insanity, its effects in diminishing crime and
pauperism cannot be very marked. But in time (it may take
two or three generations) such a reform must reach the criminal
and the pauper. Improve physical organisation and diffuse
practical knowledge concerning it?and the number of criminals
and paupers must be diminished. It cannot be otherwise.
Improvements, based upon the principles of science and involving
the highest welfare of man, never go backward nor remain
stationary. Such reforms, once started, must go forward.
A distinguished statesman, in the immediate prospect of
death, once expressed the desire that, if it were possible, he
might live fifty years more to see certain reforms in government.
So the philanthropist, in forecasting the future, may well express
the wish to live another half-century, to witness the great
improvements in society arising from the unfolding of physical
laws and the applications of science.
