Case Of Opium Habit And Chloral Habit Combined
===============================================

116
Art. XI.?D.
BY EDWARD C. MANN, M.D.
Upon the 21st day of January, 1878, there was admitted at
Sunnyside, the following unique case, which is a very interest-
ing one in many respects.
Mr.  , an officer in the army, who has been addicted
to the use of opium for 35 years, was treated in 1856 for it
with no success whatever. Is 53 years of age. At the age of 13
years he went to China, and from thence to India, where he
discovered by experiment the fascination of the drug when
eaten, and commenced the habit as a luxury. He was in the
British Army in India for twelve years, during which time he
continued the habit until, in the year 1856, he had reached the
amount of 200 grains daily. Previous to this time he had re-
peatedly endeavoured to break off from the habit, by voluntarily
discontinuing the use of opium, but each time succumbed to
the intolerable suffering which he experienced. He applied at
this time for treatment to an Indiana physician, who failed to
eradicate the habit, or even to quiet the craving for opium. He
therefore continued to take this dose of 200 grains of opium
per day in the form of the alkaloid morphia, although he felt
convinced that it was impairing his mental faculties very
markedly. The will-power had become so impaired that the
morbid impulse or craving impelled him irresistibly, regardless
of all consequences. He served through the Mexican war, and
also through the late civil war. During the progress of the
war, feeling that his memory was failing rapidly, and that his
physical health was being undermined, he reduced his daily
allowance to 125 grains of opium per day. He was so fearful
of being taken prisoner and thus losing his opium, that he
carried about his person a small pistol, determined in the event
of his capture to commit suicide, rather than undergo the
torture which the sudden deprivation of his stimulus would
cause. This is a striking instance of the moral cowardice which
this disease induces, as the patient was noted for his personal
bravery on the battle-field, having repeatedly led desperate
charges. At the close of the war he commenced to take
chloral as soon as he heard of its effect, hoping that he should
be enabled to leave off opium. This, however, he did not do,
but continuing the opium habit and the chloral in addition,
CASE OF OPIUM HABIT, ETC. 117
soon reached the amount of half an ounce daily. Upon his
admission to Sunnyside he was on the verge of insanity
?emaciated, feeble, pale and anaemic, feeble gait, no ap-
preciation of condition or surroundings, hallucinations of
sight and hearing, and delusions of fear and persecution.
Was very much excited. Several doses of a combination of the
bromide of sodium and cannabis indica were administered, also
chloral and hyoscyamus, and toward morning he became quiet.
The next morning he was partially aware of his condition,
but excited with rapidly changing delusions and hallucinations;
was given beef tea and milk, in small quantities, at short
intervals. A bi-temporal current from four cells of the galvanic
battery was applied for some minutes twice in the day, with the
effect of calming the excitement, and the same medicines
continued internally. The following night he slept a few
hours ; on the third day of treatment, there was marked im-
provement ; the bowels, which had been obstinately constipated
for a long time, were opened by enemata containing turpentine,
and the intense restlessness and the delusions disappeared, and
the patient expressed the desire to be cured. The constant
current was used as central galvanisation, the negative pile at
the epigastrium, and the positive applied successively over
the cranial centre, cilio-spinal centre, and the cervical sym-
pathetic. The induced current was applied after the manner
of general faradisation, particular attention being paid to the
brain and spinal cord, which so stimulated him that he bore
the entire withdrawal of the chloral. At the time of admission
he was taking 5 grains of morphine and 240 grains of chloral
daily, as he had been obliged to cut off his opium a few days
before admission, fearing death might result from its excessive
use. This treatment has been continued daily since admission,
with the happiest results. At the time of sending this com-
munication, February 20, nearly one month since admission,
there are no delusions or hallucinations remaining, no excite-
ment ; patient is fully conscious of and realises his position,
and expects to be cured. He takes 2 grains of morphine per
diem, which is being gradually reduced, and the stimulus
which the induced current supplies to the nervous system
enables him to bear the gradual withdrawal of the opium
and the total deprivation of the chloral, and there is no
craving for it. At present he is taking phosphorus, strychnia,
and cod liver oil, with the bromide of sodium and Indian
hemp at bed time. Eafs and sleeps well, and in a few months
it is believed that the cure will be accomplished.
