Mental Disorders
=================

118
Art. XII.?
By JOHN CUIVWEN, M.D.
In examining the exciting causes of mental disorders, it is
requisite to make a division into those which may be called
moral, and those which are really physical. This distinction
has been recognised from the earliest period and by the best
writers, though in these latter days some have said that no such
division should be made. It is claimed, by those who advocate
that physical causes alone can produce mental disorder, that
disease can only be produced by some physical cause acting on
the organism, but this is most surely substituting effect for
cause. It is useless to attempt to ignore the influence of moral
causes, of the affections, passions, desires, and emotions in the
production of derangements of the different organs of the body.
No one who has given attention to the reciprocal influence of
mind and body can for a moment question the fact that joy and
hope will exercise an active exhilarating influence on the func-
tions of the different organs, while fear, terror, anxiety, fright,
or any of the depressing passions, will cause a temporary sus-
pension of some of the functions, or a cessation for a short period
of the normal action of certain organs.
The nervous constitutions of individuals are so diverse one
from another that the susceptibility to impressions arising
from the action of the emotions, passions, etc. is of the most
varied character, and the effects consequent on these impressions
will necessarily influence the several organs of the body in a
very different manner. Fright or the receipt of bad news will
produce an entirely different effect on a number of persons who
may experience the same fright or receive the same bad news at
the same time ; just as exposure to severe cold or sudden change
of temperature may produce in one an ordinary cold in the head,
in another pneumonia, in a third enteritis, and some other
severe affection in a fourth, depending entirely on the physical
condition of the individual at the time of exposure.
It does not seem difficult to trace the connection between
moral causes and physical disease. Fright in many persons
exercises a paralysing or benumbing influence on the nervous
system, and thus impairs the normal action of the heart and
many of the other organs.
An address delivered before the Medical Socioty of the State of Pennsylvania.
MENTAL DISORDERS. 119
Anxiety will cause loss of appetite, inability to sleep, and
other effects which gradually undermine the healthy action of
the nervous system. Loss of property, business troubles, and all
the kindred class of difficulties will occasion worry of mind,
sleepless nights, and wearisome days, which, unless checked,
will gradually deteriorate the integrity of the nervous system,
and through it some of the vital organs, and thus produce in
some bodily disease and in others mental disorder.
The direct chain of causation may be in this wise : a man
meets with great reverses in business, and cannot perceive how
he can meet his engagements and support his family. He
broods over his condition, loses sleep at night, feels less able on
the subsequent day to give his wonted attention to his affairs;
his appetite fails ; the other functions of the system become
disordered, he feels his bodily strength failing, and each suc-
ceeding day he experiences greater difficulty in giving that
thought to his business which he had done before ; and gradually
he begins to look at things in a different light from that in
which he had been accustomed to view them, and soon every-
thing becomes changed to him, and his conduct and conver-
sation attract the attention of his family, who now see that he
is not what he formerly was, and his whole system is disordered.
Now it may be said that the disordered condition of system
immediately antecedent to the outbreak of mental disorder,
beiug a physical disease, was the cause of that mental disorder ;
but surely that is merely substituting effect for cause, since that
disorder is only the result of a cause tending, from the peculiar
nervous constitution of the person, gradually to produce that
particular diseased condition.
It is needless in this presence to cite a long series of cases
giving evidence of the influence of the different emotions or
passions in the production of disease. If the anxieties and
terrors of the French Revolution of 1789 greatly increased the
amount of cardiac disease in the French people, it as certainly
very greatly increased the number of cases of mental disorder.
If the fear and alarm caused by being told that the bedding in
which he had slept had been previously used by a man who had
died of cholera could produce in a man an attack of cholera, we
can certainly have no great difficulty in believing that the fear
or dread of some impending calamity may produce an attack of
mental disorder in another.
It is a matter of historic record that any great social or
political revolution in a community or State will cause a large
number of cases of mental disorder. In I ranee, in each of the
revolutions which have taken place within the last century,
medical writers have remarked the great increase of mental
120 MENTAL DISORDERS.
disorders consequent on those fearful changes. The breaking
out of the war in 1870 was attended by a great and sudden
increase for a few months of cases of mental disorder. It
may also be noted as a remarkable fact that, while a
great increase of mental disorder was noticeable at the
commencement of the war, yet, after the attention of the
country was fully engrossed in the prosecution of the war, and
in all the cares and duties consequent on its continuance, mental
disorders were less frequent than for several years previous,
arising unquestionably from the fact that the public mind, as
well as the minds of individuals, was fully occupied with the
duties and obligations which the successful prosecution required
and entailed.
Nothing need be assumed to account for these peculiar
conditions, for they all proceed from the influence of certain
fixed laws of the human economy, which we cannot ignore, if
we would, and which are susceptible of definite explanation and
positive proof.
As a large dose of poison may suddenly cause death, while
smaller doses, administered gradually, may undermine the
health and thus produce disease and death ; so certain passions
and emotions act on some constitutions with such overwhelming
power as to cause mental disorder quite suddenly; while in
others the same passions and emotions, by their slow but con-
tinued action, may exert such a deleterious influence on the
nervous system, and thus so influence the functions of certain
vital organs, as to impair the proper discharge of those func-
tions, and thus gradually produce a condition which will cause
loss of appetite and sleeplessness, and eventually such a derange-
ment of the nervous system as to lead to some form of mental
disorder. Everyone is familiar, from daily observation, with
that state of worry or fret in many individuals which leads
them continually to be on the look out for trouble or to lament
over the past to such an extent as to cause sleepless nights and
consequent irregular action of the stomach and bowels, and
gradually leading on, unless corrected by proper treatment, to
mental disorder. Whatever classification may be adopted of
the moral powers, of the exciting or depressing passions, the
cheerful or sorrowful emotions and desires, or the benevolent or
malevolent affections, each and all may have an influence,
singly or combined, in producing some form of mental disorder,
and the particular form will be determined more by the pecu-
liar constitution and temperament of the individual than by
tlie special moral cause inducing it; and this difference and
determining power will also be more perceptible in the female
than in the male, from the fact that the female sex is more
MENTAL DISORDERS.
121
impressionable, or more readily and more forcibly influenced by
the emotions and affections.
It is a matter of general observation that, in the majority
of cases of mental disorder, one or more causes combine to
produce the unhealthy condition from which the trouble
arises; and in cases where there is an hereditary predisposition to
the disorder, moral causes will act much more readily, the
faulty constitution yielding much more quickly to the strain or
pressure brought to bear upon it.
It must also be distinctly recognised that the different
depressing emotions and passions, and the malevolent affections,
have a much greater influence in the production of mental
disorders than those of the opposite character, from the un-
doubted fact that they tend in a greater degree to impair the
vital energy and diminish the power of resistance to disease,
and seriously interfere with the elasticity of the other mental
powers. Imagination has also a wonderful influence in the pro-
duction of disordered conditions, and its effect in inducing
disease, or as a prime factor in aiding in restoration, is so great
and so fully acknowledged, that it is not requisite at this time
and in this presence to enter into any detailed or extended
statement respecting it. And as prevention is better than
cure, it seems appropriate at this point to call the attention of
every medical man to the propriety of inculcating, by every
opportunity in his power, the urgent necessity of careful train-
ing and restraint of the moral powers in the early years of
childhood and maturity, in order to guard more assiduously
against the evil results which may ensue from too great indul-
gence of certain passions and emotions, or the too exclusive
cultivation of certain desires and affections.
As in ordinary diseases it is usual to consider that the
system of the patient is of a certain temperament which
specially predisposes or renders more susceptible to a particular
disease, so, as lias on a previous occasion been stated, there may
be a special insane diathesis, or strong hereditary taint, which
so weakens the nervous system that any cause, moral or physical,
acts with special force, or much more promptly than in a really
healthy or untainted constitution.
It will also be found in many cases that the mental disorder
may be caused by reflex irritation, or the perverted action of
other organs.
It is needless to attempt to give even a list of the many
physical causes which may determine an attack of mental dis-
order, for they may all be summed up in one short statement,
that any disease, over-exertion, or excess which will greatly
weaken the nervous system or interfere with its normal action
will, in certain constitutions, and under certain circumstances,
122 MENTAL DISORDERS.
varying in character, degree, and intensity, be sure to be an ex-
citing cause of mental disorder ; for it must be distinctly borne
in mind that nearly every case of mental disorder which the pro-
fession is called upon to treat in these days has an asthenic type.
What the particular form which the mental disorder may be
will be determined by a variety of conditions which are not by
any means clearly defined or easily explained, and which, being
of a speculative and not practical character, need not here be
dwelt upon.
There has been, latterly, a great inclination to attempt a
variety of classifications in mental disorders, and arrange the
different forms under certain fanciful types or classes, which may
answer very well for writers and theorists, or those who are fond
of minute and careful distinctions, but in reality are of no
essential value or assistance to the practitioner.
It will fully answer the object now in view, and very much
simplify the whole subject, to take, as the basis of what it is
desirable to say, the old division into mania, monomania, melan-
cholia, and dementia,including under eacli the acute and chronic
forms, with such variations as may arise from peculiar physical
conditions or diseases.
In all cases of mental disorder there is a period of incuba-
tion, varying with the character and intensity of the exciting
cause from a few hours to many years. Certain causes may be
so intense in their action that the interval between their im-
pression and the development of the disease may be marked
with very little appreciable extent; while cases are reported
where a very long period has elapsed, and there may have been
a combination of causes gradually inducing the disordered
condition; and very great care should be exercised in the in-
vestigation of these causes, in order to avoid as much as
possible the error, into which friends and relations so frequently
fall, of confounding effects with causes. A little patient inves-
tigation will, however, serve to unravel, in the great majority
of cases, the tangled web, and enable the physician to trace to
one or two causes all the trouble he may be called upon to treat.
Very frequently there will be observed in the commencement
of the disorder a period of dulness and depression ; an inability
or unwillingness to attend to the ordinary duties which have
generally engaged the time and attention ; a disposition to shun
company, and even the society of those with whom the person has
been most familiar, or the members of the family ; a carelessness
in dress or appearance foreign to the character ot the individual;
a disregard of the many minor proprieties of lite ; an undue atten-
tion to matters of small consequence, which would not, in health,
have been thought of; an exaggeration of trifles, a perversion
MENTAL DISORDERS. 123
or unusual irritability of temper, and a deviation from the
strict line of moral rectitude in conversation, or in ordinary
dealings with others in the everyday transactions of life.
These latter are especially to be looked for, as, in the great
majority of cases, the first evidence of any disordered condition
will be traced in the perversion of the moral powers and a
change in the character, conduct, and conversation of the
person. These deviations will gradually become more and more
marked, until the whole conduct and character of the man has
become changed, and he has passed the line which separates the
normal from the abnormal state; and the form which the
disorder will assume will be determined by causes or incidents,
or the bodily condition which may exist at or immediately
before the time at which the line is crossed.
Of course it must be understood that all these indications
may not be presented in the same case, or in the order men-
tioned ; but one or more will be found in every one, and the
physician must be prepared to trace out the particular devia-
tions from the correct course so clearly and distinctly as to satisfy
himself and the family and friends that the deviation does
actually exist, and the man has reached the point where
medical interference is requisite for his own good and that of
the family and neighbourhood.
A physician is called to see a man in regard to whom the
friends feel uneasy, and unable or unwilling to say what is the
matter with him. He finds him fretful, restless, at times quite
irritable on the least opposition or contradiction; unable to
attend to his business, or doing it in a way contrary to his
former method. He ascertains that he is sleepless, sits up
unusually late, or rises during the night or much earlier than
usual in the morning; cannot fix his attention on what he is
doing for any length of time, or has an unusual amount of
business to attend to which requires him to be riding about or
going from one place to another without regard to time or
propriety; making bargains for tilings he has no use for, or at an
extravagant price, or in unusual quantities ; talks a great deal
more than is usual with him, is very positive and certain in all
he says, is specially communicative to particular persons in a
low tone or by drawing them to one side so that others may not
hear; in many things manifests more than his usual shrewdness;
is either too much occupied to sit down quietly and talk, or has
a special desire to talk a great deal over what he is doing or
proposes to do. His appetite will be capricious, eating very
irregularly and scarcely sufficient to support his strength, or
very voraciously and more frequently than usual. Added to
these will be an indifference to outward appearances ; a dis-
124 MENTAL DISORDERS.
regard of the usual proprieties of social intercourse, finding
fault with everybody and everything; he is distrustful, un-
usually egotistic, and intensely selfish in thought, feeling, and
expression.
If spoken to about his health, he was never better in his
life ; be feels able to do any amount of work, and rejects with
disdain any suggestion which may be made that he will suffer
from loss of sleep or his great activity. In a short time he
becomes more restless and excited, talks more rapidly, and
manifests more incoherence in his ideas, or is full of plans and
projects for doing all manner of business and making his fortune
in an incredibly short period, or has a great desire to do some
great exploit which will inure to the benefit of the community;
or he will manifest an inclination to destroy or injure property
of different kinds ; will exhibit a malignant or revengeful spirit,
threatening or talking in a very insulting manner to those he
meets ; jealous, suspicious of everything he may hear or see
done, misconstruing and misinterpreting every expression, and
acting as if he were determined to pick a quarrel with some one.
He sleeps little or none, and moves about from place to
place all night, or does something which disturbs the rest of
the family and makes them fearful and anxious, and often
abuses them for their interference in what he is doing or for
the advice they offer him.
Rejecting all advice and every effort made to relieve this
condition, he will soon experience an attack of acute mania,
with unusual restlessness, constant noisy talking in an inco-
herent strain on a great variety of subjects; destroying
clothing, furniture, or anything which comes in his way ; using
the most profane and obscene language; sometimes in good
humour, more often cross, irritable, and abusive, but never con-
tinuing in the same state any length of time.
The violence and intensity of the attack will depend on the
peculiar temperament and physical condition of the patient,
varying from the most extreme to the most gentle excitement;
but in all partaking of the same general evidence of departure
from healthy, normal action.
An examination of the physical symptoms will show a dry,
harsh skin ; the hands clammy, or dry and rough; sometimes
cold with a very languid circulation; the countenance with a
peculiar heavy or very changeable appearance, the eyes lacking
their natural lustre and expression, or with a strange, uneasy
motion, so that he is unable to look steadily at any person or
anything for more than a moment at a time ; the tongue coated;
the mouth frequently dry from the constant talking ; the bowels
constipated, and all the secretions more or less disordered; the
MENTAL DISORDERS. 125
pulse but slightly if at all excited when the patient will remain
quiet for a few moments to give a fair opportunity to examine
it; the head nearly natural as to temperature, and very rarely
much heated.
There is, however, a form of acute mania which is very
severe, often quite sudden in its access and very rapid in its
course, which needs to be very carefully distinguished. The
patient may feel dull and languid for several days, with very
little to excite any apprehension; when suddenly he may become
violently and even furiously excited, with the most intense rest-
lessness, the most rapid and continuous utterance, or?to use the
French expression?a tireless babel of the most incoherent
language with scarcely three connected words, which it often
seems impossible to interrupt; a quick weak pulse, running up
to 120 or even 140; with little heat of the scalp, a dry skin,
sometimes moist, however, from the excessive agitation; a
great dryness of the mouth and tongue from the incessant
chattering, which is so much beyond the patient's control that
he will not stop to take water to cool the mouth and tongue, or
to answer a question, or even swallow the food when put to the
mouth; and the countenance has a peculiar, distressed, and
anxious expression. It is especially desirable to reach a correct
diagnosis in such cases, as their duration rarely exceeds ten days,
and if the proper treatment is not applied promptly and
vigorously death will close the scene at the end of that period.
There is also a form called transitory mania, lasting from a
few hours to one or two days, during which the mind of the
patient is very much disordered, and sometimes great excite-
ment is found; the face is often red and flushed ; the eyes
flashing, and with a peculiar restless expression, the look wild
and often fierce; the skin moist; the pulse rather full and
frequent; and the whole manner agitated as if in great fear or
anxious to do something of a violent character, which, indeed,
is often attempted and sometimes carried into execution.
Such cases have been thought by some to arise from an error
of diagnosis, but too many well-authenticated cases have been
seen by careful and competent observers to render such an
opinion tenable. Many physicians take the ground that these
are simply developments of epilepsy, this peculiar condition
taking the place of the regular convulsion, or being a more
prominent expression of the masked form.
A monograph by Dr Edward Jarvis on this subject shows
that one hundred cases at least are recorded, and an able paper
on the same subject has been written by Dr. Kraft Ebing of
Germany. The diagnosis of this form is mainly important on
account of the medico-legal questions which may arise, should
126 MENTAL DISORDERS.
the individual commit any violation of the law while suffering
from it.
Another form will be met with, usually called recurrent
mania, where the excitement varies in intensity from the mildest
mischievous disposition, with constant foolish or extravagant
talking and restless agitation, to the most violent form?noisy,
boisterous, destructive of everything within reach, filthy and
extremely careless in every way, continuing from a few weeks
to many months, followed by a period of depression correspond-
ing in duration and intensity with the previous excitement;
then an interval of complete restoration; and after this restora-
tion has continued for a certain period the excitement will
return and the disease will follow the same course as in 'the
previous attack. Often these attacks will recur at the same
period of the year, almost to a day, and will follow the same order
as in the first attack, with scarcely any variation or change in
the character of the disease. The length of time during which
the excitement may continue will be of very variable duration,
so that in some cases there may be two attacks in the course of
the year; but most generally there is only one, and the extreme
regularity of these attacks and the uniformity of the symptoms
which characterise them has led the French to give the disease
the name of circular insanity.
As a rule, it may be said that cases of acute mania will
readily recover under proper treatment; but still it is wisest
and best to give the prognosis with great caution, because in
the earlier stages it is extremely difficult, nay, almost impos-
sible, to say what form the disease may assume, and a great
deal will also depend on the previous physical condition of the
patient. If the constitution has been impaired by any previous
bad habits or excesses, there will be great danger that the
excitement will seriously undermine the system, and the
recuperative powers may not be equal to the task of carrying
the system over the period of depression, and the patient may
sink from sheer exhaustion.
Then the physician must remember that the disease may
assume the form of recurrent mania, and he must qualify his
prognosis accordingly, for the general experience is that cases
of this form of disease do not recover.
Unless the diagnosis of exhaustive mania is very clearly
made out?and it is extremely difficult to do so satisfactorily?
any statement of the ultimate result in cases of high maniacal
excitement should be given with the greatest reserve and
caution.
It may be proper in this place to call attention to a peculiar
form of mania which within a few years has received the name
MENTAL DISORDERS. 127
of paresis, or general paralysis of the insane, in order that the
practitioner may be on his guard, not only in reference to
treatment, but particularly in regard to prognosis. It is cha-
racterised by very exalted notions of personal importance or
great wealth, or ability to perform great feats of strength or
achieve great deeds which will inure to his own personal benefit
or that of his personal friends. Some of these symptoms are
also found in cases of ordinary acute mania; but with these
exalted notions in paresis will also be found a difficulty in
articulation, with a trembling of the tongue when the attempt
is made to protrude it beyond the teeth, often a turning to one
side and a general inability to use it freely, as if it were too lar^e
for the mouth or too heavy for use, very flabby, and easily
indented by the teeth ; a peculiar dragging of one of the feet
or legs; added to these will be found a heavy, dull expression
of countenance, and an unusual appearance of the eyes, and
almost invariably an unequal contraction of the pupils. Careful
observation will be required to detect these symptoms in the
early stages, and cautious judicious treatment may relieve them
temporarily ; but let not the medical man be too sanguine of
success in restoring the patient, for when once the disease has
been developed by the appearance of the symptoms above
detailed, though the issue may be retarded by careful watching
and cautious treatment, it will advance, occasionally by rapid
strides, but most generally by very slow, insidious degrees, to
paralysis of the tongue and limbs and continued enfeeblement
of the mind.
These cases are rare except in cities or large towns, and are
almost invariably confined to men.
The special history of the disease, with a discussion of the
different points on which a diversity of opinion still exists,
and probably will continue to exist, will be found in various
monographs which have been written within the past few years.
Puerperal mania may arise during the course of gestation,
but more generally is developed after delivery, and will vary in
the intensity of the symptoms and the duration of the attack
from a slight confusion of mind, continuing during a few days,
to the most violent excitement, extending through many months.
As this disease depends on the peculiar condition of the system
and arises from that condition, there will generally be no great
difficulty in the diagnosis.
Mania arising from the continuance of epilepsy has this
striking peculiarity, that its development is most decided after
one or more convulsions. How long a person may be subject to
epileptic attacks before any symptom of mental alienation is
noticed is a matter which does not appear to have received
128 MENTAL DISORDERS.
careful attention. In a majority of cases it will depend in
great measure, no doubt, on the particular form of the epilepsy,
on the impairment of the integrity of the nervous system by
hereditary transmission of nervous disease, on the general
physical condition of the individual, and on the manner of life
which he may lead, whether cautious and systematic in the
?U<ro-anCe 3rreoularities and excitement, or careless and
indifferent, and inclined to indulgence in excesses of various
kinds.
llie form which the mental disorder will assume will also
vary very greatly in different cases. In some there will be
simply restlessness, confusion of mind, and inability to attend
to anything, or complete stupidity ; in others a dogged sullen-
ness, with a fierce scowl on the countenance, and the whole
manner and bearing such as to suggest the greatest caution to
prevent a violent outbreak; while in others, an excitement will
burst forth, perfectly blind and furious, impelling to acts of a
desperate character, regardless of everybody and everythino-,
often leading the person to attack anyone who may approach
him ; a fierce wild expression of countenance, as if some fearful
sight were present to the view, and gesticulation and movements
of the body corresponding to the excitement of the mind.
These conditions will continue from an hour, or even less to
some days, when the individual will sink into a deep sleep, con-
tinuing often for hours, and sometimes for a day or two' and
arouse from it with all the excitement gone, and only a dulness
of mind and feeling of general debility.
It is a singular and striking fact that the peculiar ideas
actions, and manner which are noticed in the first attack of ex-
citement will almost invariably be found to characterise all the
subsequent attacks, in the same order though not always in the
same degree, and these often extend to the premonitory symp-
toms ; so that, by carefully watching these and using precau-
tionary medical means, the violence of the attack may be
mitigated. The variation in different cases, however, will be
so great that it is impossible to give in detail any description
which will apply to all; but a careful observation will soon
enable anyone to discover the special symptoms of each case
and take measures accordingly.
Another fact which is proper to be carefully borne in mind
is, that what occurs during a paroxysm will be recollected in all
its details during a subsequent paroxysm but not during the
interval, and what occurs in the interval will not be present to
the mind during the paroxysm. There may be exceptions to
this, but they are so rare that they only tend to confirm the
rule.
MENTAL DISORDERS. 129
As attempts are often made, from a variety of motives, to
imitate the epileptic seizure, it may be proper to state the
diagnostic symptoms, so as to avoid confounding- the true disease
with the counterfeit presentment. The first appearance of the
attack will be manifested by different indications in almost
every case. Some will have a very distinct aura rising from some
part of the body to the head, some will utter a loud and piercing
cry, and almost every case will have something peculiar which,
to those who have seen an attack in that individual, will give
warning of what will occur. Many invariably fall forward,
striking the forehead or some part of the face; others will
stagger a moment and then fall to one side, mostly to the right;
while others again may quietly settle down on the floor; but
the variations will be as great as the persons. There will be a
deathly pallor of the face and lips, and for a few seconds after
the fall there will be no convulsive movements ; but then the
muscles of one side of the face and the corresponding side of
the body will begin to work, and the contortions will be fright-
ful, with suffusion of the face, distension of all the blood-vessels,
closure of the eyelids, a peculiar stertorous breathing, and, as
the fit progresses, frothing or foaming at the mouth, often mixed
with blood from biting the tongue. When the patient falls to
one side the first movement is a convulsive drawing up of the
knees and a turning over on the face, and when turned on the
back there may appear a convulsive movement of the muscles
of both sides; but the severity of the convulsions will be con-
fined to the muscles of the side opposite to that on which the
patient fell, and the limbs quickly straighten out. The same
unilateral character of the convulsions will also be noticed when
the patient falls on the face or settles down quietly. After con-
tinuing for a few moments these frightful contortions subside,
the patient will draw a deep sigh, try to raise himself to a
sitting posture, will fall back as if completely exhausted, and
lie in a dull stupid state for some time. If the eyelids, which
are closely shut, are carefully opened during the convulsion, it
will be found that the pupils are widely dilated and insensible
to light. If the hands are examined it will be noticed that the
thumbs are bent on themselves, and also bent in a peculiar
manner rigidly in the palms of the hands and the fingers
over them, and on the side most convulsed there will be more or
less spasmodic action of the thumbs during the convulsion. The
face and body will often be covered with profuse perspiration
from the violent action. One symptom is uniform in all cases
from the earliest period of the attack, a complete unconscious-
ness of all surrounding objects and impressions.
Sometimes, in place of the convulsion, the individual will
PART I. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. K
130 MENTAL DISORDERS.
manifest unusual irritability of temper, inclination to find fault
and quarrel with everybody and everything, or have violent
bursts of passion which are really uncontrollable, and frequently
lead to deeds of violence ; and all these, with similar symptoms,
are simply developments of the disease in a different form, ancl
must be treated accordingly.
But while these attacks are readily noticed, and can be dis-
tinctly recognised, there is another form much more obscure,
and on that account more necessary to be carefully observed and
traced out in its history and development. This is the petit
mat of the French writers or the masked epilepsy of some later
authors, and it is much more fatal to the mental integrity than
the more violent form, and often exists for years before the
patient or any one else really suspects the true nature of the
case. It may be noticed in a momentary suspension of con-
sciousness ; a fulness of the head, or, as the phrase is, a rush of
blood to the head; a feeling of vertigo ; a slight confusion of
mind; a vacant stare; and a stopping for an instant in conver-
sation, with sometimes a singular movement of the hands and
movement of the head or the muscles of the mouth ; and,
after a time, a failure of memory; an extreme irritability of
temper, flying into a passion without any provocation; a per-
verseness of conduct; and at times a sudden and unnatural
obstinacy in trifling matters, with a disposition to annoy others
and do things with the apparent purpose of giving trouble, all
of these being frequently classed under the significant but
inapplicable term, devilish.
Often the masked epilepsy occurs only at night, which adds
to the obscurity of the case and the difficulty of detection.
After continuing for a variable period, the disease will develop
most generally into true epilepsy, and even in this form may
exist longer than the friends are at first willing to believe, from
the continued occurrence at night, and the attack not being
sufficiently severe to leave very distinct evidences; and, when
the conviction is forced upon the mind by evidence which can-
not be gainsaid, the friends will insist very often that the attack
which had been brought prominently to their notice is really
the first which the patient has had.^
In no class of mental disorders is more difficulty experienced
in reaching a clear and satisfactory diagnosis than in cases of
monomania, and this difficulty arises in great part from the very
gradual approach of the disease and the slight change apparent
in the conduct and conversation of the patient in the earlier
stages, and an unwillingness to talk about their views and
feelings. The only sure guide to a correct and clear decision in
any given case will be found in a thorough and searching
MENTAL DISORDERS. 131
examination into the whole history of the individual, his
opinions, habits, and conduct, comparing him as he may be at the
time of the examination with what he had been at a previous
period of his life when really himself, and thus tracing out as
far as may be done the deviation from the healthy condition.
This will require patient and painstaking labour ; for, if Lord
Erskine, with all his great tact, ingenuity, and skill in cross-
examination, could not obtain the clue to a delusion of the
most extravagant character after hours of close examination, it
may fairly be allowed to men of less skill and ability to require
a much longer period and the most thorough investigation.
Many men are very ready to talk on the subject of their
delusion, and will very readily give all the information desired,
but there are those who are very reticent, who do not feel free
to talk about their peculiar ideas, and from these it is much
more difficult, if not impossible, to obtain such information as
will enable the physician to pronounce a decided opinion. There
will be noticed a peculiarity in the manner of the patient, a
reticence in his conversation, an abstraction of mind, a disposi-
tion to avoid others, with other deviations from the natural
disposition, long before anything may be said about the peculiar
delusion which engrosses the mind, and often the delusion will
only be ascertained from the letters which the patient may write
and the persons to whom they may be addressed.
Many of this class are very shrewd in all their business
arrangements, and in many cases their abilities seem sharpened
by disease, so that to the ordinary observer they appear quite
sound and free from any mental obliquity; but in all these
cases there is a change of conduct, a perverseness of the moral
nature, and a bearing and manner towards the members of their
own family, and a disposition to find fault with all they do,
which clearly indicate the mental disorder. The delusions of
many of this class are of a harmless character and give no
trouble or annoyance to any one, but a very large number have
such a tendency as to render their possessors very troublesome,
and often dangerous to their families and to the members of
the community at large.
The most dangerous of these forms are those which take the
homicidal tendency, where the patient may be quiet and plea-
sant for the greater part of the time, but will suddenly start up
and rush on any one near with anything which may come to
his hand, and in a few moments the paroxysm passes off, and no
one is more penitent for what may be done or attempted to be
done; but the impulse urging to the act is irresistible, and
such persons need on this account to be carefully watched to
prevent serious consequences during such paroxysms.
K 2
132 MENTAL DISORDERS.
Many persons will give warning of the feeling which
prompts the impulse, and ask to be restrained until it has
passed away, but in the majority no such warning will be given,
though to those accustomed to their manner, something in the
expression of the countenance and in the conduct will give
notice of what is to be apprehended.
Authors give a variety of names to other symptoms of the
disease, according to the form which it may manifest, but being
only names for variations of the same disease, or species of the
same genus, they need only be referred to as manifestations in
various forms of a disease which requires carefully to be inves-
tigated, and when once recognised as disease to be properly
treated, and from the tendencies manifested such treatment is
generally only practicable in some hospital for the insane.
Another form is what is usually called moral insanity.
Though the abuse of the term has rendered its use of question-
able propriety, yet it must be admitted, there is a disorder of
the moral powers which cannot be classed as simple wickedness,
however great, or inclination to evil, but is clearly and
unmistakably the result of disease, for the plain reason that it
is not a steady advance from one degree of wickedness to
another, but is a change in the man's moral nature, rendering
him just the reverse of what he had previously been. A man is
attacked with some fever or other severe disease which greatly
disorders his nervous system, and it is noticed that, as he begins
to recover, his views of his relations to his family and friends
have changed ; he is morose, regardless of truth and honour,
suspicious of all his family, profane and abusive in language,
profligate and addicted to a variety of evil habits and practices ;
in fact, he is the exact counterpart of what he was before the
attack of the disease, but, so far as can be discovered, no de-
cided intellectual disorder exists. It is claimed by some that this
cannot be classed as insanity, because the intellectual faculties
appear to act properly ; but as the mind has two classes of
faculties, moral and intellectual, is it not reasonable to infer
that the moral can be affected and disordered without any
appreciable disorder of the intellectual ?
The relations of the two classes are so intimate, that one
class must be more or less affected by the disorder of the other,
but in the disease under consideration, the intellectual dis-
order is so slight in the early stages as not readily to be traced,
and often the disease will continue for a long time without any
distinct delusion, even when the most persistent efforts are made
to discover it.
It lias, however, always seemed to me, that the very fact,
that the man was not able to recognise the manifest incon-
MENTAL DISORDERS. 133
sistency in his life and conduct with his professions, and the
total change in all his views and feelings which he is so ready to
ascribe to changes in others while it really exists in himself, must
be evidence of the weakening of the intellectual powers, and the
consequent inability to discover the correct relations of things.
Unfortunately the disease manifests itself so insidiously, and
the indications are shown so often only to the man's own family,
whom he annoys and torments by every imaginable device, and
by many devices unimaginable except to a disordered mind, and
appears so well before strangers, that it is extremely difficult in
most cases to detect the disorder in its early stages, and it runs
on until all hope of curative treatment has passed.
In some cases the disease which has blunted the moral has
sharpened some of the intellectual powers, and there is a sharp-
ness and shrewdness, combined often with a malignity of evil,
which renders the person the very incarnation of mischief and
hate, and enables him dexterously to hide, under a very
plausible exterior, his own defects, and depict in the most
glowing colours those of others. While it may be suspected
that such persons have intellectual delusions, it will defy the
sharpest examiner to bring them clearly and distinctly to the
apprehension of others, and the simple assertion of a belief in
their existence will not satisfy those who demand proof positive
of the fact.
The case must be treated and judged by what is clearly to
be seen and traced out by unmistakable symptoms, and not by
what may be supposed to exist, for no sane mind, not even the
most gifted of those who have been longest engaged in the
treatment of the insane, can imagine what extragavant vagary
may lie concealed behind the shadowy veil of the man's out-
ward conduct and deportment.
The symptoms of melancholy are generally so clear and
positive that it does not seem worth while to give a detailed
statement of them ; but there are certain antecedent conditions
leading to the disease which claim attention in order, if possible,
to avert the impending trouble.
In these times, when the violent and sudden changes
in values, and the fluctuations consequent on these changes,
require the constant and earnest attention of men of business,
there is a large class who feel sensibly the effect of this great
and continued strain on their nervous system. The constant
anxiety, the close and continuous effort of mind required to
prevent the injurious effect on their own daily transactions, of
the many rapid changes which occur in the course of business
with the strong desire to maintain their own credit, and keep
their families happy and comfortable, act on many men by
134 MENTAL DISORDERS.
causing sleepless nights, a gradual diminution of appetite with
a consequent feeling of languor and inability to give that close
thought and application to their duties which hitherto they
have been in the habit of doing, a depression of spirits and a
constant foreboding and apprehension of evil.
A single step only in almost all these cases is requisite to
carry the man across the border line into melancholy, though
many men sever the vital cord by some violent means just
while lingering near the line, and before the family and friends
can summon up courage to realise the situation and take the
proper steps to prevent such an act.
These antecedent conditions require all the caution, skill,
and tact of the physician so to adapt the means for their
relief that the progress of the disease may be stayed, and the
man turned back in health and soundness to his family and to
society. The means to be used are absolute rest and change of
scene, if it can be had, but, if not, relaxation from the severe
strain to as great an extent as can be secured, the application
of the appropriate means to secure regular and abundant sleep,
with the use of the remedies most conducive to strengthen and
improve the condition of the nervous system and correct the
errors of digestion. These means will, of course, vary with the
condition of the patient, his peculiar temperament and idiosyn-
crasy, and the necessity for greater or less promptness in the
administration of the proper remedies; one thing must, how-
ever, be steadily kept in view, the avoidance of stimulants of
every kind, for though they may act more promptly and give
relief more speedily, the great danger must be considered of
leading the man into a habit which may bind him with bonds
he may not be able to break, and cause greater distress and
trouble to his family than an attack of mental disorder.
In cases of melancholy the delusions and hallucinations are
all sad and distressing, either of some great and unpardonable
sin committed, some duty neglected, some injury inflicted on
others ; the exaggeration of some slight action, trifling thought,
or hasty expression into a fearful offence against their fellow
men ; the apprehension of great torture or punishment to be
inflicted on the person himself or his family, with constant
self-accusation ; avoiding the society of others and brooding in
seclusion over the condition into which each one imagines these
things to have brought him. With this distress of mind is
almost always associated a depressed state of all the physical
powers, loss of appetite, great inability to sleep, and sluggish-
ness of all the different functions of the body.
The condition most to be dreaded in all these cases is when
the suicidal disposition is strongly manifested, for, while the
MENTAL DISORDERS. 135
idea is present to tlie mind in all cases, it is developed with
fearful force and power in others, and then the greatest possible
precaution and vigilance will be required at all times. When
the disease has assumed the form of religious melancholy, and
the patient believes himself forsaken of God, having com-
mitted the unpardonable sin, or in some other unaccountable
manner lost the favour of God and man, this suicidal propensity
haunts the mind with fearful force, and to the same mind the
singular inconsistency is constantly manifested of the constant
fear of death and the torments they believe they will suffer after
death, and the continual effort to rush into that very state they
so much dread.
It is very often stated, when inquiry is made into the cause
of melancholy, that the condition has been induced by too great
reading of religious books, or too constant attendance on reli-
gious services. Careful observation in these cases will show
that this is rather a hasty assumption, and that the reading of
religious books, or attendance on religious meetings, is an effect,
not a cause, of the state of mind which immediately precedes
the positive manifestation of mental disorder. The person,
without understanding the cause, and being unwilling to say
anything to his friends on the subject, feels miserable and un-
comfortable ; the mind is depressed and filled with gloomy
apprehensions, and the resort is to the Bible or other religious
books, in the hope of finding something which will afford
comfort and consolation, and thus bring relief; but as the mind
is confused and troubled, the effect desired is not obtained in
the manner expected, and the more the person reads, the more
confused and troubled be becomes. Some active medication to
relieve the disordered system, and something to give sound
sleep for several successive nights, would sooner dissipate all the
fears and clear the mind and enable the person to see things
clearly.
Very many cases of religious melancholy occur in those who
have led most correct and religious lives, who are scrupulously
exact in the discharge of all their duties, and in whom no one
could trace any irregularity of life or conduct, but in whom the
nervous system has been weakened by some physical disease or
unusual strain, and the person hopes by more strict attention
to religious matters to relieve the uncomfortable condition,
when, in reality, what is particularly needed is rest and nourish-
ment.
There is a form of acute melancholy which is not common,
but on that account, and also because of its rapid course, needs
to be more carefully examined. In connection with the dis-
tressed ideas and great depression of mind, there is a peculiar
136 MENTAL DISORDERS.
duskiness of tlie countenance, often a suffused condition of the
eyes, and frequent disposition to weep ; a frequent and languid
pulse, and a languid capillary circulation; a clamminess of the
hands and surface of the body, in contrast with the dry and
harsh skin in ordinary cases of melancholy; loss of appetite
and great physical debility, which give warning of a tendency
to pulmonary troubles, and unless proper attention is given in
the early stages to such cases, they very rapidly run into pul-
monary consumption.
It may not be amiss here to state that in many cases of
melancholy phthisis is developed in a very insidious manner,
so that, before any one suspects the true nature of the case, the
disease has assumed a most positive and dangerous form, and
has passed beyond the reach of any restorative means.
There is often a disposition on the part of some people to
make light of all the troubles which persons labouring under
melancholy experience, saying they are all imaginary, and
attempting to reason with or ridicule them on account of these
fears and anxieties. But it is utterly useless to attempt to
reason against or ridicule them, for they are as fixed in the
patient's mind as the bodily ailment which causes them, and as
to their imaginary character, I know no better answer than that
given by an elderly lady, " They say all these notions and pains
are only imaginary, but they are all real to me, and I suffer just
as much from them." What they need will be a few words of
kindly sympathy, pleasantly and cheerily expressed, and the
assurance that everything will be done to relieve them and make
them more comfortable.
Though dementia is usually regarded as the termination of
every class of mental disorders which does not yield to restora-
tive treatment, there is an acute form of the disease which
requires attention and careful treatment. This will be mani-
fested by apparent obliteration of all the mental faculties ;
entire stupidity, so as not to take notice of anything transpiring
around, or even speaking in any way ; standing for hours in the
same posture with scarce a movement; great carelessness in
every respect; coldness and lividity of the whole capillary
circulation, with great languor of the whole arterial circulation,
and every function of the body in full sympathy with this
extremely depressed condition.
It is proper also to call attention to the great periodicity so
frequently noticed in cases of mental disorder, so that in certain
classes nearly every case will partake of this character and render
it extremely difficult to form an opinion as to the ultimate
result of the case, for, while this periodicity complicates the case
and leads to the belief that no restoration will be effected, there
MENTAL DISORDERS. 137
are those in whom this condition gradually wears off and the
patient recovers entirely.
The lesson to be drawn from these facts is to exercise
extreme caution in expressing a positive prognosis in any given
case, for it has been the experience of every superintendent of a
hospital for the insane to have had his predictions frequently
falsified both in regard to restorations promised and unfavourable
results anticipated.
Two principles must be constantly kept in mind in the
treatment of the different forms of mental disorder, as well as
in all nervous diseases: to secure ample rest and to administer
carefully and systematically proper nourishment.
It has been usual to recommend to persons suffering from
mental disorder to take a greater amount of bodily exercise than
they have generally seemed inclined to do, and those afflicted
with various nervous diseases are often urged to take more
exercise in order to become stronger. The natural inclination
in many persons so afflicted and suffering from languor, lassi-
tude, and a feeling of general debility is to keep quiet and do
as little as possible, and this indication of nature for rest ought
to be more respected than it usually has been. It would seem
that a little consideration would show the fallacy and injury in
recommending exercise in such cases. The nervous system has
been injured by overstrain of some kind, and what is essentially
requisite to enable it to regain its healthy action is rest, absolute
rest for a time, and then alternating with exercise very care-
fully graduated and regulated.
Every one will admit, that in order to relieve and restore
speedily a sprained limb, it should be kept quiet as possible; if the
eye is injured by too steady work too long continued, or by the
effect of too great light, it should have rest and protection, and
the same principle must be applied where the mind is suffering
from great disorder of the nervous system. It is an acknow-
ledged fact that every physical act of the system is accom-
panied with loss of power and waste of substance, muscular and
nervous, so that in any system already enfeebled, and where the
nerve power is so much injured as to show decided symptoms
of disease, it is only reasonable and right to enforce rest, so
that the loss of power and the waste may be reduced to the
minimum.
The same principle must also be insisted on in regard to the
mind when in any way or from any cause disordered in its action ;
constant exercise of any kind will only tend to increase the
condition on which the disorder depends, for as every act of the
mind involves the waste and decay of the cells of the brain by
which the manifestations are made known to us, it must be
138 MENTAL DISORDERS.
clear that in a part already weakened, continued exercise will
only further impair its power, and the more positive the enforce-
ment of rest, the less will be the loss of power and the better the
prospect of restoration.
Then having insisted on and practised rest, it is as needful
that the loss of power and the waste be supplied by the regular
and systematic administration of good substantial nourish-
ment, and, if the powers of assimilation are much impaired, the
proper remedies must be given to restore them to their normal
action.
It is too common to give weak broths and such dilutions to
persons suffering from languor and lassitude, or even to those in
a more excited state. What is really needed is some more
positive food which can be readily acted on, and give a larger
amount of nutritive matter for the quantity taken, and the great
majority of persons have such a strong dislike and even repug-
nance for such watery extracts, that their taste and their
strength would both be better consulted by such food as eggs,
egg and milk, bread, meat, tender and well-cooked and free
from grease, with such vegetables as are agreeable. It is
preferable and desirable to insist on the rule, a little and often,
than to keep on filling the stomach with a quantity of watery
material with an almost infinitesimal amount of nutritive
matter in it.
In cases of acute mania, as a rule, the appetite is good and
often ravenous to supply the demand consequent on the great
physical exercise ; but in those suffering from melancholy, the
desire for food is often, and indeed generally, very slight, and
they require to be carefully watched to prevent their neglect
and refusal of such food as may be really needed for their
support.
The primary indication in the treatment of mental disorders
is to correct the diseased or disordered condition on which the
irregular action depends. The causes inducing that disordered
action may have been very various, and their removal will
claim the earliest attention, but the treatment of the condition
consequent on their action must be carefully investigated and
conducted so that the nervous system may be placed in the
most favourable state for the process of repair and renovation.
The loss of sleep is one of those conditions almost invariably
found in the commencement of all cases of mental disorders
which tends to great deterioration of the nervous power, and
consequent irregular action of the more important viscera.
Belonging to the class of middle age physic, cautious and con-
servative, I have never yet been able to see the force of the
reasoning which would discard the discreet and moderate use of
MENTAL DISORDERS. 139
calomel, and I am confident that, in many persons, the disease
lias been shortened and restoration more promptly promoted
than if it had not been used. I do not profess to explain its
physiological action, but from an experience of a third of a
century, confidence in its therapeutic benefit is strengthened,
not diminished.
Commencing the treatment with six grains of calomel and
ten grains of Dover's powder at night, followed by castor oil,
or some other medicine calculated to produce a free but not
exhausting catharsis, the system is prepared for whatever
treatment may be most clearly indicated by the symptoms
presented.
Every case must be carefully studied by itself, and no
system of treatment can be laid down which will meet all the
varying symptoms presented by different cases; but a little
care and caution will soon enable the practitioner to ascertain
what will be best adapted to the particular case in hand.
In acute mania the clear and positive indication is to
induce rest and quiet, and that is usually best secured by some
of the preparations of opium. Of course the idiosyncrasies of
patients in reference to the use of these preparations must be
carefully watched, and often when one preparation will not
agree another may be tried and then another, and, given in
combination with extract, byoscyami, some one of the prepara-
tions will often be more readily borne, and appear to act more
satisfactorily than by itself.
If there is decided contraction of the pupils, with a dry and
parched condition of the tongue and fauces, the medicine does
not agree, and must be stopped, but often there is a very dry
state of the tongue, caused by constant talking, and little effect
011 the pupils, and this state may readily be removed by drink-
ing some water.
O ? ?
The regular administration of the preparations of opium
has a tendency in many persons to produce constipation, which
must be guarded against and relieved by such means as will act
most gently. Some writers, who claim to be authority, declaim
against the use of opium on account of its supposed tendency to
injure the brain and render mental disorders chronic. Such
has not been my experience, and I fear that those who have had
such experience have been very careless in the administration
of the drug, and very inattentive to the general treatment.
Many physicians rely 011 bromide of potassium to produce sleep,
but except in large doses it lias very little beneficial effect in
cases of insomnia accompanying mental disorders, and the large
doses required often derange the stomach and produce bromisin,
the effects of which are very depressing and troublesome to
relieve.
X40 MENTAL DISORDERS.
Convinced that chloral hydrate is a remedy which requires
to be used in a very cautious manner, and that the bad effects
attributed to it arise from the large doses in which it is often
given, it will naturally be inferred that I would recommend its
use only in moderate doses of fifteen to twenty grains, repeated
if required at intervals of two hours, until the desired effect is
produced.
The combination of chloral hydrate and bromide of potas-
sium is often found beneficial in cases of great restlessness and
fretfulness; and when a more permanent effect is desired a small
amount of morphia may be added to the mixture, or given with
either separately, thus prolonging the sedative influence. As a
matter of practical experience, it may be stated that it is safest
and best not to adhere to one preparation of any class of
medicine for a length of time, but to change it for another. If
one preparation of opium has been used for a time, substitute
another; or if one preparation of iron has been given, it would
be found most advantageous to change it for another after a
few weeks' use, and not continue the use of any one form more
than a few weeks at a time.
There are certain cases of high maniacal excitement, par-
ticularly in asthenic cases, where none of the usual anodynes
appear to do any good, and where sleep can be readily induced
and kept up for several hours by the administration of half
an ounce or an ounce of pure old rye whiskey, according to the
severity of the excitement, combined occasionally with a small
dose of morphia. It must, however, be remembered that the effect
of such doses must be carefully watched, and the whiskey with-
drawn as soon as it can possibly be done, so as not to induce the
habit of drinking. It is always best to give whiskey mixed
with some carminative, so as to hide the taste and not allow the
patient to know what lie is taking. In conjunction with the
medical means, strict attention must be given to the regular and
systematic administration of food, so as to support the strength
and prevent exhaustion from the excitement.
In cases of exhaustive mania, the safest and best treatment
after the preliminary course recommended, will be the exhibition
of half-ounce or ounce doses, according to the violence of the
symptoms, of pure old rye whiskey, witli milk and the most
nutritious diet which can be given, and the confinement of the
patient to the horizontal position. I have found it necessary in
some such cases to give an ounce of whiskey every two hours
for nearly a day, thus reducing the pulse from 120 to 80, and
bringing on quiet refreshing sleep, and ultimate restoration.
In epileptic mania, the only medicine which seems to control
the high nervous excitement is bromide ol potassium, regularly
MENTAL DISORDERS. 141
and perseveringly given in small doses from day to day, and
from month to month, with special care to prevent constipation,
and, if possible, a milk diet morning and evening and a small
quantity of meat with bread and vegetables for dinner. The
danger in epileptic mania arises after the convulsion, or when
unusual irritability takes the place of the convulsion ; but any
one who will carefully watch the case can generally ascertain by
certain changes of manner and conduct, or certain methods of
expression peculiar to the patient, when the excitement is
coming on; and when these appearances are observed, renewed
vigilance must be exercised to prevent any violent demonstra-
tion. There is such an infinite diversity in the appearances and
conduct that no rule can be laid down for particular guidance,
but the physician must study each case by itself and learn how
to meet the indications presented.
The most troublesome symptom in melancholia is sleepless-
ness, and to remove this will require all the tact and ability of
the physician in the administration of the different form of
narcotics witli at the same time such a course of tonic treatment
as will bring up the system to the normal standard. The most
annoying and perplexing symptom in this form of disease is the
disposition to suicide, and the only resource is unceasing watch-
fulness at all times and under all circumstances. Such cases
can never be trusted for a single moment where the propensity
is active, and are most to be suspected when they protest most
positively that they have given Tip all idea of such a thing and
ask to be left alone; and many cases succeed in their plans by
some plausible pretext by which they throw the attendant
entirely off his guard.
Cases of monomania have generally assumed such a character
when the family are willing to consult the physician that
medical treatment cannot be attempted with any hopes of
success, and the physician's only duty then is to sign the certifi-
cates required by law to secure admission to a hospital.
The treatment of puerperal mania in the earliest stages is
so clearly marked out by the symptoms presented that every
physician will know what is required in the case, and it is only
when the disease has assumed a violent form, or has become
intractable and troublesome to the family, that the necessity
arises for removing the patient from the family to the care of a
hospital.
In acute dementia the difficulty of administering food and
medicine is so great, and the care in other respects so trying and
wearinf, that the friends soon see the necessity of placing the
patient in some hospital for the insane.
It is a duty incumbent on the physician to impress upon
142 MENTAL DISORDERS.
the minds of every family in which he may be called to treat
an insane person the fact that mental disorders will, as a rule,
require considerable time in the treatment before any decided
improvement will be noticed; that very few persons really
regain their full mental integrity in less than six months ; and
that in melancholy the course of treatment will be quite pro-
longed, generally from nine months to a year and more.
Some attacks of acute mania will pass off in a few weeks,
but these are very exceptional cases, and it is always to be
apprehended where the attack passes off suddenly that another
outbreak of greater violence and longer continuance will follow
in a few weeks.
Every physician should impress on those who have occasion
to place a member of the family in a hospital for the insane,
that, having shown confidence in the physician of the hospital
by placing the patient under his care, they should be willing to
continue that confidence, and be guided by his judgment as to
the proper time at which the patient may be removed. Never
encourage the family to be trying experiments to ascertain
whether a change of scene might not be of benefit and hasten
restoration, for in a mind weakened by disease the most careful
and cautious management will be required to prevent the
injurious effects of certain scenes and associations. Every
physician of a hospital for the insane who has had many years'
experience can count scores of cases where irreparable injury
has been done, and the disorder rendered chronic and incurable,
by these efforts to try change of scene and associations during
the convalescent period. The patient himself will urge the
change in the very strongest manner, and make a most pitiful
appeal to the friends by persuasion, threats, promises, and com-
plaints, and the mode in which this is done ought to convince
the friends that the man lias not regained his healthy mental
action, and at this critical juncture, the calm and dispassionate
opinion of the physician ought to be more potent in enabling
them to reach a correct conclusion than the passionate appeals
of one just recovering from a serious disorder, and whose
brain and nervous system have not yet acquired their full
healthy operation.
The question of the removal of a patient from home and
friends to a hospital and the care of strangers is surrounded
with so many considerations involving the welfare and happi-
ness of the patient and the family, that it is almost impossible
to lay down any rules to which many exceptions may not be
taken; but when the necessity does arise?and that period is
generally much earlier than the friends are willing to act?the
sooner the decision is reached and carried into effect the better
MENTAL DISORDERS. 143
for the patient and the family. It is always far better to be
frank and honest with a patient when it has been decided to
send him to a hospital, and tell him the plain truth of what
has been thought best to be done, and not deceive him by a
variety of tales which he will soon find to be false, and which
will rankle in his mind, cause ill-feeling-, and often bitter
dislike to those who deceived him, and interfere in many cases
with successtul treatment and restoration; for it intensifies the
distrust already existing in his mind, and renders it extremely
difficult for the officers of the hospital to disabuse his mind and
acquire his confidence. It is difficult under the most favourable
circumstances to acquire the confidence of the insane, and
when they have been deceived in being brought to the hospital,
their distrust is intensified, and they consider all in the hospital
in league against them, and the difficulty of treatment is
greatly enhanced. The physician should also impress upon the
minds of the family the very great importance of early treat-
ment, and the continuance of that treatment in the hospital
until restoration is fully effected, and the physician of the
hospital can recommend the removal with safety. At the same
time he should endeavour to disabuse their minds ot the
prejudices entertained by so many against hospitals, and
impress upon their mind as strongly as possible the idea that
the treatment in all well-regulated hospitals at the present day
is conducted on the principles of kindness, forbearance, good-
will, and charity in its noblest and most expansive expression.
