The Brain in Health and Disease
=================================

G9
Art. VI?
BY EDWARD C. MANN, M.D.
Late Medical Superintendent, New York State Em. Insane Asylum,
Sunnj side, Washington Heights, New York City.
Tiie Histology and Functions of the Cerebrum.
The study of the histology and functions of the cerebrum?not
alone of the several ganglionic centres, but also of the different
layers of the great " hemispherical ganglia," formed by the
convolutions of the cerebrum?has as yet been little prosecuted.
It presents a wide field for investigation, experimental inquiry,
and discovery; and, already, such investigators as Dr Ferrier,
Sir Charles Bell, Dr Carpenter, and Dr Brown-Sequard have
thrown great light upon the localisation of brain function.
We know very little, positively, of the different operations of
psychological and intellectual life, the phenomena of which
have been but slightly noticed and are open to discussion.
Mental diseases depend upon a physical lesion of the central
nervous system, and as there is a very close relation existing
between the regular functional activity of a normal brain and
the diverse functional manifestations in insanity, the study of
the structure and functions of the successive ganglia which
compose the brain is a matter of deep interest as well a?
necessity to students of psychology.
The white substance of the hemispheres consists of medullated
nerve fibres of about 0-0026-0'00G7 mm. in diameter, while at
the surface of the larger ganglionic masses, and towards the
cortex, some non-medullated fibres are seen. 1 he fibres of the
white matter are separated from one another by bands of
delicate connective tissue-fibrillated sustentacular matter, in
which are situated, at intervals, round or oval nuclei, smooth in
contour, and measuring 0*0093-0*007o mm. lliese fibres of
the white matter may be divided very properly into two classes
1st. Those having a radiating and converging direction or
course; and 2nd. Those uniting the two halves of the cerebrum
and forming the corpus callosum, which is properly to be looked
upon as a physiological as well as an anatomical commissure,
and it is often found to be absent in congenital idiots. The
cortex of the cerebrum, or grey matter of the convolutions, is
divided into several layers or laminae, the number being
variously estimated by different observers, among whom are
Koelliker, Arndt,. Meynert, and Frey; the latter regards
70 TIIE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE.
the cortex as divisible into six lamin?. The general plan
of structure of the grey matter of the cerebrum is, primarily,
a wide-meshed network of medullated fibres, in whose inter-
stices ganglion cells are situated. We also find that very
delicate network of very fine fibres met with in the grey
matter of the spinal cord, first discovered by Deiters, which
consist of very delicate fibrillse springing from the broad proto-
plasm processes of the ganglion cell. These fibrilla3, Deiters re-
gards as a system of secondary axis cylinders for the most delicate
nerve fibres. Gerlach first described the network as occurring
as well in the cortex of the cerebrum as in the spinal cord.
The remainder of the grey matter is made up of the delicate
sustentacular substance before alluded to as intervening between
the fibres of the white matter. In the superficial layers of the
convolutions, the cells are small multipolar nerve cells, analo-
gous to the small cells in the posterior cornua of the cord;
while in the deeper stratum, or fourth layer of Frey, are found
large multipolar ganglion cells 0025-0'040 mm. in diameter,
presenting oval or roundish nuclei. These large cells correspond
to the large cells in the anterior cornua of the spinal cord,
which, it will be remembered, send out "axis cylinder pro-
cesses," which are prolonged into the nerve fibres of the motor
roots. In like manner we observe under the microscope an
"axis cylinder process" given off from these multipolar
ganglion cells of the deeper layers of the convolutions of the
cerebrum, which process is prolonged into one of the nerve
fibres of the corona radiata. It is, I think, demonstrable that
there is a lateral anastomosis between the cells of each layer or
lamina, and also anastomoses between the successive layers of
the convolutions. I desire now to advance the theory respect-
ing the functions of the hemispherical ganglia, or cortex of the
cerebrum, which has appeared to me, during my microscopical
investigations on brain tissue, to be the most reasonable one.
We are already familiar, through the admirable physiological
treatises of the present day, with the general description of the
structure and functions of the nervous system, so that in speak-
ing of the structure and functions of the grey matter ot the
hemispherical convolutions, I desire to be understood as
referring to the histological elements, the functional activities
of which we are as yet comparatively unacquainted with. Of
course it is impossible to limit exactly the special attributes of
any particular group of cells in the convolutions of the cere-
brum ; yet, by comparing them with the elements of the spinal
cord, may it not be possible to make certain legitimate induc-
tions relative to their diverse activities? I have just stated
that the large nerve cells of the convolutions correspond to the
THE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. 71
multipolar ganglion cells of the anterior cornua of the spinal
cord, which cornua are connected with the motor roots of the
spinal nerves; while the small and superficial cells of the con-
volutions are analogous to the small cells of the posterior
cornua of the cord, which are connected with the sensory roots
of the spinal nerves. We have also seen that in both the
multipolar ganglion cells of the deeper layers of the convolu-
tions of the cerebrum, there exist processes which become the
axis cylinders of nerve fibres. I think, therefore, that we
may fairly conclude that the superficial layers or lamince of the
convolutions of the hemispheres, disseminate the impression of
general sensibility, and that the deeper layers, containing the
larger multipolar ganglion cells, originate motor impulses.
The cerebral ganglia whose structure and functions remain
to be considered are the corpora quadrigemina, thalami optici,
and corpora striata. The structure of the corpora quadrigemina
consists of a white layer overlaid with a zonal stratum of nerve
fibres. Underneath them, the crura cerebelli ad corpora
quadrigemina pass on to reach the cerebium, and should more
properly be called, as Frey remarks, crura cerebelli ad cerebrum.
Laterally, there enter the corpora quadrigemina from below,
the two leminisci arising from the motor tiact of the medulla
oblongata, and traceable back to the same tiact or part of the
medulla. In the anterior tract of the corpora quadrigemina
a root of the optic nerve, coming from the corpus genicula-
tum internum, terminates. Small nerve cells are seen in the
internal grey substance of the quadrigeminal bodies, with larger
multipolar and fusiform ganglion corpuscles, the latter being
said by JNleynert to be found in the deeper layei s of the anterior
bodies, about the aqueduct of Sylvius. 1 lie functions of these
bodies are tolerably well understood, as they gi\ e i ise to the optic
nerves, and act as the ganglia of sight, tiom which they have
been also called " optic ganglia. Destruction of these bodies
causes complete blindness. I hey thus seive^ as neivous centres
for the perception of light, and a reflex action also takes place
through them, by which the amount of light admitted to the
eye is regulated to accommodate the sensibility ot the pupil.
The structure of the optic thalami, like the corpora quadrige-
mina, consists of a white layer ovei laid with a zone of nerve
fibres. The posterior end of these ganglia has been termed the
pulvinar. Internally to it, and more posteriorly, is situated the
corpus geniculatum internum; and, externally, the corpus
geniculatum externum. Into the latter a portion of the optic
tract passes on its way to the pulvinar. Fusiform cells are
found more deeply coloured than those of the corpora quadrige-
mina. The cells of the corpus geniculatum externum are
72 THE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE.
found to be frequently pigmented, and the internal geniculate
"body also contains fusiform cells. The thalamus receives
numerous white fasciculi coming from the hemispheres. They
run towards the superior surface of the thalamus to the supe-
rior and internal border and the pulvinar, and are ultimately
lost in the same manner as are the fibres continued from the
crus cerebri into the corpus striatum; that is, by a sub-division
into close plexuses of extremely delicate nerve fibres. The func-
tions of the optic thalami are but little understood. They are not,
however, principally connected with vision. From experimental
observations which have been made it seems most probable to
the writer that the optic thalami receive, preserve, and transform
the sensorial impressions, previous to their definitive irradiation
to the cortical periphery. It would seem to be proper to
regard the optic thalami in four distinct parts or ganglion
tracts. The anterior ganglion tract is undoubtedly connected
with olfactive impressions. The middle ganglion tract receives
the nerve fibres of the second pair and may properly be called
the optic tract. The posterior ganglion tract, from its connec-
tion with the perception of sounds, may be called the acoustic
tract; and there is undoubtedly another tract of the optic
thalamus, which, from its close relation to the sensitive fibres
of the convergent system, may be called the tract of general
sensibility.
The structure of the corpora striata consists of a collection
of grey matter, nerve cells, and of fine nerve fibres. They
contain two larger nuclei respecting which we know very little.
The system of nerve fibres is derived from crura cerebri run-
ning parallel in a straight direction, entering both nuclei, and
ultimately lost in these nuclei. The surface of the corpora
striata is grey, and in the grey matter we observe multipolar
ganglion cells and smaller cells. The neuroglia is analogous to
the neuroglia of the cortex of the cerebrum. There is also
another set of fibres proceeding probably from the medullary
substance of the hemispheres which ramify in the large nucleus
of the corpus striatum. These fibres differ from those derived
from the crus cerebri, which in this location are extremely
attenuated, and present a plexiform arrangement. Physio-
logists have supposed the functions of the corpora striata to
have some connection with sensation and volition, although they
have not attempted to explain the nature of the connection.
As experimental observations have proved that destruction of
the corpus striatum results in motor paralysis, with the pre-
servation of intelligence depending upon the extent of the
lesion; and also as cases have occurred in which the functions
of the corpus striatum having been not destroyed, but impaired
THE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. /D
by compression or degeneration of its elements, there have
resulted disturbances in the motor sphere; may we not reason-
ably infer that the corpora striata are undoubtedly the centre of
the reception, regulation, and elaboration of voluntary motor
impressions emanating from the deep layers of the cortical
matter whose large cells originate them ?
There is no question more interesting to the follower of
mental pathology, than that of the connection between nerve
function and nerve organisation, and it is only by the better
knowledge of the physiological laws of the brain that we can
determine that connection ; and it is only by patient experiment
and observation that we are to fully understand the nature of
the relation between the histology of the brain and the
physical functions. It is impossible to fully appreciate the
pathological changes met with in the brain, until we are in full
possession of all the available knowledge of cerebral histology,
and of the knowledge of the normal functional activity of
nerve cells, and we certainly cannot understand defective in-
intellect unless we are thoroughly acquainted with the ordinary
and normal manifestations of intellect. We must therefore
clearly understand the physiological laws ot healthy mental
action before we can comprehend any departure from the
healthy working of such laws. With this end in view
have the writer's efforts in the direction of the study of the
physiology and pathology of the central nervous system been
made. It being a very difficult matter to harden the very
delicate tissue of the brain, so as to be enabled to cut sufficiently
thin sections for demonstrating the finer structural relation of
the tissues, the writer gives the formula employed by him for
a hardening fluid for the brain and spinal cord, which in its
effects surpasses any other hardening fluid, and better prepares
the tissues for the reception of staining fluids. It is as follows:
13^. Bi-chromate of ammonia.
Methyl alcohol.
Distilled water. F. H.
Tiie Pathology and Morbid Histology of Acute and
Chronic Insanity.
The morbid histological changes occurring in insanity are, at
the present day, undergoing microscopical investigation at the
hands of many very skilful observers, both in our own country
and in Europe, and these assume great importance when we
reflect upon the fact that the pathological phenomena discovered
in the brains of persons dying insane, all have for their basis,
interference with the due nutrition, growth, and renovation of
74 TIIE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE.
the brain cell, which, by interrupting the nutrition, stimulation,
and repose of the brain, essential to mental health, results in
the impress of a pathological state in the brain and disordered
mental function. The investigation of both the normal and
the morbid histology of the brain is a work requiring great
labour, patience, and perseverance, and also judgment in the
recording of observations ; and even with the most conscientious
and careful microscopists mistakes may be made at times, as to
the nature and value of appearances met with in histological
research. We may fairly divide the pathological changes met
with in insanity into three classes.
First. Those which may be considered accidental.
Second. Those which are found in other diseases yet appear
to be concerned in the production of insanity.
Third. Those essential to mental disease.
In the first class we may enumerate cerebral haemorrhages,
softening of the white substance, and disease of the cerebral
vessels. In the second class we meet with thickening and
opacity of the arachnoid, hyperamia of the pia mater and
of the brain, serous infiltration of tbe pia mater, and col-
lections of fluid in the arachnoid cavity. In the third class, or
the changes essential to mental disease, I woidd enumerate
sub-arachnoid ecchymosis, and a partial punctiform injection of
the cortical surface, with or without softening; extended
softening of the middle portion of the cortical substance ; ad-
herence of the pia mater to the surface of the brain ; different
discolourations of the cortical substance; loss of colour of the
cortical substance; atrophy of the convolutions; and, lastly,
induration of cerebral tissue.
The naked eye appearances which may be met with in the
bodies of those dying insane, are chiefly peculiarities in the form
of the cranium, of which the most frequent is want of symmetry
between the two sides; the shrunken and shrivelled ear in
chronic insanity, consequent upon hsematonia auris; variations
from the normal standard in the thickness or thinness of the
cranium; changes in the membranes as to appearance and
structure ; and, finally, changes in the cerebral substance itself.
In acute insanity the changes or prominent alterations in the
brain?as will be seen in the appended cases illustrative of the
pathology and morbid histology of insanity*?met with by the
writer have been?hypersemic conditions of the brain and its
membranes, which latter are often thickened and opaque; in-
jection and softening of the cortical substance, and pigmenta-
* We regret to say that the copies of tho photograph of tho microscopic
structure of the brain, forwarded to us with this paper, have not reached us at
the moment of going to press. Wo propose to publish them in our next number.
THE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. 10
tion of the cortical grey substance. While the dura mater is
very rarely thickened, its vessels are found to be dilated and
irregular, and the coats of the vessels much hypertrophied.
The arachnoid I have found to be thickened, to be the seat of
hemorrhage, and have often found it covered with fine granula-
tions on its surface. The blood vessels of the brain I have
found to present thickening of the coats, thickening of the
sheath or hyaline membrane, deposits between the adventitia
and sheath, and proliferation of nuclei. The neuroglia has been
found to be the seat of various lesions in insanity, the principal
of which are disseminated sclerosis or grey degeneration, atrophy,
miliary sclerosis, and colloid degeneration. The cerebral cells
I have found to be the seat of atrophy, pigmentary or granular
degeneration, calcification, and hypertrophy. Microscopical
examination of the spinal cord in the insane has revealed to
me very little, except in paresis generalis, where an atro-
phoid condition of the cells of the posterior columns has
been found, with an increase of connective tissue which seems
in most instances to commence externally and extend inwardly.
I think it is proper to call this lesion of the cord the dis-
tinguishing lesion of general paresis. The cells of the cervical
sympathetic have also been found undergoing pigmentary
granulation in general paralysis, and also in epileptic insanity.
In chronic insanity the changes chiefly met with in the
brain have been atrophy of the convolutions and brain itself,
induration of both white and grey matter, thickening and
opacity of the membranes, chronic hydrocephalus, effusions into
the sub-araclmoid space, pigmentation of the cortical substance,
and extended and profound sclerosis of the brain. The pia
mater is found to be thickened and adhesive to the brain, and
its vessels tortuous and thickened in their walls. I have also
noticed atheromatous and fatty degeneration of the walls of
the cerebral capillaries. Having devoted considerable time and
thought to the microscopic investigation of both the normal
and morbid histology of the brain, I desire to call particular
attention to an appearance which I have noticed in the brains
of those dying insane, and to whicli my attention has been
drawn from the interest it assumes when viewed in the light of
the probable ultimate cause of the nutritive defect which results
in chronic insanity. We know, that for the proper nutrition
and healthy functional activity of the brain cell, is required the
proper nutrient supply, and that we cannot have healthy mental
function without a due supply of healthy blood to normal
and healthy brain substance. We also know if any agent
operates in the influencing of the circulation unfavourably, so
that a morbid condition of the cerebral capillaries be induced,
76 the brain in health and disease.
that we shall inevitably have resulting morbid changes set up
and maintained in the cerebral cells. In previous writings on
insanity I have called attention to the fact that a microscopical
examination of blood from insane patients, as compared with an
examination of blood from the same number of healthy persons,
revealed in the blood of the insane a marked increase in the
number of white blood corpuscles. In making microscopical
examinations of brain tissue from chronic insanity, I have
noticed repeatedly in different cases lymphoid cells or white
corpuscles, and also red corpuscles in small numbers, in the
membranes and in the substance of the brain itself, evidently
having emigrated from the blood vesssels. From what I have
observed, I think, that under conditions of inflammatory irrita-
tion of the brain,- an emigration of lymphoid cells takes place
on a large scale, the cells or corpuscles, by virtue of their vital
contractility, passing through the walls of the vessels and pene-
trating into the brain tissue. It will be remembered that both
Dr Bastian and Dr Blandford have noticed a plugging up of
the blood vessels by small embolic masses composed of aggrega-
tions of white corpuscles in insanity. Ekker found that the
vessels of the grey matter more generally dilated in insanity,
and Ramaer also noticed the same thing in the vessels of the
pia mater, while Dr Major has described a dilatation of the
arteries in "brain wasting," a condition whicli appertains
to chronic insanity. We have here two factors which operate,
I think, in the production of the appearance in the pia mater
and the brain of the lymphoid cells and in some cases of the red
corpuscles?first, the undue predominance and accumulation in
the blood vessels of the white corpuscles, which obstruct the
capillaries, giving us as a result an impeded circulation and an
increased pressure in the coats of the vessels ; and second, the
dilatation of the vessels before alluded to. These two conditions
are favourable to the rapid emigration of the white and also
the red corpuscles through the walls of the vessels ; and also,
perhaps, the same condition may be produced at times by the
obstruction in the capillary vessels, becoming great enough to
rupture them. Such lymphoid cells must act undoubtedly as
foreign bodies, and a slow course of inflammation is set up. Such
an inflammatory process must necessarily be of slight intensity
and long duration, and these collections of lymphoid cells un-
doubtedly tend to become developed into a fibroid structure,
resulting in the induration of the brain which we meet with in
chronic insanity. I am also forcibly impressed with the idea
that we have here the solution of the problem as to the relation
which exists between tuberculosis and insanity. Dr Clouston,
in the Journal of Mental Science for April 1863, showed
TIIE BRAIN IX HEALTH AND DISEASE. I I
that of 828 patients Avho died with tubercular disease at the
Royal Edinburgh Asylum, 153 passed rapidly into the state of
chronic insanity, the acute stage being- of very short duration,
the patients all manifesting a decided tendency towards chron-
icity. He also noticed that the prognosis relating to mental
recovery was eminently unfavourable, and that apparent re-
coveries proved to be only remissions. In these cases, where
the development of the two diseases seemed to Dr Clouston to
be nearly contemporaneous, was not the tuberculosis the result
primarily of the escape or emigration of the lymphoid cells
into the connective tissue of the lungs, owing to this state of
leucocythemia in the patient ? I think that this condition
occurs more frequently than we are aware of, especially in
persons who inherit the predisposing neurotic element or
morbific force. That there exists such an hereditary neu-
rotic or morbific element or force, present in both insanity and
phthisis, I most firmly believe ; and I also believe that there
is a correlation of morbific force which renders these diseases
mutually convertible. I have repeatedly seen this borne out
by undeniable facts, children of one family being affected with
both insanity and phthisis, in many different instances.* To
return, however, more immediately to our subject. Respecting
the dilatation of the vessels, which I before alluded to, it
appears to me that the general obstruction in the capil-
laries of the brain causes primarily, probably, a compensa-
tory liypersemia, and as this gradually becomes permanent,
the small arteries would naturally become enlarged, as they
have been found to be by Ekker, and Dr Major, and also
myself, and their walls would become thickened, as we find
them to be, post-mortem, in chronic insanity, feucli long-con-
tinued mechanical hyperemia causes an impairment of vitality
and function, and this we find exemplified by the retrogressive
changes which occur in the substance of the brain in chronic
insanity?viz. atrophy, induration, and degeneration of the
nervous elements of the brain. "\V ith the exception of cases of
apoplexy in which large clots have been discovered post-
mortem, I am not aware that any observer has described any
such lymphoid deposit in the brain, which may or may not
have undergone fibroid metamorphosis or degeneration. I
think therefore that from both a physiological and pathological
standpoint these observations become of the highest clinical
significance. I desire not to be misapprehended as regarding
the presence of the lymphoid desposits in the brain as the
* Wo aro glad to find Dr Winn's theory, that " hereditary diseases" dopend
on a correlation of morbific forces, is recognised in America (vide Nature and
Treatment of Hereditary Diseases with reference to a Correlation of Morbific Forces.
London: Hardwieke. 1869).?Ed.
78 THE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE.
ultimate cause of insanity. I do, however, think that by
their presence we are enabled to explain many of the changes
incident upon chronic insanity, and think their presence must
affect very materially the ultimate molecular changes in the
brain, upon which its functional activity depends, and regard it
as a very strong probability that such foreign deposits in the
brain, may, by interfering with the molecular changes just
alluded to, destroy both functional excitability and activity. It
would appear very probable that the prominent alterations
taking place in chronic insanity?viz. atrophy of the convo-
lutions and of the brain itself, and induration of the two
substances, with degeneration and atrophy of nerve cells?may
be considered fairly to depend upon this abnormal state in the
mutual relationship between the blood and the tissues, which
becomes the ultimate cause of the nutritive defect which results
in chronic insanity.
Cases Illustrating Pathology and Morbid Histology of
Insanity.
Case I.?Melancholia with Delusions. Death resulting
from chronic meningitis. C. Mc., male, aged 44 years, single ;
occupation porter. Upon admission was noisy and maniacal.
This state lasted but a few days and he then became depressed
and melancholy. He refused food for a number of days and
had to be fed artificially. The melancholia assumed an acute
form, and he had hallucinations of sight and hearing, causing
at times groat terror and mental excitement. At such times,
when he imagined that he saw devils in the ward, his face
would assume an aspect of the utmost fear and distress. He
often expressed a wish to commit suicide. He died quite sud-
denly about five months after his admission, having eaten and
slept but little for some days previous. Post-mortem.?Upon
removing the calvarium, the dura mater was found to be
adherent to it; the pia mater was thickened, infiltrated, and
hypenemic ; the arachnoid was clouded and covered with granu-
lations ; the brain was hypernemic and the cortical substance
softened; the lateral ventricles were filled with fluid; the
lungs revealed commencing tuberculosis; the kidneys, spleen,
and liver were normal.
Case II.?M. H., male, aged 31, single, and by occupation
a labourer. Admitted to asylum with melancholia. Had delu-
sions of fear and persecution, and had suicidal impulses. Often
refused food, saying he wished to die. The mental faculties
were very feeble, and the enfeeblement gradually increased.
The bladder became paralysed, and the health gradually failed
THE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. 79
for about eight months, when he died from exhaustion. Post-
mortem.?The membranes were found to be adherent to each
other, and the pia mater was thickened and adherent to the
surface of the brain. Throughout the brain were small miliary
tubercles; the substance of the brain was softened near the
base; there was also considerable effusion about the base of the
brain, and effusion in the lateral ventricles; lungs normal,
kidneys congested, spleen, liver, and heart normal.
Cask III.?Melancholia ivith religious delusions and hal-
lucinations of sight and hearing. Death resulting from
acute tuberculosis and rupture of pulmonary artery. J. S.,
male, aged 20, single; occupation labourer. Upon admission to
asylum was in poor physical condition, having never regained
bis strength since an attack of pneumonia, some months
previous. There was dulness at the apices of both lungs, and a
prolonged expiratory murmur with difficult respiration. He
was very much depressed and melancholy, and said that he had
committed unpardonable sins, and should be eternally lost. At
night he imagined he was visited by evil spirits, who tormented
him. He died suddenly five months after admission. Post-
mortem.?Dura mater firmly adherent to the skull; the
meninges were congested and the -vessels enlarged; the brain
revealed softening of the cortical substance and effusion of
fluid in the lateral ventricles. Examination of the lungs
revealed the existence of tuberculosis. The upper and the
middle lobes of the right lung were partially destroyed, and the
sudden death was found to be the result of rupture of the
npper branch of the right pulmonary artery in the middle
lobe of the right lung.
Case IV.?Dementia and paresis. Death resulting from
pulmonary ha3morrhage. T. A., male, aged 22 years, single ;
occupation waggon maker. Upon admission to asylum was
demented, with symptoms of paresis. Laughed vacantly when
addressed and stared unmeaningly about him. No appreciation
of condition or surroundings. His gait was staggering, and his
lips and tongue were affected with muscular tremors. He
never spoke but once and that was upon the occasion of a visit
from his brother. His speech at that time was hesitating and
trembling. He had an attack of sub-acute meningitis four
months after his admission, and died three months later from
an exhausting haemorrhage from the lungs. Post-mortem.?
The membranes were found to be adherent to the skidl; there
was sub-arachnoid effusion, and a large effusion between the
pia mater and the brain. The pia mater was thickened in
patches. There was effusion at the base ot the brain, fluid in
the spinal canal, and the spinal cord was atrophied. There was
80 THE BRAIN IX HEALTH AND DISEASE.
a miliary tuberculosis throughout the brain. Upon making an
examination ot the chest, the left lung was found to be par-
tially destroyed by the breaking down of the caseous products
of pneumonia, as a result of which large cavities were formed.
The heart gave evidence of recent endocarditis. The surface
of the heart and endocardium were covered with miliary
tubercles. The walls of the heart were atrophied and
exhibited traces of fatty degeneration. The kidneys, spleen,
and liver were all normal. Upon hardening the spinal cord
and making thin sections, and employing carmine staining,
there was found to be, upon microscopical examination, atrophy
and degeneration of the nerve elements of the posterior
columns, with increase of connective tissue. Sections of
hardened brain tissue being made, t?here was observable in the
cerebral cells of the frontal convolutions (after staining) a
diffused granular degeneration. Also diffused collection of the
lymphoid cells, alluded to previously in this paper, most of
which had undergone a fibroid metamorphosis. No change
could be detected in the cells of the cervical sympathetic,
which was carefully examined.
Case V.?M. A. I?., female, aged 29, single; occupation
servant. Admitted to asylum with dementia, which ended in
paresis. Speech was slurring and hesitating, and her gait was
staggering. She would become very angry at trifling incidents,
and then would relapse into silence which lasted sometimes
for weeks. She suffered from gradually progressing paralysis,
which involved the sphincters of the rectum and bladder. The
cutaneous and muscular sensibility was impaired, and likewise
there was loss of electro-muscular contractility, so that disease
of the antero-lateral and posterior columns of the spinal cord
was diagnosticated before death. The paresis was attributed
to spinal injury received when quite young. She died from
exhaustion four months after admission. Post-mortem.?The
dura mater was firmly adherent to the cranium; the pia mater
was thickened and infiltrated, and the arachnoid thickened and
opaque. The convolutions of the brain were atrophied and
the brain substance indurated. There was fluid in the spinal
canal and the cord was slightly atrophied and softened in
patches. The heart was small and flabby, spleen atrophied,
stomach, liver, and kidneys, normal. The uterus was in a rudi-
mentary condition, apparently never having been developed
properly. The spinal cord, after being hardened and sections
being made, revealed, upon microscopical examination, loss of
neuroglia and connective tissue, and degeneration of the pos-
terior columns, and loss of nerve tubules of white substance.
The ganglion cells of both anterior and posterior cornua were
THE BRAIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. 81
disintegrated and atrophied, and granular and fatty matter
occupied their place.
Case VI.?Dementia and epilepsy. Death taking place
during a succession of paroxysms. 0. M. S., male, aged 19 ;
occupation gardener. Was admitted to asylum with epilepsy
associated with mania, which preceded and followed the
paroxysms, requiring sometimes mechanical restraint. Dementia
soon resulted from the mental deterioration. The patient had
epileptic fits nearly every day, which condition had been going
on for years. He also inherited the predisposition to epilepsy.
During the mania he imagined himself to be the Emperor of
Germany. The paroxysms increased in frequency and intensity,
in spite of all medication, for eight months, when he had a
succession of fits lasting thirty-six hours, during one of which
paroxysms he died. Post-mortem.?Membranes of brain
thickened; arachnoid opaque; pia mater thickened; brain
atrophied and indurated; lateral ventricles filled with fluid;
spinal cord normal. Upon hardening the brain tissue and
medulla oblongata, and examining microscopically, there was
seen to be some vascularity in the fourth ventricle which ex-
tended through the medulla, the capillary vessels of which
were somewhat thickened and enlarged. The cervical sym-
pathetic was also subjected to a careful microscopical examina-
tion, but without satisfactory results.
Many more interesting cases might be given, but want of
space forbids. The writer has never entrusted the making of
post-mortem examinations to assistants, and in each case the
brain and spinal cord have been immersed immediately in the
hardening fluid before alluded to. In closing, I desire to
insert the post-mortem record of a very interesting case in
which insanity and phthisis were contemporaneous in their
development. Girl, aged 23. Dementia, paresis, tuberculosis.
Post-mortem.?Pulmonary tuberculosis, with cavities at apices
of both lungs. Brain atrophied, aniemic, and indurated, being
the result of the lymphoid deposit, as proved by microscopic
examination. Upon hardening the cord, the posterior sec-
tions of the lateral column were found to be affected. The
posterior column presented atrophy and disintegration of nerve
elements, and plates of connective tissue in different places. In
the postero-lateral column were granular and fatty corpuscles
and new bands of connective tissue.
PART I. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES.
