Athetosis
===========

62
Art. V.?
BY A. C. HUNRO, M.B.
Southern Counties Asylum, Dumfries.
It was in 1871 that Dr Hammond, of New York, first drew
attention to an affection of the nervous system having analogies
with chorea and with cerebro-spinal sclerosis, of which he
had seen one case in his own practice, and another had been
minutely reported to him by Dr Hubbard of Ashtabula, Ohio.
This affection he called Athetosis (from aflrroj?without fixed
position), and having regard too exclusively to its particular
manifestations in his own case?for Dr Hubbard's exhibited a
different phase of the disease?he considered it to he mainly
characterised by " an inability to retain the fingers and toes in
any position in which they may be placed, and by their continual
motion." Since he first drew attention to the matter, a
number of cases of Athetosis have been placed on record, but
I do not think the clinical history of the disease is yet so clearly
made out as to render the report of such a case as the following
a work of supererogation.
J  D , aetat 23, was admitted to the Southern
Counties Asylum, Dumfries, on the 2nd May 1876, and reported
to have been "insane from birth." A maternal history of
intemperance is to be noted. His condition is congenital:
lias altered little since admission, and is as follows:?
His general health is fair, muscularity and fatness average,
there is no heart murmur, and no trace of chorea in the family
history. His memory is good, intelligence fair, attention
acute; the pupils are normal as regards size and sensibility,
sight and hearing are normal, but the gustatory sense is under
par. Sensibility as to heat and pain is normal, as is also reflex
sensibility, but tactile sensibility is slightly dulled. There is
no malformation cf the palate. The tongue is large and thick,
and bound down to the floor of the mouth to within a quarter
of an inch of the edge all round by thick fleshy adhesions which
render it almost incapable of lateral motion, and limit antero-
posterior motion to nearly the same extent. Articulation is
almost entirely unintelligible except to those accustomed to his
mode of speech. It is impossible to determine how much this
* Read before the Border Counties' Branch of tlio British Medical Association,
October 1877.
ATHETOSIS.
63
is due to the tongue adhesion, how much it has in common
with the conditions to be presently detailed.
There is a general affection of motivity, hut this is much
less marked in the lower extremities than in the head and
arms ; in fact it will soon he seen that it is most clearly exhibited
the more delicate the movement attempted : that is, the more
necessary it is to have combined action of the muscles, the
disease being, as I believe, one of incoordination. At will the
patient can by clenching his fists maintain an attitude of entire
repose, with the exception that he is unable generally to control
the action of the occipito-frontalis and corrugator supercilii
muscles (the continued contraction of which gives his counten-
ance an expression of chronic surprise), and that there are faint
fibrillary contractions of the extensors of the arms. When,
however, volition is slightly relaxed, and under the influence of
emotions, there is a gliding "protrusion of the head forwards
and upwards " and to one side or another, mostly over the left
shoulder; the muscles of the neck are perceptibly hypertrophied.
When inhibitory force is not brought into action there is fioin
time to time a flickering play of all the muscles of expression,
and this developes into more violent action under the influence
of any volition which would normally bring any of them into
Play. So, in the effort at articulation, in which only the oral
muscles are concerned normally, the eyebiows are twitched up,
the eyelids wink violently, and the risoiius, zygomatic,
buccinator, and the muscles of the lower part of the face are
thrown into violent and irregular action : at the same time the
thyroid cartilage is raised and depressed spasmodically. In
laughing the muscles of the face twitch convulsively, and each
independently of the other, and the head is thrown fiom side to
side. The muscles of expression are hypertrophied. As further
illustrating the incoordination of the face muscles, it is observed
that while the patient can maintain the lowei part of the face in
a state of almost entire quietude by the tonic apposition of the
lips, when desired to keep his mouth open, t le circum-oral
muscles twitch in all directions, and he cannot hold an object
such as a pencil between his lips?it is at once dropped, from
the inability to coordinate the labial muscles m such an action.
So in eating, he cannot retain food within the mouth unless it
is secured by the teeth. The coarser action of mastication,
requiring less coordinating power, is performed tolerably well,
but the jaws are closed with rather a snap.
In the arms there is in repose foint tonic contraction of the
flexors not at all amounting to rigidity, with slight twitching of
the extensors. The movements of the hands and arms are very
characteristic. Almost entire immobility can be maintained so
64 ATHETOSIS.
long as the patient keeps his hand and fingers in a state of
flexion. When, however, this state of flexion is given np, as in
initiating any movement, the fingers assume most grotesque and
characteristic positions?the thumb is arched backwards into
almost a complete semi-circle (for the joints have acquired an
altogether abnormal mobility backwards), the index finger is
frequently in a state of hyper-extension at the middle joint,
while at the terminal it is flexed, the other fingers move about
capriciously, the little finger being mostly widely abducted.
All this time the hand is generally flexed at the wrist; and here
again the over-balance of the flexors is shown, for while patient
can maintain a tolerably uniform flexion of all the joints, he is
unable to extend the wrist and fingers at the same time : if the
fingers are fully extended, the wrist is partly flexed, and vice
versa. The grasp is pretty nearly of normal strength, and
patient can lift heavy weights with ease. Movements when car-
ried out are not jerky but rather slow, rhythmic, and wavelike?
corresponding to those of the head and face. This is well seen
when patient is told to make a prehensile effort?as to lift a
small object, such as a pencil, from the table. There is a moment's
pause, as if patient were concentrating his coordinating energies,
and then a series of awkward, sinuous movements begin, the
muscles of the trunk being engaged in rotating patient's body
so as to diminish the effort to be made by the muscles of the
arm, and also, it would seem, to give a fixed point, or 'point d'
appui, in the trunk. The movement ends by patient's applying
often not the tips of the fingers?the more delicate control
required for their action putting a great strain on patient's
power of coordination?but some more proximal and lateral
part to the object aimed at, and closing the fingers over it, joint
by joint, in a manner somewhat suggestive of a camel kneeling.
Coarser movements of the arm and forearm are carried out more
easily. It is observed that the blow delivered by the extensile
action of the arm is much feebler than that given by flexile, or
combined flexile and supinative action. The more complex
movements, such as fastening a shirt button, are impossible from
inability to coordinate the action of the fingers sufficiently.
And in executing any difficult movement the head and arms are
thrown into varying and grotesque movement. The affection
is similar in both arms, but patient from constant practice is
able to use his right arm to more advantage than the left.
The affection of the legs is much less marked, as was to be
expected from the movements of the lower limbs being of a
much coarser nature, and requiring much less power of coordina-
tion in their execution. Here again the flexors seem to over-
balance the extensors, the legs in walking are considerably
ATHETOSIS.
G5
flexed?the body is thus thrown hack, arid the action is a
shuffling- trot; so that the patient looks as if he were always on
the point of falling-, which, however, lie seldom or never does.
When at rest, too, it is observed that the feet are slightly flexed
and inverted. Entire immobility can be maintained in tbe
lower extremities, with the exception of occasional faint twitch-
mgs of the extensors of the toes. The toes, also, mostly retain
their normal position, with the exception of the great toe of tbe
left foot, which is kept in an analogous position (of hyper-
extension) to the thumbs. All movements cease in sleep.
Dr Hammond's first case was that of a man aged 33, of in-
temperate habits, who had suffered from epilepsy for five years ;
the disease first appeared on regaining consciousness after a
prolonged attack of delirium tremens ; its onset being cha-
racterised by numbness on the right side, with pain and rhyth-
mical involuntary movements of the fingers and toes on that
side?the movements soon passing almost entirely beyond the
control of volition. The second was also an adult, of tubercular
diathesis, and with a family history of intemperance: the
attacks here, after several premonitory signs, succeeded an
epileptiform seizure; the patient was aphasic, and had " lost the
normal antagonising force of the flexors and extensors" on the
right side of the body, the flexors being weakest in the arm,
strongest in the foot. In both cases there was impairment of the
mental powers. Professor Gairdner ot Glasgow has since then
put on record two cases of the disease in children, in one of
which, at least, it was not congenital: in one there were almost
incessant irregular involuntary movements in the left arm and
leg; in the other, similar movements in the right arm and leg,
most distinctly seen in the upper extremities, and in this
ease it is noted that no individual muscle was entirely with-
drawn from the will. Dr Shapter, who has apparently written
in ignorance of Dr Hammond's observations, records in the
Medical Times and Gazette of June 7th, 1873, what is
evidently a case of Athetosis, coming on in a girl of 12, and
affecting the left arm and temporarily the left leg, as a case
of " Motor Incoordination (Locomotor Ataxy) without paralysis."
In the appendix to Vol. II- of his " Maladies du Systeme
Nerveux," Professor Charcot furnishes notes of three rather
doubtful cases. The only other cases yet recorded, so far as I
know, are those of Dr Claye Shaw, who has given a most
graphic delineation of the disease in Vol. IX. of " St. Bar-
tholomew's Hospital Reports." His cases are seven in number,
all of them congenital; in one, the disease affected merely the
PAUT I. VOL. IV. NEW SERIES. p
G6 ATHETOSIS.
head, in the others the arms and legs were affected in varying
degrees.
The establishment of a new disease with a new name has
been objected to by many, who think that the differentiation of
Athetosis is an altogether unnecessary and unwarranted refine-
ment. One gentleman at the last annual meeting of the
British Medical Association is reported as having objected to
its tabulation as a disease on the ground that it is " but a
symptom which may be due to very different lesions." But, on
the same grounds, the recognition of epilepsy and many other
clinical entities as diseases must be discarded. And I further
foil to see on what authority this decided statement rests, since,
to the best of my knowledge, no post-mortem examination has
yet been made in a case of Athetosis, and what the lesion or
lesions may be is still a matter of conjecture.
The contention of those who regard Athetosis as an un-
important modification of chorea, into which, in fact, they say
it merges, is somewhat more worthy of notice. This objection
has probably in part its origin in Dr Hammond's rather faulty
definition of the disease, which would apply equally well, or
better, to chorea itself, and was based too exclusively on the
one case he had himself examined. No case of Athetosis pass-
ing into chorea, or vice versa, has yet been placed on record,
and careful clinical observers of the disease easily recognise a
group of symptoms 8ui generis. The movements in chorea are
clonic and jerky?sudden, rapid, unexpected: in Athetosis
they are slower?wavy, gliding, and with some method. The
peculiar position of hyper-extension of the thumb and index
finger, with sprawling abduction of the other digits, which the
hand in the more marked cases constantly tends to assume, is
pathognomic of the disease, and once seen, can never be mis-
taken. The gliding protrusion of the head, when it occurs, is
equally characteristic of the disease. I consider the case above
reported a particularly representative one. It is well differen-
tiated from chorea, in that all muscular action, with the
slight exception of that of the forehead muscles, can be quieted
at will, and almost entire immobility maintained. And it seems
to form a bond of unity between two sub-classes, having on the
one hand such cases as Dr Shapter's in which there was " no
chorea," but where, when the patient was " told to pick up a small
object, the fingers were seen to separate from one another
instead of acting in concert, then futile and awkward attempts
would be made to grasp it; " and Dr Hubbard's, in which there
was " incoordination effecting the right forearm and leg" but
no involuntary movements. On the other side, there are the
cases of Drs. Hammond, Claye Shaw, and Gairdner, where the
ATHETOSIS.
G7
most prominent symptoms were the incessant complex involun-
tary movements. And it illustrates my position that the
essential feature of the disease is incoordination (consisting
largely in loss of balance betweeen the flexors and extensors, as
is well seen in the above recorded case)?that in this unique
group of cases is always present, while the " incessant voluntary
movements " may be absent. In chorea there is a discharging
lesion in Athetosis there is rather an interruption and diffusion
of a 'normal nerve current. The further differentiation of
Athetosis is very clearly made out by Dr Claye Shaw: "In
imbecility with ataxia (for so he designates the group of cases
in which the affection is congenital), no history of chorea can
be traced, even in other members of the family; there is no
sign of heart disease. In chorea there is not the wavy, sliding
movement resembling the peristaltic action of involuntary
muscle, and the jerkings are more sudden, rapid and un-
expected, so that it is quite impossible to say which muscle
will he next affected. In ataxic imbecility one part of a muscle
may be quite at rest, the other being in motion, but in chorea
the whole of any muscle that is affected acts at once and sud-
denly. The mode of speech is another element of diagnosis,
for in choreic insanity the words are jerked out in a quick-
decisive manner; in imbecility with ataxia they are drawled
out in a manner due obviously to the slow and gradual manner
in which the angles of the mouth are retracted. Chorea is rare ,
before the sixth year of life, Athetosis is most frequently con-
genital. In chorea, the class books say, "the recovery of the
patient, with very few exceptions, may be always prognosticated:
in the disease which is the subject of this paper, recovery has
not yet been known to take place, and therapeutics are mostly
P?WCha?cot is one of the chicf opponents of the differentiation of
Athetosis, which he regards as a mere variety of posthemiplegic
Hemichorea. I object to this tabulation for, in the first place,
Dr Hammond's and Professor Gairdner s eases at least were
not poet-heniiplegic; and in the second place, the case I
have above recorded and some of Dr Claye Shaw s were not in
any sense hemi-choreie, as the disease affected the body gene-
rally, and not one side only. Again, while Professor Charcot's
first case may have been one of Athetosis, it will be seen that his
conception of the disease is not that above evolved or generally
adopted, for he speaks of the movements 111 his third case as
" mccades, brusque," and says that when the patient tries to put
her hand to her head she slaps herself; while in the second,
the choreic movements are associated with anaesthesia. Then,
in each of the three cases there was distinct loss of power,
68 ATHETOSIS.
while it has been repeatedly noted that in true Athetosis there is
no paralysis. Athetosis has as well, it will he seen, points of
comparison with other diseases besides chorea, as cerebro-spinal
sclerosis, paralysis agitans, writers' cramp, and post-hemiplegic
rigidity, though from these it is more easily differentiated.
Finally, as to the pathology of Athetosis. Charcot considers
that in the cases he records the lesion is unilateral cerebral
atrophy. Such is very probably the pathology of these cases.
But in Athetosis proper the seat of the lesion can in the mean-
time merely be conjectured. From the analogies of Dr Ham-
mond's cases the disease may be supposed to have its origin
in some disruptive lesion of the corpus striatum, of intra-uterine
occurrence in the congenital cases, as the result of which an
obstacle of some sort is interposed to the transit and coordina-
tion of nerve force in that " centre of automatic or sub-volun-
tary integration of the various voluntary-motor centres dif-
ferentiated in the hemispheres." Dr Shaw, in addition, would
anticipate a lesion of the cervical portion of the cord as well as of
the nucleus of the seventh pair of nerves, but the sudden onset
of the symptoms in immediate sequence to headache, vertigo,
and loss of consciousness in Dr Hammond's cases seems to
point to a purely cerebral origin in the first instance, whatever
the consecutive deterioration may be.
