The Report of the Committee of Inquiry
=======================================

:Author: Book Reviews & Abstracts.

Appointed by New Zealand
Ministry of Health to Inquire into
and Report upon the Necessity for
Special Care and Treatment of Mental
Defectives and Sexual Offenders in
New Zealand. Wellington. 1925. Is.

A copy of this Report, to which we referred
in our July issue, has now reached us from
Wellington, through the courtesy of the
Acting Director-General of Health.

The Committee dealt separately with the
two classes of persons named, as being not
necessarily identical, and we only propose to
deal with that section of the Report which is
concerned with Mental Defectives.

The first part of this Section is largely a
summary of the findings of investigators in
other countries, chiefly the United States of
America.

The Report states: " Probably New
Zealand has much the same proportion
of mental defectives as other countries.
This is stated by Goddard to be between 2
and 3 per cent, of the population." This
the estimate is far in excess of the figures
given for England. It is of course not easy
to get a uniform standard of diagnosis even
as between one medical man and another,
and to get international uniformity is at pre-
sent impossible. It was estimated by the
Royal Commission that in England the pro-
portion of mental defectives to the whole
population was 4.6 per thousand, but this
figure may have to be revised in view of the
fresh data available through the practical
work of the last ten years. More recent
figures are those of the child population, given
by Sir George Newman in the Health of the
School Child, 1925, who estimates that among
the children of the Public Elementary Schools
the incidence is 8.6 per thousand, the Lon-
don ascertainment being, however, 12.86 per
thousand. Even allowing for unascertained
defectives, there is no likelihood of our figures
being brought up to 2?3 per cent, of the whole
population.

Under the New Zealand Education Act,
1914, the notification of all mentally defective
children is compulsory, and Special Classes in
connection with the Day Schools, and Special
Residential Schools have been established,. It
would appear from the Report that the supply
of Residential Schools is inadequate. The
same distinction is drawn as in England be-
tween those children who can be dealt with
under the Education Act (though the age under
the New Zealand Act is 6?21) and those
under the New Zealand Mental Defectives
Act, 1911. The administration of this latter
Act is under the Mental Hospitals Department.
In the Mental Defectives Act, 1911, there is
no mention of ' moral imbeciles.' The Report
quotes the definition of ' Moral Imbeciles ' in
our Mental Deficiency Act, and adds, " In the
opinion of the Committee it is very important
that a similar definition should be included in
any amendment of the New Zealand Act."

The Committee seem to be unaware of the
practical difficulty which has arisen in this
country in connection with the definition, and
before legislating it would appear desirable
that the New Zealand Government should give
very careful consideration to this subject,
more especially as it concerns children and
young people. As we noted at the time of the
issue of the Board of Education's Circular
1359, that Circular points out that in the
opinion of the Board it is only in rare and quite
exceptional circumstances that a child of school
age can properly be certified as a ' moral
imbecile.' Who will quarrel with this opinion,
when it is remembered that the definition of
moral imbeciles ' in our Act is " persons who
from an early age display some permanent
mental defect coupled with strong vicious or
criminal propensities on which punishment has
had little or no deterrent effect."

The Committee are not satisfied that the
problem of the Mental Defectives is being
adequately dealt with in New Zealand. They
do not suggest many improvements in treat-
ment, beyond advocating an increase in the
Residential School accommodation and the
establishment of Farm and Industrial Colonies
and of Clinics to be attached to Children's
Courts, which they wish to see set up on the
model of those in other countries. Their con-
cern is less the proper treatment of the defec-
tive than the protection of the community.
The present system of notification is apparently
not sufficiently effective, and they propose the
establishment of a Eugenic Board, one of
whose duties would be to keep a register of
" all feeble-minded, epileptic and mentally de-
fective persons living outside institutional
care." This, in itself, would go far beyond
anything attempted in England, for the num-
ber of people dealt with by the English Men-
tal Deficiency Act is limited, broadly speaking,
^ those who become chargeable to the State.

Among the classes of persons whose names it
ls suggested should be on the register, are
those who have been discharged from a mental
hospital. The adoption of such a suggestion
ln England would, we fear, have a very harm-
ful effect on the present effort to encourage
early treatment for mental cases, to put men-
tal and physical ill-health in the same cate-
gory, and so to do away with the shame felt
m regard to mental diseases, which prevents
the patient seeking advice in the early and
helpful stages of his illness. It would cer-
tainly act as a deterrent to schemes for the
admission of voluntary boarders, which we
hope to see more widely adopted in our Mental
hospitals.

1 he Committee suggest that it be made a
legal offence to marry or have sexual relation-
ship with any person whose name is on the
Agister, and though we are not clearly told
whether such a register is open to the public,
this proviso appears to foreshadow that it
Would be accessible to all, a proposal which is
?pen to grave objections.

We do not know how far such a scheme
Would answer in New Zealand, with its less
dense population, but we are inclined to think
that in England there would be considerable
uon-compliance with the Act, from a deep re-
luctance on the part of all concerned to publish
the facts, especially in the case of the highest
grades of feeble-minded. Legislative strin-
gency may defeat its own ends, if it tends to
exclude from care and protection more and
more of those who would otherwise be
reckoned as feeble-minded. For it must be
remembered that our chief problem lies with
the higher grade.

After careful consideration of other views
and experiments, the Committee decided to
recommend sterilization. They say " Sterili-
sation gives the patient liberty to do useful
Work in the community, is less drastic than
segregation for life, and on the whole a much
slighter interference with the rights of the in-
dividual." . ... . "As regards the suggestion
that sterilization may lead to new foci of
venereal disease, it must be borne in mind
that the unsterilized feeble-minded are already
prone to sexual promiscuity, and there is no
evidence that sterilization would increase this
tendency." This is a most extraordinary point
of view, for it is for these very cases that
segregation in the interests of the community
is so absolutely essential. Surely no one would
recommend that such cases should be sterili-
zed and allowed to live in the community. It
is suggested that the Eugenic Board should
have the power, with the consent of parents
or guardians, to make sterilization a condition
of removal from the register or of release from
an institution, the persons so released being
on probation and returnable to the institution
if leading an immoral life, or unable to sup-
port themselves, or for any other reason which
the Eugenic Board may consider sufficient.

The Committee do not omit to note that
even if a vigorous policy of segregation and
sterilization were adopted there would still be
defectives and degenerates, since " mental de-
fectives may be the offspring of apparently
normal stock?or of persons who have not
themselves necessarily shown any marked
traits of instability or degeneracy and to whom
therefore sterilization or segregation would be
inapplicable."

In considering the question of the steriliza-
tion of sexual offenders the Committee have
felt considerable doubt and have suggested
that the subject should be referred to the
Eugenic Board for consideration. In view of
the division of opinion amongst experts all
equally concerned with the racial aspects of
the problem, it would appear advisable that
the sterilization of the feeble-minded be also
referred to the Eugenic Board for full dis-
cussion rather than for immediate action..

We welcome the recommendation of the
Committee (Recom. 7) that fuller provision be
made by the Universities and Training Col-
leges for the special training of teachers, etc.
The Report is altogether an illuminating
and interesting document, but we feel that it
is somewhat academic, and that it would bene-
fit before the recommendations are put into
operation by a closer examination of the prac-
tical working of the Mental Deficiency Act in
this country, where the size of the population
has enabled many authorities to gather a very
considerable amount of data, which is not yet
fully available in printed documents.

We shall watch with the greatest possible
interest any action which may be taken by the
New Zealand Government on this Report.

The Decroly Class : A Contribution to
Elementary Education. By Amelie
Hama'ide. Translated by Jean L. Hunt.
Pp. xxviii., 318. J. M. Dent & Sons,
Ltd. 1925. 7s. 6d%
On laying" down this book the reader feels
that he has been a privileged visitor in the
Decroly class in Elementary School C in
Brussels ; that Augusta, Helene and Yvonne
are children whose growth and development
he has watched and in whose future he is as
interested as Mile. Hama'ide herself. For this
we are deeply indebted to Mile. Hama'ide who
has in this volume given us a vivid and
interesting account of the experiment which
has demonstrated that the principles for
which Dr Decroly stands can be carried out
even under the conditions which must hold in
a public elementary school.

On reflection, the reader will realise that
the book is much more than this. It contains
perhaps the most complete formulation of
Decroly's fundamental principles, and of the
details of educational practice which follow
as corollaries from them.

In the introductory chapters the author
traces the development of this type of class
from Decroly's class for defective children held
in 1901 to the date of publication (1922), when
eleven such classes were being carried on suc-
cessfully in the city of Brussels as part of the
public school system.

The chapters which follow deal with the
fundamental principles of Decroly's system of
education. The conception which underlies the
whole of Decroly's work is that of the neces-
sity of self-development through active experi-
ence. Learning must come through doing,
and education is a long process of develop-
ment of personality and adaptation to environ-
ment. It is characteristic of human activity
that it is purposive. The school-room, there-
fore, will be of the nature of a workshop
where schemes are worked out, and the prob-
lems that are faced are such as arise out of
the task which has been undertaken. Decroly
is a sound psychologist as well as a zealous
educationist, and it is this fact that has made
his scheme successful in practice. Since
education involves spontaneous activity, it
follows that it must be based upon funda-
mental tendencies which have their own
" drive." The Decroly system consists in
organising the child's environment in such a
way that it appeals to these fundamental
needs. It is not a cut-and-dried programme
imposed upon the child from without; it *s
rather a living- developing- plan which opens
out concomitantly with the widening of his
own problems. The Decroly " Programme
is a programme only in its very general
characters; the topics studied vary from class
to class and from individual to individual with-
in a class.

In consequence of the different attitude
toward learning, the curriculum of the Decroly
class differs from that of the usual school*
The whole of the work is grouped around a
problem, a " Centre of Interest," e.g., Food-
getting or House-building. The point of
departure is alwavs from facts in actual
experience. From the psychological point
of view this means the use of senses
and muscles in relation to the object
studied; the process may therefore be con-
sidered as primarily perceptual. To this stage
of the study Decroly gives the name Observa-
tion. From observation develops naturally the
stage of relating the perceptual experience to
other similar or connected experiences, either
already familiar to the children or such as can
be sought out from records. This is the stage
of Association. Association in time will give
that group of facts known as " history,"
association in space will give details of " geo-
graphy." But since all activity is purposive,
these stages are preliminary only to the stage
of Expression. The child wants to do some-
thing to or with the object he has been con-
templating. Expression may take the form
of actual manipulation of the material such
as building a hut; or it may be of a more
representative character such as drawing a
house. At a later stage it may become still
more symbolic and take the abstract form of
a verbal or written report. Reading and
writing, therefore, take their place in this
scheme as tools for expression rather than as
constitutive " subjects." The actual technique
of these tools must be acquired just as any
other form of muscular skill, and methods of
teaching, reading and writing which have
proved themselves successful in the Belgian
schools are described.. Number and measure-
ment are regarded by Decroly as forms of
more accurate observation and are developed
along with the actual perceptual study of the
subject matter.

The third section of the book (Chaps. VIII.
and IX.) is a record of the actual experiences
?f Mile. Hamaide during" the four years she
conducted the first Decroly class to be held
ln a public elementary school. To many
readers this section will make the strongest
appeal. Chapter VIII. gives a full and
interesting description of the class activities,
and Chapter IX. a detailed study of several
?f the children. This chapter combines in an
admirable manner an objective and scientific
study of the children with a sympathetic under-
standing of them as individuals. Specimens
the children's work at different stages are
included, and the book is generously illus-
trated with reproduction of pictures and charts
made by the children.

Chapter X. gives typical outline programmes
?f work drawn up on the Decroly plan. These
are of great interest in indicating what a
Wealth of material the normal environment of
a child provides for work. The programmes
are regarded as suggestive only; they are
not models to be copied. Indeed, it would
be contrary to the essence of this point of
yiew that any scheme should be adopted ready-
made.

Two appendices give an account of an
attempt to study and assess the character and
emotional equipment of the children and so to
supplement the findings of the intelligence
tests. A third appendix adds a list of refer-
ences to articles written by Dr.. Decroly and
his collaborators. As these have nearly all
appeared in scattered journals and reports of
conferences, it is useful to investigators to
have the references brought together in this
"Way.

1 he book should be read by all interested in
the primary education of children. The prin-
Clples for which it stands underlie much of the
best work in modern English primary teach-
}ng. and are also to be discerned in the " Pro-
ject Method " in American education. Those
educationists whose immediate work lies with
abnormal children will realise what a very
important bearing this point of view has upon
their problems. The only hope of progress
with defective children lies in securing some
centre of interest " and building around this.
Reading and arithmetic, those bugbears of
defective children, when treated as " subjects,"
do fall into the scheme of things if they emerge
as useful tools. It is true that they are tools
which these children will never handle very
skilfully. It is interesting- to note that the
less abstract forms of expression mentioned by
Decroly are tools of expression used often by
the defective with much greater success. Such
children will often show a much greater wealth
of detail in a sketch than in a verbal account
whether spoken or written.

English readers are indebted to Miss Jean
L. Hunt, of New York, for the present trans-
lation, and to the Committee of Relief in
Belgium Foundation through whose co-opera-
tion the translation was undertaken.
M. McF.

Childhood's Fears. Psycho-analysis and
the Inferiority-Fear Complex. By
G. F. Morton, M.A., B.Sc.., Headmaster
of the Leeds Boys' Modern School, Duck-
worth. 1925. 7s. 6d.

This book is written from the standpoint
of a schoolmaster on a subject of great im-
portance to all students of child-life and edu-
cation. It is unfortunate that the term
" Psycho-analysis " has not a more definite
meaning and use, as to many people it implies
principles to which they may rightly object,
especially if they are applied to children.. It
might be well if some other term, such as
" Mental Exploration " were applied to the
methods of investigating such cases. As the
author says " Fresh experience daily confirms
the writer in his conclusion that sex is only
a secondary consideration " (p. 275). The
author divides his book into five parts. The
first part he occupies with a brief outline and
discussion of the views of Freud, Jung, Adler,
Rivers and others. The second part deals with
the practical application of the results arrived
at in the first and should serve to provide
some guidance and, above all, stimulate
thought, in those for whom the book is in-
tended. It is a book which might, with pro-
fit, be read right through and the material
contained in it be allowed to settle down in
the reader's mind; after this the reader should
think out his own method of approach to such
problems as are dealt with, on common-sense
lines, guided by what he has learnt. It must,
however, be remembered that much harm may
be done by faulty handling of the subject and
that there are other problems than the in-
feriority-fear complex which may arise in the
investigation of these cases.

F.. H. D.
Report of the Departmental Committee on
Sexual Offences Against Young Per-
sons. H.M. Stationery Office.. 1925.
2s.

This Committee was appointed in July, 1924,
and its Report, which was somewhat de-
layed by the death of two of its members, has
just been issued.. Miss Clara Martineau,
J.P., member of the Council of the C.A.M.W.,
and Chairman of the Birmingham Special
Schools Committee, was one of the members
of the Committee and the C.A.M.W. gave
evidence.

The Committee was appointed to " collect
information and to take evidence as to the
prevalence of sexual offences against young
persons and to report upon the subject, indi-
cating any direction in which in their opinion
the law or its administration might be im-
proved," and was the outcome of a general
public sentiment that inadequate penalties
were sometimes inflicted for these offences,
and that those who committed them were often
mentally abnormal.

The Annual Criminal Statistics as at pre-
sent arranged, do not separate the offences
against young persons from those against
adults, so that it is not easy to compile figures
showing the prevalence of such offences, but
as far as can be ascertained, it appears that
the annual average of persons tried for certain
sexual offences (and attempts to commit same
on persons under 16) for 1909-13 was 884;
for 1920-24 1,058, the actual numbers for 1924
being 1,117.

The Committee state that the " official
figures which we have analysed indicate that
the worst types of sexual offences against
young persons have decreased considerably,
and the evidence we have taken convinces us
that sexual crimes accompanied by violence
have greatly diminished over a long period."
But they proceed to add : " Various reliable
sources of evidence incline us to the view that
in the interests of the child some cases of
sexual offences are now dealt with summarily
on a reduced charge, which would formerly
have been dealt with on indictment and tried as
a more serious offence at Assizes. Thus, by re-
ducing a more serious charge to one of in-
decent assault, the gravity of a sexual offence
is masked."

As the Report points out, however, there
are many cases of sexual offences against
young- persons which are not brought to the
notice of the police, either for the sake of
sparing- the child from giving evidence or
owing to the difficulty of proving the offence.
Repetition of evidence and delay, both so
harmful to the young child witness, are due to
the fact that certain offences can only be tried
at Assizes or Quarter Sessions, and the Com-
mittee recommend that to avoid this the juris-
diction of Petty Sessions should be extended.
This would, we believe, greatly encourage the
reporting of all cases.

The Committee state that there is evidence
that the number of girls who begin to lead
immoral lives at 16 is large, and they recom-
mend that the age of 17 be substituted in
general for 16 in regard to sexual offences.
There are many other recommendations
equally valuable regarding procedure, sworn
evidence, etc., which will repay careful study.
We must pass over to that Section of the
Report which especially concerns us. We
cannot do better than quote at some length.
"We have been impressed by the large
number of witnesses who have strongly re-
commended that there should be a mental
examination of every offender who commits a
sexual offence against a young person. The
demand has arisen, partly, from a general im-
pression that many of these offences are com-
mitted by men who are insane or mentally
defective, and partly from a desire that the
problem of mental abnormality should be more
closely studied. We have taken careful evi-
dence, but we have not found that experts,
and those best qualified to know, entirely bear
out the opinion that many such offenders are
insane or defective. ..."

"We have considered an analysis with regard
to the mental condition of prisoners. Of 200
men certified consecutively in prisons as being
mentally deficient 50 were admitted for com-
mitting sexual offences. On the other hand,
of 108 men remanded to prison in the three
years ending March, 1924, for indecent assault,
incest and carnal knowledge, all these offences
being against a young person under 16, none
could be certified as insane and only 8 were
certifiable as mentally deficient. The cases of
indecent exposure, however, showed a com-
paratively large proportion of mental trouble.
Of 150 men remanded to prison for this offence
14 were found to be insane and 24 were found
to be certifiable as mentally deficient. Other
expert evidence confirms these statistics in
showing- that among" the insane and defective,
sex obsession or sex perversion is somewhat
common, and that in cases of indecent expo-
sure there is a fairly large proportion of men
suffering from mental disease or defect. ..."

'Many witnesses have drawn attention to the
^ct that Courts are unskilled in detecting the
Mentally afflicted, and have little expert assis-
tance to guide them in this matter. We have
had reported to us the cases of five sexual
offenders who were imbeciles, but whose con-
dition had in each case passed unrecognised by
the Courts which sentenced them to imprison-
ment.

High-grade feeble-minded persons are
exceedingly difficult to detect as such by those
unaccustomed to dealing with them, and magis-
trates are apt to consider that if a man or
Ionian has not an imbecile appearance, and
can answer ordinary questions, he or she can-
n?t be a person requiring " care, supervision
and control for their own protection and for
the protection of others." (Mental Deficiency
Act, 1913, section 1 (c).) This also applies to
that very difficult class, the moral imbecile,
whose intellectual attainments are on a much
higher plane, but who displays " from an
early age, permanent mental defect coupled
With strong vicious or criminal propensities
?n which punishment has had little or no deter-
rent effect." (Section 1 (d).) Our recom-
mendation for the appointment of skilled
mental advisers should help to overcome these
difficulties.

Even when mental defect is recognisable, a
further obstacle to certification often arises in
the words " From birth or an early age "
(Mental Deficiency Act, section 1) where it is
^possible to obtain the early history of the
defective. We have had reported to us a
case in which a man had 50 previous convic-
tions for indecent exposure, and was said by
the local authorities to be a moral imbecile of
a hopeless character, whose offences were
aggravated by being committed against school
children. Unfortunately, the doctors, while
Prepared to say that the man was defective
now, were unable to find evidence of mental
defect in him earlier than the age of 25,
and this would not fulfil the statute's require-
ment of " from birth or an early age ". . . .
" Where mental defect or disease cannot be
diagnosed there still remains a proportion of
unstable, weak-minded offenders for whom at
present there is no provision except in
prison. ..."

" Weak-minded persons are frequently found
among- those who are convicted of indecent
exposure. Thus, of the 150 men remanded
for this offence, 38 were certifiable as insane
or feeble-minded, and of the remaining- 112
men, no less than 23 were weak-minded or
alcoholic or neurotic. It is evident, therefore,
that 41 per cent, of men remanded for indecent
exposure were abnormal, but that only 25 per
cent, were definitely certifiable."
The Committee recommend therefore :?
(1) That the words " from birth or an early
age " in Section 1 (c) and the words
" from an early age " in Section 1 (d)
shall be deleted from the Mental Defi-
ciency Act, 1913.

(2) That in all cases of indecent exposure (as
a fairly large proportion of these men
have been found to be insane or feeble-
minded), the offender should be examined
as to his mental condition.

(3) That in all cases of sexual offences
against young persons there should
be a mental examination where the
offender has been previously found
guilty of a sexual offence, or where the
Court has reason to suspect mental
disease or defect either from the pre-
vious history or conduct of the accused,
from his defence to the charge, or from
any special circumstances in the case.
(4) Where a mental examination is to take
place, that the Bench should remand the
offender after conviction, but before
sentence, to be examined by a mental
expert, and that the Bench should act
in accordance with the result of the
examination.

(5) Where the number of cases are too few
to justify the appointment of a full time
mental expert, that arrangements might
be made, without setting up new
machinery or multiplying personnel, for
the Medical Superintendent of the
County or the Borough Mental Hospital,
or for the Medical Officer of the Mental
Deficiency Act Committee, to serve as
mental expert to the Courts in the dis-
trict.

The Committee Further state their considered
view regarding repeated offences. They say
" Where there is no mental disease or dis-
order we believe that there would be support
for the prolonged detention of men who appear
quite incapable of abstaining from indecent
exposure or from committing repeated indecent
assaults on children. We are aware that the
public mind is distrustful of any kind of inde-
terminate sentence, but we believe that the
period of prolonged detention in a special in-
stitution might occasionally effect a cure. In
any case it would protect the public more
effectively than many short terms of imprison-
ment."

There are many other recommendations on
matters of detailed administration, which
though apparently less important, would in
their sum total make for the further preven-
tion of offences, and for more adequate judicial
procedure.

Of all the recommendations regarding
mentally defective persons, that of the omis-
sion, as suggested above, of the words
from birth or from an early age "
would have the most far-reaching effects. It
is not too much to say that it would greatly
increase the number of those subject to be
dealt with under the Mental Deficiency Act.
We must not lose sight of the fact that the
Mental Deficiency Act is intended to deal with
persons suffering from a permanent defect,
and that the existence of the condition from
birth or from an early age is one of the surest
indications of its permanence. Such a pro-
found modification of the Act appears to us
to require very careful consideration and is
not one to be lightly recommended. Whilst
fully aware of the existing difficulties of estab-
lishing defect as having existed from birth or
from an early age, we must bear in mind that
if the Defective and Epileptic Children Acts,
1899 and 1914 (now Sections 53 to 69 of the
Education Act, 1921) were fully administered,
practically all defective children would be
ascertained sufficiently so as to bring them
within the definition of the Act. There would
remain a very small number of high-grades,
mainly of the temperamentally defective type,
whom it will always be difficult to bring within
the four walls of any definition. The deletion of
the words " from birth or from an early age "
would in practice bring within the Act many of
those persons referred to under the definition in
the Act as first drafted as "Mentally infirm per-
sons ; that is to say, persons who through
mental infirmity arising- from age or the decay
of their faculties are incapable of managing
themselves or their affairs."

The Council of the C.A.M.W. has appointed
a Committee to consider this recommendation.
Everyday Psychology in the Nursery : A
selection from Courses of Lectures
delivered under the auspices of the
National Society of Day Nurseries.
National League for Health, Maternity
and Child Welfare. 1925. 1/-.

The Call of the Child. By A. Dingwall-
Fordyce, M.D., Hon. Physician, Royal
Liverpool Children's Hospital. Adam &
Charles Black. 1925. 2/6..

We have received these two little books from
the publishers and have pleasure in calling
the attention of our readers to them. Though
they do not fall entirely within the usual scope
of our work, they are useful summaries of
various truths of general importance to those
dealing with children.

" Everyday Psychology in the Nursery "
consists of the following addresses :?
The Use and Abuse of Suggestion with
Children, by Dr J. R. Rees.
The Psychology of the Boy, by Dr J. R.
Rees.

Sex Education, by Dr Elizabeth Sloan
Chesser.
The Part Played by Diet in the Psychology
of the Child, by Dr Eric Pritchard..
The Psychology of the Child, by the late
Dr Charles W. Hayward.
The Children's Evening Hour, by Miss
M. G. Ostle.

Viscountess Erleigh, to whose initiative the
Course of Lectures was due, writes a little
introduction. Each lecture is followed by a
suitable bibliography. Dr Rees' first lecture
is of special interest to those who realise the
extreme suggestibility of the sub-normal child.
The Call of the Child deals mainly with the
basic essentials of health in childhood. Dr.
Dingwall-Fordyce says in his section on
"Mental and .Scholastic Training" : " It is im-
possible to dissociate medicine and mental
nurture?education." He gives a very clear,
well-arranged survey of psychological needs
and school methods and aims, and has a short
chapter on Physically Defective and Mentally
Defective Children.

Criminality and Levels of Intelligence :
Being- a Report of a Mental Survey of
the Hobart Gaol. By Professor E. Morris
Miller, M.A., Litt.D. University of Tas-
mania, Director of the State Psychological
Chnic. 1925.

This short report gives the results of a
survey carried on by Dr Morris Miller,
whereby he found that " nearly three-fifths
?f the Tasmanian prisoners are mental deviates
?f some sort.." This number includes psycho-
paths. There was a re-classification of
Pnsoners according to the findings, and con-
sequent marked improvement in prison dis-
ClP'ine. Dr Morris Miller urges a further
Provision of appropriate education and train-
lng in early life so that the defective may not
become the criminal.

Annual Report of the Chief Medical
Officer of the Board of Education for
the Year 1924. H.M. Stationery Office,
1925. 1/Gd.

Sir George Newman's Annual Report con-
tains, as always, matter of the highest interest,
attractively presented, and his remarks deserve
the closest attention, whether he is dealing
with the general health of the school child,
?Pen-air education, nursery schools, rural
schools, etc.., or particular diseases or defects
and their prevention or efficient treatment. In
that portion of the Report devoted to mentally
defective children, detailed reference is made
to Circular 1341 (re Supervision of Educable
Children not in Special Schools).

There is a pregnant sentence, referring to
the argument that our limited money resources
should be spent on those whose education
Would be most fruitful. Sir George Newman
Writes :?" The defective children, the blind,
^alt, lame and mentally defective are from
causes beyond their control already gravely
handicapped in capacity and in human happi-
ness?does it accord with enlightened views
?f humanity and common sense that they
should be still further handicapped by lack of
such nurture and training as can be provided?
I think not. I am convinced that we must
do our best for them and not neglect them.
For if We neglect them, two things must
)nevitably happen; first, they will be retained
|n the ordinary Elementary Schools and thus
^pede the whole elementary system of educa-
tion; and, secondly, they will subsequently
become a higher charge on the State."
Here is stated succinctly the justification of
all work among- mentally defective children.
Sir George Newman further states : " Even
one-third to one-half of the mentally defec-
tive are so much improved that they
subsequently become contributory to their
own independent maintenance and are safe-
guarded from most of the evils inherent
in their condition." Recognition is also
accorded to the fact that " the methods of
education employed and ' tried out ' in the
Special Schools, here and in other countries
are contributing substantially to the evolution
and betterment of all educational methods.
Like the School Medical Service itself, the;
have helped to show that education of the
child cannot be a cast-iron system of uniform
imposition, but a growing and adaptive pro-
cess of individual culture, which should be
modified in accordance with the needs and
capacity of each child." This is indeed true.
The figures for 1924 for the incidence of
mental defect per 1,000 children show, in
nearly all cases, an increase in the number
of mentally defective children.. This is no
doubt due, not to an actual increase, but to
an improved ascertainment. According to the
latest returns from the Local Education
Authorities for 1924, the incidence is 6.01, as
against 5.65 in 1923, which still falls short of
the Board's estimate of 8.6.

The figures suggest, as Sir George New-
man says, " that there are large numbers of
physically and mentally defective children who
are not yet recorded in the Authorities'
returns. It will certainly be wise always to
bear this possibility in mind when estimating'
the total provision required for these children."
A few of the Local Authorities show a
decrease in the number ascertained, and there
are one or two startling increases such as :?

i 923. 1924.
Bedfordshire ... .90 7.17
Chester   3.64 15.04
Radnorshire ... 5.37 10.93
York   1.00 11.90

The returns represent a total of 30,821 chil-
dren (29,278 in 1923) while the Board's esti-
mate is 44,553. For this large number of
children there were in July, 1925, only 174
Day Schools, and 6 Residential Schools, with
accommodation for 16,569 children. These
facts require no comment.
