At what Age does Intelligence cease to Develop? and Intelligence in Relation to Different Social Classes
=========================================================================================================

By Dr. Ovide Decroly. Translated from the French.
Methods of measuring- intelligence have produced results which have given
rise abroad to many subjects of discussion, one of which is the age at which
intelligence usually ceases to develop.
In the United States, Group Tests go to prove that intelligence does not
develop beyond 13-14 years of age. Terman and other writers, have shown
that the average soldier in the United States cannot go beyond the tests for
children of 13 or 14. On the other hand, Dr. Burt, who is Psychological Examiner
of the children in the London Schools, points out that the tests which he has
devised for children of 16 are the same as those which normal urban adults can,
on the average, accomplish. He does not think it likely that intelligence grows
by regular stages up to fourteen, and then ceases abruptly. He has carried
on researches by means of tests, other than those of Binet, applied not only to
the students at the University and at Training Colleges, who would of course be
of higher mental capacity, but also to adults of various types who may be con-
sidered as having been average pupils at the Elementary Schools. From these
researches he is inclined to admit fifteen or sixteen as the point at which intel-
ligence ceases to grow.
Having regard to the standard rate of progress, and taking the age of 9
as being the age at which the rate of pi ogress is commensurate with the actual
age, it follows that, if the mental age were to increase after 9 at an equal rate,
the limit of development would be 13. But as the fact is that the rate of develop-
ment decreases from year to year, the age of 15 to 16 as the limit of development
aPproaches more nearly to the truth.
According to the above, and we have only quoted evidence based on wide
statistics, we must admit that development of the intelligence ceases somewhere
between 13 and 16.
It seems, however, difficult to deny that a certain number of minds do con-
tinue to develop; and the whole organisation of education is built up on this
idea. For we have Secondary School Education for 5 to 10 per cent, of the total
school population, and University Education for 1 to 2 per cent.. Now, by the
provision of these educational opportunities, we surely presuppose that for a
certain number of children there is an increase of capacity after the age of 16,
10 MENTAL WELFARE.
But this is only a presumption, and positive proof is still needed to show that
the mental aptitudes of all these pupils, who enjoy Higher Secondary and Uni-
versity Education, really do increase beyond the age-limit indicated above.
The researches made even in Belgium, by means of group tests, do not
provide this proof. It seems rather, from the results obtained,1 that the fact that
groups of scholars, who pass in successive years through Higher Secondary and
University Education, are capable of following more and more difficult courses of
study, is due, less to the increase of their intellectual capacity, properly so called,
than to other factors of quite a different order, such as health, home circum-
stances, a good verbal memory, great perseverance, ambition, inclination, etc.
The proof of this seems to be found in the fact that the average group improves
mainly by the elimination of the inferior,2 and not by an increase in the number
of the superior intelligences.
Besides, progress is most marked in the co-efficient of precision, that is to
say, in the decrease in the number of errors in proportion to the actual number
of questions, which seems to be due rather to an improvement in concentration
and method of study than actually in the intelligence.
In short, what one can count as proved by modern investigations is that
three-quarters at least of the adult population does not go beyond 15 years3 of
age, from the point of view of ability to understand, to reflect, to profit by
experience, to foresee, to analyse and generalise, and above all to work at abstract
ideas. And this would agree in the main with the views of Moebius4 con-
cerning the mental state of the female, and of Ch. iRichet5 concerning that of
man in general. This also gives an explanation of Crowd Psychology, apart
from the hypothesis of a special mentality characteristic of men in groups.
Another fact has been proved, to which we wish to call attention. This fact
has not indeed greatly surprised those who happen to live in contact with chil-
dren of various classes, but it should considerably modify the views of those
theorists, who say that one man is just as good as another, that all children
are equally endowed, equally disposed to goodness, according to the formula
of Jean Jacques, that social conditions are alone responsible for the differences
which one finds in human beings.
The fact to which we refer is this. The results of tests of the Binet-Simon
type have shown that the children of the comfortable classes are more or less
in advance of those of the proletariat.
We ourselves have since 1910? drawn attention to this fact, and we
have actually proved it with a group of 45 children from 6-15 years from the
comfortable classes, examined by tests which were only at the level of their
age. Of this group, 13 were one year, 17 two years, and 9 as much as 3 years
in advance of the Paris children.
(1) Decroly. Les divers types de tests (Bulletin de la Society Royale des Sciences
medicales et naturelles, 1925).
(2) Communication au Congrks Fran^ais pour l'avancement des Sciences. Li&ge,
(3) This does not mean, of course, that three-quarters of the population all
reach the mentality of 15 years. Intelligence, like other biological phenomena, is
found in different individuals in differing degrees, which may be represented by the
classical curves, of Galton, for quantity, and of Gauss, for frequency (see the statis-
tics in regard to measuring education in my book in collaboration with M. Buyse
to be published by Alcan).
(4) Ueber den Physiologischen des Weibes. Halle, 1901.
(5) Ch. Richet. L'homme stupide. Flammarian, 1919.
(6) Decroly et De Gaud. La mesure de l'intelligence par la methode Binet-
Simon (Arch, de Psychol), 1910.
MENTAL WELFARE. 11
By a further application of Binet's tests (2nd series 1908) in collaboration
with Messrs. Boulanger & Smelten on 80 children from a Public Elementary
School in Brussels, we found on the other hand that the children were on an
average one year behind those of Paris.7
Meurmann,8 dealing- with this question, points out that tests applied
by Dr. Schubert to poor children of Moscow, showed that these children are
two years behind the Paris children, while the children of the middle class of
Petrograd were two years in advance.
The children examined by Miss Johnston nt Sheffield (Public Elementary
Schools) reached the level of those of Paris, while the children of an upper class
school surpassed them.
The results of tests made by Goddard on 2,000 pupils in Vineland and
district (U.S.A .) are also very similar to those obtained by the Binet Tests on
the little Parisians. The same result is found among- the Italian children examined
by Jeronutti : those of the comfortable classes of Rome go beyond the Binet
average; the same applies to those examined by Treves and Saffiotti at Turin.
Stern does not believe, however, that it is entirely due to heredity, and we
have ourselves also admitted from the beginning that language has something
to do with it : the tests being for the most part verbal, are easier for the children
of the middle class, where language is more developed.
It is for this reason that we have emphasised on several occasions the need
for the Binet Tests to be supplemented by tests of intelligence where language
plays a less important part.
That is why we have advocated tests, such as arranging parts of a picture
in the right order, grouping correctly the different activities of a picture, or
opening Puzzle Boxes. It has become the practice to use such tests in the
United States and here.
It is interesting to note what other writers have found from the point of
view of social differences.
Investigations made in the same school among children of different social
classes by Morle, Jaederholm, Max Schmitt, Treves and Saffiotti, have led
generally to the conclusion that the difference is most marked in the early years
of the Infant School, and disappears in the later years.
Karstadt explains this by the fact that in the later years of the Public Elemen-
tary School, the children of the better class leave in order to go to Preparatory
Secondary Schools. So that in the later years there only remain the more back-
ward members of the better class, so much so that we may reverse the formula
and say that the children of the better class who are left behind are inferior
to those of the lower classes..
The comparison between schools belonging to different districts affords
some convincing evidence. Thus Morle, at the suggestion of Binet, examined
30 pupils of the same age in two distinct schools, without taking into account
their school records. The comparison revealed a difference of three quarters of
a year in favour of the children of the better class.
Yerkes and Anderson compared in the same way two schools at Cambridge
(Massachusetts), the one taking pupils from a good, the other from a bad environ-
ment. Fifty-four pupils were chosen from among the children of both sexes in
the Kindergarten and the first year Primary School (5-7 years). Hie average
of the two groups was about six years. The Binet test, modified by Yerkes
(7) Unpublished.
(8) Meurmann. Preface to 2nd edition.
12 MENTAL WELFARE.
(point-scale) showed that the boys of the one school obtained on an average 37
points and of the other 29 points. In the case of the girls, the figures obtained
were respectively 41 and 33. If one kept exclusively to the children of 6 years
of age, the difference would be all the more marked.
According to this enquiry the children of the better class were 30 per cent,
above those of the poorer class.
Certain writers, such as I. and R. Weintrob, of New York, and Schmitt,
of Germany, state that they do not find such marked differences. But against
this Stern objects that the first two are comparing children who are not only of
different social classes, but also distinct in race, and as regards the second, he
remarks that Schmitt was working in a Boarding School in the one instance
and in Day Schools in the other, going on the assumption that the Boarders
were in better circumstances than the day pupils?an assumption not justified.
Schmitt also assumes a priori, without examining the pupils, that the results
of the day pupils must work out on a symmetrical curve, and as he states that
those of the Boarders do not, but curve downwards more rapidly the greater
the age, he concludes that the latter are inferior.
Schmitt, as Stern has rightly remarked, has not sufficiently taken into
account the fact that his pupils were older, and that the Binet Tests are relatively
more difficult for the more advanced ages than for the less.
The influence of environment becomes more marked, when one chooses schools
of different types.
In 1912, at Breslau, Stern and his students compared pupils from 7-9 years
attending Preparatory Schools (Vorschule) with pupils of 7-9 and 10 years
from a Public Elementary School. In all there were 150 pupils. The results
of the examination, made with special precautions, were as follows :?The chil-
dren of both 7 and 9 years old from the Public Elementary School were about
half a year below those of the other group of the same age?the 10 year olds
from the former group were about on a level with the 9 year olds in the other
group.
In comparing results in different parts of the tests, Stern comes to the
conclusion that the superiority is most marked in the verbal (formal) tests.
Investigations have been made with tests other than those of Binet.
Eor example, G. and A. Schober submitted 60 children, of 4 to 8 years
old, to Heilbrommer's tests : half the children belonged to the better class;
for each year there were 3 girls and 3 boys of each group. Although the numbers
were too limited to be satisfactory, the differences are very marked, especially
among the youngest children, and decrease as the ages advance, which the
writers attribute to the influence of the school. The differences are more marked
in the use of perception (Erkennens) and association (Erganzen) than in the
vocabulary.
H. and P. Roloff, by means of a Definition test, made an enquiry among
children of 9-13 years of the classical and modern sides of Secondary Schools
and the Public Elementary Schools of Hamburg. The differences are more
marked between the pupils of the classical and modern side of the Secondary
School than between those of the Secondary School and the Public Elementary
School.
The differences are as follows :?
Between the 1st and 3rd group ... 3 years.
,, ,, 1st and 2nd group   2J years.
,, ,, 2nd and 3rd group   f of a year.
MENTAL WELFARE. 13
Stern believes that the differences between the first two groups is not due
to educational conditions, but to stock. Thus if one classifies them according
to the profession of their fathers, one can point out that in the first group, the
fathers are mostly big commercial men, professors and higher officials; in the
second, mostly manual and industrial workers, and officials of the lower rank;
in the third, mostly labourers, sometimes illiterate..
The statistics of housing conditions also show a greater difference between
the first two groups :?
1st group. 2nd group. 3rd group.
Living in a House or Villa ... 76% 25%
Living in Workmen's Dwellings... 24% 25% 100%
At Breslau, Minkus experimented on children (12?16 years) belonging to
the Public Elementary Schools and Vocational Schools (Fortbildungschule). For
each sex the writer chose children of a different class..
The results only refer to one test, that of Masselon (to arrange words into
a sentence). It is stated that in the upper class of the Public Elementary School
there was hardly any difference, while the difference was very marked in the
lower and middle class of the Vocational Schools. In these latter schools it
seems that the difference can be attributed to the fact that the better type are
attracted towards employment in shops while the rest tend towards manual
occupations.
A School Inspector, of Bremen, Hartnacke, basing his inquiry on statistics
and the opinion of the masters, compared the non-paying and paying children
under the same school conditions, and states that the level of the latter was
higher than that of the former..
The statistics of 1913?18 show in addition that 8 per cent, of the non-
paying children and 3 per cent, of the paying fail, and double their years.
Further, when the teachers were invited in 1916 to select the pupils whom
they found capable of passing into the Secondary School, 96 were selected out
of 836 paying pupils and 41 out of 1,413 non-paying pupils, which means 11.5
per cent, and 2 per cent.
In a third set of figures regarding 50 children, who were the most remark-
able for their intelligence in two schools, the fathers belonged to the intellectual
professions, for half of them were officials, business men, salaried people, con-
tractors, and the other half were better-class artisans, the important category of
labourers not being noticeably represented.
It is interesting to compare the results collected by Stern in his work on
the intelligence of children and adolescents with those which were given by Burt
of London, whom we have already quoted.
This writer gives in this connection a curious diagram in which he com-
pares the differences which exist between the children of opposite sex and
different social surroundings. In this diagram the sign + with the numbei
following indicates the extent to which a test is easier for the children of the
better class and for g'irls than for the children of the poorer class and for boys.
The sign ? indicates the opposite. The numbers indicate the different place
occupied by the tests in the order of difficulty in the four groups under considex-
ation..
Thus, if a test occupies the 30th place among the boys and the 35th among
the girls the difference is indicated by ? 5; if a test occupies the 33rd place
among the children of the better class and the 40th among those of the poorer
class, the difference is indicated by + 7.
14 MENTAL WELFARE*
Test.
Picture (Interpretation)
60 Words
Reading (2 Facts)
Dictation
16 Syllables
Reading (6 Facts)
Differences (Abstract)
Sentence Building (1)
Picture (Description)
Transcription
Age
4 Colours
26 Syllables
Definition (Class)
Re-statement
3 Rhymes
Sentence Building (2)
Mixed Sentences
Definition (Use)
Definition (Abstract)
Days of Week
Surname
10 Syllables
4 Pennies
Fingers
6 Syllables
Picture (Enumeration)
Count 20 to 1
Right and Left
Comparing Faces
6 Numbers
Pointing
2 Lines
Differences
in Order
Social
Status.
+ 6
+ 5
+ 5
+ 5
+ 4
+ 4
+ 4
+ 4
+ 4
+ 3
+ 3
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 1
+ 1
+ 1
+ 1
+ 1
+ 1
+ 1
+ h
o
0
0
Sex.
- 1
- 5
+ 5
+ 5
+ 9
+ 6
+ 2
+ 2
+ 1
+ 4
+ 1
+ 6
+ 3
+ 3
+
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 2
+ 1
+ 1
0
+ 3
4- 2\
+ 2
+ 1
- 1
- 3
- 4J
4- 2
+ 3
- i
- }
Test.
Differences (King, President)
Months
Morning and Afternoon
13 Pennies
3 Numbers ...
4 Numbers
7 Numbers
Sex
2 Numbers
Differences (Concrete)
Absurdities ...
Diamond
Square
5 Numbers ...
Reversed Triangle ...
Naming
Easy Questions
Date ...
Missing Features
Folded Paper
2 Weights
Difficult Questions ...
4 Coins
Triple Order ...
Change
Divided Card
Memory Drawing ...
5 Weights
9 Coins
Pence and Halfpence
Problems
Suggestion
Differences
in Order.
Social
Status.
2
? 2
? 2
? 2
? 2
2
3
3
? 4
? 4
? 4
? 4
? 5
? 5
? 6
?10
Sex.
- 1
- 1
- 1
_ n
4- 3
4- 2
4- 2
- li
? 2
- 2
_ 2
- 3
- 5
4- 3
4- 2
4- 1
- 1
- 1
- 14
- 3j
- 4
- 1
- 3
- 5
- 2
- 4
- 4
- 5
- 4
- 5
- 3
- 7
From tins diagram, Burt concludes that the tests in which the children ot
the better class excel are (1) those where language is more important, requiring
a wide vocabulary; (2) those which have to do with scholastic attainment; (3)
those which depend upon verbal memory; (4) those which relate to knowledge
acquired early in life among the better and cultivated class.
It sometimes iiappens that an only child, or the youngest in a family, has
the best chance.
On the contrary, the poorest children excel in tests (1) which have to do
with money (2) those which require perception rather than conception, especially
when manual activity enters into play, such as drawing, weighing, games of
patience, etc; (3) those which deal with practical affairs, errands, easy and diffi-
cult questions, concrete problems; (4) those which require the critical faculty
(absurdity, resistance to a suggestion).
As to the differences between the sexes, they are attributed by Burt for
the most part to the influence of school; they are in fact more precise where
the sexes are educated separately and less marked where they are together.
He concludes therefore that the social differences as well as those between the
MENTAL WELFARE. 15
sexes are for the most part the result of influences which have come since birth
rather than the effect of heredity.
In Burt's opinion these differences are relatively little marked and are not
as important as those which exist between individuals of the same social
standing- (1) and of the same sex.
The enquiries made in the United States, the evidence from which we
have set out in an article on the " Mieux-doues " in the Bulletin International
de la protection de 1'enfance, 1924, also prove in no uncertain manner the influence
of social conditions.
As to the relative importance of environment and heredity in deter-
mining- the differences found among- school children it is obvious that one cannot
at the bidding of certain writers attribute to one too much importance to the
exclusion of the other.
Evidently in some isolated instances one can see cases where one of the
factors preponderates..
In our book, published with the collaboration of Inspector P. Renault on
L'Enfance Malheureuse M1 we have shown particularly that in the case of GO
to 80 children brought before the Magistrates the environment was the chief
cause of the anti-social conduct of the child. On the other hand, there is no
doubt that in order to produce the best a good heredity is the first essential.
Only, in order that the natural disposition may develop completely in the right
direction the environment must also play a part, and it cannot be doubted that
on the one hand, among the descendants of gifted people, aptitudes arc often
mis-directed, turned aside and wasted, while on the other hand, it is above all,
thanks to the care, the sacrifices and the solicitude of the parents that an excep-
tional nature can develop itself and reach its full height. But taking all things
into consideration, it is not possible to admit one only of the two factors as
being the sole contributory cause..
Evidently one can still argue that tests do not bring out actual capacity,
and emphasise, as we and others after us have emphasised, that children who
belong to circles where language is more developed, for reasons both of heredity
and education, are given some advantage by tests like Binet's. They also have
the advantage of educational methods which are themselves based on the use
of language. Besides there are children, and we ourselves have seen many,
in whom the verbal side develops at the expense of the visual-manual, some-
times to such an extent that all mental activities seem to depend on language,
and there is a real inability to observe, and to realise actual facts and things.
A serious want of balance is the result.
Sometimes these children give the impression at first of an astounding-
precocity, but later they are outstripped by those less gifted in expression, who
possess, however, greater powers of observation and initiative, even though
they may develop more slowly.
Characteristic examples of this are the infant prodigies who give such
brilliant promise, but whose want of balance makes it impossible for them in
later life to turn to account their over-stimulated talents (see Claparcde).
We will not here examine the peculiar difficulties created by the war among
the peoples of Europe by the change in social conditions caused by the abnormal
rise in the material and political position of certain persons. Nor will we examine
how the facts which we have emphasised help to solve the problem of the single
school, nor what relation there is between those facts and these social conditions.
(l) Decroly et P. Renault. L'enfance malheureuse (office da la Protection de
1'enfance, Ministere de la Justice), 1922.
16 MENTAL WELFARE.
Our conclusions are :?
(1) Mental tests, individual or group, confirm what has been already ob-
served, namely, that the children of the comfortable classes are in advance of
the others.
(2) These tests can measure child) en according- to age or according- to the
intelligence quotient.
(3) The superiority, shown in 1, is due to hereditary and educational factors
in varying proportions, often difficult to define.
(4) In a certain number of cases where this superiority is due to facility of
expression it is especially helpful in meeting school requirements at the beginning
of the primary education, and in classical studies, but it does not necessarily
mean that this advantage will be maintained in professions requiring other
qualities.
(5) A mental examination, to be complete, should not only be carried through
by tests where language is predominant, but should also include tests which
call upon other qualities, such as observation, concrete and abstract presentation
of a visual and motor order, and the power to solve practical problems.
(6) A mental examination should be completed by information or tests
concerning the character, the social and moral tendencies of the child.
Bibliography. W. Stern. Die Intelligenz der Kinder und Jugendlichen. 1922.
W. Stern. Differenzen der Pscychologie. 1911 nnd 1921.
E. Claparede. Comment diagnostiquer les aptitude? chez les ecoliers. Flaummarian. 1924.
XXIst Year Book. Society for the Study of Education, Bloomington, U.S.A. 1921.
R. M. Yerkes, Physiological examining in the United States Army. Memoirs of the National
Academy of Sciences. Vol. XV., Washington, 1921.
C. Burt. Mental and scholastic tests. 1921.
