News and Notes
=================

C.A.M.W. Courses for 1926.

Two short courses under the auspices of the Board of Education are to be
held this year?one from April 10th?30th, in the area of the Manchester Educa-
tion Authority, with residential headquarters at Hope, Derbyshire; the other
from July 7th?28th, at Leeds, the students being- in residence in the University
Hostels for Women.

A nine weeks course will be held in London from May 3rd?July 3rd. Bess-
borough House, near Victoria, will be headquarters for lectures and Eurythmics,
and the students will not go into residence, but will find their own accommodation.
As we write the arrangements for the Refresher Course for July 31st?
August 7th are nearly completed. This course is primarily intended for those
people who have already attended one of the C.A.M.W. Courses, and we shall
be glad to receive further applications.

The Medical Practitioners' Course will be held, as formerly, from May 31st?
June 5th, at the University of London.

Conference, 1926.
----------------

The Conference has been fixed for May 20th and 21st, 192C, in the Central
Hall, Westminster, and among the subjects of discussion will be Encephalitis
Lethargica and its after effects, the proper Safe-guarding of the Defective in the
Community, and the Training of Teachers for Special School Work.

Conference on the Training of Social Workers in Mental Welfare.
----------------------------------------------------------------

This Conference was called in December at the instance of the
C.A.M.W. Dr. H. B. Brackenbury was in the chair, and there were present
representatives of University Social Science Departments and the Joint Univer-
sity Council of Social Studies, and of the Mental Hospitals, Psychiatric Clinics
and various organisations.

After an interesting discussion it was agreed that the most helpful course
would be for the Council of the C.A.M.W. to lay before the Joint University
Council a scheme for training and instruction in mental welfare in conjunction
with University Diploma Courses in Social Science, with suggestions for the
formation, if desired, of a consultative body of experts.

Encephalitis Lethargies.
-------------------------

Weekly notifications (reproduced from the Lancet) :?
Week ending Week ending- Week ending
Oct. 3 43 Nov. 7 40 Dec. 5 51
10 30 14 43 12 44
17 5G 21 30 19 44
24 42 28 41 2fi 34
31 52
229 154 173
Total, 556

Poor Law Reform.
----------------

The Provisional Proposals issued, for the consideration of the Authorities
concerned, by the Ministry of Health are generally in accordance with the
Maclean Report and the views that have been advocated for many years for
the abolition of the Board of Guardians and the co-ordination of services under
the County Councils.

We do not propose at this juncture to criticise the scheme as it will effect
the care of defectives, but there is no doubt that the present system of exemp-
tion under Sec. 30 Proviso (ii.) is most tedious and complicated. There is also
very serious overlapping between Certified Institutions and Poor Law Infirmaries
who both have many of the same types of eases under totally different conditions
as regards certification and the power of detaining them.
