Obituary Notices
=================

:Author: John Thomson, M.D., L.L.D., F.R.C.P.

It was with the deepest regret that we announced in the last number of
this Journal the death of Dr. John Thomson, of Edinburgh, which took place
on July 2nd, at the age of 70 years. It is a great loss, not only to all having
to do with Mental Deficiency and Children's Diseases, but to the whole Profession
of Medicine. For John Thomson was a skilled physician of the front rank; a
man of wide knowledge and attainments, an earnest seeker after truth, and
one whose clinical acumen, painstaking and accurate observations and valuable
writings had gained for him a reputation which was world-wide and which
added a lustre to British Medicine.

John Thomson was born in Edinburgh in 1856, and, after receiving his
education at the Academy and University, he studied in London, Berlin and
Vienna. His interest was early directed towards diseases of children, and his
patient and methodical work in this field led to his amassing a vast store of
clinical experience, and to his being recognised as one of the highest authorities
on the subject. For many years h^ held the appointments of Physician, and
subsequently Consulting Physician, to the Royal Hospital for Sick Children in
Edinburgh, and of Lecturer in Diseases of Children in the University. He was
also Consulting Physician to the National Institution for Mentally Defective
Children at Larbert, and he instituted, and for many years conducted,
a clinic for mentally defective children, where his advice on care and
management was an inestimable boon to hundreds of mothers. He was naturally
the recipient of many distinctions; America elected him an honorary member of
the Pediatric Society ; Canada elected him to the membership of the Society for
the Study of Diseases in Children ; the University of Edinburgh conferred upon
him the honorary degree of L.L.D. The Royal College of Physicians of London
elected him a Fellow in recognition of his distinguished work.

Dr. Thomson made many valuable contributions to clinical medicine. Perhaps
the chief of these was his " Guide to the Clinical Study and Treatment of Sick
Children." The first edition of this book, published in 1898, at once gained
high appreciation for its clearness of expression, its accuracy of description and
its sound common-sense information. The fourth edition, which appeared last
year, had developed into a large text-book and was not only highly valued
throughout the English-speaking medical world, but was translated into French
and Spanish.

Dr. Thomson was greatly interested in, and a high authority on, the subject
of Mental Deficiency. To this he contributed many important papers and lectures.
One of the most valuable was his book " Opening Doors," published three
years ago. This is only, a small volume of 20 pages, but it is the result of years
of patient observation. It is written in delightfully simple language, and it
may safely be said that it stands unequalled as a practical guide for the mother
of a defective or backward child.

But, valuable as was John Thomson's work, and great as was his reputation
as a physician, his character and personality were even greater. He was a
man of singular kindness of heart and gentleness of disposition, a man of the
utmost patience and humility, one ever ready to sympathise with and help those
who sought his aid, whether they were rich or poor, and one who gained and
held the esteem and love of all who came into contact with him. It was as
impossible for anyone to harbour an unkind thought of John Thomson as it was
for him to say or do an unkind thing. To those who were privileged to know
him his death is indeed a sad loss.

A. F. Tredgold.
