The International Society for "Logopeedia"
==========================================

:Author: Joan H. Van Thal, L.R.A.M.
(Registered Teacher of Speech Training-, of the Royal Dental Hospital of
London, etc., etc.)

The word " Logopaedie " was coined by Doz. Dr. E. Froeschels, of Vienna,
to describe his work, i.e., research on the cause of defects of speech and their
treatment.

In England we have not this passion for coining terms, displayed by our
colleagues on the Continent, and it is unlikely that we shall adopt this new
word. We might use " elocution " if it were not that we are apt to associate
" recitation " (and what recitation !) with that word. The term " Speech
Training," which many prefer as a description of our profession, may be
thought to cover too wide a field, but that can be avoided by adding the word
"remedial." Thus, "Remedial Speech Training" is the subject of this
article. The term is not so compact as " Logopaedie," but it is plain English.
The shortened term, " Remedial Classes," will be used to describe special
classes for correction of defects of speech, as opposed to " special schools," to
describe classes at which children suffering from defects of speech receive general
education as well as special instruction in speaking.

A group of German and Austrian speech specialists has organised an
International Society for Remedial Speech Training. The first congress, at
which delegates from Austria, Czecho-Slovakia, Germany, Great Britain, Greece,
Japan, Russia, U.S.A. and Yougo-Slavia were present, was held in Vienna in
1924. At this congress the following resolutions were passed :?
1.?The system of " special schools " is recommended as the most
satisfactory one for the treatment of defects of speech in school-children.
2.?The Staff of such schools should consist of teachers specially
trained to treat defects of speech, and School Medical Officers cognisant
with the subject.

3.?Instruction in phonetics and phonology should be included in the
curriculum of all Training Colleges for Teachers, in order that each teacher
may use his or her own voice hygienically, and impart such knowledge
to his or her pupils, and that he or she may also be able to recognise and
diagnose defects of speech and recommend cases that come under their
notice for treatment.

4.? That singing lessons be given by special teachers who have a
knowledge of phonetics and phonology, as well as the usual musical
qualifications.

5.?The congress urges Education Ministries to create posts for
medical men,1 who will specialise in the treatment of defects of speech;
whose duty it will be to examine cases recommended by their teachers, and
to decide whether the pupil shall be treated by him personally or sent to
a special school or remedial classes.

1 In all cases where mention is made of " medical men," women practising medicine are,
of course, included.

It is evident that these resolutions presume an educational system entirely
under Government control. Indeed, the difference in the educational system of
this country, and the one in which the congress took place, makes some of
these suggestions impracticable; others may be disputed, but there is much
good advice that we should do well to accept.

Before proceeding to discuss the resolutions, it will be useful to give an
outline of the organisation of Remedial Speech Training in England and Wales.
Private speech specialists and their patients do not concern us here. For
children attending schools under the jurisdiction of the Board of Education,
provision is made in the following manner :?

The Board of Education permits local education authorities to establish
remedial classes for stammerers 2 if this is considered necessary. The teachers of
such classes have to satisfy the authorities as to their qualifications as speech
specialists, but they are not bound to follow any particular method. The pupils
'ire inspected at regular intervals by a School Medical Officer, who makes a
separate report on the progress of the case. At some centres two classes,
limited to twelve pupils each, receive about an hour's tuition twice weekly ; in
Others the classes are more or less frequent; and in a few cases whole-time
tuition in all subjects is given. There are 32 such centres in England and
Wales.

It will be noticed that no provision is made for organic defects of speech
(e.g., cleft palate speech), or functional defects (retarded speech, neurotic
lisping, etc.) other than stammering.2 A number of hospitals in London provide
speech clinics at which such cases are treated. These clinics are not solely
for them, however. Stammerers not eligible for the L.C.C. remedial classes
are admitted as well. For instance, an inhabitant of that part of London which
is in the County of Middlesex can only receive tuition at the hospitals, as the
Middlesex Education Committee does not provide remedial classes. Many of
the hospitals also admit adults.

To what extent is it practicable or desirable for us to subscribe to the
resolutions of the first congress of " Logopaedists "?
Resolution 1.

There is still some difference of opinion as to the desirability of special
schools for stammerers. The constant supervision of a teacher specially skilled
m Remedial Speech Training is very beneficial, but there is a risk that, to force
the stammerer to attend a separate school, is to strengthen his inferiority complex.
Also, where the pupil lives in an environment of stammerers, the constant contact
with others at school may do as much harm as good.

Most of the speakers at the congress urged the complete re-education of
the stammerers and condemned the "course" of lessons. I he latter method
?s the one where the pupil is absent from school for two or three weeks, and
111 that time has to concentrate on voice exercises and the like, then returns
to school and has little or no further remedial lessons. There is no doubt that
Stammering (or stuttering) is that defect of speech which manifests itself in a spasm of
the respiratory tract or the organs of articulation, often accompanied by other spasmodic
movements, and is due to a diversion of attention. Briefly, the stammerer thinks not
of the matter to be spoken, but the manner, with resultant inhibition of speech.
a stammer cannot be cured with exercises only, and that the pupil's whole
attitude to life needs to be re-educated. The best method is the one which
gives frequent and adequate remedial lessons without interfering- unduly with
the pupil's general education.

Since there are as yet no Remedial Classes for all defects of speech in this
country, there is little danger of our Education Authorities, if they establish
special schools, falling into the error of mixing stammerers and other defectives.
It must be borne in mind that children suffering from defects of speech,
especially neurotic ones, are temperamentally pre-disposed to stammer. There
is a number of cases on record where children with an organic defect have,
owing to the ridicule to which they were subjected, developed a stammer.

Constant contact with stammerers may prove detrimental to such cases.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The writer opposes herself to the opinion of many experts, " that special
schools are desirable for all defects of speech and essential for the treatment
of stammering." There is still some doubt as to what is really best for the
stammerer, but there is none as to the benefit obtained by other defectives from
special schools. The stammerer is usually highly intelligent and well able to
keep up with his class. The sufferer from an organic defect of speech will often
drop behind his class on account of his difficulty ; the child who has a functional
defect of speech is often behind his age in all things, and there is no disputing
the benefit such children will derive from being taught in small classes by
specially trained teachers.

In the meantime, wanting a special school, I urge Education Authorities
to establish Remedial Classes for such cases, and teachers to recommend parents
to utilise the existing speech clinics for the treatment of all defects.
There is a theory that retarded speech will come " right of its own account."
Very often it does; but in the meantime the child has dropped behind others
of his age, whereas at a special school his defect would be corrected and his
general education kept up to standard. Even attendance at Remedial Classes
or clinics will hasten the " coming right " of the defect and make the child
fit for ordinary education.

Enthusiasts should be warned against looking on the toothless lisp of a
six or seven-year-old child as a defect of speech. This, of course, does come
right on its own account.

Resolution 2.
--------------

This requires a training college at which instruction is given in the special
subject, " Speech Training," as well as the ordinary course of study for
prospective teachers. Such a college would have to be founded, or, better still,
a course arranged, at which part of the training is received at a recognised
college of speech training and part at a teacher's training college. This would,
of course, involve a rather prolonged period of training, and some material
advantage would, in consequence, have to be offered to the special teachers.
As to the specially qualified medical men, there is no doubt that it is highly
desirable that medical practitioners as a whole, but particularly those who
specialise in the diseases of children, neurologists, auralists, dentists, etc.,
should pay more attention to phonetics and phonology.

Resolutions 3 & 4.
-------------------

No one can be in two minds as to the desirability and practicability of
these. Too many teachers suffer from " sore throat " for it to be possible to
deny, that for their cwn sakes instruction in speaking is essential and should
be included in their training- to a greater extent than is at present customary,
nor can there be any doubt that it would prove an advantage for them to be able
to pass on such knowledge to their pupils.

Resolution 5.
---------------

Is one for members of the medical profession, of whom a number attended the
first congress, to consider.

The immediate adoption of all these resolutions is unlikely on account
of considerations of economy. It would be possible, however, to leave the
situation much as it is, i.e., let the Remedial Classes remain in the hands of
specialists who are properly qualified, and adopt Resolution 4, so that their
work may be assisted by the class teachers of their pupils.

The co-operation of the class teacher and the teacher of speech training is
most needful and " devoutly to be hoped for." We have long since learned
not to look on a cripple as an object of mirth, but there are still many who
regard a defect of speech as a fit subject for laughter. This causes untold
mischief to the defective, and none so cruel in this respect as children, while,
shame to relate, some teachers not only fail to check such unkindness, but join
in the teasing. Surely such ignorance is not to be tolerated ! Let us therefore
urge that:

All Training Colleges shall give adequate instruction in phonetics and
phonology in order that all teachers may use their voices well and speak
standard English, that they may pass on this knowledge to their pupils and learn
to detect and diagnose defects of speech. When this point is gained what else
!s required will follow suit.

The second congress of the International Society for " Logopaedie " will
be held in July (the exact date is not yet known), and the Executive Committee
has expressed a hope that many representatives of Great Britain, both of the
medical and educational professions, will be present. Those who wish for
further particulars should apply to Dr. Leopold Stein, Wien VI., Mittelgasse 37.
