The Sterilization of Mental Defectives
=======================================

By A. F. Tredgold, M.D.
No person who possesses a spark of humane feeling-, or who has any concern
for the prosperity and happiness of our nation, can be other than impressed with
the necessity for preventing- mental deficiency. For it has been demonstrated to
the full that mental defectives can never become independent and efficient citizens;
that, from an economic standpoint, the lower grades are not only totally unpro-
ductive, but that they absorb a vast amount of time and attention from persons
who might be more profitably employed; that not a few of them are possessed
of habits and propensities which render them no inconsiderable menace to the
community; that their offspring are almost invariably of sub-normal intelligence
and often enough actually defective; that, in short, mental defectives not only
detract very considerably from the happiness and efficiency of the nation, but
that they constitute an ever growing financial burden which the country is ill
able to bear and for which it gets no return. On all grounds, therefore, whether
of happiness and general well-being, of efficiency and prosperity, of Eugenics
and progress, even as a plain business proposition, the question of the prevention
of mental defect is one of paramount importance.
Some of us have been preaching these facts for many years, and for a long
time it almost seemed as if our efforts were in vain so far as the general public
were concerned. But recently the seed has shown signs of life. Articles in
the public press, discussions, even resolutions, by Boards of Guardians and
other bodies have become more and more frequent, and it is plain that at last
public feeling is being aroused. Coincident with this it has become generally
known that by means of a comparatively trifling operation upon either sex,
propagation may be effectually prevented, without otherwise interfering with
36 MENTAL WELFARE.
physiological functions. Very naturally, it has occurred to many people that
here lies the remedy, and that we have only to bring- in a law for the compulsory
sterilization of all mental defectives to secure the prevention so much desired.
It is not always the seemingly obvious course, however, which is the best
one. Many persons having a practical knowledge of mental defectives were
by no means convinced that sterilization would produce the results which were
claimed for it. It seemed to them that the disadvantages might even outweigh
the advantages. Consequently, when the question was brought before the
Council of the Central Association for Mental Welfare in June, 1922, it was
decided to refer it to the Standing Medical Committee for their opinion. This
Committee, which consists of Superintendents of Institutions and Mental
Specialists having a wide knowledge of all classes of defectives, considered the
matter fully and carefully. They were well aware of the cost of institutional
care and of the urgent need for economy; they were even more alive to the
necessity for preventing propagation by defectives; nevertheless, while of the
opinion that sterilization might be appropriate in certain particular cases, they
were unanimous in deciding against it as a general measure to be applied indis-
criminately to all defectives. They came to the conclusion that such general
adoption would have comparatively little effect in preventing mental deficiency;
that it would certainly lead to serious social evils ; and that, as a general policy,
some form of segregation was far preferable to sterilization. The Council of
the Association were in complete agreement with these views of the Medical
Committee and they authorised the publication of a pamphlet dealing with the
question.*
The subject has recently been brought somewhat prominently before the
general public. Indeed, it may almost be said that a campaign has been
launched with the object of bringing about the compulsory sterilization of all
mental defectives. This campaign has undoubtedly been undertaken with the
best of intentions and with a real desire to benefit the country. Its authors
are anxious, and rightly anxious, not only to prevent mental deficiency, but to
lessen the expense to the nation consequent on the maintenance of these persons
in institutions. Since, however, few of the persons responsible for this campaign
have that intimate and practical knowledge of the habits, propensities and limita-
tions of defectives which can only be obtained by close association with them
over a long term of years, and since the great majority of those having such
experience are convinced that sterilization, as a general measure, would not
produce the results claimed for it; that it would, in fact, be attended with more
harm than good, it seems desirable that the subject should again be referred to.
Before sterilization could be put into practice an Act of Parliament would
be needed, and an objection which is frequently urged against it is that the
passing of such an Act is quite out of the question in the present state of public
opinion. I have no doubt that this is so, and that this objection is sound. If a
Bill were presented to Parliament to-morrow I think it would certainly be rejected,
and that many years of propaganda would be necessary before public opinion
was sufficiently ripe for such a proposal. This, however, is somewhat beside
the mark. The question is one which should be considered on its merits, and if
it were thought that sterilization would be beneficial to the nation at large it would
be our duty to educate public opinion. I am quite sure that none of us who have
worked for the cause of defectives in the past, and no member of the Central
Association, would shrink from this task.
*This article is being published in pamphlet form. Copies may be obtained from C.A.M,W.,
24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W. 1, at 2d. each or 1/9'doz., post free.
MENTAL WELFARE. 37
It would appear that those who advocate the sterilization of all mental
defectives do so for three main reasons. First, that by preventing- propagation,
sterilization would result in a marked decrease of mental deficiency. Secondly,
that, by allowing of the discharge of many patients who are now in institutions,
it would lessen their cost to the community. Thirdly, that this liberty would
increase the happiness of the defectives themselves. The first of these reasons
appears to be the chief one actuating those responsible for this propaganda, and
a statement made by a recent writer in " The Spectator " may probably be
reg-arded as typical of their views. This writer says, "It is the only effective
method of diminishing the now ever-increasing load of mentally diseased persons."
Leaving aside the assertion regarding the increase of mental disease, which many
competent persons deny and which is unsupported by any reliable statistics, let
us consider the preventive effect which would be produced by the sterilization
of all existing defectives.
Now there is not the slightest doubt that, although a small proportion of
cases of defect are not in any way due to inheritance, but are the result of an
accidental injury or disease of the child's brain, yet the great majority of cases
are inborn and are due to inheritance. This fact is well established and is now
widely known. Consequent on this it has not unnaturally been assumed by
those who have no great experience of defectives and who are unacquainted with
the subject of heredity, that the mentally defective child must necessarily be
the offspring of mentally defective parents. It is of the utmost importance to
realise that this is not so, and that the defect of a child may be due to inheritance
without its parents being similarly defective. The explanation of this paradox
lies in the nature of the inheritance in these cases. Although some writers,
chiefly in America, have attempted to prove that Mental Deficiency is due to
the absence in the ancestral germ cells, or seed, of certain definite constituents,
and that transmission is in accordance with the laws formulated by Mendel,
these attempts have been entirely unsuccessful. On the contrary, there is every
reason to conclude that mental defect is not to be regarded as resulting from
the absence in the seed of a definite item, but as a state of incomplete mental
development consequent on the seed having a diminished capacity for
growth, to whnt is called a defective developmental potentiality, or
a vitiation of the ancestral germ cells. The amount of this vitiation, however,
probably varies not only in the germ cells of different individuals of the same
stock, but also in the germ cells of the same individual. Moreover, there is
reason to think that even with vitiated germ cells the condition of the offspring
resulting- therefrom will be to some extent influenced by the nature of the ante-
natal environment. The result is that, although the majority of mental defectives
come of families whose germ cells have undergone vitiation, this vitiation
shows itself in many other ways than mental defect. In some individuals it may
be manifest as Dementia Precox or other forms of Dementia. In others, as
certain forms of insanity or mental instability. In yet others it may be so
slight and the environment of the individual so favourable that it is not manifested
at all and he passes through life apparently normal. Nevertheless it is
probable that all these classes of persons are " carriers" of mental defect,
inasmuch as a chance combination of adverse circumstances may at any time so
increase the impairment of their germ cells as to prevent the normal mental
development of their offspring.
It is thus seen that mental defect may be due to inheritance, as it un-
doubtedly is in the majority of cases, without the parent or parents of the
affected child being- defective. As a matter of fact my own observations show
that, in relation to the total number of defectives, the proportion of those who
38 MENTAL WELFARE.
are the offspring of a certifiably defective parent, or parents, is extremely small.
And I have no doubt that this is the general experience of all those who have
investigated any considerable number of these cases. This, however, is a very
important fact in relation to the preventive effect of the sterilization of defectives.
For it follows that if every defective in existence a generation ago had been
sterilized, the number of defectives to-day would not have been appreciably
diminished. It also follows that if every defective now existing were to be
sterilized the result a generation hence would be insignificant. In short, in
order to produce any marked decrease in the total number of mental defectives
a generation hence it would be necessary to sterilize, or otherwise prevent the
propagation of, not merely those who are themselves defectives, but all those
who are " carriers that is to say, every person suffering from germ vitiation.
Obviously, this is not merely impracticable, but it is impossible. It may be
added that even could this result be achieved, it is yet practically certain that
the factors which initiate that impairment of the germ cells, whose culminating
manifestation is mental defect, are still in operation, and that consequently if
every individual carrier were eliminated to-day, a fresh crop would soon come
into being. We are compelled to conclude, therefore, that from the point of
view of prevention, sterilization would not do what is claimed for it and that its
results would be relatively slight. In my opinion the eradication of mental defect
must of necessity be a slow and gradual process and I believe that it will only be
achieved by the removal of those adverse factors of the environment which operate
to bring about germ impairment, and by the education of public opinion towards
the Eugenic ideal.
Whilst it is necessary to emphasise this point regarding the relatively
slight preventive effect which would result from the sterilization of defectives,
I wish to make it clear that I do not by any means lightly regard the propagation
by defectives which undoubtedly takes place. This is all the more serious for
the reason that such progeny are almost invariably sub-normal and in many
instances actually defective. It is true that, in proportion to the total number
of defectives arising each year, the number so produced is relatively small; but
their absolute number is not inconsiderable, and since this addition to the total
would certainly be prevented by sterilization the question arises whether it
still might not be put into operation with advantage. I think, however, that the
disadvantages would far outweigh the advantages, as we shall see in considering
the other claims advanced by the advocates of wholesale sterilization.
Their second contention is that, by permitting of the discharge of defectives
from institutions, sterilization would greatly decrease their cost to the community.
This is a statistical question, but unfortunately we are without the statistics
necessary to make a comparison. For while we know the cost of defectives
in institutions we have no sufficiently extensive figures showing their cost
outside. It is to be remembered, however, that sterilization will merely prevent
propagation. It will not make defectives more stable or more efficient; it will
not in any way lessen their social incapacity. Even the mildest grade are defined
by statute as " persons in need of care, supervision and control for their own
protection or for the protection of others," and this need would still exist even
were they sterilized and discharged from institutions. What would happen in
such a case would be that large numbers of defective men and women, youths
and girls, who are now living by no means unhappy lives in well managed
institutions, where they have the companionship of their kind, and are engaged
in useful and to some extent remunerative work, would again be thrown upon
the world to shift for themselves. They would have to compete for a living
against their more fortunate normal fellows, in a market already flooded with
MENTAL WELFARE. 39
superfluity of labour; they would again be the butts and tools of the ignorant,
designing and unscrupulous; they would have no real companions, and they
would inevitably drift into destitution, vice and crime. In other words the
liberation of defectives to an extent which would make an appreciable difference
to the nation in the cost of their maintenance in Institutions would simply
result in a return to the evil days which existed before the passing of the Mental
deficiency Act, and those of us who are familiar with those days know only
too well how evil they were, and how wretched were the conditions under which
thousands of mental defectives existed in this country before 1913. Large
numbers of the feeble-minded then lived a harried existence between the workhouse,
the refuge, the prison and the streets. Their cost to the community was spread
over so many different areas and borne by so many different authorities that it
is impossible to say what it amounted to, but there is not the slightest doubt
that it was very considerable. And it was a cost accompanied by decided
menace to the community, quite apart from any question of propagation, and
for which the community received no return. The presence of mental defectives
in a nation must always be an uneconomic proposition, but I am disposed to
think that, on the whole, institutional care is certainly more economical than
Were the conditions which formerly prevailed and which would again prevail
were any considerable number of these persons to be discharged from such care.
It may be pointed out that the Board of Control have recently given par-
ticular attention to the subject of discharge and release on licence of defectives
from institutions. In their report for the year 1924 they say, with regard to
discharge, " The failure and consequent need for re-certification of many
discharged patients in the past again emphasises the truth that mental deficiency
is a permanent condition, and that, in consequence, the mentally defective person
requires throughout his life some form of care and protection. Discharge is,
therefore, felt to be inexpedient except in very rare cases, where the circumstances
in which the patient is discharged are such as to insure his permanent protection."
With regard to release on licence the matter is somewhat different. Liberation
is here conditional and the patient can be recalled to the institution should this
become necessary. I am in agreement with the Board in considering that
certain patients who, as a result of several years' training, have established
good habits and acquired some measure of self-control and who do not display
erotic, unstable or violent tendencies, may be released on trial. There are
undoubtedly many stable and well-behaved defectives for whom adequate super-
vision can be obtained outside institutions. It is important to note, however,
that even of the selected cases released on licence a considerable proportion
have had to be recalled to institutions.
With regard to this, however, there is another very important point. It
is well known that under the conditions which formerly prevailed a considerable
amount of promiscuous sexual intercourse took place between defective young
women and normal males, and, to a less extent, between high-grade defective
males and normal girls. It cannot be doubted that this would have been even
much more prevalent had there been no fear of pregnancy and no risk of being
mulcted of a weekly charge for the maintenance of offspring. Does any
experienced social worker question for a moment that if this fear were removed,
owing to these persons having been sterilized, such promiscuous sexual inter-
course would be greatly increased ? But it is intercourse of this kind which is
the chief means of spreading venereal disease, and I do not think there can
he the slightest doubt that the presence in the community of a number of
defectives who were known to be incapable of producing children would be
followed by a very considerable increase in these diseases. Not only is the
40 MENTAL WELFARE.
feeble-minded girl more amenable to sexual solicitation, but it is well known that
her very defect makes her unaware of the danger of venereal disease to her health,
oblivious of the need for treatment, and undeterred by the state she is in from
responding to further solicitation. The advocates of sterilization may, and
do, pooh-pooh this aspect of the question and affect to regard it as a thing
which is not at all likely to happen, but I venture to believe that what I have
stated will be endorsed by everyone having practical experience of defectives.
The third contention is that sterilization, by permitting their discharge from
institutions, would conduce to the greater happiness of defectives. It is
perfectly true that a certain number of defectives do resent such detention. They
object to the routine and the discipline, they dislike having to do any work,
they would much rather be released from all oversight and control and be where
they could do exactly what they pleased, how they pleased and when they pleased.
Almost invariably, however, these are the very persons who have proved their
utter incapacity for social adaptation, who are so fickle and unstable that no
one will employ them, and for whom the supervision, against which they fret,
is absolutely necessary in their own interests. It is exceedingly doubtful
whether such persons would be any happier outside than inside an institution.
But cases of this kind are in the minority. It may safely be said that the
majority of defectives are by no means unhappy in institutions. On the contrary,
institutional life affords far greater opportunities for companionship, recreation
and amusement than they would obtain outside, besides shielding them from
that constant reminder of inferiority which results from their incapacity to succeed
in competition against their normal fellows.
In view of what has been said, I think it will be clear that, as a general
policy, the segregation of defectives in suitable colonies or institutions is far
preferable to their sterilization. It not only does all that sterilization would do
in preventing propagation, but it does more than this ; for it removes the many
dangers to society which would arise from their freedom ; it is, on the whole,
more conducive to their happiness; it is attended with some amount of remunera-
tive return; and it is, in the long run, almost certainly less costly to the State
than would be the discharge from care which sterilization would entail.
It has been pointed out, however, that there are many defectives who are
stable and well conducted and for whom, after training in institutions, suitable
employment can be found outside. In such cases the chief objection to their
discharge from institutional care would appear to be the danger of procreation.
The question therefore arises whether sterilization might not be made a condition
of such discharge, and whether it might be possible, by its application to suitable
cases, to reduce considerably the number of persons in institutions. It is obvious
that this is a totally different proposition to that of the wholesale and indis-
criminate sterilization we have hitherto been considering. It is also one which
has received a considerable measure of support from persons having a practical
knowledge of defectives; it is therefore worthy of careful and serious
consideration.
The first thought which occurs to one is this. If such persons as I have
mentioned can be discharged to effective supervision, or if their characters are
such that there is no danger of sexual intercourse, then their sterilization is
unnecessary. The fact that this operation is considered necessary is proof that
sexual intercourse is considered likely; consequently it seems to me that the
arguments against it, to which I have already referred, apply here also with
equal force. Sterilization would increase the likelihood of sexual intercourse
and the spread of venereal diseases.
MENTAL WELFARE. 41
There is a further practical difficulty. The sterilisation of even such a
limited and particular group of cases as is here suggested would necessitate
an alteration in the law. It seems to me that it would be practically impossible
to devise any legal definitions or regulations which would ensure its limitation
to the particular class under consideration. At the present time the demands
for the discharge of patients who are quite unsuitable for discharge are very
frequent and insistent. They arise from parents, friends, lay committees and
authorities responsible for payment. These demands could not fail to be
enormously increased and more difficult to resist were sterilization legalised. In
the eyes of those who had not carefully considered the matter it would make
discharge appear so safe. I have little doubt that, owing to the difficulty of
definition and the increasing demand for its application, a method which was
intended to be restricted to particular and suitable cases would soon come to
be applied generally, with all the disastrous consequences to which I have already
referred.
Further, at the present time the amount of institutional accommodation is
Woefully inadequate even for cases which are urgently in need of it. The
legalisation of sterilization, even in the most restricted form, could not fail to
accentuate this want. By giving rise to a false sense of security it would make
authorities still more reluctant to provide institutional care and efficient super-
vision. Experience has shown that these are the only satisfactory methods of
dealing with defectives, and anything which tended to delay or diminish their
provision would certainly react to the disadvantage of defectives and the
community alike.
It follows that the adoption of wholesale sterilization would result in far
more harm than good, and that whilst there are probably some particular cases
in which it would be an appropriate and justifiable procedure, the number of
these is so relatively small, the practical difficulty of restricting it to them so
considerable, and the danger of its extension, and the disastrous consequences
which would follow, so great, that we should not risk even the introduction of
such a hazardous proposal.
