Mental Invalids: Being the Morison Lectures
============================================

:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts.

delivered before the Royal College of
Physicians of Edinburgh in June, 1925, by
C* C. Easterbrook, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.E.
Edinburgh & London. Oliver & Boyd.
Med. 8vo., pp. 86. 5s. net.

Here is one of those valuable books none
to? common?which represents the thoughts
and work of a lifetime. Can a man offer any-
thing of higher value than this to his fellow-
men? Is not the world thereby much richer
than if the gift took the form of gold and
Precious stones? Yet how little is this appre-
ciated by many reviewers who fail to dis-
tlr*guish such works from mere monographs
?l~ epitomes of other people's ideas and dismiss
them cavalierly with a few words of condem-
nation or praise. But to review them seriously
ls ?ften impossible because of the small space
allotted to the reviewer, and the present is a
Case in point.

However, I can at once assure the reader
that these lectures by Easterbrook are
deserving of direct attention and study, and
0r the small expenditure of 5s. the materials,
at lfcast all that really matters, of a large and
^P-to-date work on psychiatry are at hand,
those who know Dr. Easterbrook personally
are not in any doubt as to his sincerity and
earnestness of purpose. This is exemplified in
t e work before us which treats of that all-im-
Pprtant subject, namely, the mind in health and
^sease. Easterbrook's name should ever be
Remembered, for did he not first introduce in
these isles the treatment of acute mental
disorders by rest, open air, and sunlight? Yet
nobody ever speaks of Easterbrook's treatment
as they do of Weir Mitchell's.

This calls to mind the abiding work of F. A.
'kins, who taught us how to nurse those
Rental patients who have dirty habits, thereby
eaning up an(j sweetening our mental insti-
tutions. Now add to these two pioneers G. M.
v?bertson in regard to nursing the insane,
and one arrives at the three modern psychi-
rists whose fundamental work for the better
are and treatment of the insane ranks with
lat of the great pioneers of the early nine-
teenth century. How little is this appreciated
OWn generation?

Wow the reading of these lectures leaves us
both stimulated and thoughtful. The language
they are written in is remarkably clear and
has the virtue of simplicity despite the con-
densation which has been found necessary.
Questions are not raised merely to show that
they are unanswerable?a miserable practice
so common now-a-day in psychiatric works?
but really difficult problems (and there are
many whenever one contemplates the mind in
any relation) are bravely tackled and some
answer assayed or solution suggested and, as
a rule, very much to the point.

The general viewpoint adopted is dynamic,
hormic and not without a spiritual element,
but the facts of psychics, chemistry,
anatomy, and psychology are never lost sight
of and the psychogenic and physiogenic
brought in close approximation in their bio-
logical significance.

The human being is dealt with as a bio-
psychic unit and social creature in the first
lecture, which is appropriately entitled " The
Body-Mind." Lecture II. forms two chapters
devoted to the clinical examination of mental
invalids and the causation of mental diseases
and their prophylaxis respectively. There is
much to be said for Easterbrook's view that
there is a real practical advantage in regarding
the primary serological factors, not as heredity
and stress, but as the nervous constitution,
inherited or acquired (pre-disposing) and stress
(exciting). He applies the two clinical methods
of general medicine to psychiatry, namely :
the historical or life-history method, and the
observational method. The third lecture deals
with classification as based upon not one
but many fundamental principles, forming a
true nosological or natural classification and
one which he has found very serviceable in
practice.

There follows what is perhaps the finest
lecture and which concludes the series?one on
some aspects and methods of curative treat-
ment. Here our author is in a dominion
peculiarly his own. He is a strong advocate
of the psychiatric clinic, and voluntary treat-
ment in mental hospitals.

I think I have said sufficient to indicate to
readers the extent of the ground covered and,
as for the rest, it would be greatly to his
advantage to read for himself, promising him
with confidence much of the greatest interest
and no disappointments.

J. R. Lord.
The Language and Thought of the Child.
By Jean Piaget, Professor at the University
of Neuchatel and at the Institut J.J. Rous-
seau, Geneva. Translated by Marjorie
Warden. London. Regan Paul. 1926.
10s. 6d.

The volume before us is the first of a com-
prehensive series which Professor Piaget has
planned on the subject of child thought; the
second volume will be entitled Judgment and
Reason in the Child, after which an attempt
will be made to analyse causality and the
function of reality in the child. The material
on which the study is based was obtained from
children in the Maison des Petits de I'Institut
Rousseau. For about a month Professor
Piaget and a collaborator took down with
context everything that was said by two little
boys about six years of age. The material
thus obtained was checked by obtaining similar
records from a group of about twenty children
on the move, the place of the observer this
time being fixed. In the Institute, children
from four to seven years of age occupy a floor
of five rooms, being free to move from one to
another doing only as much consecutive work
in any one as they like. The place thus
provides in the same way as do Dr.
Montessori's classrooms, a laboratory where
the natural child may be studied.

Everyone who, from a scientific point of
view, has observed the early language of the
child has noticed how extraordinarily different
it is in nature and purpose from that of the
adult. The adult talks so as to communicate
with his fellows; this purpose is to be found
in the child's talk, but it can scarcely be said
to be the main purpose; at a certain period in
his life the child talks straight on, paying little
heed to whether anyone is listening to him or
not. This kind of talk Professor Piaget calls
ego-centric, in contrast to socialised speech, in
which there is inter-action between the child
and another person. These two main cate-
gories are sub-divided and the sub-divisions
illustrated amply from the material, and dis-
cussed. In the case of the two children first
studied, the proportion of ego-centric to other
spontaneous forms of language is .47 in the
one case and .43 in the other. The material
obtained from the twenty children, whose
average age was six, was examined in the same
way, the co-efficient now obtained being .45.
It seems therefore probable that nearly half of
the talk of children of about this age is ego-
centric.

In the following- chapters Professor Piaget
deals with understanding- and verbal explana-
tion between children of the same age between
the years of six and eight; with some peculari-
ties of verbal understanding in the child
between the ages of nine and eleven; and with
the questions of a child of six, particularly the
" why " questions. As the author says, the
essays are, first and foremost, a collection of
facts and documents the bond between the
various chapters being, not that of systematic
exposition, but of unity of method applied to
a diversity of material.

Child thought and child logic are different
in kind from adult thought and adult logic-
During the early years of life the child is
passing slowly and gradually from one plane
to the other. That the passage of even a
year may make his own earlier ways of
thinking quite unintelligible to himself is shown
by a concrete example.

Obviously, until Professor Piaget's work is
complete one cannot estimate the value of the
contribution he has made to child psychology*
but even in this preliminary volume one has
not only a storehouse of fresh facts gathered
by a trained observer, but suggestions and
adumbrations of theories which will un-
doubtedly have a tonic effect upon the science.
Margaret Drummond.

Mental Life. By B. Edgell, D.Litt., Ph.D-
Pp. 275. Methuen. 1926. Price 7s. 6d.
This book is designed to provide social
workers with a sound textbook on modern
psychology, and it succeeds admirably in
achieving this aim.

While the treatment of the subject is genetic*
it is clear from the outset that the framework
of the explanation of the mental life of the
individual is based on the psychological prin'
ciples laid down by Ward and elaborated in
the writings of Stomt. Fidelity to the teaching
of the best English psychologists knits up a
series of discussions, which touch controversial
problems at many points, into a book which Is
systematic in plan and consistent in character.
Social workers who are brought into contact
with mental defect as well as with social delin-
quency, will be glad to note the comprehensive
and careful treatment of the nervous system
and the useful diagrams connected with it. In
e _ chapters on Native Endowment and
nyironment, as well as in that on Adolescence,
J 1S also evident that the writer is keenly
aware of the information and knowledge
ed by those brought into relation with
^ver-changing nature of immaturity and
The student who follows the distinction
rawn between reflex action and impulsive
Activity in the chapter on Primitive Values will
^ Prepared to reject Behaviourism and endorse
Q cf^?ugaH's doctrine of Instinct, while being
n his guard against the unqualified acceptance
0 his " neat parallelism between instinctive
resP?nse and emotional experience."

After dealing with Sensation as the basis of
j*?g"nition, the fundamental processes of intel-
ectual growth are shown to be retentiveness,
Vl'ch secures the effects of the past for new
vance, and attention, working selectively
j.jr?ugh the consciousness of likeness and un-
^eness to a continuously richer integration.
e^rning by experience forms the topic of the
?"nth chapter, in which the simpler modifica-
1 of behaviour, such as adaptation and
'bition and the various methods of acquiring
w responses are fully discussed and illus-
jr ec*- The development of Ideation is traced
?m the " acquired meanings " found in per-
id^tUa^ exPer'ence through " tied " to " free "
as. The hallucinatory vividness of the
c,?ently discovered " eidetic " imagery of
1 tlren is referred to as a possible explanation
0f children's lies.

hapter ten gives an account of those emo-
^?nal attitudes?Fear, Anger, Sociality,
i as*erfulness and Subjection?which play an
^Portant part in the development of the
fa ke'ng in his relation to society. The
the Pr^m^tive values tend to conflict with
^ahues acquired in the advance to civilised
of ^ends to t^ie discussion of current theories
ful fG Unconsci?us- All students will be grate-
the ?r ^r* ^dgell's clear distinction between
0f Unc?nscious, considered as the organisation
strmean'n?s and values, which is the abiding
. c^Ure of the mind, and the sub-con scions,
ev c ls " that portion of the stream of mental
niti S,,w^'ch is beyond introspective recog-
fion n f referi"in& to Dr. Jung's concep-
Co .. tfle racial unconscious as an innate
Co^n^1Ve disposition parallel to the innate
aiItu lve disposition met with in instinct, the
?r suggests that this may raise more diffi-
culties with regard to heredity than it solves.
The behaviour of the adolescent in the stress
of conflicting- claims is used to distinguish three
types of individuals : those who impulsively
adopt the opinions of others, those who con-
form to group standard morality, and those
who are able to take their own way and are
probably regarded as outlaws. Yet the latter,
by sustaining conflict and playing a lone hand,
are able to move forward to the construction
of new values which raise the level of group
morality.

In dealing with Thought as the process of
solving a problem, it is shown that in prac-
tical problems thought can succeed through
performance?through an analysis and re-
synthesis in the world of things comparable to
the analysis and re-synthesis involved in the
world of ideas. Experiments recorded by
Kohler in " The Mentality of Apes " and by
Julius in " Mental Life of Monkeys and Apes "
are cited in support of a process, which it is
important for the educator to understand.
The last three chapters of the book give a
straightforward account of the formation of
sentiments and the organisation of conduct and
character. The teaching of Stout is followed
and the further contributions of McDougall
somewhat unaccountably ignored?a fact
which may account for the somewhat weak
treatment of Temperament.

Good diagrams, excellent illustrations drawn
from literature, sets of exercises, a list of
books recommended for further study, and a
careful index enhance the value of a book,
which will not only satisfy students preparing
for educational or other social work, but also
hold the attention of the general reader who
desires to understand his own conduct or the
behaviour of his fellows.

N. G. R. Taylor.
-------------------

Behaviorism. By John B. Watson, formerly
Professor of Psychology at the Johns
Hopkins University. Kegan Paul. 1926.
12s. 6d.
The avowed aim of this book is to suggest
how the principles of behaviorism can be
applied in all branches of psychology, in educa-
tion, sociology and ethics.

The author begins with a brief account of
the development of the behaviorist point of
view, and includes, through reference to primi-
tive man, a rapid sketch of the origin of the
concept of " mind." He then proceeds to
illustrate the manner in which the mechanism
of the conditioned reflex can be used to explain
various kinds of human behaviour. Here
foliows a brief outline of the physiology of the
nervous system, muscles and glands. This
leads up to a theory of instincts as chains of
responses, built up by the conditioning" of that
original physiological structure by which man
is forced to respond in a certain manner to
certain stimuli. Further development of the
theory leads to the assertion that individual
differences in ability or behaviour are entirely
due to training, the only differences that are
inherited being peculiarities of physiological
structure.

In order to prove his theory of instinct, he
quotes records of observations made on the
earliest behaviour of the child; by studying
emotional reactions in young children he con-
cludes that there .are only three types of
response that can be described as " innate."
These he classifies as " fear, rage, and love."
He gives interesting studies of the situations
that call out these responses in the first
instance, with further experiments and obser-
vations on the development of the response in
connection with different stimuli and complex
social situations.

There follows a discussion of the acquisition
of muscular habits, which is explained by the
law of frequency, memory being described as
the amount of the habit shown to be retained
after a given lapse of time. The same prin-
ciples are applied to thinking, which is defined
as internal speech or " language habits."

Here the author makes an advance on earlier
presentations of his theory and emphasises
the importance in thought of the bodily and
visceral muscular systems, in addition to the
purely laryngeal muscles. The book finishes
with a general discussion of personality, con-
sidered as the sum of the habit systems of the
individual; this includes some practical con-
siderations with regard to the study of per-
sonality, its development and diseases.

The illustrations throughout the book seem
intended to demonstrate the application of
behavioristic principles in everyday life, as
well as in the social sciences, but the actual
task of analysing the instances given into
terms of conditional reflexes is seldom
attempted. It thus seems that many of the
difficulties of the theory have been evaded,
with the result that the arguments intended
to demonstrate the possible revolutionary
effects of the doctrine, are distinctly uncon-
vincing. With regard to the experimental
results cited, recent work on learning and
memory in animals tends to show that the
law of frequency does not adequately fit the
facts.

The most significant part of the book is the
record of observations on young children, while
the emphasis placed on the need for a scientific
approach constitutes a useful attack on
uncritical anthropomorphism. On the other
hand, when the desire to be objective results
in an attempt to analyse behaviour entirely m
terms of the mechanics of muscles and glands,
it becomes unscientific, in that it ignores much
relevant material.

Marian Blackett.
-----------------

Psychological Medicine. A manual on
Mental Diseases for practitioners and
students. By Sir Maurice Craig, C.B.E-,
M.A., M.D. (Cantab.), F.R.C.P. (Lond.)?
and Thomas Beaton, O.B.E., M.D->
M.R.C.P. (Lond.) Fourth Edition. Pp*
437. J. & A. Churchill. 1926. 21s.
" In this edition the book has been almost
entirely re-written in order to place before the
reader the modern views of mental disorder.'
The object of the book is "to lay before the
student a short account of the principles and
practice of Psychological Medicine." It is
admirably adapted for this purpose, and is
certainly up-to-date. But it is more than a
mere manual; it is a very interesting work,
much of which might be read with advantage
by any practitioner. This is partly due to the
lucid style, and also to numerous apt refer-
ences to illuminating facts gleaned from a wide
field of knowledge. The illustrations, many
of which are coloured, enhance its value.

There is an excellent exposition of
Psychology; we have never read better ex-
planations of some ideas, such as Volition and
Rationalisation, but in the definition of
Sublimation, on page 52, it is not made suffi-
ciently clear that Sublimation is not merely a
deflection of the interest-flow, but means
guiding it into channels of activities, which are
socially acceptable and valuable. On page 43
the use of the word " affection " in discussing
emotion, without explaining that it is not used
jn the ordinary sense of the word, may puzzle
e student. If the writer did not wish to
Use the technical term " affect " he could have
!ade his meaning- plain by speaking of feeling-
ne> or even affective tone, an expression
ually used earlier in the same paragraph.
An outstanding and valuable feature of the
??k is the attitude to disease, and in par-
r'cular to mental disorder, which is approached
om many angles. Great importance is
ached to minor symptoms in the earlier
^.ag;es. We read that " More cases of mild
's?rder of the mind occur in general practice
? an is commonly imagined, and it is as
Jttportant to diagnose and treat mild disturb-
nces as more advanced disorders. In many
t>ays it is more important. . . ." The fact
at sufferers from mental disorder are not a
ass apart from the more normal man will
<<0n?e home to the student when he reads that
^e student can study mild forms of mental
^Sorcjer jn Jnmself, ancj wiH find that this kind
!ntrospection helps him to comprehend the
0re advanced disorders of others." As
&ards the practitioner, we should like to see
.. nted on the top of every doctor's visiting
the aphorism on page 168 : "A case of
? e ancholia should never drift while the doctor
re UP his mind what to do." If he
th this book he will get much help from
e sections dealing with treatment,
^he section dealing with Psycho-analysis on
&e 361 is disappointing. The student may
^ the impression that " free association " is
e*ercise done by itself, and not a method
solving the dream problem. The statement
\v?Ut assistance in Psycho-analysis from the
^ association experiment is inaccurate.
do6 y?r^"assoc'ation test has nothing to
^ith Psycho-analysis, but is a method
el k aPProaching the Unconscious Mind
0rated by Jung, not Freud, before
is WaS accluainted with Analysis. There
itn n? rnention of the Transference, a very
sh ant item in Psycho-analysis. These
*??ings are the more striking when we
lu -*Se that on page 115 there is a terse but
tat" an-^ a^equate account of dream interpre-
ts n' -ln whieh the views of Freud and Jung
Pectively are rightly differentiated.
?tyell e section on Mental Deficiency describes
scar asPects of the condition. But it
ancjrcev gives enough help in the diagnosis
certification of the feeble-minded,
especially the high-grade cases, a duty which
any general medical practitioner may be called
upon to perform under the Mental Deficiency
Act, 1913. This contrasts markedly with many
helpful sections, especially the chapter on
Malingering, a chapter which any practitioner,
however experienced, could read with benefit.
Such criticisms as we have made deal with
blemishes which might easily be dealt with in
the further editions which are sure to be
demanded of this informing book.

W. A. Potts.
------------

Children's Courts. By W. Clarke Hall.
George Allen & Unwin, Ltd. 1926. 7s. 6d.
A new book by the well-known magistrate
of the Shoreditch Children's Court is very
welcome, especially to those who are familiar
with his previous work, " The State and the
Child." The latter appeared nearly nine years
ago and it is interesting to note how opinion
(including Mr. Clarke Hall's own) on the
subject of juvenile delinquency has advanced
since then. One sign of the advance has been
the publication of Dr. Cyril Burt's " The
Young Delinquent," from which many quota-
tions are made in the book under review.
Readers of this paper will turn with interest
to see what is said on the question of the
mental examination of delinquent children. It
is urged in the summary of conclusions that
there should be " expert medical advice in all
serious cases." It is not sufficient that a
mental specialist should be available for the
cases that the magistrates suspect of some
mental defect. As Mr. Clarke Hall says :
"No one without medical knowledge and
experience can in all cases diagnose the
necessity for a special report. Many children
who may seem to a magistrate quite normal
are in reality in very urgent need of such an
examination, a need which an experienced
doctor would at once realise." But a medical
examination necessitates a remand, and the
lack of suitable remand homes is a serious
obstacle in the way of establishing the exam-
ination as a definite feature of our penal
system. A room on police premises, such as
is provided by a large number of courts, can
hardly be considered a suitable place for a
child to remain in while a medical examination
and the enquiries are being made. And yet,
where the total number of cases is very few,
it is impossible to arrange for a separate insti-
tution. In such places it might be a good
plan to make it part of a probation officer's
duty to have a room available at his or her
house for a child on remand.

Causes of juvenile delinquency are divided
into external and internal, and the Children's
Court is mainly concerned with the former.
" The first and paramount duty of the Juvenile
Court is to obtain a complete and exact know-
ledge of the child's environmental conditions."
Then follows " the further duty of obtaining
expert advice on the physical and psycho-
logical factors which may have contributed to
or . . . caused delinquency." The amount
of physical defect found among delinquent
children is terribly high. No less than 70 per
cent, are said to suffer from some bodily
weakness or ill-health, and nearly 50 per cent,
require medical treatment. As regards mental
defect, Mr. Clarke Hall considers that the
great majority of juvenile offenders are fairly
up to the average in intelligence; in fact, the
brightness of many of the children is very
striking. Of course, in any consideration of
juvenile delinquency it must always be borne
in mind what a very small proportion of
children who break the law ever come before
the Court at all. In 1924 only 311 children
were charged at the Old Street Court, while
the population served by the Court is over a
million, of whom at least 300,000 are children
under 16. It is an interesting speculation as
to how far this extremely low figure is due to
a real decrease in juvenile naughtiness or to
a reluctance on the part of the police, parents,
and general public to bring a child before a
court of law.

With regard to procedure in Children's
Courts, it is urged that legal language and
unintelligible questions should be dropped and
a reasonable practice made universal. As
things are, after hearing a few incomprehen-
sible sentences, a child soon loses " all hope
of even partially understanding what on earth
it is all about and relapses into a sullen silence
which no subsequent explanations can over-
come." If a child denies the charge, it is
absurd to ask him to cross-examine the
witnesses. He is quite incapable of doing it.

The magistrate should hear what he has to
say and then cross-examine the witnesses for
him. This is Mr. Clarke Hall's own proce-
dure, and one wishes that magistrates in
general would have the wisdom and courage
to adopt it. The difficulty is that as long aS
the Children's Court remains a criminal court
and the enquiry is a trial, it is almost impos-
sible to make the procedure what we should
wish it to be. There are in the book son16
drastic proposals regarding special magis*
trates for Children's Courts, the grouping
Petty Sessional Divisions round a Central
Children's Court, and the inclusion in the
jurisdiction of Children's Courts of new classes
of cases (such as adults charged with offences
against children) which raise important issues
and require the gravest consideration.

Many proposals which are made f?r
improved methods of dealing with young
offenders will be heartily welcomed by those
who have considered the subject. Birching 15
utterly condemned. No boy has been birched
at Old Street for the last six years, and it lS
quite clear that the abandonment of the
punishment has produced no increase in delin-
quency; nor is much use made at Old Street
of fines or of recognizances. Nearly all the
children are either put on probation (50 per
cent, in 1924) or sent to Home Office Schools
(28 per cent, in 1924). Part of the success of
Probation at Old Street is doubtless due to the
admirable staff of Probation Officers who have
been appointed by the Home Office to that
Court. Mr. Clarke Hall writes strongly
against the rigid denominational tests at
present imposed on all Probation Officers
appointed under the Police Court Mission. To
many who would like to become Probation
Officers the sectarian test is an insuperable
barrier " as futile as it is harmful." Nor *s
Mr. Clarke Hall any admirer of the system
by which the Home Office Schools remain under
private management. He thinks that earlier
licensing, better classification, and better
training would result if the schools were under
direct State control, and that, if the present
system continues, at least much greater powers
over the schools should be conferred on the
Chief Inspector. Mr. Clarke Hall's long e*"
perience as a magistrate, his wide knowledge
of the schools, and the high regard in which
he is held by all who know his work make his
opinions on this, as on all other questions of
child welfare, of the greatest weight and value-
Clara D. Rackham, J.P-

^lth Compendium and Health Publicity.
^ompiled by T. Crew, F.F.I, and F.I.H.
(J^lerk to the Leicestershire Health Insurance
Committee). 1926. 7s. 6d.

This book of reference is a guide to social
?rkers in their search for the right associa-
n to deal with any special problem of health,
yr subjects akin to health. The number of
k untary associations in England, as we all
fr ?if' *S so ^ar&e as to excessive, yet each
v- society is started with a slightly different
c ^Point from its predecessor in the same
h ^ Marshalled in one book, the list of
a. organisations looks formidable. But
jn ,.ls a helpful publication, and its issue
i lcates the public interest in maintaining and
ti Pr?ving the mental and physical health of
e community.
