The Inheritance of Mental Diseases
====================================

MENTAL WELFARE. 49
^ook Reviews e32 Abstracts.
. By
r. A. Myerson; pp. 336. Williams &
Wilkins Co., Baltimore. 1925. Price 25s.
1 his book is a critical survey of the chief
i h ? ant^ current opinions regarding the
" eritance of mental diseases, together with
Jle results of an inquiry by the author into a
'r!^e number of cases under his care in the
^a""ton State Hospital for the Insane. The
^rst part of the book, consisting of 100 pages,
_ taken up with a short description of the
,.ai" features of the various forms of mental
lsease embraced by the vague term insanity,
of the different views which are held
yarding their hereditary transmission. This
i Cc?unt emphasises a point which is well
"own to all psychiatrists, namely, the many
P'tfalls which await the biologist and
atistician who attempts to inquire into the
. eritance ^ mental disease without an
e<3uate clinical knowledge of the subject. In
Qfe second part, the author gives an account
"is own researches into 130 families, illus-
ted by a number of genealogical charts.
t(reats separately of " vertical " or direct,
~ ' horizontal " or collateral transmission,
, . arrives at the general conclusion that
dis certain particular types of mental
j eas.e> e-g-, Paranoia and Manic-depressive
."sanity, tend to be followed by similar states
the descendants, there is nevertheless a
baal?^' terldency ^or them to be followed even-
by
be
LUa|ly by Dementia precox, and possibly later
imbecility. In the author's words, " It will
e seen that all roads seem to lead to Dementia
Precox and from thence to imbecility." It
?llows, that as a result of ante-dating of the
. 1Sease in successive generations and of this
'"crease in severity, there is a tendency for
Propagation to be checked and for the neuro-
pathic stock to die out. I have little doubt
at this would be the case if the mating of
"europaths were restricted to those of like
_endency, but it is to be remembered that this
's by
no means so, and it is important for the
immunity to realise that the dragging of
""tainted stocks into the vortex of disease
"?t only keeps alive the morbid process, but
tends to its ever-increasing dissemination,
further, there is the strongest reason for
'"king, and this opinion is confirmed by the
conclusions of the author regarding the origin
uf mental disease, that even if every individual
coming- of neuropathic stock could be elim-
inated to-day the factors which produce the
impairment are still in operation and a fresh
crop would speedily arise.
In discussing the various theories and
research work regarding- hereditary transmis-
sion, Dr. Myerson enters a vigorous, and, in
my opinion, justifiable protest against the
methods of many of the biometricians and
Mendelians. Many of the latter, especially in
America, have made statements which are
certainly not warranted by the facts, and I
do not consider that the writer is at all too
strong in stating of one such inquiry, " It
postulates Mendelism in advance, considers all
its researches only in the light of this theory,
and dismisses entirely all other conceptions."
With regard to the primary origin of the
tendency to mental disease which unquestion-
ably runs in certain families, the author's
conclusions are definitely in favour of the view
which is now becoming increasingly held,
namely, that it is the result of an impairment
of the germ cells (Blastophoria) produced by
adverse factors of the environment. The
possibility of this was, of course, long denied,
especially by the disciples of Weismann, but
there is now abundant clinical and experi-
mental evidence that, whether " possible " or
not, such impairment does actually occur, and
the author refers to a good deal of this
evidence.
The book as a whole is well written, but it
is somewhat marred by a certain amount of
diffuseness, unnecessary repetition, and vitu-
perative criticism which tend to obscure the
main thesis. It is nevertheless a sound and
useful work containing many facts of interest
as well as a useful bibliography.
A. F. Tredgold.
Report of the Departmental Committee on
Sexual Offences Against Children and
Young Persons in Scotland. H.M.
Stationery Office. 1926. Is.
This Report of the conditions prevalent in
Scotland follows upon the Report of the
Departmental Committee for England recently
issued, and reviewed in our January number.
The Report points out that the Scottish
statistics for sexual offences cannot be
properly compared with the English, as many
cases are included which could not be in-
cluded in a return prepared in England.
50 MENTAL WELFARE.
In the three years from August 1st, 1921,
to July 31st, 1924, there were 1,050 cases in
which proceedings for sexual offences against
persons under sixteen were instituted. The
Scottish Committee find, as did the English,
that a large number of cases are not brought
to the Courts either for lack of evidence or
so that the child concerned may not have to
undergo the strain of proceedings.
Sexual crimes and offences are, in general,
found to be most prevalent in large cities.
Regarding the variability of the sentences
inflicted, the Committee remark : "In our
opinion, the real difficulty, until recently, was
that a number of serious cases were sent for
trial to a Police Court, or, as summary cases,
to the Sheriff Court, in which the maximum
penalty is three months. We assume that
it was in order to prevent this that instruc-
tions were lately issued by the Lord Advocate
that all cases of assault on children
involving indecency, or of indecent practices
towards children, other than charges involving-
only indecent exposure of the person, should
be tried either in the Sheriff Court or in the
High Court, and for that purpose should be
reported to the Sheriff's Procurator Fiscal.
We are satisfied that this instruction will go
far to remedy the inequality of sentence com-
plained of."
The English Report strongly expressed the
opinion that the crime of indecent exposure
was indicative of mental defect. A similar
view is here expressed : "No complaint was
made of too great leniency in punishing these
cases, but great stress was laid on the neces-
sity for ascertaining whether such offenders
are not really abnormal or mentally deficient
and in need of treatment accordingly."
The Committee recommend that it
should be possible to institute proceedings
under Section 5 of the Criminal Law Amend-
ment Act regarding offences against girls
under 16 any time within twelve months
instead of within nine months, as at present.
Several witnesses recommend the surgical
treatment of certain offenders, but the Com-
mittee state that in " the present state of our
knowledge and of public opinion, they cannot
recommend this." As regards segregation,
however, in some form of industrial colony
or institution, while considering it the obvious
course as regards mentally defective offenders,
they recommend that " it be carefully con-
sidered also in the case of habitual offenders
and offenders against young children who are
not certifiably defective. If not mentally
deficient, such offenders are a danger to the
community because they persistently refuse to
control themselves, just as mental defectives
are dangerous because they cannot control
themselves. Although segregated, they could
be trained and required to do useful work. ^
a margin for clemency were considered neces-
sary, the sentences?or some of them?could
be indeterminate."
The Report lays special stress on the un-
desirable sexual relationships consequent upon
the overcrowded conditions of Scotch homes-
A section of the Report is devoted to the
relation between mental defect and sexual
offences, and the evils which are occurring'
owing to the lack of institutions. " It has been
made abundantly clear to us," the Report
states, " that the Mental Deficiency and Lunacy
(Scotland) Act, 1913, is not being worked efii-
ciently, partly on account of some inherent
defect, and, to a greater extent, because of
want of funds, and particularly of institutional
accommodation. No doubt remains in our
mind that only a small proportion of mental
defectives are certified and cared for under
the Act, and that, of these, many arc released
from care and supervision when the respon-
sibility of the Education Authority for them
ceases. It is impossible to say whether many
of these are sexual offenders, but we under-
stand that experts on mental deficiency and
on criminology are generally agreed that
there is an extremely intimate connection
between mental defect and sexual offences. If>
therefore, mental defectives are numerous, it
may be presumed that they present an appre-
ciable proportion of sexual offenders, and we
have had many instances cited to us which
support this view."
The Report puts forward the views of the
Committee on the division of responsibility
regarding children : "Whatever view may be
taken as to the feasibility of the foregoing"
recommendation, we feel, as we have already
indicated, that there are grave defects
attaching to the existing system under which
the responsibility for children under 10 is
divided between two different local bodies, the
care of educable defectives being entrusted to
Education Authorities, and the care of unedu-
cable defectives to Parish Councils. The
terms " educable " and " uneducable " have
not yet been clearly defined; the border-line
MENTAL WELFARE. 51
^ases must always cause trouble, and the
^perience of more than 10 years has proved
lat the distinction is often baffling in the
e*treme. Very frequently the confusion has
^fortunate results. While we are well aware
?f the difficulties that surround the problem,
are disposed to think that the balance of
^vantage would lie in concentrating" the caie
supervision of all mentally defective
children, whether educable or uneducable, in
^ hands of the Education Authorities."
Ihe opinion expressed in the report of the
English Committee and in the recent Report of
Commissioners of Prison and the Directors
Convict Prisons regarding- the words
from birth or from an early age " is again
set forth here, and the further opinion that
weak-minded or emotionally unstable persons
, 0 come constantly through the Courts
s lQuld be certifiable in virtue of the frequent
rePetition pf their offences.
"re comment elsewhere on these highly
Controversial points.
Then and Now. The Froebel Society's
Jubilee Pamphlet. Published by the Froebel
So
Is
jggrfty' Bloomsbury Square, W.C.I.
\xt
Pul 1"G a,re ?^ac^ draw attention to this little
fift 1Ca^on' which marks the completion of
y years of effort to broaden the educational
cuh *n ^n^ant schools. It is indeed diffi-
e picture methods that would still be
te,P^yed had there been no Froebelian
aching-?and the mentally defective child has
n ^e gainer no less than the normal child.
Genical Sterilization : Historical, Legal
Statistical Review of Eugenical
TeRilization in the united States. By
p&rry H. Laughlin, Eugenics Record Office.
ublished by the American Eugenics
Society, 1926.
Th'
to t1S Pamphlet is a complete record down
the lluary 1926, of the State laws and
sw^neral position regarding Eugenical
all 1 Ration. It should be read by
sterjj- S? wb? are inclined to think that
sho 11^atlon of mentally defective persons
^ork k a^owec' *n England. A previous
izati ? same author, " Eugenical Steril-
ity iQ2c>ln United States," was published
tlir. anc^ *s an important contribution to
llle Problem.
Eugenical sterilization was first legalised by
an American State in 1907, and one may
estimate the difficulty of administering such
laws by noting that in all these years only
0,244 operations have been performed in the
23 States, and of these 4,G3G operations were
in California. The first State to adopt a
sterilization law was Indiana. It was only
applicable to inmates of Institutions, and this
limitation is still incorporated in many of the
State statutes. Unfortunately, in California,
where the largest number of cases have been
dealt with, no provision has been made to
keep in contact with the individuals so dealt
with, and the results of returning to the com-
munity without supervision, the sterilized
feeble-minded persons and those with incurable
chronic mania or dementia, cannot be esti-
mated. Under these circumstances it is im-
possible to speak definitely of the beneficial
effect of such sterilization. In many of the
States the law has become a dead letter, and
the largest number of operations in any State
excepting California is 335 (Kansas).
A Study in Vocational Guidance, Carried
Out by the Industrial Fatigue Research
Board and the National Institute of
Industrial Psychology. Medical Research
Council, Report No. 33. H.M. Stationery
Office. 4s. 1926.
This Report is of high scientific value. The
investigation was the first of its kind to be
carried out in this country, and was concerned
with vocational guidance rather than voca-
tional selection (with the requirements of
particular individuals rather than with par-
ticular occupations). The scheme was planned
thus :?
I. As a preliminary step, an analysis of
the occupations taken up by 1,000 children
leaving the schools in a London Borough was
made, in order to ascertain which were likely
to be the commoner occupations involved.
II. The investigation proper, which was
limited to the children educated at three
schools in the Borough, consisted of an
intensive individual study of all children due
tp leave the three selected schools in the
course of the next twelve months and of the
making of vocational recommendations based
on this study.
52 MENTAL WELFARE.
III. After the lapse of two years, as many
as possible of the children who had been
tested were traced, and the subsequent suc-
cesses or failures noted, and related to the
indications of the tests.
The Report states : "It became clear at
the outset of our research that one of the most
important problems for the educational
adviser would be to ascertain the degree of
intelligence possessed by each individual
child." Some indication of the general form
of the investigation is given in the following :?
SCHEDULE FOR INVESTIGATING
INDIVIDUAL CASES.
I. HOME CONDITIONS.
II. PHYSICAL CONDITION.
III. MENTAL CONDITION.
A. Intellectual Capacity :
1. General Intelligence :
(a) Verbal Tests :
i. Group tests; ii. Individual
tests.
(b) Non-verbal tests :
i. Group tests; ii. Individual
tests.
2. Specific Capacities :
(a) Manual dexterity.
(b) Mechanical ability,
(cj Constructive ability.
(d) Imagination.
(<e) Capacities needed for par-
ticular trades (dressmaking,
engineering, clerical work,
etc.)
3. Educational Attainments :
(a) Reading.
(b) Writing.
(c) Spelling.
(d) Arithmetic.
(e) Drawing.
4. Special Interests :
General culture, vocational, pre-
ferences and experience, amuse-
ments, hobbies, etc.
B. Temperament and Character.
1. Emotional qualities (cheerfulness,
assertiveness, timidity, bad
temper, etc.).
2. Moral qualities (honesty, industry,
reliability, etc.).
3. Social qualities (ability to co-
operate with inferiors, equals,
superiors, etc.).
IV. VOCATIONAL RECOMMENDA-
TIONS.
Eull details are given of the various tests
used, and a close study of the Report wi'1
repay the reader.
" The children selected for our main
inquiry," the Report states, " numbered n<?
more than one hundred. It was, therefore)
only to be expected that, with a group s?
small, the range of intelligence would be com-
paratively narrow. Further, long before the
age of thirteen, the brightest children from
the elementary schools have been transferred
to central schools or secondary schools and
the defective have been removed to special
schools. Nevertheless, wide differences were
found among the children tested; the brightest
had a mental ratio of 134 and the dullest one
of 62. This means that at the age of thirteen
their intelligence was scattered over a range
of more than nine mental years."
Dr. Cyril Burt, under whose general direc-
tion the whole inquiry was undertaken, sums
up the result thus : " With a small group of
a hundred children, followed up for a period
of but two short years, nothing but tentative
results can be expected, and nothing but pro-
visional deductions can be drawn.
". . . The general outcome of the inquiry
speaks strongly in favour of the methods used.
The scheme has proved workable; the results,
unexpectedly successful. Judged by the
after-histories of the several children, those
who entered occupations of the kind recom-
mended have proved both efficient and con-
tented in their work. As compared with their
fellows, they are, on an average, in receipt of
higher pay, they have generally obtained pro-
motion earlier, they have experienced fewer
changes of situations, and have incurred
hardly a single dismissal between them. Over
80 per cent, declare themselves satisfied alike
with the work they have taken and with their
prospects and pay. On the other hand, of
those who obtained employment different from
the kind advised, less than 40 per cent, are
satisfied. Among the latter group nearly half
dislike their work, and among the former only
one dislikes it, and that simply because it is
not quite identical with what was originally
advised. As has been pointed out above, no
great weight can be attached to these figures;
yet, so far as they go, they are certainly
encouraging."
MENTAL WELFARE. 53
. He adds : " One incidental result of great
Importance vocationally is the distinction
et\veen children who have a verbal and a non-
^erbal bias. It becomes obvious, therefore,
lat a child's ability should not be assessed
^?lely by his progress at school or by his per-
0rrnance in psychological tests of a verbal
V'pe. Accordingly, tests for mechanical,
Poetical and manual abilities are equally in
heed of standardisation."
. ^ is good to know that further investiga-
l0ns on a more extensive scale are being
parried out by the National Institute of Indus-
nal Psychology under a grant from the
arnegie United Kingdom Trust, and the
lq^ute's Report of Progress up to August,
just issued, gives an interesting account
0 the work so far carried out.
Rp
Ep?Rt of the Commissioners of Prisons
and the Directors of Convict Prisons
fOR the Year 1924?1925. Cmd. 2597.
"?M. Stationery Office. 1926. Is. 3d.
/t is not proposed to review the whole of
ls Report, but merely to allude to some parts
which are of special interest to those
enRaged in work amongst mental defectives,
the first place, it is very satisfactory to
that much greater use is now being made
?. the Mental Deficiency Act. The Commis-
Sl0ners state that during the past four years
?? ^ss than 985 mentally defective prisoners
of'^een dealt with under Sections 8 and 9
.the Act. Since the majority of these would
'erwise ultimately have gone to swell the
anks of the habitual criminal class, it is clear
at the Act " has already conferred very great
enefits on the community." This is certainly
n.e the causes of the steady diminution of
Pnson population; and it is to be hoped that
aS experience grows, and the Act is perhaps
tended, it will operate still further in the
"a,"e direction."
n fondly, there is no doubt that the
, mber of defectives so dealt with would have
1 en considerably greater but for the narrow
m ^Pretation placed by many magistrates and
Jcal men upon the words, " from birth or
Ah]11 an earl>' ag"e>" 'n the legal definitions.
_ lQUgh I consider that such a narrow inter-
int at-10n 's bicorrect and is opposed to the
pr entl0n ?f the Act, it is nevertheless very
po*V^ ' and, as many prison Medical Officers
n- out, these words unquestionably stand
in the way of the certification of a considerable
number of defectives. There is reason to hope
that before very long- the definitions in the
Act will be amended in this respect.
But, and this brings me to the third point
of importance, the Commissioners go much
further than recommending a modification of
these words in the legal definitions. They
raise the question whether the provisions of
the Mental Deficiency Act might not be ex-
tended so as to provide proper care and control
for certain persons who are not mentally defec-
tive but suffer from sub-normal mentality and
mental instability?and this is a very important
and a very serious question. As a matter of
fact, I am disposed to think that many of the
persons referred to are, in reality, mental
defectives and couid be certified as such if
Medical Officers would only realise that the
existing definitions say " mental " and not
" intellectual " defect, and if they would
appreciate that an individual may suffer from
a defective development of mind of such a
nature as to necessitate care, control and
supervision, and yet show no marked illiteracy.
But if an individual is in reality neither defec-
tive nor of unsound mind; that is to say, if
lie cannot be brought within either the Mental
Deficiency or the Lunacy Acts, then it seems
to me that there are grave public objections
to any modification or extension of these Acts
for the purpose of including him. I should
regard any such stretching of the Mental
Deficiency Act with particular anxiety. As
things are at present, it is practically impos-
sible to secure institutional accommodation for
thousands of real defectives, and this difficulty
would certainly be increased if the Act were
to be extended in the manner suggested. It
would simply break down through the weight
put upon it. It is not denied for a moment
that offences are committed by many persons
in consequence of mental disorder or deteriora-
tion, and for which they are not fully respon-
sible. But if such persons are neither legally
defective nor of unsound mind, the remedy
would appear to lie in the provision of some
special type of custodial institution, where they
would not have to associate with ordinary
criminals, and where they would receive the
care and discipline appropriate to their needs,
rather than in such a dangerous extension of
the scope of the existing Mental Deficiency or
Lunacy Acts.
A. F. Tredgold.
54 MENTAL WELFARE.
Educational Psychology. By Charles Fox,
M.A. London : Kegan Paul, pp xiii., 380.
1925. 10s. Gd.
This is without doubt an important contri-
bution to educational psychology and gives no
little pleasure in the reading. Its chapters
range over a series of psychological problems
lying at the heart of educational technique;
and, indeed, the reader is left clear that all
questions of educational technique are at
bottom questions of psychological fact. The
topics dealt with are but selections from the
whole field of genetic psychology; but each
is considered in relation to a single and central
point of view, which everywhere holds together
and enlivens the broad body of fact. That
informing point of view is the author's insist-
ence on the selective, plastic, active nature of
mind. This is a view which is most widely
heard of to-day as the Gestalt theory of the
nature of mind, although, as Mr. Fox rightly
points out, it is familiar enough in other
terms to students of William James and G. F.
Stout. Mr. Fox brings this central standpoint
to bear on each topic in turn, sensory data,
preperception and observation, mental
imagery, habit formation, mental discipline
and mental fatigue; and in each case it vivifies
and humanises the detail of experimental fact
?as when, for example, it is profoundly said
that " to form a habit is ro compose a move-
ment-melody." Hitherto unpublished experi-
ments are described in regard to many of the
issues discussed. A new view of mental
imagery, and a new theory of mental fatigue
are offered. Mr. Fox holds that the real
effects of mental fatigue are tp be found in the
increased variability of performance, due to
the breaking down of the normal rhythmic
pulsation of attention.
Mr. Fox is extremely severe on " eidetic
imagery," which he regards as a " mon-
strosity." He attacks the view that new habits
can only be acquired on the basis of an inherited
impulse; but is driven, for the momentary
purpose of this attack, to foget his Gestalt
theory of impulse and of mental activity in
general, here interpreting " inherited im-
pulse " far too narrowly, as if it were merely
a simple mechanical reflex.
It is, however, on the Freudian theories that
he brings to bear his big guns of invective and
sweeping rejection. It is here that his
historical sense and his scholarship fail him,
and the limit of his assimilative capacity for
new and difficult orders of fact is reached.
The reader is surprised to find in a book of
this general calibre the old mis-statements that
have been pointed out ad nauseam, and that
could never be made by one who was as careful
and disinterested here as elsewhere. Freud's
theory is " that all mental energy is derived
from the sexual impulse." Then how is it
possible to speak of conflict and repression?
In what does the work of analysis consist, if
this is true? " The Freudians maintain that
our desires start by being fully conscious, and
then become suppressed." Mr. Fox quotes
Wohlgemuth on psycho-analysis with simple
approval, apparently quite overlooking Pro-
fessor Pear's destructive criticism of his
relevant experiments. In dealing with his own
and other people's experiments on the question
of the influence of effect on remembering and
forgetting, Mr. Fox neglects the all-important
distinction between internal and external
stimuli, between the conflict of impulses and
unpleasant sensory experience. But we confess
that we feel inclined to forgive much for the
sake of the one truth (profounder than Mr.
Fox can realise) so well put when he says (p-
224), " The term ' complex ' is peculiarly
unfortunate, since the distinguishing feature
of a complex compared with any other state
of mind is its extreme simplicity, and it ought
in strictness to be called a 'simplex.' "
Susan Isaacs.
Personality. By R. G. Gordon, M.D., B.Sc.,
M.R.C.P., Edin. Kegan Paul. 1925.
12s. 6d.
This book is really a broad survey of modern
psychological thought. In bringing the views
of the various leaders of schools of psychology
under one cover and in attempting, not only
to expound their views briefly, but at the same
time extract from each of them whatever is
useful, Dr. Gordon has done something which
has not, to my knowledge, been attempted
before. The book shows wide reading and an
unbiassed grasp of the essentials of the various
teachings which, with the evidence of clear
independent thinking, make one regret that
the author has limited himself as he has done
in this volume. A first reading of the book
leaves the feeling that he had material for
something better.
The contents of the book are well arranged,
MENTAL WELFARE. 55
r\ ?.u?h a way as to allow of the matter un-
0 ding- itself in sequence. Full consideration
ls given to the work of Freud, Jung", Adler
a Kempf. The earlier chapters deal with
such important problems as the relationship
etween body and mind, variation in person-
?uy? etc. There is an adequate chapter on
Internal secretions, with a brief mention of
leir relation to Mental Defect. Too little
sPace has been given to this more than im-
portant subject, and the author's outlook on
is more vague and unhopeful than is justi-
ce. Also his classification is such that it
^eans nothing from a practical point of view.
? could have said more with advantage,
ihe chapter on the delinquent is good.
n?ugh has been said to illustrate the import-
ance of early treatment. Environment as a
Causative factor is well demonstrated. Here
again, more could have been said to prove that
neurosis and delinquency may be the dissimilar
[esults of the same environment on different
yPes of children. An important fact in dealing
lta the problems of child behaviour
Poetically.
T?,
ine last chapter deals with Spiritual aspect
, . Pers?nality, and talks of the need for a
P "osophy of life, a fact too often missed in
yehological writings. In this instance the
eed for such a philosophy is brought forward
00 apologetically and timidly. Such a philo-
a?H ? *S essent^a^ f?r a right adaptation to life
O ltS ^mPortance need not be minimised.
s ne hopes that the author will be tempted at
me subsequent date to enlarge on the ideas
Panted tentatively in this chapter.
general conclusion is that this is one
those few books on psychology which will
epay close study. At the same time, well as
e book is written, one feels that the author
u'd have used simpler language in many
in CeS advantage to his readers and an
bQ-ase in the sphere of usefulness of his
E. A. Hamilton-Pearson, M.B., Ch.B.
L?^don County Council Annual Report,
?* r Vol. II. Mental Hospitals and
ental Deficiency. 1925. Is.
This Report of the Mental Hospitals Com-
As ,ee Was *ssue(l at the close of the year 192.5.
jyj. ls usual, details are given of the various
hospitals, and it is stated that the
a number of lunatics (excluding private
patients) under the care of public authorities
(including- M.A. B. and Poor Law Institutions)
in London was 24,330 on 1st January, 1925,
as compared with 16,362 in 1890. Under the
Mental Deficiency Act, there were on
December, 1924, 1,881 cases in Institutions
provided by the Council or under contract, 20
under guardianship, and 1,657 under statutory
supervision.
One special point of interest that arises is
the employment of women as part-time occupa-
tions officers at Horton Mental Hospital and
at the Maudsley, and the consideration that
is being given to the extension of such appoint-
ments to all the Mental Hospitals.
Since this Report was written similar
appointments have been made at other Mental
Hospitals.
Mental Hospital patients who are known or
believed to have suffered from encephalitis
lethargica are being grouped at West Park
Mental Hospital, while similar cases of mental
defect are grouped at the Manor, Epsom. The
M.A.B. is accepting uncertified cases at
Windmill Hill. There will thus be possible,
co-ordination of treatment and research, and
it may be hoped that knowledge of this
baffling disease will be increased.
The results of the work of Occupation
Centres has justified their continuance, though
the cost of the provision of guides still con-
tinues to be a serious problem. The Council
has wisely extended the medical inspection of
Special Schools so as to include Occupation
Centres as far as is possible.
Trial of Ronald True. Edited by Donald
Carswell, of the Middle Temple, Barrister-
at-law. Wm. Hodge & Co., Ltd. 1925.
10s. 6d.
This book has an interest for those who
desire to weigh the legal difficulties, when
insanity is pleaded in a criminal charge.
From the admirable introduction, in which
Mr. Carswell gives an unbiassed summary of
the salient features of Ronald True's behaviour
from the age of six, it would appear to the
average reader that there could be no doubt
about the mental condition of the man. Dr.
East and Dr. Young, at Brixton Prison, after
close observation of True, came to the con-
clusion that his was a case of congenital mental
disorder aggravated by the morphia habit, and
that he was certifiablv insane, True was,
56 MENTAL WELFARE.
however, found guilty of murder, and
sentenced to death, and the Court of Criminal
Appeal dismissed the appeal, relying on the
Rules in M'Naughton's Case (tried in 1843)
regarding" criminal responsibility. For al-
though the medical evidence pointed to
insanity by the law of England, insanity
does not necessarily imply irresponsibility. It
then, however, became the duty of the Home
Secretary to take notice of the medical
evidence.
He appointed a commission of three medical
men, who all agreed that True was a lunatic,
and True was removed to Broadmoor.
This book gives the evidence at the trial in
full, and in the appendix is printed an account
of the M'Naughton case, and the debate in
the House of Commons on the Home Secre-
tary's action in the True case. In a further
appendix is printed a summary of the Report,
issued in July, 1922, of the Committee that
was appointed, with Lord Justice Atkin in the
chair, to consider the procedure in criminal
trials where insanity is pleaded as a defence.
Certain recommendations were made by that
Committee (of which Sir Leslie Scott was a
member) which would allow the recognition
of irresistible impulse as a defence in a criminal
charge. " We think it should be made clear,"
the Report says, " that the law does recog-
nise irresponsibility on the ground of insanity
where the act was committed under an impulse
which the prisoner was, by mental disease, in
substance deprived of power to resist."
