An Outline of Abnormal Psychology
=================================


102 Mental welfare.
Book Reviews ? Abstracts.
. By
William McDougall, F.R.S. Methuen &
Co., Ltd. Demy 8vo., pp. xvi., 572. 1926.
15s. net.
Professional students of Psychology, no less
than the very considerable number of the
general public which Professor McDougall has
made his own, have been waiting for the
publication of this book. It was promised in
1923. They expected it to be a useful, and
even a necessary, sequel to his " Outline of
Psychology." In these days of the popularisa-
tion of the Abnormal, they wished even more
to learn the views of one of the foremost
" pure psychologists " upon the conflicting
theories which pass current under the un-
merited name of the New Psychology.
In neither of these expectations have they
been disappointed. No system of hormic
psychology?such as is McDougall's?could
afford to leave out of account the abnormali-
ties of the mind. This volume was therefore
needed to complete the former one. On the
other hand, it would seem quite impossible to
deal with the causes which lie at the root of
mental disorders without an adequate dynamic
of mental process in general. This McDougall
finds in the instincts. His theory has been
widely known, and with good reason, since the
publication of his " Social Psychology " in
1908. It now receives further confirmation
from, and at the same time explains many
facts which were out of the purview of the
original theory . In common with the school of
Psychotherapy, which includes so many leading
English Psychologists, McDougall, who writes
as a Psychologist rather than as a medical
practitioner, wages successful war against the
mechanical conception of the human mind.
Man is no machine. He is a conscious
organism in which purpose has its full part to
play. He works towards ends at which he
aims and is not merely pushed forward
passively by natural causes working at his
back. And, against deterministic schools even
of Psychotherapy, he advances a theory based
not merely upon pathological, but upon normal
?and primarily on normal?facts as well. He
would have us understand disordered mental
processes in terms of the general principles of
pure Psychology.
The thirty-four chapters of the volume treat
of all the subjects usually dealt with in a work
of this kind; all the preceding- ones leading UP
to those on Personality and Integration and
Disintegration respectively.
It is perhaps unfortunate that McDougall
should have made use of the term personality
as synonymous with character. Philosophi-
cally, they stand for very different things; and
McDougall, besides being a psychologist, is
well acquainted with Philosophy. Integration
of character is understandable, while integra-
tion of personality is not. But the usage
seems to have become fairly well fixed now in
the science. The " Outline of Abnormal
Psychology," like its predecessor, is not only
an interesting book, it is a practical one. It will
be of great service to all who wish to under-
stand the principles at the basis of the minor,
as well as the major, maladaptations of the
human mind, and wish to put them to practical
account. It will be especially welcomed by
those who have the aims of the Association
for Mental Welfare at heart. This, perhaps,
is no argument in favour of the book, but the
book is certainly a sound argument for the
aims of the Association.
F. Aveling.
Early Mental Disease. (" The Lancet "
Extra Numbers.) By various writers. Pp-
194. Wakely & Son, Ltd., 1926. 12s.
Recent events have given rise to additional
interest in the subject of early mental disease :
so this is a most timely volume. It is a pity?
however, that the valuable information which
it contains is not rather more concentrated, so
that the busy man might familiarise himself
with these early symptoms without waste of
time. Indeed, it is not so much a matter of
" waste," it is simply that few people have a
sufficiency of leisure to familiarise themselves
with even a tithe of the books and articles
which pour from the press in only one branch
of science ! Then the form of the volume?'
and nearly two hundred pages with double col-
umns?is awkward. It is true that the shape
conforms to that of some of the weekly jour-
nals?which is no commendation. This much
by way of complaint. On the other hand,
the mere bulk of matter should serve as an
answer to those who affirm that in regard to
mental disorders comparatively little is known '?
the inference being apparently that in other
MENTAL WELFARE. 103
Ranches of medicine knowledge of disease and
lts treatment is quite satisfactory. Yet a little
thought will bring" the realisation that even
*n general medicine much treatment is tenta-
Ve or palliative.
j- he method adopted by the editor of this
v?lume of allocating different topics to separate
Writers, although it has resulted in a collection
0 extremely interesting articles, militates also
a^ainst compression. This allowance being
m^de, much praise may justly be given to those
o have contributed. Indeed, it is difficult
Well as invidious?to specify particular con-
^butions as most worthy of commendation.
erhaps it may be permitted to mention in the
j^ction on " Classification " the contribution
py *>r. Mapother on the " Schizophrenic-
paranoid Series "?that is the Dementia Prse-
??x and Delusional Insanity group because it
s one of the most difficult problems in the
uhole range of mental disorders to deal with,
fnd to describe. It is an important group
ecaUse jj. incjU(^es cases of mental disorder in
Jch the preliminary symptoms are exhibi-
.eQ, for the most part, in early adult life, and
** which the prognosis is so bad. Also the
umber of those who break down in this way
th amentat>ly large. Diagnosis is difficult in
he early stages : " transitional cases abound,
the relegation of any particular patient,
??\> to the category of manic-depressive in-
anity Qr dementia praecox, or even to the
arger groups of neurosis or psychosis is in
any cases a question of personal judgment
ano choice." Dr. Mapother does not take an
optimistic view of treatment?at any rate, of
e measures which have so far been tried
proving successful. He is probably right: for
those cases in which improvement has taken
P ace after treatment, it is very possible that
Ul diagnosis has not been correct! Or it may
"- merely one of the remissions of symptoms
lch are so well known. Prophylaxis may
iCrve to prevent the development of an attack),
ut, in view of the difficulty of diagnosis, " it
at present quite impossible to say whether
^ ? ? one would ever be justified in claiming
0 ave averted a psychosis."
s *n.cidentally, it is to be regretted that no
Pecial section is devoted to prophylactic mea-
Ures. It is doubtful if the community will
;V-Cr ^ Educed to give up its right to marry
^judiciously and to give birth to the next
generation of unstable individuals. Still, it
would have been as well to emphasise the
necessity of doing- something- in this direction
if there is to be any appreciable reduction in the
numbers of the insane.
There is quite a satisfactory amount of space
given to treatment by most of the writers :
and there are several appendices devoted
chiefly to this. Particularly interesting are
those on the "Early Treatment of Mental Dis-
order," by Sir Maurice Craig, and on " Orga-
nised Occupational Therapy," by Dr. D. K.
Henderson; while mention must also be made
of Dr. Millais Culpin's contribution on the
" Application of Psycho-Analytical Principles."
Dr. Henderson remarks : " I have often been
asked whether I found one type of work more
suited to a special form of mental disorder than
another. The answer is in the negative. Every
case is a law unto itself, and with each new
patient a different interest has to be found.
. . . The types of work which we have found of
most value are raffia-work, cane-work, basket-
making, chair-making, rug-weaving, simple
joinery, repousse, china-painting, embroidery,
the use of the fretsaw for toy-making, and
more intricate work, such as batik and bar-
bola." Dr. Henderson widens the scope of the
term so as to include " all forms of activity,
games, dancing, theatre-going, participation
in sports, and crafts of all kinds."
Despite the criticisms already made, it can
be quite freely admitted that this is a valuable
book, and one which everyone who is interested
in the study of mental disorders should read.
Perchance, when a new edition is called for?
as it should be?it may be possible to make it
more succinct and rather more handy.
Hubert Norman.
Report from the Select Committee on
Nursing Homes. (Registration.) H.M.
Stationery Office, 1926. 4d.
The recommendations of the Select Commit-
tee on Nursing Homes (Registration) corre-
spond in the main with advanced opinion on the
subject. The need for registration is empha-
sised, and the exemption of homes with a
medical practitioner resident or in actual con-
trol at the time is considered impracticable. It
is recommended that the inspecting authority
should be the County Councils and the County
Borough Councils, and that the definition of
the term " Nursing Home " should be made to
include all types of nursing homes, including
maternity homes. With provisional exemption
104 mental welfare.
of existing- homes and possibly in special cir-
cumstances, the Committee consider that the
matron or other person in charge should be a
fully qualified nurse, and that the general
standard of qualification of the staff should
gradually be raised.
The Committee received complaints of very
bad conditions in some senile chronic cases,
and the position is summarised in the words,
" Elderly and senile patients, practically put
away in a cheap home by relations who take
little or no further interest in them, suffer great
indignities, are very unhappy and too fright-
ened to make any complaint." We quote at
length the opinion of the Committee. " Your
Committee have been deeply impressed with
the urgent need for registration and supervision
in that class of nursing home which caters
for the poor senile chronic. It has been stated
in evidence that it is impossible adequately to
nurse and accommodate, in a private room,
a patient under ?5 a week. Unfortunately,
there exists a large class of elderly persons
who, although they are capable of making some
payment, are quite unable to find a weekly sum
of this order. Your Committee consider that
the general application of registration and in-
spection will do much to alleviate the bad con-
ditions and sufferings undergone to-day by
patients of this class, but they desire strongly
to emphasise their opinion that this change
cannot be regarded as a cure for these evils,
but merely as a palliative. They feel that the
problem can only be properly solved by the
re-organisation of the Poor Law system, and
with regard to the class of patient dealt with
in this sub-paragraph, by the provision of
proper paying accommodation by local
authorities to meet their needs."
Brain Capacity and Intelligence. By E.
Morris Miller. Director State Psychological
Clinic, Tasmania. 1926. 2s. 6d.
This monograph is published by the
Australasian Association of Psychology and
Philosophy. The brain measurements were
taken during August to October, 1925,
according to the methods laid down by the
British Association for the Advancement of
Science, and by Berry & Porteous in their
measurement of Melbourne children. 4,042
schoolboys were examined from varying
types of schools. Dr. Miller says : " We
found that the medians of cubic capacity of
their brains varied in accordance with the
de
mental levels." Comparisons are iria
between Tasmanian and Victorian childrefl'
and careful statistics made of yearly gr?xV
in brain capacity. Table 18 gives a c
parison of means of cubic capacities 0
retardates and normals of sub-group of State
schoolboys. ,
Means of Means of
Year of Life. Retardates. Normals
8th
9th
10th
11th
12 th
13th
14th
15 th
16th
17 th
1,255
1,274
1,248 1,288
1.275 1,298
1.276 1,322
1,284 1,335
1,307.3 1,336
1,307.6 1,362
1,332 1,377
1,412
" In general terms, it may be affirmed ft"0111
these data relating to groups of schoolboy5
that brain growth shows a positive correS'
pondence with mental growth and pedagogic3
attainment."
The State Psychological Clinic has, during
the last three years, included brain measure'
ments as part of its routine of examinations-
From the results, Dr. Miller says : "
conclude, then, that small-headedness increase5
considerably as the mental levels decrease, ^
it becomes most marked at the levels of feeble*
mindedness, imbecility, and idiocy. As a classi
the feeble-minded possess a much smalle1"
brain capacity than the border-lines ; and th?
border-lines, in their turn, are, as a class,
smaller brain capacity than the normals."
An examination of prisoners in Hobart Ga?'
gave evidence to prove that " this prison pop^'
lation is much smaller-headed than the intel'
lectual and the law-abiding members of the
community, and that as the mental levej
recedes the numbers of small heads increase-
It would be interesting to compare Dr. Miller s
results with those of Dr. Goring which were
published in his " English Convict."
Dr. Miller concludes : " With such result?
as we have attained from the measurement o*
brain capacity, and comparing the diagnostic
value of these results with other intelligence
and performance tests with world-wide recog'
nition, we may claim that the brain capacity
record should be utilised along with the other
recognised methods in the diagnosis of mental
deficiencv."
MENTAL WELFARE. 105
An Outline of the Practice of Preventive
Medicine. By Sir George Newman. H.M.
Stationery Office. 1926. Is.
the State of the Public Health. Annual
Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the
Ministry of Health for the year 1925. H.M.
Stationery Office. 1926. 3s. 6d.
Education in England and Wales : Being
tjle Report of the Board of Education for the
School Year 1924-25. H.M. Stationery
0ffice. 3s. 6d.
These three official publications have each
?me reference to the causes of mental disease
^nd defect, to prevention and treatment,
Honing and education.
,.\r George Newman's " Outline " is a new
ltl?n of his 1919 Memorandum, and it is
|v?rth while to read in handy form so excel-
^ a summary of the present trend and
c llevements of medical practice. He
Rurally includes in his survey the latest know-
?C regarding mental defect and disease, and
summary of the 44 Provisional articles
1 a national policy in Preventive Medicine "
puts " Heredity and Race " in the first place.
? JjJjs Annual Report contains these words :
itherto interest in child welfare has centred
m?st entirely in the physical well-being of
le child. Scientific study of the child has now
?^Un to seek a new direction for investigation,
attention 1S being focussed to an increasing
,^ree on the mental health as distinct from
, e bodily health. The mental health or lll-
tp'1 adults is largely determined by influ-
v !~es which are operative in early childhood,
j , '?he observations on which this conclusion
m ased are hardly known except to those who
i"ake a special study of the subject. Few,
Dn^u ^oca' authorities have considered the
i Nihility of the practical application of
cp^ gy to the work of infant welfare
nties." long quotation is given from
pj e. .n?tes by Dr. David Forsyth, Senior
ysician, Evelina Hospital for Children, who
tr^??ates strongly the need for psychological
ining fQr those working at Child Welfare
entres. He says: " School influences come
of?,. ate ? . . It is the first five or six years
ea 1 6 t^at are decisive this connection. 1 he
i r lest symptoms indicating nervous trouble
as we^ as the beginning of a future
th,U ^ n^Urosisi are to be sought not later than
ls Period. Conversely, a child who has safely
passed its sixth year without showing1 any
nervous manifestations will hardly develop
neurotic trouble in later life."
In the Board of Education Report, covering
the year 1924-25, brief reference is again made
to the Committee of the Board which is investi-
gating the problem of Mental Deficiency. It
is stated that all local authorities are now using
the new model schedules prepared by the
Board for the ascertainment of defective
children, and by these model schedules the
number of m.d. (non-notifiable) children was
30,821. No increase in the number of schools
can be recorded, there being only 191 schools
with accommodation for 16,531.
Among the Vocational Courses for Defec-
tive Students over sixteen, there were three
for epileptics. We wish that Local Education
Authorities in populous areas would explore the
possibilities of supporting practical courses for
higher-grade feeble-minded persons over 16.
Metropolitan Asylums Board. Annual
Report for 1925-26. 5s. Mental Diseases
Section (only). Is. Offices of the Board,
Victoria Embankment, E.C.4.
The Mental Diseases Section of the Annual
Report gives, as in previous years, a clear
picture of the many differing types of Institu-
tions under the Board's control.
At the Caterham Mental Hospital special
attention is being paid to records, a convenient
record sheet for making six-monthly records of
progress on each child and a new system of
medical case-records having been adopted.
The account given of Darenth Training
Colony indicates how much useful industrial
work can be accomplished where grading and
classification is possible. The value of output
for the year ending March 31st, 1926, was
<?74,034. The number of inmates that can be
accommodated at Darenth is 2,260.
Among the papers contributed by the Board's
staff are those by Dr. Kinnier Wilson on the
arrangements made by the Board for post-
encephalitis cases, and by Dr. Stewart on the
" Incidence of Congenital Syphilis in Mental
Deficiency," being a preliminary report of
observations made at Leavesden Mental
Hospital.
The Board has set aside accommodation at
the Northern Hospital, Winchmore Hill, for
50 boys and 50 girls under 16 who are suffering
106 MENTAL WELFARE.
from the effects of encephalitis lethargica.
The work is still in an experimental stage. It
has been found necessary to exclude cases
below three years of age, cases in which
diagnosis is doubtful, very slight cases, and
completely bed-ridden cases, and also (which is
a point of importance to workers among mental
defectives), cases in which such mental deteri-
oration has followed the original attack of
epidemic encephalitis as to reduce the patient
to the level of the mental defective. The
report states that " other arrangements exist
for their treatment," but it is only too true
that (outside of London) in many areas no
adequate accommodation exists.
It is encouraging to read that " much less
difficulty has been encountered than was
expected in regard to the cases with inversion
of sleep rhythm," as the patients appear to
improve greatly under the conditions of a
regulated life. Similarly behaviouristic trouble
is less pronounced."
Dr. Stewart's investigations regarding the
incidence of congenital syphilis in mental defi-
ciency were made with 800 patients. Steps
were taken to exclude those who had been
exposed to the risk of acquiring venereal
disease. Dr. Stewart writes : "In 642
patients the Wassermann reaction was nega-
tive, and in 158 positive. Forty-two of the
642 patients represented unequivocal stigmata
of congenital syphilis. . . If the 42 con-
genital syphilitics with negative reactions be
disregarded, the incidence of syphilis as shown
by the Wassermann reaction is 19.75 per cent.
Even when the clinical examples of congenital
syphilis with negative Wasserman reactions
are excluded, the percentage of positive results
appears to be unduly high; certainly much
greater than that reported in recent years from
other institutions for mental defectives, and I
believe the high incidence of congenital syphilis
in this hospital can be explained on the basis
that a very large proportion of its inmates
are low-grade mental defectives with physical
infirmity, varying from paralysis of all types
to blindness and deaf-mutism." Previous re-
sults of other investigators have shown much
disparity, and Dr. Stewart believes the explana-
tion must be sought in the quality of the
material investigated, age and type of case.
In drawing any conclusions from Dr. Stew-
art's results, care must be taken to keep
clearly in mind that Leavesden accommodates
unimprovable adults of both sexes, chiefty
those suffering- from chronic infirmity, not prI
marily due to old age. As Dr. Stewart says>
the cases are mainly low-grade mental defeC
tives with physical infirmity. If generalisation
were made from his evidence, an undue pr?
minence would be given to syphilis in ^
causation of mental defect.
The Need for Eugenic Reform. By Maj?r
Leonard Darwin. John Murray. 1926. l^s-
Those who are familiar with Major Darwin ?
writings will be particularly glad that the firs
really comprehensive text-book of EugenlCS
should have been written by him. No one
devoted more time and energy to the stud)
of the subject in all its aspects, and there
few who could bring so sane and impart#
a judgment to bear on the data collected, \vhi'e
still preserving a genuine enthusiasm for the
relief of human suffering. ,
The main criticism which has been levelled
at eugenic reformers in the past has been thaj
they were basing impossibly idealistic an
academic aims on very insecure scientific
grounds, that, in fact, they were entirely ?ut
of touch with reality. Whatever truth there
may have been in this criticism of some
eugenists, Major Darwin's book should remote
the subject of Eugenics once and for all fr0lJl
the realms of idealistic, academic and some'
what vague propaganda, into those of botn
science and practical politics. The author
discusses the extent of our present knowledge
of the laws of heredity, and the relative in1'
portance of these and other factors in t^e
evolution of civilised society. While recog'
nising that much of our knowledge is either
incomplete or still debatable, he considers
every possible way in which this knowledge*
such as it is, might be used to benefit the r&ce
in the future. No one who has read these 5^0
odd pages of closely-reasoned argument, hoW
ever, will feel disposed to doubt that the
science of Eugenics rests on weighty founds
tions. On the other hand, it would be ir*1'
possible to accuse the Eugenic programme,
outlined in this book by its most distinguished
advocate, either by raising exaggerated hopeS
of future benefits, or of claiming the exclusiy?
attention of reformers. Emphasis is la'?
throughout on the impossibility of di5'
tinguishing between, or of weighing the relative
importance of environment and heredity aS
MENTAL WELFARE. \QJ
Causes of human misery. The two are inextri-
cably mixed up. The author in no way tries
to minimise the importance of or the necessity
tor environmental reforms. They are essential
full use is to be made of any improvement
which might come about in the race as the
Result of eugenic reforms ; they will also he p
the eugenic reformer in so far as, by ensuring
?^ore equal opportunity for all, they will render
the less fit more easily distinguishable. But
^e author rightly regards it as unlikely that
such reforms will ever be neglected in favour of
eug"enic reforms to any undesirable extent; their
results are immediate, while those of eugenic
reforms will be apparent to our great-grand-
children at the earliest; they entail fewer and
ess drastic immediate sacrifices than do
puRfenic reforms ; and last, but not least, they
lrnPly a more hopeful view of the human race,
ar,d the reformer is essentially an optimist.
he book is, in fact, a plea that eugenic
reforms should not be entirely neglected in
avour of those reforms which will produce
^mediate results, since to do so would mean
the expenditure of money on inferior material,
r?m which no adequate return could be
exPected.
is obvious, therefore, that far from en-
??Ur&ging the crank and the too optimistic
Realist, this book is unlikely to appeal to those
^ho expect to find a simple solution of human
troubles, or who are looking for immediate and
sensational results. There are few conclusions
Which the author does not find it necessary to
qualify? both among those dealing with the
P&st and with the future. Nor will it be more
1 ,ely to appeal to those who attribute the
??lsery of one class to the fault of some other
e ass in the community, and who are inclined
o deny that any class can be as a whole
inferior. And this brings us to the point in
e book which seems likely to be the most
?riticised, namely, the contention that success
,n 'ifc, that is, broadly speaking, economic
Recess, is at once the most practical and on
~ whole the least unsatisfactory test of
"tness " or racial desirability.
is impossible in a short review to give any
. ecluate summary even of the main conclu-
sions of so detailed a work as this. One of
, e ?Teat merits of the book lies in the fact
at the author has allowed himself no easy
generalisations. It is not to be expected,
erefore, that we should be able to condense
the arguments into any convenient formula,
still less that we should find in it a popular
slogan. Every aspect of the subject, and
especially every practical proposal, is subjected
to detailed discussion, and each chapter is
followed by a summary of the argument and
of the conclusions at which the author has
arrived. Readers of this journal will probably
be most interested in the conclusions of
the author regarding the best methods
of eliminating the definitely unfit and
the simply inferior stocks. If a sum-
mary of the whole is needed it would be
to the following effect : The scientific evidence
of the possibility of modifying the human race
is convincing. All the evidence we possess
supports the belief which has been gaining
ground recently that at present the inferior
stocks are increasing while the superior are
decreasing. In any attempt to reverse this
process two things must be kept in mind :
Firstly, any increase of the population in this
country at any rate would probably be disas-
trous; and secondly, that it will be better to
aim at raising the general level of the "fitness"
in the community rather than at producing a
small number of supermen. With this aim in
view, and taking as a basis for a test of racial
desirability the criterion mentioned above, i.e.,
that of economic success, it would be possible
at the present time and with our very limited
knowledge to introduce reforms which might
reasonably be expected to have important
eugenic results in the future. Great sacrifices
would certainly have been made, and no imme-
diate results could be expected, but if we do
not adopt some such measures our civilisation
is doomed.
It will be said that this is indeed a gloomy
picture, but Major Darwin, if he is not an
optimist is still an idealist. He believes that
the best among the human race will be wise
enough to face these facts, and self-sacrificing
enough to take the necessary steps to save
their descendants from disaster.
Hester A. Adrian.
The Clinical Study of Mental Disorders
By Lt.-Col. J. R. Lord, C.B.E., M.B.,
M.R.C.P. (Journal of Mental Science Special
Number, Aug., 1926). 5/-.
Col. T. R. Lord's Presidential Address to the
Royal Medico-Psychological Association, pub-
lished as a special number of the Journal of
108 MENTAL WELFARE.
Mental Science, and entitled " The Clinical
Study of Mental Disorders," gives the reader
a most thorough insight into the present posi-
tion of the study and practice of psychiatry
or psychological medicine.
He begins by reminding us how popular
interest in general psychology has developed
recently owing to the utilitarian aspect of the
newer ideas on that subject, and how this has
reacted on psychiatry. He points out the
immense scope of modern psychiatry, as set
out in the aims of his Association. It is, he
says, much more than a mere branch of general
medicine, and might well be named medical
anthropology. Psychiatry and mental hygiene
constitute also a department of Public Health.
He emphasises the necessity of psychiatry and
general medicine being much more closely asso-
ciated than they have been duringf the past
fifty years. He urges his Association to make
greater effort to attract and keep within its
folds psychiatrists of every description and
school of thought, and to do more to promote
research and the clinical study of mental dis-
orders. Research should, he says, include
endocrinology, biochemistry, bacteriology,
haematoloey, serology, anthropology, eugenics,
psychopathology, and experimental, industrial,
educational and social psychology. A most
useful suggestion he makes is that the Asso-
ciation should publish a glossary of terms used
in psychology and psychiatry, giving one mean-
ing for each term, that of the greatest utility,
so that clinicians and others adopting the
glossary might all use the terms in exactly the
same way.
Colonel Lord pleads earnestly for a properly
organised and routine team work in the inves-
tigation and treatment of individual cases of
mental disorder. He says that this is specially
needed for mental patients, in view of the com-
plicated nature of the reaction in such cases,
and the large number of possible factors that
may be operating in vicious circles. He wants
this team work everywhere, in the Mental
Hospital as well as in the Mental Clinic.
In a mental hospital he would not only have
a complete staff of consulting specialists, but
he would also have each resident medical officer
specialise for the time being in some depart-
ment of clinical work and give the results of
his investigations to a clinical director respon-
sible for treatment.
Much of the address is taken up with de-
scribing the various trends of thought among1
psychologists, and he pleads for toleration to-
ward one another of such workers, particularly
so between the physiogenic and psychogenic
enthusiasts, pointing out that truth is many-
sided. The latter part of the address con-
tains plans for examining patients and many
practical suggestions. Altogether the address
will be found most helpful to a variety _ ?j
people concerned with the study of the min"
and of health.
M. A. Archdale.
Aphasia and Kindred Disorders of Speech-
By Henry Head, M.D., LL.D., F.R.S.; 2
vols. Cambridge University Press. ^"3 3s.
It is 28 years since the publication of
Bastian's " Aphasia and other Speech De-
fects," the most recent English work on the
subject which at all approaches the scope of
Dr. Head's book. The intervening period has
been abundantly fruitful in anatomical, physio-
logical and psychological research inspired by
the conceptions of biology. Amongst his
numerous contributions to knowledge, Dr-.
Head's discovery of epicritic, protopathic and
deep sensation alone would have placed him
in the front rank of the workers to whom this
progress is due. 1
The present book, the product of investiga-
tion extending over a period of 40 years, is
divided into five parts, four of which are con-
tained in vol. 1.
Part I is historical, and in itself would be
invaluable. The author agrees with a growing"
tendency among psychologists in giving high
place among early workers to Gall. As an
ardent follower and personal friend of Hugh-
lings Jackson, Dr. Head's full account and
concise exposition of the latter's views is of
particular interest; so also is the section set-
ting out the theories of von Monakow; this
includes an explanation of his use of the term
diaschisis, and goes further than his published
work.
Part II describes Dr. Head's tests for
aphasic patients, his conclusions as to the
clinical varieties of aphasia, and the effects of
the disorder on behaviour and mental capacity.
This is the crux of his whole position, and he
has here the opportunity of stating his exact
point of view in regard to the criticisms ad-
MENTAL WELFARE. 109
j nce<^ since he delivered the Linacre Lecture
9^0. (See, for example, " the discussion
res P^asia," Brain, Vol. 43.) Variety of
^.sponse in reaction to a number of presenta-
m?nS ?^.an identical stimulus is one of the
-t striking features of the behaviour of the
a*ic, and Dr. Head's serial tests have been
ex Co.me^ as an application of the methods of
SePerimental psychology to the problems pre-
tio* ef' ^ Physical condition and educa-
ted ? atta'nments ?f many of the patients
^ith6* ^ P?ssible to supplement objective tests
?f tl ln^rosPective evidence. The introduction
of <<le c^ock, hand and eye tests, etc., as tests
full Symk?lic formulation and expression," is
va y .explained. Dr. Head's four clinical
Noriet'es of aphasia ? Verbal, Syntactical,
themina' and Semantic?which he recognises to
ale ,.exclusion of verbal apraxia and agnosia,
is ? la> a&raphia, etc., are already known. He
nQlnsistent that these four clinical varieties in
Sense correspond to the constituent elements
fra S^ee?h and language, any more than the
the sa^r' a c^'na CUP correspond to
react*later^als ^ was made. " The
is '?n at the moment, however insufficient,
ne resh adjustment of the organism to the
of conditions " (p. 536), i.e., an adjustment
organism as a whole. Of the 26 cases
sistse (^>art V, which constitutes vol. II, con-
c0n ?. reports of these), only two were
befo 6nita^> an^ neither of these was examined
lano.re 0r during the acquisition of speech and
irrUaS"e; but in this connection it may not be
sj0ne'ant to recall Miss Lucy Fildes' conclu-
word hrtlle result her inquiry into congenital
(gr .b"ndness in children of school age
one ln' Vol. 44) that " Word-blindness is but
Spec-^sPect of a more general, yet still in itself
tory1 C defect in either the visual or the audi-
^regions or both."
that re^art^s nominal aphasia, we could wish
the ?ni0re tests had been employed eliminating
menMi113^ ^actor- Those acquainted with the
menta ^ defective may be struck by the ele-
semaS .of similarity in the behaviour of the
chile]11 'u aP^as'c and that of the defective
seern ^ when offered a piece of chocolate
ing. to " forget " his objective while cross-
With T"6 u00?' Comparison is also suggested
ciaiiv ? .'s recent researches on apes, espe-
Elliot 'c v'ew ?f the conclusion of Professor
that th h'- quoted Dr- Head (p- 502)'
e cortical area in which the lesions of
the semantic patients occurred, is that most
developed in man, as compared with the
gorilla. Part II contains a chapter on the effect
of the lesions on pictures, drawings, visual
imagery and music.
Part III deals with localisation of function.
Ur. Head says that " the material ... is
in no sense ideal for anatomical localisation "
(p. 469). The number of cases is not large?
two only of the nominal variety are quoted as
satisfactory in this connection. It is made
clear that "orthodox " views of the represen-
tation of motor and sensory elements, sight,
hearing, etc., in the cortex are not altogether
denied, but " most so-called ' centres ' in the
nervous system are, strictly speaking, nodal
foci where central neural activities undergo
intergration and other changes in relation to
one another " (p. 474); they are " like points
on a railway," and functions are disturbed by
a lesion according to their order in the neural
hierarchy, and if acquired, their recency of
acquisition. " The more recently acquired
aptitudes suffer in a more massive and specific
way " than those gained by the patient earlier
in life. The " schemata " of a foreign tongue
may be almost lost while the use of the verna-
cular?in a less severe condition of the dis-
order?is comparatively untouched. " Motor
centres form the means by which we are en-
abled to interfere at will, with otherwise, auto-
matic acts " (p. 434). Dr. Head says cate-
gorically that " the phenomena of aphasia are
supposed to discover the motor auditory and
visual elements of normal speech. ... I
have shown that such a position is completely
untenable." He states also that where part
of the cortex has been injured or extirpated,
re-education is not the result of " vicarious
activity of surrounding centres."
Part IV analyses the development of lan-
guage in the race and in the individual from
the point of view of the author as both neurolo-
gist and psychologist. Hughlings Jackson's
description of linguistic processes as " a march
of events" is repeatedly quoted; the time-
factor is important for the succession of re-
actions necessary, let us say, for the utterance
of a word or a phrase. " Consciousness " is
to " higher " functions what " vigilance "
(see p. 536) is to " lower." The purposive is
the essential aspect in linguistic development.
The reason for a patient's inability to use or
understand a word or phrase at one moment,
110 mental welfare.
though he can at the next, is that the necessary
nodal foci for the reaction under the previous
conditions are disabled or destroyed. Chapter
iii of Part IV is devoted to the relation be-
tween language and thought. Dr. Head differs
from Marie (who considered that we think in
words), and his views do not contradict but
rather support the conclusions of the VVurzburg
School and other workers in this field on the
purely psychological side.
Ihe publication of the book is in the best
traditions of the Cambridge University Press.
Alex. W. Gordon Ewing (M.A.Edin.).
Industrial Psychology in Great Britain.
By Dr. C. S. Myers, pp. 16i. Jonathan
Cape, Ltd. 1926. 7s. 6d. net.
It goes without saying that nobody is better
qualmed in every way to describe the present
position of Industrial Psychology in this
country than Dr. C. S. Myers. For the success
which has attended the application of psycho-
logical methods to the solution of industrial
problems in Great Britain has been due to him
more than to any other single person. The
book which he has written can, in my opinion,
safely challenge comparison with any other
treatment of the same general subject that has
yet appeared. It is lucid, concise, authorita-
tive, packed with information, and at the same
time extremely interesting.
The volume opens with an account of how
experimental psychology has developed in
Great Britain, on the research side, as is well
known, chiefly through the activities of the
Industrial Fatigue Research Board, and on the
more immediately practical side through the
National Institute of Industrial Psychology,
founded in 1921 by Dr. Myers himself. It is
at once made evident that the method of
approach adopted has been genuinely human-
istic, and " has endeavoured to base its ideals
on sound psychology rather than on the super-
ficial analogy with a piece of engineering
mechanism. It has sought, not to press the
worker from behind, but to ease the difficulties
which may confront him. It has aimed at
removing the obstacles which prevent the
worker from giving his best to the work, and
it has almost invariably succeeded in increasing
output by this method."
The second chapter deals with the very
difficult subject of industrial fatigue. From the
immense mass of work which has been d?ne
on the problems of fatigue, both in the labora
tory and in the workshop, Dr. Myers make5
an extraordinarily judicious and successl
selection. There is in his discussion, however*
a good deal more than a well-chosen accoun
of specific researches. There are suggestion5
with regard to the relation of fatigue to in*11
bition and adaptation which, fully developed'
would lead to new and very promising lines o
attack. " If we continue to use (and it lS
almost impossible to avoid using) the tern1
' fatigue ' in industrial conditions, let uS
remember how complex is its character, ho^v
ignorant we are of its full nature, and ho^v
impossible it is in the intact organism to dis'
tinguish lower from higher fatigue and fatigut;
from inhibition, to separate the fatigue 0
explosive ' acts ' from the fatigue of main*
taming ' attitudes ' or to eliminate the effects
of varying interest, of excitement, suggestion
and the like." Following hints of this kind,
will perhaps be more fully realised than ha5
been the case in the past that not a little 01
what passes under the name of fatigue is due*
not really to diminished capacity to perform
a given task, but to diminished capacity to
resist the performance of related and competing
tasks; and types of experiment based upon thifi
notion may prove of the greatest value.
Dr. Myers passes on to consider movement
study. His illustrations are new and at first
hand, and lead him to an investigation of ho^v
far and in what ways training in movement Is
needed if skilled operations are to be produced'
Two final chapters discuss vocational
guidance and vocational selection. Here are
considered the importance of the interview an"
how it should be arranged; the value of speci^0
tests for vocational aptitudes; how certain
tests, e.g., dressmaking tests and engineering
tests, have been successfully applied by the
National Institute of Industrial Psychology*
the different types of vocational test and their
relative importance; and the advantages an"
dangers of group tests. Every point is excel'
lently illustrated.
The whole book may be most confidently
recommended. It demonstrates conclusively
that the intelligent and valuable application oI
psychology to industrial problems must he
based upon a thorough and all-round knowledge
of physiology and psychology. Far too often
this branch of work has been in the hands o*
mental welfare. Ill
the engineering or of the " business " expert.
J- is true that the psychologists who attempt
'?his work must have the opportunity and the
Opacity to assimilate actual working condi-
tions. They must " soak themselves in the
1 e of the tactory by personally engaging in
[he work they are studying." But they must
lave their physiological and psychological
fining as a background if their work is to
, e of any practical usefulness. It is largely
^cause of the constant recognition of this that
Industrial Psychology in Great Britain is
^ thoroughly good book, and that the National
^stitute ot industrial Psychology is rapidly
advancing to an assured and valuable place
ln the industrial life of this country.
F. C. Bartlett.
oard qF Control, England & Wales,
Twelfth Annual Report. H.M. Stationery
0thce, 19:26. 12/6.
1 he relationship between the Central
'^thority and Local Authorities in English
^ministration is always delicately balanced,
each year the Report of the Board of
?ntrol indirectly emphasises the need for ener-
^tic striving by both authorities towards the
end?tne adequate protection and control
ciei^erS?nS su^erin? irom mental disorder or
file introduction of the 12th Annual Report
0lltains these words (pp? 2 & 3) : " f he ques-
a^.n oi accommodation lias given us consider-
i(; anxiety. Although there is no evidence to
. *?w that tne incidence of insanity is increas-
further accommodation is necessary in
. ^sequence ot the growth of the population.
. actual number ot vacant beds in County
lI!tborough Mental Hospitals at the end of
0 Was a,557 : and in view of the fact that
_ e average annual growth of the number of
a lents tor the last five years has been 2,838,
ls essential that steps should be taken imme-
lately to secure additional accommodation.
j ? ? The absence of sufficient accommo-
ion for the care and treatment of mental
^tectives has also given us considerable
nxlety, ancj tjie ?uu concurrence of the
auH1St^r. of Health, we are pressing local
th >1?r*t*es to fulfil their statutory duty under
ab? *ental Deficiency Act of providing suit-
Ce e anci sufficient accommodation. The suc-
Ss this important social measure is seri-
ously hampered by the lack of accommoda-
tion."
To those who are working for mental wel-
fare in the local areas, the lack of accommoda-
tion for the insane is perhaps not so apparent,
as urgent cases are usually accommodated
(though for slight and incipient and borderland
cases there is a lamentable lack of provision),
but hundreds of cases of mental defect are
known to remain in the community, a menace
to themselves and others.
The Report (pp. 56 & 57) states that as re-
gards all types of defectives " the position has
not improved during the year under review. It
has, in fact, become more acute, as the num-
ber of new beds has not kept pace with the
number of new cases, and nothing has been
done to overtake the arrears. . . . Out of
the 124 Local Authorities under the Mental
Deliciency Act, only 17 have at present pro-
vided any accommodation, and in no case is
the provision adequate to the needs of the
population of the particular district. In all,
only 5,075 beds have been provided by Local
Authorities, and so far only two institutions
are sufficiently large to secure proper training
and classification."
Our readers may have heard the argument
used by some Local Authorities that it is un-
economical and premature to build institutions
until the promised legislature is passed con-
cerning the Poor Law, which would very prob-
ably set free many Poor Law Institutions.
But those who argue thus forget that in
nearly all cases such Poor Law Buildings are
entirely unsuitable and do not allow of classi-
fication, nor would they usually have sufficient
land attached for a colony of 400 or 500, which
the Board give as the minimum number for
which adequate grading and an adequate staff
can be secured.
Ascertainment (pp. 67, 68) is being carried
out more fully, and for the year 1925 the num-
bers ascertained were 55,480 or 1.46 per
thousand. The Board (p. 68) still continue to
think that the " variation in ascertainment in
districts, which merge into one another geo-
graphically and in which the populations are
racially and industrially the same," must be
due to the difference in method and persistence
in the carrying out of this duty. "For the
purpose of considering the relative value of
these different methods we have taken," the
Report states (p. 69) " the 21 Authorities
112 Mental welfare,
whose ascertainment is highest and the 10
whose ascertainment is lowest, and compared
the systems on which they work. We find that,
of the 21 Local Authorities with the highest
ascertainment, 15 make full use of the Volun-
tary Association in their area. In nearly all
these instances the Secretary of the Voluntary
Association is responsible for ascertainment,
and her salary is partly paid, directly or in-
directly, by the Local Authority.
The facts disclosed by the answers to our
circulars taken in relation to each Local Autho-
rity's success or non-success in ascertainment,
leave no doubt as to which methods lead to the
best results. They point strongly to the desira-
bility of appointing an officer who should be
specially trained for the work, or to making
use of the services of a Voluntary Associa-
tion. If no Voluntary Association exists in f.he
district, it is always possible to obtain the help
of the Central Association for Mental Welfare
to establish one.
Some Local Authorities may prefer to em-
ploy Officers of their own, but if they do so
they should see that such officers receive ade-
quate training either on or before appointment.
If sufficient trained Officers are employed this
plan may prove quite as efficacious as seeking
the help of a Voluntary Association; but it is
likely to be more expensive, for one Officer
cannot cover a whole County or a large County
Borough, whereas the Voluntary Association
has generally a body of voluntary workers who
can report cases from the particular village,
town or suburb in which they live." (P. 71.)
Under the headings of " Marriage of and
Procreation by Mental Defectives " (p. 63),
and " Supervision " (p. 71) the Board discuss
the general position. They are, of course,
unable to get returns for the actual number of
births to defective parents throughout the
country, and can only get returns for those
under statutory supervision. The figures are
as follows :?
(P. 64). " Number of adults and children
under Statutory Supervision on 1st Janu-
ary, 1926 (calculated on the basis of pro-
portions give in Table 1 of Board's Circu-
lar of September, 1925) :
Adults. Children under 16. Total.
12,114 3,619 15,733.
Number married, 195, or 1.6 per cent, of the
adults.
Children of married and unmarried defec'
tives, 275, or 2.3 per cent, of the adults-
Without Statutory Supervision both these
percentages would probably have been cot1'
siderably greater. Further, by a wiser choice
of defectives who can safely be left under
supervision, by a wiser choice of homes in
which they can suitably be left, and by l{tl'
proved methods and training of the supef'
visors, this percentage could be further
diminished."
They recommend certain measures (p. 65) f?r
tightening up the present methods of dealing
with mental defectives, one of which, if more
fully acted upon, would prevent many *
tragedy. " Regarding lack of parental control
leading to sexual irregularities on the part o*
a defective as constituting ' neglect ' and so
rendering a defective subject to be dealt with.
They go on to say, " These measures would
no doubt tend to decrease the marriages
defectives. But we are inclined to think that
the law should be altered so as to provide that
marriage by a defective when under Order
should be void."
Their views on sterilization do not in the
main differ from those set forth by Dr. Tred-
gold in his pamphlet (recently published by the
C.A.M.W.) on Sterilization of Mental DefeC'
tives." 1
Sterilization can be no substitute for segre'
gation. " Unrestricted freedom," the Report
states (p. 65), " in a large number of cases at
present under care, would lead to a return to
the conditions prevalent before the passing
the Mental Deficiency Act. Sterilization would
not prevent these persons from leading useless
and harmful lives in and out of Poor La^
Institutions, Prisons, Hospitals and Refuges,
or from spreading venereal disease.
" As far as immediate expense is concerned)
the economic burden to the State is not likely
to be lessened by the discharge of the sterilized
mental defective. Care in an institution where
his limited capacities are made full use of, and
where he may be trained for partial indepeU'
dence, is probably the cheaper method of treat'
ment."
The Board further discuss whether it 's
desirable to allow sterilization, not as an alter"'
native, but as a complementary measure to
segregation. It is evident that they do not
feel the number of cases to be very consider-
able who are now requiring institutional care
MENTAL WELFARE. 113
and who could safely be returned to the com-
munity if procreation were impossible. After
reviewing- the matter, they say : " On the
?ther hand, it is clearly impossible under the
Present law and the state of public opinion to
Provide institutional care for all our defective
Population, even if it were desirable, and the
Question arises whether, in cases where per-
manent institutional care is now only necessary
ln order to prevent the risk of propagation,
sterilization followed by return to some f?rm
community life on licence under supervision
0r guardianship, might be the most humane
and expedient course to adopt." They con-
clude : "We have arrived at no definite con-
tusions in regard to this subject, but we may
state that we do not consider that sterilization
^vould materially diminish the immediate need
?r increased institutional accommodation, or
9r better provision for the care and supervi-
sion of defectives outside institutions.
Approval of Occupation Centres as a means
supervision and training is again given in
lrhe Report (pp. 74-75). Eighty Occupation
entres have now (March, 1926) been estab-
tshed by Voluntary Associations and three by
?cal Authorities. The number of defectives
rePorted as attending on 1st January was
1,157.
Considerable attention is paid to " Guardian-
shlP," and the Board express their satisfaction
: at the M.D. (Amendment) Act, 1925, permits
transference of a defective from an institution
p guardianship. Reference is made to the
guardianship Society, Brighton, and to the
guardianship scheme of the C.A.M.W., which
,s month by month adding to the number of
Cefectives whom it places.
It is significant that the Board should urge
e importance of training and experience in
the branch of medical work dealing with defect
PP- 85, 86). " We doubt whether the Act will
3e Worked in a thoroughly efficient manner
until each district has a Medical Officer, with
special knowledge and experience, whose prin-
ClPal work is mental deficiency. . . ?
If the effect of legislation in the future is
0 bring all defectives and insane persons who
?^ed Care and treatment under the existing
'siting and Statutory Committees of the Local
uthorities, the work of those Committees will
,5 greatly increased. A large number both of
e defectives and of the insane are at present
maintained by the Poor Law Authorities in
Poor Law Institutions. There is no doubt that
a measure which brought all mental patients
under one authority, both locally and centrally,
would be beneficial and would render a consis-
tent and scientific treatment of the whole ques-
tion possible. It would then, we think, be
essential that each County or County Borough
Council should establish the post of Medical
Officer of Mental Health."
That part of the Board's Report which deals
with Mental Disorders indicates the improve-
ments that are steadily being made in the
methods of care for the insane. The general
desire that practical medicine should keep
abreast of discovery is instanced by the sug-
gestion that, for purposes of administration and
conferences, there should be regional districts,
and that such districts should be grouped
round a University (p. 8). " We think it im-
portant that the mental hospitals of the
country should be in living touch with Univer-
sities and the scientific spirit of these seats of
learning. By maintaining contact with the
Universities much will have been done to
secure that our mental hospitals will be in the
forefront of scientific progress, and that they
will be properly equipped with all that modern
science has shown, and may in the future show,
is necessary for successfully treating the in-
sane."
The Board further urges (p. 10) that every
mental hospital should possess a laboratory
" in which, in aid, and indeed as part, of
clinical work, ordinary routine investigations
can be carried out."
Considerable space (pp. 50-56) is devoted to
the question of out-patient treatment of mental
cases, and interesting reference is made to the
fact that historically the separation of the
mental from the general hospital was in the
interests of the insane, while at the present
time it is incumbent that the co-operation of
the general hospital should be regained for the
benefit of incipient cases. The Board stress
the need of in-patient facilities accompanying
the out-patient treatment, and point out that
the Mental Treatment Bill, had it passed,
would have made this possible. They add :
" It would not be right, however, to conclude
this section on out-patient treatment without
pointing out that in order to secure its com-
plete efficiency, the assistance of a Social
Worker will ultimately be found an additional
necessity. She might, in the light of local
114 MENTAL WELFARE.
experience, be a member of the staff of the
general hospital or of the mental hospital or
of some voluntary association; but it is essen-
tial that she shall act directly under the physi-
cian undertaking- the work and that she be
specially trained for the performance of her
share in it."
Board of Control, Scotland, Twelfth
Annual Report. H.M. Stationery Office.
1926. 2s.
One of the most interesting chapters in this
report is concerned with the Early Treatment
of Mental Disorders. Reference is made to the
first Report of the Board in 1859, from which
this quotation is made : " Adjunct houses in
which patients afflicted with certain forms of
insanity could be received without the strict
legal formalities at present required, would
prove a beneficial modification of our asylums
and would tend to increase recoveries by
inducing patients and their friends to have
recourse to treatment before the malady had
become confirmed."
Since 1890, when the Parish Council of
Glasgow inaugurated Hospital Wards for the
treatment of incipient forms of mental disease
and temporary states of mental disorder, some
progress in the same direction elsewhere has
been made. Striking evidence of the value
of such wards has come since 1924 from
Glasgow.
In that year, in order to avoid erecting addi-
tional asylum accommodation, it was decided,
" with the concurrence of the Board of Health,
to open Observation Wards at the General
Hospital at Stobhill. Four wards, each accom-
modating 20 patients, were then set aside for
the treatment of all cases of incipient, tem-
porary and unconfirmed mental disorders
arising in Glasgow parish.
" The maximum duration of residence, which
was formerly limited to six weeks, has been
extended to six months. The wards at Stobhill
differ in no respect from the other wards of
the hospital, and the arrangements are con-
ceded by those competent to judge to equal in
all respects those of the larger general
hospitals.
"It is interesting to note that, in conse-
quence of the institution of the Observation
Wards, the erection of a third Asylum for the
Glasgow District Board of Control has mean-
time been avoided, and the advantages which
have been gained by the hundreds of patien ^
who, as the result of their treatment in Obsef
vation Wards, have not required to erue
Asylums, is immense. Through the preventi?n
of complete mental breakdown, many have
been freed from that anxiety and fear whicl
too often clings to patients who have had t?
be sent under certificate to an Asylum.
" The value of these Observation Wards 15
shown by the fact that, though they have aval -
able only 160 beds, in the course of the ye^r
under review, 1,176 patients were admitted
611 were discharged either as recovered ?r
improved and 383, or less than 33 per cento
required to be certified and sent to Asylurns-
Without making any actual recommendation
the Board draw attention to the fact that 3
definite post-graduate course in " mental diS'
orders has been instituted in several Univef'
sities and a diploma in Psychiatry has bee11
established, but the taking of this diploma lS
entirely voluntary," and that " while a specif
diploma is required by Statute from all Medic*1
Officers of Health, no special qualification lS
required for a medical man to deal with menta
disorder, which presents perhaps the most
complicated and most difficult problem of any
department in medicine."
In last year's Report the Board lamented the
need of provision for cases suffering from the
effects of encephalitis lethargica. They are
now able to report that, " By an arrangement
with the Board of Health, public authorities
throughout Scotland have now the opportunity
afforded them of sending all cases of encepha'
litis lethargica to Stobhill General Hospital
where the excellent Observation Wards to
which we have already referred are situated)
and where there are facilities for care and treat'
ment and for the investigation of the causa'
factors in this mysterious affection."
The Board has obtained a recent census ?t
the mental defectives in Scotland, and the
returns show that there are 12,969 mental
defectives throughout the country.
If the number of mentally defective persons
in Scotland were calculated on the basis of the
Royal Commission's estimate of four pe^
thousand of the population for England and
Wales, the figure for Scotland would be over
19,000 (population 4,891,300).
It is extremely regrettable to read that f0^
economic reasons restrictions have been placed
on the number of guardianship cases. The
Report states : " So far as the care and main'
MENTAL WELFARE. 115
rej15006 defectives boarded out with
th ^te<^ anc^ unrelated guardians is concerned,
r e^e. has, until the present year, been no
1 0OQCti?n *n Grant, an^ no fewer than
' " rate-aided mentally defective persons are
e ?Vlded for in private dwellings. As, how-
jner' the total amount of Grant provided for
. the estimates of the Board is now fully
in ? 't has been necessary, owing to the
u C^easin?" tendency to place mental defectives
a ,er guardianship, to intimate to the several
q ?rities concerned that the Government
u rant can only be given in cases which might
designated as ' urgent.' "
n reference to the adequate protection of
^ ntal defectives in their own homes, the
ciaf-r^ state : " In this connection the Asso-
. 'on for Mental Welfare, which received
fQ;-g the past year, a grant of ?700, by
J>g, as it were, a liaison between relatives
q guardians of defectives and the Parish
^ouncil Authorities, performs a most valuable
WiH?Ce' This work is in its early stages, but
an, the progress of years, and as the scope
kn act'yities of the Association become better
or ^Vn'.'t is hoped that all who do not desire
As reHu^e public assistance will appeal to the
Ration for Mental Welfare for help and
affe a,nCe *n an^ change of circumstances
cting the welfare of the mentally defective."
