News and Notes
================
C.A.M.W. Conference, December 2nd and 3rd.
We wish to draw attention to page 117, giving full particulars of the
Conference to be held in December. We would especially ask all those working
with Local Voluntary Associations for Mental Welfare to make a special effort
this year to attend.
About 500 people usually attend the Conference, representing the varying
aspects of the work among mentally deficient people, and the informal exchange
of views is of great value. The names of the lecturers set out on page 117 are
sufficient guarantee of the high quality of the matter to be presented to the
delegates.
C.A.M.W. Courses.
The Refresher Course for teachers, held for the Board of Education at
Aberystwyth from August 4th to 11th, was entirely successful, and it will probably
become a regular feature of our programme of Courses.
Thirty-four teachers attended, and all of them had previously attended at
least one, and practically all two, of our ordinary Courses. The University of
Aberystwyth provided classrooms and hostel accommodation. The Course included
lectures and Eurythmics and a display of handwork.
A Magistrates' Course is to be held in February. To meet the convenience
?f magistrates, whose time is usually very much occupied, it is intended that
the Course should last not more than three days, and that it should consist of
morning lectures and afternoon demonstrations, all to be held in London. Visits
to Institutions will only be arranged if asked for. It is hoped that for this more
restricted Course .there will be a large attendance of magistrates, and it may be
expected that the Course will be especially convenient to those in London and
the Home Counties.
We have been fortunate in securing the services of Dr. Cyril Burt, Dr.
Bernard Hart and Dr. Tredgold. Dr. Burt will lecture on the Delinquent Child,
^r- Hart on Mental Disorders, and Dr. Tredgold on Mental Deficiency. Sir
Leslie Scott, K.C., M.P., has promised to give the opening address.
Industrial School for Girls.
Inval School, Haslemere, a school for girls, under the Home Office, was
closed on September 30th. This small school was especially adapted for girls
of 12 years of age and over requiring special care and training through mental
?r physical disability.
It seems a matter of much regret that a school which gave some opportunity
or special training of " border-line " cases should be closed. Though the
?me Office gives no public indication of the reason for closing the school, we
98 MENTAL WELFARE.
suspect that the upkeep was unduly high owing to its small numbers. The
closing of the school brings to mind again the need for " border-line " homes
especially for children and young people who have not come before the Courts.
The evidence of the C.A.M.W. before the Royal Commission on the subject of
such homes has been published as a pamphlet.
Encephalitis Lethargica.
Weekly notifications (reproduced from the Lancet) :?
Week ending Week ending Week ending
July 3 52 Aug. 7 39 Sept. 4 29
,, 10 37 ? 14 46 ,, 11 28
,, 17 47 ,, 21 39 ,, 18 38
? 24 39 ,, 28 39 ? 25 36
,, 31 44
219 163 131
Total 513
Birmingham Special Schools' After-Care Sub-Committee.
In the report of this Committee, published in July, we read the following
interesting statement : '' The most striking thing the records show is the great
increase in the number of persons of both sexes doing remunerative work. This
year there are 1,107 males at work, compared with 799 last year?an increase
of 308?and in the case of females, 582 are doing remunerative work, compared
with 481 last year?an increase of 101. In addition to there being an increase
in the number of defectives in employment, there is also an increase in the wages
earned." The Sub-Committee thinks that these results " may legitimately be
claimed as an indication of the progressive value of the instruction given in the
Special Schools."
The Royal Sanitary Institute, Jubilee and London Congress.
At this extremely comprehensive Congress in July, sectional meetings were
held on " Sanitary Science and Preventive Medicine," " School Hygiene " and
many other subjects of great administrative importance.
The section on Sanitary Science and Preventive Medicine was presided over
by Sir George Newman, and among the papers read were Dr. Tredgold's " The
Place of Inheritance in Preventive Medicine " and Dr. Newsholme's " Preventive
Medicine and the Healthy Mind." Dr. Tredgold gave a summary of the figures
of various official reports. Though they cannot, for lack of adequate comparative
statistics, tell us whether the physique and health of body and mind of the nation
has declined, they do at least tell us that we are " still very far from being a
liealthy nation." Dr. Tredgold very aptly summed up the causes of disease.
" Viewing the matter broadly, it can be said that all ill-health, disease, and
defective mental and physical development are explicable by a simple formula.
They are the result of the non-adaptation of the individual to the inimical agencies
of his surroundings. In other words, they are the resultant of the two factors?
inheritance and environment." Dr. Tredgold stated that he was of opinion that
at " the present time the Insane and Mental Defectives together comprise about
1 per cent, of the population of the country," and that " probably 80 per cent,
of Mental Defectives owe their condition to innate defect, which no attention
to the environment can obliterate." Dr. Newsholme gave a particularly clear
exposition of the inter-relation of mind and body. He added : " Whatever
MENTAL WELFARE. 99
limitations science may ascribe to the control of mind over body, sufficient has
been said to make it clear that preventive medicine cannot be fully preventive
until it includes the mind within its province. Unhealthy prolongation of emotions
has been seen to be capable of causing changes in the physical condition of the
body, to the extent of producing functional disease; and common-sense concludes
that, with undue continuance, functional may pass into organic disease," and he
concluded : " Preventive medicine needs no new weapon to conquer the realm
of the mind, but only a better understanding of the directions in which to apply
more vigorously weapons even now in use."
Agnes Western Occupation Centre Camp at Berkhamsted, Aug. 3rd?13th, 1926.
A cottage was very kindly lent by Mrs. White, of Woodcock Hill,
Berkhamsted. There was accommodation for nine children, and it was decided
to take boys only. Their ages ranged from 13 to 26 years. The Camp was in
charge of two people of wide experience, who were assisted by a young helper.
The day began at eight o'clock, when the boys got up. They were left
to dress and wash themselves, and took great pride in showing themselves with
clean hands, necks and teeth every morning. They were all washed thoroughly
at night, under supervision, but it was remarkable how much care they took
of their person and appearance.
After breakfast each one had a little job, washing up, making beds, brushing
rooms, etc., and the rest of the morning was spent in play.
After dinner came the walk, which the boys thoroughly enjoyed; they were
interested in everything, the wild flowers, which they rejoiced to be able to pick,
the birds, the trees and the open country. No one was ever too tired to walk,
and they managed quite long distances.
A glorious meadow next the cottage was purposely kept free from cattle
so that the children could play there, and they had cricket, rounders and other
organised games.
Much could be said about the behaviour of the children and the way in
which they developed both mentally and physically, even in the all-too-short
fortnight. There was not a tear throughout the whole time; they sang at their
work, sang at their play, and sang themselves happily to sleep at night. It was
a revelation to find how many songs of the popular order they had learnt and
pould sing. One boy, who had never spoken at the Centre, was found to be
joining in the songs, and before the end of the holiday he was dancing, running
and playing cricket with the rest of them.
Everyone was struck with the obedience and good manners of the boys.
The total cost of the Camp amounted to about ?17, including the purchase
of blankets and one or two other items, which are in stock. I he cost was
defrayed by contributions, averaging 8s. each, from the parents of the children,
and by a grant from the Finsbury Fresh Air Fund and donations from friends.
In estimating the value of a Camp, not only must the direct gain to the
child from a fresh-air holiday be considered. One of the great advantages
ls the opportunity it affords the supervisor or social worker of getting
to know the child more intimately. 1 here may be a totally new response, as in
the case of the boy mentioned above, to the greater freedom of conditions
approximating more closely to the home. Greater knowledge of the child as an
individual is possible.
We should be glad to receive details of other Camps organised by Local
Associations or Occupation Centre Committees.
100 MENTAL WELFARE.
Congratulations to Dr. Devine.
We should like to offer our congratulations to Dr. Devine on his recent
appointment to the post of Medical Superintendent of Holloway Sanatorium,
Virginia Water.
He has shown a constant interest in the work of this Association, and as
Medical Superintendent of the Corporation Mental Hospital, Portsmouth, he
worked wholeheartedly for the success of the Portsmouth Voluntary Association
for Mental Welfare, and guided it in its initial stages. Indeed, he was largely
instrumental in starting it. He acted as Hon. Medical Adviser, and saw a
large number of border-line and neurotic cases on behalf of the Association.
By his personal influence, and by many addresses on the subject, such as
his address to doctors and officials last year at Reading, he has done much to
increase the public interest in the adequate care of sub-normal persons.
The People'e League of Health.
We are glad to note that the League is arranging a course of eight lectures,
beginning at 6 p.m. on November 1st (fee for the course, 10s.), on " The Mind,
and What We Ought to Know About It." Among those who have promised
to lecture are Sir Maurice Craig, Sir Robert Armstrong-Jones, Dr. E. Mapother,
Dr. Crichton Miller, and Dr. Tredgold. Particulars can be obtained from the
People's League of Health, 12, Stratford Place, W.l.
Mental Deficiency and Rescue and Preventive Work.
The Central Council for Rescue and Preventive Work in London have
directed their attention to the important question of mental deficiency as it
affects Rescue and Preventive Work. With the assistance of the London County
Council they undertook a preliminary investigation into the mental status of girls
in Rescue and Preventive Homes. The report of the Medical Officers of the
County Council was of great interest, and showed that further investigation
would be valuable. At this stage the Central Council laid the matter before the
Medical Research Council.
The Medical Research Council have decided to appoint an Investigator to
work in co-operation with the Central Council on the question. Active work
will shortly begin.
British Social Hygiene Council Summer School.
The Summer School at Oxford, from July 26th to 31st, proved a great
success.
Free public lectures were held, notably on " The Government Social Hygiene
(speakers, Dr. Norris and Miss Kelly) and " Juvenile Delinquency (speaker,
Dr. Burt).
Dr. W. F. Snow's lecture on " Retrospect and Forecast in Mental Hygiene "
and Dr. Hadfield's course of lectures on " The Materials of Character," " Psycho-
logical Mechanism," " Abnormalities of Mind and Character " and the
" Psychological Conception of Sexuality," and Dr. Brown's lecture on the
" Adolescent and the Community " served to show the attention paid at this
Summer School to the psychological aspect of social hygiene.
MENTAL WELFARE. 101
Warwickshire Voluntary Association for Mental Welfare.
A new development in Warwickshire is of much interest. A bed is to be set
apart in one of the General Hospitals for nervous cases, which, in the opinion
of the general practitioner, appear to be incipient lunacy, although at the time
very definitely uncertifiable. One of the lunacy experts attached to the County
Mental Hospital will visit and advise treatment. Whether the case recovers in
the General Hospital or has to be certified and sent to the Mental Hospital and
is later discharged, after-care is to be in the hands of the Voluntary Association.
It is hoped that the scheme may extend throughout the county. A very valuable
piece of preventive work is here indicated.
The M.D. Bill.
This Bill came before the House of Lords in July, and after passing the
third reading, was introduced into the House of Commons. It is hoped that
it may become law in the autumn session.
The Bill appears to have met with general approval.
Clause 1 (2) gives greater precision to the definition of the term " mental
defectiveness " and should do much to remove the difficulties which from time
to time arise in administering the Act. The Clause runs :?
"For the purpose of this section ' mental defectiveness ' means a
condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind, whether innate or
induced after birth by disease, injury or other cause."
Though the words " from birth or from an early age " are omitted, it is quite
clear that the new wording is meant to include only those whose mental defective-
ness is produced by causes operating before they have attained full mental
development, while excluding those whose mental disease or degeneracy has arisen
at a date subsequent to the maturity of their faculties.
We understand that the definition was drafted after repeated consultation
With medical experts and administrators.
Clause 2 (3) will introduce a reform that has long been demanded. Hitherto
the Education Authorities have only been empowered to notify for guardianship
pr institutional care. The new clause will allow notification for supervision
Jn cases where the Education Authority are of opinion that, though a defective
after the age of 16 is not in need of institutional care or guardianship, he requires
continued supervision. This amendment will greatly assist in obtaining adequate
after-care for those remaining at home.
By allowing contracts between Local Authorities, and by allowing a County
Council or a County Borough in their capacity as Education Authority and
M.D. Act Authority, to provide institutions to be used both as Certified Institutions
and Certified Schools, the new Bill, if it becomes law, will do something to
facilitate the more rapid provision of Institutions by Local Authorities.
G'ft to the Library.
Sir Horace and Lady Darwin have generously presented to the Library
Henry Head's monumental work on " Aphasia and Kindred Disorders of
^peech," which has just been published in two volumes by the Cambridge
University Press.
It is indeed most helpful to receive as a gift a book of such value, which
Would have been a heavy item in the Library's accounts.
