Patients Have Families
========================

By Henry B. Richardson, M.D.,
F.A.C.P. The Commonwealth Fund. Humphrey
Milford. Oxford University Press. Price 16s. 6d.
net.
The title of this book expresses a well known truth
^hich may not always have been sufficiently appreciated
?y the various medical departments which deal with
^dividual units of the family. The work described here
ls based on research carried out through the co-operation
?f the faculties of Public Health, Medicine and Psychiatry
ln association with the medical social worker, the case
Worker, and the educational nurse. The object of this
scheme was to study the family unit and indications for
its treatment and also to explore the best methods to
obtain co-operation in treatment. The concept upon
which the work was based was the interrelation between
illness and family situations.
The book is divided into three sections. In Part I
the author describes the family as the unit of illness and,
with several clear-cut examples, shows how time and
energy may be misapplied if investigation and treatment
are limited to the physical complaint of individual
members without consideration of the family background
with its social, economic and emotional problems. In
addition he points out the importance of psychological
mechanisms, the interplay of family relationships and
the way in which they affect the individual. At the same
time he stresses the need for the maintenance of a stable
equilibrium both within the family and between the
family and its environment.
In Part II Dr. Richardson describes the family as a
unit, rather than the individual to be treated, and with
many case histories shows the way in which individual
units may receive help from different members of the
hospital team.
A concise account is given of the work of Physician
and Psychiatrist and the ways in which their fields of
activity may overlap. This is followed by a detailed
discussion of the work of other members of the team?
the Case Worker, the Social Worker and the Public
Health Nurse, all of whom have important and well-
defined functions.
In Part III, the problems which have arisen in the
family as a direct result of wartime conditions, are
discussed. This is followed by suggestions for the
practical application of the methods and schemata which
have been found to be of value in the course of this
research.
Dr. Richardson has covered a wide field during his
investigations and describes in clear and simple language
the conclusions which he has drawn. His case histories
are excellent examples of the way in which the stresses
and strains of family life react upon different members,
and give convincing evidence of the need to study all
forms of illness from the point of view of psychosomatic
and social medicine.
This subject is of interest and importance to all
members of the medical profession, and Social Workers,
in particular, will find that the principles so clearly
expressed are of immense value in every department of
their work.
E.C.
