National Health Service Bill
==============================

MENTAL HEALTH 45
News and Notes

The Government's scheme, embodied in the recently
Published National Health Service Bill, for promoting
a comprehensive Health Service in England and Wales,
includes provisions for mental treatment and mental
deficiency services which are to be part of the new
hospital and specialist arrangements. Local health
authorities, however, are given responsibility for all the
ordinary local community care in the mental health
service which covers also the initial procedure for placing
under care those who require treatment under the Lunacy
and Mental Treatment Acts. Certain sections of these
Acts and also of the Mental Deficiency Acts, 1913 to 1938,
are to be Repealed or amended in order to bring them
Jnto conformity with the provisions of the new Act.
Certain functions of the Board of Control are to be
transferred to the Minister of Health, including the
ucencing of houses, registration of hospitals and the
approval of nursing homes, the certification of institutions
and houses and the approval of homes for the reception
?f mental defectives as private patients. The Officers
?f the Board, other than the Commissioners, the Secretary
and Inspectors, are to be transferred to the Ministry.
Extended powers in regard to the provision of mental
health services are given to local health authorities who
will be required to submit proposals to the Minister
within a specified period for the carrying out of their
new duties under the Act. While the Bill provides
opportunities for mental health development, there is
a danger of these not being implemented owing to the
ambiguity and elasticity of the relevant clauses, the
|;xtent of the mental health services to be provided being
J?r the most part not clearly defined.
. A special Committee appointed by the Provisional
National Council for Mental Health has forwarded
recommendations to the Minister urging, in particular,
lne need for making adequate provision for the care and
aftercare not only of persons suffering from definite
Cental illness or mental defectiveness, but also for
Neurotics, psychopaths and psychotics, who cannot be
uealt with under the Mental Treatment Act, epileptics,
and mentally subnormal persons not certifiable under
the Mental Deficiency Acts.
jThe need for a fuller representation of the Mental
j^ealth Services on the Central Council and on the
Regional Boards to be set up under the Act is strongly
advocated, as is also the establishment of an Advisory
^ommittee on Mental Health as envisaged in the White
l^aper. Of the present total number of hospital beds in
lne country, some 40 per cent, are reserved for mental
Patients and mental defectives and this figure is exclusive
01. accommodation for neurotics, psychopaths and
ePileptics which is so urgently needed. Thus the 10 per
S?nt. Mental Health representation provided for on the
central Council under the First Schedule of the Bill is
?bviously quite inadequate.
The Council's Memorandum to the Minister further
raws attention to the paramount importance of setting
UP machinery for ensuring that there is the closest possible
co-ordination between the new Regional Hospital Boards
Responsible for Hospitals and Clinics, and tfte Health
;r?nirnittees responsible for Community Services. In
ms connection the following definite recommendations
are made:
(i) That the Officers of Regional Hospital Boards
should include psychiatrists whose services should
be available for Health Committees when such
Committees do not themselves employ psychia-
trists.
(ii) That Psychiatric Social Workers and their teams
employed by Regional Hospital Boards, should
be available for carrying out work for Health
Committees as and when needed, and conversely:
(iii) That where Psychiatric Social Workers or teams
of Mental Health Workers are employed by
Health Committees, their services should be made
available for Regional Hospital Boards as and
when needed.
It is felt that unless the need for reciprocal arrange-
ments of this kind is realized to be necessary, the
administrative " split " created by the Bill as between
the different types of mental health service may lead, on
the one hand, to serious overlapping and, on the other,
to inadequate provision in certain directions of the
services required.
Finally, the Memorandum, stressing the deplorable
lack of training facilities for all types of workers in the
Mental Health field (psychologists, psychiatric social
workers, mental health workers engaged in community
care, Supervisors of Occupation Centres and staffs of
" School Departments " of Certified Institutions and
of Hostels for Difficult Children)?raises the possibility
of provision being made in the Bill to empower the
Ministry, Regional Hospital Boards, and Health Authori-
ties, to establish training facilities, or to contribute to
their establishment by other approved bodies.
Copies of this Memorandum have been sent by the
Council to a number of Members of Parliament of all
political parties, and, at the time of going to press, offers
of help and support had been received in introducing or
supporting amendments on some of the points raised.
Institute of Labour Management
The establishment of an Institute of Labour Manage-
ment to provide a centre for the study of management,
and generally to assist in raising the standards of
management in this country, is the outcome of the
recommendations of the Committee appointed in
November last by the President of the Board of Trade
and presided over by Sir Clive Baillieu, President of the
Federation of British Industries. The Committee, whose
members included heads of some of the large industrial
groups of the country, was charged with the duty of
formulating detailed proposals for the setting up of a
central institute for all questions in connection with
management.
In the Committee's recently published Report,
reference is made to the important part wlych the
Institute will be called upon to play in promoting
facilities for training and education whereby those engaged
in management may equip themselves to discharge their
functions more effectively, and in this connection tl\e
Committee recommend the establishment of propaganda
and training and education divisions of the Institute..,
While there are many existing bodies in this country
concerned with questions of management which have
done valuable pioneer work, it is recognized that they
cannot individually provide the comprehensive facilities
which a central institute would offer. One of its primary
purposes will be to strengthen existing effective organiza-
tions in every possible way, and to act as a co-ordinating
body.
The importance of the human factor in all kinds of
employment, both as regards the workers themselves,
46 MENTAL HEALTH
and those in positions of authority, is now generally
recognized, and the scheme to be set in motion is one
which should command wide approval and support.
In order to ensure a favourable start to the project,
the Treasury will make a grant of not more than ?150,000
for the first five years, after which time the Institute
should be self-supporting. It is also recommended that
the Government should nominate the first Chairman and
the first Council of the Institute, and that thereupon it
should be left as an independent body responsible for its
own affairs.
Training in Child Care*
No doubt most of our readers have already seen the
recommendations made by the Curtis Committee on the
Care of Children which were published in its Interim
Report on Training issued in March. It may, however,
be useful to summarize them here, for the benefit of
those who have not yet read the Report.
It is noted that a few large voluntary organizations
responsible for Homes make their own provisions for
training staff, but that otherwise:
" The men and women now employed in the
posts in question, though sometimes very suitable
in temperament and possessing the necessary
practical skills, have only rarely had the oppor-
tunity for special study of the normal develop-
ment of the child, his need of affection, the
causes of any unusual developments of behaviour
or personality, or the conditions, physical and
social, which can best compensate him for the
deprivation of the more stable background of a
family home."
It is therefore urged that child care should be raised
to the status of a " recognized calling for which definite
qualifications are required
To this end the following Recommendations are made
which we are glad to note include proposals put forward
by the Provisional National Council for Mental Health
in evidence submitted to the Committee :
1. That a Central Council for Training in Child Care
should be set up, to administer schemes of training.
This Council should be representative of the
various bodies interested in the subject, including
the Government Departments concerned, the
Association of Municipal Corporations, the
County Councils Association, the Association of
Education Committees and the L.C.C.
Voluntary Bodies represented should include,
the Council of Associated Children's Homes, the
British Paediatric Association, the National
Council of Social Service, the Provisional
National Council for Mental Health, the National
Council for Maternity and Child Welfare, together
with educational bodies such as the Joint Univer-
sity Council for Social Studies, and the Association
of Teachers in Training Colleges and Departments .
of Education.
2. That a Course in Child Care should be instituted
for House Mothers, Assistant Matrons or Masters,
Foster Mothers or Fathers, consisting of two parts
?Part I, leading to a Certificate in Child Care,
after two years' training?Part II, comprising a
third year's training in employment and leading
to a second Certificate indicating suitability for
more senior work.
3. That the Course should begin with a trial period
of not less than 3 months in a selected Home, as a
test for suitability and aptitude for the work.
Thereafter, theoretical instruction would be
added to practical work, the two being preferably
carried on concurrently.
4. That the theoretical work should include (i) House-
hold Management, (ii) Care of Health, (iii) Study
of Child Development, (iv) Playing with Children,
(v) Elementary lectures in social conditions and
the social services, (v) Courses for improving
general standard of culture, e.g. literature, music,
art and dramatics, (vii) Record Keeping, accounts,
etc., (viii) Religious Education if desired.
5. That provision should be made for bursaries for
candidates who are unable to take the Course
without financial assistance.
6. That the theoretical training should be given at
existing educational institutions such as Teachers'
Training Colleges, Polytechnics, Technical Col-
leges, County Colleges (when established), existing
Training Schools such as those attached to Dr.
Barnardo's Homes, and the National Children's
Home. The Central Training Council would, in
addition, employ Supervising Tutors to keep in
touch with the Training Centres and the students'
progress.
Under Section 23 of the Report it is recommended that
encouragement be given to any suitable scheme for
immediate intensive theoretical training of a few Heads
and Senior members of the staffs of those Homes which
may be selected for residential training. Mention is
made of the proposal that the Provisional National
Council for Mental Health is prepared to institute such
a course in Child Development.
The Report contains a useful Appendix on qualifica-
tions and present facilities for the training of Nursery
Nurses, Staffs of Homes, and Social Workers in Child
Care.
Developments in Provision for Maladjusted Children
St. Francis School, Hook
The Society of St. Francis (Anglican) is opening, with
the approval of the Ministry of Education, a Residential
School in Dorset for Maladjusted Boys, between the
ages of 12 and 16.
A large country house a few miles from the sea has
been secured, and there will be ample opportunities for
outdoor activities in addition to school-room education.
There will ultimately be accommodation for 30 boys,
but owing to delay in the completion of building
operations, it will not be possible in the immediate future
to admit more than 10.
Further particulars can be obtained from Father Owen,
S.S.F.,St. Francis School, Hook, nearBeaminster, Dorset.
Reception Hostel, Salford
The Salford Education Committee is about to open a
Hostel for the reception of children committed to them
by the Courts for " Care and Protection ", but too
maladjusted to be placed in foster-homes without
preliminary psychiatric treatment and habit training.
The children will remain in the Hostel for as long a
period as is necessary, and they will be under the super-
vision of a carefully selected staff working in close touch
with the Authority's Child Guidance Clinic.
Provision of this type, though urgently needed all over
the country, is all too rare and Salford's enterprise
should encourage other Authorities to take similar
action.
Hay brook House Residential Nursery ,
In December, 1942, the Provisional National Council
for Mental Health, with the approval of the Ministry oi
Training in Child Care. Interim Report of the Care of Children Committee. H.M. Stationery Office. 3d.
MENTAL HEALTH 47
Health and in co-operation with the Church of England
Waifs and Strays' Society, opened this Nursery for
maladjusted children from the age of 2 years. The
Nursery was specially designed to meet the needs of
children evacuated to ordinary Nurseries who were
unable to make a satisfactory adjustment, and of the
45 children received, all were ultimately able to return
to their own homes or to be passed on to billets or
hostels.
With the ending of the Evacuation Scheme, the
Nursery has been approved by the Ministry of Education
for the reception of maladjusted children, and the
Provisional Council invites applications for admission
from Local Education Authorities, Public Assistance
Committees and other interested bodies. The fees are
Three Guineas weekly. Particulars may be obtained
from the General Secretary, Provisional National Council
for Mental Health, 39 Queen Anne Street, London, W.l.
Tavistock Institute of Human Relations
A pioneer venture of outstanding importance has
recently been inaugurated by the Council of the Tavistock
Clinic, London, who, with the aid of an initial grant
of ?22,000 from the Rockefeller Foundation, have
formed an Institute of Human Relations. Its primary
object is to undertake and to co-ordinate practical work
in relation to the clinical and social needs of the
individual. The experience in this direction gained with
the Forces during the war and the successful results
achieved have afforded convincing proof of the desir-
ability for extending such work to the civilian population.
The individual's psychological well-being depends not
only on medical treatment, but on a satisfactory
adjustment to environmental conditions and community
life. This in its turn involves the development of
harmonious relationships in all spheres of human
activity, and the linking up of the clinical with the wider
aspect of social work on such problems as industrial
relations, rehabilitation and the current difficulties of
families and communities.
The work will be undertaken by a co-ordinated team
of psychiatrists and psychologists, most of whom have
served with the Forces and who will be able to bring to
it the valuable experience in the field of social psychology
which they gained during the war.
It is proposed that the Institute shall also become a
Training Centre, and plans for this are expected to be
completed by next autumn.
The generous grant made by the Rockefeller Founda-
tion will enable the Institute of Human Relations to
carry on their activities for a very limited period only,
but the promoters of the scheme are confident that the
value of the work will be conclusively demonstrated
during that time and they are hopeful that it will
command a wide measure of public support which will
ensure its continuance on a permanent basis.
University Appointments
Dr. Aubrey J. Lewis, who for a number of years has
been Director of Clinical Psychiatry at the Maudsley
Hospital and is also Director of Clinical Psychiatry at
Mill Hill Emergency Hospital, has recently been
appointed Professor of Psychiatry at London University.
Prof. Lewis is also Consultant in Psychological
Medicine at the British Post-Graduate Hospital, Hammer-
smith, and in the course of a distinguished career he has
undertaken research in Europe having been awarded a
Rockefeller Medical Fellowship in 1926. He was at one
time on the staff of the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Balti-
more. Prof. Lewis is closely associated with the work
of the Provisional National Council for Mental Health,
being also Chairman of its Clinical Services Committee.
It is announced that Aberdeen University have
appointed Dr. Douglas R. MacCalman to the Crombie-
Ross Chair of Mental Health.
A unique feature of the appointment is that it was
made in co-operation between the University, Voluntary
Teaching Hospitals and Local Authorities. The teaching
will be centred mainly in the General Hospitals rather
than be oriented to the Mental Hospitals.
Dr. MacCalman, who has been Lecturer in Psycho-
pathology at the University since 1938, was formerly
Medical Director of the Child Guidance Council,
London. Prior to this he was for some time Medical
Director of the Notre Dame Child Guidance Clinic in
Glasgow, which he helped to organize and to develop,
and for over a year he studied in America at the Boston
Psychopathic Hospital and the Johns Hopkins Hospital,
Baltimore.
Course for Psychiatric Social Workers
The University of Manchester have recently made
provisional arrangements for the institution of a course
for the training of psychiatric social workers, particulars
of which are given in an advertisement appearing in this
issue. The great need for increased training facilities
has for long been felt in order to meet the wide demand
for qualified psychiatric social workers for mental
hospitals, clinics, and institutions, etc. For many years
training for the recognized Certificate in Mental Health
was provided only by the University of London, but
Edinburgh University instituted a course in 1944. The
facilities now offered by Manchester University will be
generally welcomed.
The " Lord " Memorial Essay Competition
The results are now published of the 1945 Essay
Competition for mental nurses employed in mental
hospitals in the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland
(organized by the National Council for Mental Hygiene
on behalf of the Society of the Crown of Our Lord who
founded the competition in memory of the late Dr. J. R.
Lord, C.B.E.). The subject on which candidates were
invited to submit an essay of approximately 2,000
words was : " What are the essential personal qualities
required for success in Mental Nursing?" There were
45 entries, and the Selection Committee have awarded
the First Prize of ?3 3s. and a medal to Staff Nurse
Leonard S. Heal, of Herrison Hospital, Dorchester.
The Second Prize of ?1 Is. goes to Staff Nurse Charles
Fee, of the Coppice Hospital, Nottingham. It is worthy
of special note that this is the second occasion on which
a member of the staff of Herrison Hospital has success-
fully competed, the second prize having been awarded last
year to Staff Nurse J. F. Wright of that Hospital.
Subject to space limitations, the winning essay will be
published in our next issue.
Regional Work of the Provisional Council
In addition to the work in connection with the after-
care of discharged Service psychiatric casualties, and
clinical and advisory services for children and adults,
the Regional Representatives of the Provisional National
Council for Mental Health undertake a large amount of
liaison work with local authorities, organizations and
individuals with a view to promoting mental health in
their areas and a recognition of its fundamental impor-
tance in every sphere of human activity. This personal
approach has been found to be of the greatest value and
help as is evidenced by the increasing demand on the
services of the Regional Representatives.
Lectures are also given by the Regional Representa-
tives, and during the past few months they have addressed
such groups as Red Cross Home Visitors, service women
48 MENTAL HEALTH
about to be demobilized, children's Welfare Officers and
Moral Welfare students, teachers, and Club Leaders, etc.
Lectures in the areas have also been arranged by the
Provisional Council for Townswomen's Guilds, Women's
Institutes and other women's organizations, clubs,
groups connected with Maternity and Child Welfare
Centres, parents and teachers. On May 21st, Dr. Soddy,
Medical Director of the Provisional Council, addressed
a drawing room meeting held at Eversley, Hants, on the
subject of " Mental Health and the Community ".
This introductory talk has brought requests for further
lectures on mental health in the area and has been the
means of stimulating a fresh increase of interest in the
subject.
Defectives and the Disabled Persons (Employment) Act
The Board of Control have recently issued a Circular
on the position of mental defectives in connection with
Registration as Disabled Persons.
It is pointed out that mental defect is a recognized
disablement under the Act, provided that it causes a
substantial handicap to obtaining or retaining employment
or work, and that there is nothing to prevent a defective
on licence, under Guardianship or under Statutory or
voluntary Supervision from applying for registration.
If, however, there appears to be no reasonable prospect
of obtaining or keeping any form of employment,
registration should not be suggested. ?
Advisory Service on Handicraft and Play Activities
The Provisional National Council for Mental Health
is prepared to offer, and invites applications for the
services of its Advisers on educational handicrafts and
recreational activities. The Advisers are prepared to
visit Institutions and Occupation Centres for mentally
defective children, and Childrens'Homes of various types.
Advice is given on the planning of time-tables, the
teaching of handicrafts with improvised and home-made
materials, play activities suitable for children of various
ages and aptitudes, group work, etc.
Further information regarding fees, etc., may be
obtained from the General Secretary, 39 Queen Anne
Street, London, W.l.
Birthday Honours
We are happy to announce that among the recipients
of Birthday Honours this year are the Rt. Hon. Lord
Alness, P.C., K.C., who is created G.B.E., Prof. Cyril
Burt, designated Knight Bachelor, Miss D. Keeling
(O.B.E.), Alderman William Pashby (O.B.E.), Dr. J. R.
Rees (C.B.E.).
Lord Alness was until recently Chairman of the Scottish
Savings Committee, and for a number of years has been
Chairman of the Child Guidance Council and also of the
National Council for Mental Hygiene. Dr. Cyril Burt,
who is Professor of Psychology at University College,
London, is also a member of one of the Standing Com-
mittees of the Provisional National Council for Mental
Health, and Miss Keeling is Chairman of its Social
Services Committee. Dr. Rees, who attained the rank
of Brigadier in the late war, carried out valuable pioneer
work as Consulting Psychiatrist to the Army. He is
Medical Director of the Tavistock Clinic, London, and
also a member of the Committee of the National Council
for Mental Hygiene. Since his demobilization he has
become actively associated with the work of the Pro-
visional Council. Alderman Pashby represents Hull
City Council on the C.A.M.W. Executive Council.
General Board of Control for Scotland
It is announced that during the past year the following
changes have occurred among the Members of the Board
of Control for Scotland: Sir John Jeffrey, K.C.B.,
C.B.E., retired from the Chair on December 31st, 1945,
and was succeeded by Dr. John Jardine, O.B.E., Principal
Assistant Secretary Scottish Education Department.
Dr. Aidan Thomson, Medical Commissioner retired in
July, 1945, for health reasons and was succeeded by
Dr. T. Ferguson Rodger.
