Mental Deficiency in Northern Ireland
=======================================

The task of the Mental Health Services Committee
^ppointed in October, 1945, by the Minister of
Health and Local Government in Northern Ireland,
to give the problem of mental deficiency urgent
c?nsideration ", was?as is stated in their Report
Just issuedf?a formidable one.
"In Northern Ireland there is no Mental
Deficiency Act, no institution, no community
supervision and there is only one special school
(in Belfast) which is unable to meet even local
needs. Apart from the inadequate provision made by
the Education Acts and the Poor Relief Acts, the
responsibility for dealing with mental defectives
has not been placed by statute on any authority and,
for the most part, these unfortunate people lead
a hopeless existence at home, in poor law institu-
tions or in mental hospitals. The problem of
Rental deficiency has, by years of neglect, developed
into a grave social evil and we cannot over-emphasize
the need for early action to deal with it."
These words will have a familiar ring for the
generation of social workers concerned with the
^ePort of the Royal Commission on the Care and
^-ontrol of the Feeble-minded, published nearly
7" years ago, and Northern Ireland, as a late-comer
jnto the field, has at least this advantage?that she
s able to benefit by British experience. Of this
116 Committee is not unmindful and they have
utlined a Mental Deficiency Act which, though
fected within substantially the same type of
cafTolding, seeks to avoid the demerits inherent
'thin its English counterpart and to meet the
P^ial needs of a much smaller territory.
r We would particularly draw attention to the
Commendations which diverge most widely from
our own legislation on the subject as embodied
in the Mental Deficiency Acts, 1913-27.
Definitions
The Committee, whilst adopting in the main the
definitions of the English Acts, suggest a revision
of that relating to the feeble-minded group in order
explicitly to emphasize the basic conception of
Mental Deficiency as a social rather than an
educational defect, viz.: (the italics are ours) :
" . . . . persons in whose case there exists mental
defectiveness which . . . renders them socially
inefficient to such a degree that they require care,
supervision and control for their own protection
or for the protection of others, and in the case of
children special training also.''''
Further, to avoid " unpleasant apd undesirable
associations in the minds of the public it is
proposed that the various groups shall be referred
to by numbers, and that the terms idiot, imbecile,
feeble-minded and morally defective?though
adopted by implication?shall not be explicitly
formulated.
Ascertainment
Although under the Education Act (Northern
Ireland) 1923, it is the duty of Education Authorities
to ascertain mentally defective children and to
report those considered ineducable to the appro-
priate authorities, the Committee point out the
" futility of the present system " as revealed by
statistical tables showing that, e.g., in the twelve
year period, 1932-44, only two children were so
H.M. Stationery Office, Belfast. Is.
76 MENTAL HEALTH
notified in Co. Londonderry and three in Co.
Tyrone. (During the same period the figures for
Belfast and Co. Down were 302 and 232 respectively.)
It is not proposed, however, that the English
system should be adopted in toto, but that on the
Mental Deficiency Authority should be laid the
duty of ascertaining all defectives, whether or not
they are in need of immediate help and whether
or not they are attending school. Thus it is
recommended that Education Authorities should
be required to report any child considered to be
defective, to whatever degree, for examination
and diagnosis by the Mental Deficiency Authority's
psychiatrist. Further, in order to supplement
ascertainment through other authorities, voluntary
bodies and individual social workers, it is proposed
that it shall be made incumbent on all medical
practitioners to notify any patient whom they
suspect to be a mental defective.
Certification
Taking its stand on the principle that the final
determination of mental defect is a medical rather
than a legal question, the Committee recommend
that judicial certification shall be dispensed with,
and that a certificate by a specialist medical officer
of the Mental Deficiency Authority shall be all that
is necessary as a preliminary to removal to
Institutional care.
Institution Accommodation
It is suggested that, as Northern Ireland's popula-
tion is not more than 1| million, one Colony to
accommodate in the first instance, 500 patients (and
ultimately 1,000) should be adequate to meet the
need. Priority in the selection of cases for admission
should be given to trainable patients, and the low-
grade untrainables should be housed in a separate
building of a simpler type within easy range of the
main Colony.*
An interesting proposal is also made for the
establishment of an Observation Unit to receive,
for a temporary period, cases in which further
observation is needed prior to an accurate
diagnosis.
Administration
The Central Authority for the administration of
the new Act would obviously be the Ministry of
Health and Local Government, but it is suggested
that here another departure from the English
set-up should be made. To ensure uniformity
in standards of administration and the pooling of
the services of the necessary experts, it is proposed
to institute a special Regional Authority composed
of representatives from all the statutory bodies
dealing with defectives. To act in an advisory
capacity to this body, Local Mental Health Com-
mittees would be formed, co-ordinating the activities
of interested local organizations and individuals.
Ultimately it is envisaged that the Service should
be linked up with the other Mental Health Services
of the Province.
In concluding their Report, the Committee,
whilst recognizing that the programme outlined
must inevitably take a considerable time to put
into operation in its entirety, urge that as early as
possible plans should be drafted for the proposed
Colony and that a Medical Superintendent should
be appointed.
This is emphatically a document which should
be studied by all who are interested in social trends
and particularly by those concerned with mental
deficiency administration in other countries.
* Iii this connection, the Committee have perhaps tended to overlook the need of even low-grade defectives for skilki
training and the response which may be got from them, as shown by the experience of Bridge Home> Witham (Ro)'a
Eastern Counties Institution.)
1
