I Social Work in a Military Hospital
=====================================

:Author: SUBALTERN B. GAUTREY, A.T.S.
Military Social Worker
In August, 1944, the Army Department of
Psychiatry decided to train selected A.T.S. Officers
as Military Social Workers in various psychiatric
hospitals. The following is a brief survey of the
work done since that time till March, 1946, in the
largest military hospital dealing with psychoneurotic
cases.

The range of cases dealt with has been varied
but marital and family difficulties have been amongst
the most frequent and difficult. The following
table shows the number and type of problem
presented :

Total cases interviewed .. .. 1,866
Average number of interviews per case 4
Distribution of main problems.
Investigations regarding compassionate
release or postings .. .. .. 91
Financial problems   167
Marital and family difficulties .. 226
Legal aid .. .. .. .. 74
Interviews to arrange After-Care 211
Home investigations .. .. .. 67
Housing difficulties .. .. .. 132
Compassionate leave investigations .. 521
Other domestic problems .. .. 377
In addition, 2,275 men were interviewed in groups
before being discharged to civil life as medically
unfit for further service. This was to discuss their
resettlement problems and generally to give informa-
tion concerning pay on leave, grants from the
Ministry of Labour, etc.

It will be seen that this table merely shows a very
rough division of cases. Under the heading
" Marital and Family Difficulties ", are included
arrangements made for the relatives of patients to
visit the hospital to interview the doctor and social
worker. Accommodation is found for them, as
they usually need to stay overnight, and, if necessary,
we send reduced travel vouchers. The psychiatrist
may feel that it will be helpful for the treatment of
his patient for a wife to stay in the vicinity of the
hospital for a longer period. Where there are
financial difficulties, grants are obtained from the
Commanding Officer's Fund to cover the expenses
of the visit.

If a visit to the hospital is impracticable and the
psychiatrist feels that a more detailed picture of his
patient's home and relatives might be helpful,
home visits are arranged. If in the vicinity of the
hospital these are undertaken by the military social
worker, and for others the Provisional National
Council for Mental Health have been extremely
helpful.

A large number of applications for compassionate
leave are received and are investigated by the military
social worker. If it is practicable the reason for
the request is verified, always with as much speed
as possible, so that the patient can feel that an
interest is taken in his home anxieties and his
possible desire to go absent without leave is thereby
minimized.

Whenever the army scale of allowances is proved
to be inadequate, a patient's anxieties can be
allayed by helping him to apply for additional
grants such as Emergency War Service Grants,
War Service Grants, Dependents' allowances, etc.
Also S.S.A.F.A. are frequently approached for
their help in adjusting the family income to meet
their needs.

Anxious relatives and friends are constantly
enquiring about the health of the patients and these
letters are dealt with by the military social worker
after consulting the psychiatrist concerned. Also
enquiries are received from civilian organizations,
*n particular the After-Care Regional Officers,
for particulars of former patients referred to them
for help.

Compassionate Postings
-----------------------

As can be expected many applications for com-
passionate postings have had to be investigated.
It is not always realized that even if the grounds
?f application are good, and have been corroborated,
that such a posting may not prove a complete
solution of the problem. A man may be posted
as near as possible to his home, but this may prove
to be at least twenty miles away. This is too far to
Pe of any real assistance to his family and may merely
increase his anxiety, as he feels eager to help but
ls unable, materially, to do so. Even if he is
actually living at home, the daily difficulties may
Prove such a burden, in conjunction with his army
work, that he becomes a liability to his home and
to the army.

Case 1.?Pte. D., on the staff of the hospital, had
a compassionate posting here, after his wife gave
birth to a child when he had been in Burma two
years. He accepted the child and was extremely
proud of her and spent all his savings in providing
clothes, etc. for her. He and his wife lived with her
parents, but his wife's mother made difficulties.
She refused to allow them to sleep together, sleeping
with the wife herself and making Pte. D. occupy
a room with a young brother, although there was
sufficient room in the house for other arrangements
to be made. Both Pte. D. and his wife were,
naturally, unhappy at this arrangement, but both
were timid and the mother-in-law domineering.
Eventually they were helped to find other
accommodation and they settled down happily.
^atrimonal and Family Problems
This is far the largest group and includes the most
ornplex problems requiring close co-operation
etween the psychiatrist and social worker.

(a) Family 11 has been widely recognized
Readjustment that many difficulties of family
u * readjustment are experienced
em fetVr?nS prisoners of war. It cannot be
Phasized too strongly that the majority of these
problems are also experienced by the man returning
from long service overseas. He has experienced
the same anxiety about his wife and family and has
been subject to similar letters from well meaning
friends, possibly making allegations against his
wife. He feels different and out of everything when
he comes back, finding his wife has changed so
greatly. The wife, also, must realize that her
husband too will have changed. The factors of
separation, and the necessity of being a self reliant
individual during their loneliness, have changed
them both. The difficulties of readjustment are
likely to be great and take a long time to resolve.
Many men overseas have built up a fantasy picture
of home, their wife, the children, their own private
world. On their return it is all so different. In
some cases even though the home is obviously
broken up and the wife has no inclination to return
to her husband, he cannot accept it. His home
has been his anchor all the years away and he cannot
face life without it. He will accept anything rather
than the break up of his home. Then, sometimes,
it is best to help him to realize that it is an untenable
situation, he must find new interests and a different
future from the one he has envisaged so long. A
wife has usually looked forward desperately, during
the time her husband has been away, to his return
so that she may again lean on him. He, however,
wishes to come home to be mothered and cherished,
and is not ready to take over the responsibilities
of home immediately. His wife must be helped
to an understanding of her husband's feelings
and to accept the position of head of the family
for a little longer. It has also been necessary to
try and help the wife to accept the fact of her
husband's neurosis, to allay her anxiety with regard
to insanity and again to reassure her that he is not
less of a man because of his breakdown. The man
may need a woman's reassurance and help to allay
his guilt at having broken down and having sustained
a blow to his masculine pride.

Children, also, often find it difficult to accept the
father's return after so long away, and become
troublesome and aggressive. Thus Pte. T. after
disembarkation leave said that his small son was
quite unmanageable. He obeyed his father, but
now had become exceedingly difficult with his
mother. Arrangements were made for the child to
be referred to a Child Guidance Clinic.

sr\ TT r , , ? The unfaithful wife, either in
(b) Unfaithfulness. actuajjty or jn the imagination
of the man, is often a precipitating factor in a
soldier's breakdown. A recent survey of neurosis
among repatriated prisoners of war, found the
incidence to be as high as 25 per cent. Among the
cases in this hospital, infidelity in the wife has been
found to arouse many varying reactions in the
husband. Some men can condone the offence,
realizing the difficulties that their wives have
experienced during their absence, the loneliness
and the monotony of their existence. In many,
however, the idea of tolerating such a lapse is
impossible. Their immediate reaction is divorce?
at once. When it is explained this may take
about eighteen months, their enthusiasm often
wanes and they are prepared to reconsider their
decision. Often they have not known of the
situation before arriving home. Possibly there is
an illegitimate child of whose existence they were
unaware, and the shock of this discovery tends
to warp their judgement. Time, however, may give
a more objective view if they are not inundated
by hasty advice from well meaning friends, relatives
or outsiders. If they can be advised to consider
whether, in fact, they still do love their wives and
can tolerate the situation, there is then some chance
of establishing a satisfactory marital relationship
again. When there is an illegitimate child it has
been found important to impress upon the man
that he must decide whether he can accept the
child. If so he must be prepared to accept it fully
and not as a perpetual reminder of his wife's lapse.
Should he be unable to do this, but wishes to remain
with his wife, then, providing his wife agrees,
adoption is best arranged as soon as possible.
Case 2.?An illustration of this type of case is
Pte. N., who when he first came to the hospital,
was full of aggression against his wife, who was
then pregnant with a child of which he was not
the father. At first he was determined that the
child must be adopted and that no one must ever
know; this seemed to him easy, as his wife was at
that time evacuated in the country with their
daughter, aged 3, but was planning to return home.
He was discharged from the Army, but during his
period in hospital he recovered from his first shock
and fury against his wife. At first he took no
part in hospital activities, ruminated on his mis-
fortune and talked about it to everyone. Endeav-
ours were made to ascertain the wife's attitude
to adoption, but she refused to come to the hospital,
or keep appointments made for her locally. Before
he left the hospital he was happier but still wanted
the child adopted. He had recovered sufficiently
to do a full day's work in a factory near the hospital.
He was recommended for the After-Care Scheme
and six months later a follow-up showed that after
the child was born he had decided to accept it.
He was still resentful against his wife, but was
settling down fairly well.

(r\ CpYiiai Another factor in the mar-
Difficulties. ri,?se . difficulties of men
returning from long service
overseas is temporary impotence. It is quite frequent
on their repatriation leave and when they come into
hospital they are very depressed about it. The fear
of impotence often grows up in a man during
captivity, or long service overseas; he broods about
it and fears that such things as the deprivation of
food he has undergone, may affect his virility. When
he goes on leave his anxiety produces the result he
has feared. It helps enormously if the wife can be
interviewed and helped to understand that her
husband is no less a " real man " because of this
temporary situation?that she, more than anyone
else, can help him to regain his potency and that
she must try not to be impatient with him or
despise him.

Another type of patient who is extremely difficult
to help is the syphilophobe. He may have run no
actual risk of infection, or been exposed only once,
but that one episode has produced such feelings of
guilt that it is exceedingly difficult for him to be
convinced that he is free from infection. These
men are often depressed and their wives are acutely
anxious about them, without realizing the cause of
the depression. It thus becomes a social, as well
as an individual psychiatric problem. If the man
can explain the situation, and the wife can under-
stand, it will probably help more than anything
else. Nevertheless it is considered dangerous
for any man to be advised to discuss this illness
with his wife, unless she has previously been
interviewed and considered mature enough to grasp
it. The situation on leave can be distressing if
the implications have not been foreseen, as the
man may be afraid of infecting his wife and so refuse
to have intercourse, or may find himself impotent
because of his guilt towards her.

Case 3.?Pte. M., had served three years overseas
and was nearly due for leave in the U.K., when
he had intercourse with a prostitute for the first
time. Shortly after this he complained of a feeling
of numbness in his genitals. He went on leave and,
finding intercourse impossible, told his wife what
had occurred. At the end of his leave he was still
acutely depressed, and reported sick immediately
he returned to his unit. After tests for V.D. had
proved negative and he refused to accept reassur-
ance, he was seen by a psychiatrist and admitted
here. On admission he was depressed, intro-
spective and cried most of the day. He still
complained of lack of feeling and could not believe
that he was free from infection. He wanted to
see his wife, but said he was not worthy to do so.
Mrs. M. was invited to visit the social worker at
the hospital and she agreed. She was an upright
little Yorkshire woman, who did not understand
her husband's illness at all. They had planned
to have another child when he came on leave and
she felt that she could not now do this. She took
up a determined attitude of a wronged wife. She
said she did not understand her husband's act
because she, herself, did not understand physical
desire. She felt she had a good hold on him for
life, if she took him back, but was prepared to keep
him wondering about this indefinitely. Eventually
she was helped to realize that she could accept his
fault and that by appearing to want him physically
again, she might help him to become potent and
lose his fear of V.D. His psychiatric treatment
included a course of E.C.T. He became more
cheerful and, when he eventually left hospital, was
planning to have another child.

Resettlement Advice
--------------------

Recently a large number of patients have been
discharged from hospital to return to civil life. AH
these men have been seen and explanation given
regarding arrangements made for their terming
leave in relation to pay, allowances, etc., what
facilities there are for applying for help for employ-
ment, Ministry of Labour training schemes and to
whom they should apply if they are in difficulty.
In addition a certain number of men are recom-
mended for the After-Care Scheme of the Provi-
sional National Council for Mental Health. It is
felt strongly that the men should be considered,
not only as an individual, but as part of a family
social unit. In this connection a man may be
recommended for the After-Care Scheme largely
because it is felt his wife, or mother, may need
help or advice. In addition to the usual resettle-
ment difficulties, the wife, or mother, may feel
the burden of the man's neurosis too heavy to carry.
The realization that she has someone to whom she
can turn, and who will understand her difficulties,
ean ease the emotional strain.

Case 4.?Major T. was a regular soldier, who
had had several severe breakdowns in the past.
He could not bring himself to tolerate the idea of
civilian life and had no idea what work he could
do. His wife, also, was exceedingly neurotic.
She had married hoping her husband would be
a tower of strength, but she had found that a very
small breeze would knock him over. Their
physical relations had always been unsatisfactory
as she had never received any satisfaction from
them, while he did not understand how his wife
felt. Both were helped by a full discussion of their
future, which both dreaded. He was recommended
for After-Care and therefore felt he had something
to lean on, while Mrs. T. welcomed the discussion
of her difficulties and the prospect of understanding
help in the future.

There have been several cases of men recom-
mended for discharge but who have nowhere to
?? and do not know what employment to take up.
Case 5.?Pte. B. was aged 34, and of very low
grade intelligence and illiterate. His parents were
dead and he had not been in contact with his brothers
and sisters since 1934. He had nowhere to go on
discharge. At first efforts were made to trace his
relatives, but without success as they had moved
and left no address. He said he would like to work
on the land, in one of the Western counties, as
he knew that area and had worked there before as
a groom. Contact was made with a former
employer who agreed to re-employ him in farm
work and eventually accommodation was found
for him in a nearby village.

Conclusion
------------

In the hospital, it has been found that having
social workers who are themselves in the army
and have a knowledge of the military machine,
has helped enormously in understanding the patients.
One's own difficulties in the army have given an
insight into the problem that a civilian could not
have acquired. The earlier a man's total welfare
and family situation can be considered, the more
chance there is of being able to give constructive
help. If these aspects are left until he is about
to be discharged, it may be too late to do more
than touch the fringe of the problem.

It is fully realized that the cases used to illustrate
the points made, can only be accepted as readjusted
in a limited sense. The stay of each man in hospital
is unlikely to be longer than 3 to 4 months and in
that time it is only possible to assess the possible
future according to the adjustments he has made
during his stay. The follow-up visits that were
done have helped to substantiate this a little, but
it is still all too possible that hopeful progress of
these men and their families may not be sustained.
It is thought that many of these problems will
be met by social workers dealing with men recently
demobilized, as they are not only to be found in
men suffering from neurosis, as has been sub-
stantiated by the advice sought by the men on the
staff of this hospital. It is hoped, therefore, that
this somewhat fragmentary picture may be helpful
to others engaged in similar work.

I wish to thank Colonel L. M. Rowlette, D.S.O.,
M.C. for permission to write this paper. Also
Subaltern Elton with whom I have worked at this
hospital.
