Child Treatment and the Therapy of Play
=========================================

:Author:  Lydia
Jackson, B.bc.(Oxon) and Kathleen M. lodd, M.B.,
D.P.M., with an introduction by Emanuel Miller,
M.R.C.P., D.P.M. Methuen and Co. Ltd.,
London. 1946. Price 8s. 6d.

When a child is taken on for treatment in a psycho-
logical clinic, what happens ? He comes once a week.
If he is of an age to enjoy play rather than conversation,
he goes with the therapist into a playroom at each visit
and there he " has his treatment ". And what happens
behind the closed door of the playroom ? Often this
remains somewhat of a mystery not only to the child's
parents but even to many who are working in the clinic.
For an account of what happens is extremely difficult
to give.

In Child Treatment and the Therapy of Play the authors
attempt such an account, and with so great a measure
of success that this book must be welcomed by all serious
students of child psychology, as well as by those who are
engaged in the treatment of children's mental disorders.
From the point of view of those treating children, of
very great value are the careful and detailed accounts of
children's actual play during treatment and the authors'
interpretation of its meaning. One is grateful that they
confine their accounts to play which is really significant
of the child's character and conflicts, and avoid the trivial
or merely witty ; grateful, too, that they avoid the
suggestion of quick relief and spectacular recovery which
often makes play-treatment appear to be something much
snappier than it really is. Their evaluations of the
children's play show great freedom from bias: they
relate to the individuality of the patients rather than to
schools of psychology, which from the therapist's point
, of view is essentially important.

Equally valuable is the attempt to describe the play of
different types of children, obsessional play, hyper-active
play and so on. Here, necessarily, only a small part
of the ground is covered. But one is glad of beginnings,
for it is a subject which has been little studied and where
knowledge is very much wanted, for purposes of
diagnosis as well as of treatment.

The accounts of obsessional play are the most detailed
and interesting, and the work on obsessional children is
perhaps the most illuminating in the book. It forms a
real contribution to our knowledge of this disorder.
So we are taken behind the playroom door and we
certainly see the child at play. But that leaves us with
only a very inadequate knowledge as to what happens
during treatment. For the therapist does a large part of
the work. And here we are very much more in the dark.
We do not know how much of the interpretation of play
given to the reader is ever made to the child. Clearly
some is made; but as to how it is made and at what
stage, whether as a regular means of promoting further
play or only as an explanation at crucial moments, all of
this is left vague. Nor are we any wiser about methods
other than interpretation. " The therapist is there with
his knowledge and understanding, his sympathy and
tolerance; he controls and guides the play in directions
which he knows will promote recovery." The notion of
controlling and guiding play is foreign to many forms
of play-therapy and it is certainly one about which we
should like to know more. But not even an illustration
is given.

Thus while we have an admirable and quite invaluable
record of children's play, we have singularly little
information as to the technique of treatment. This is
the more to be regretted since some study of this is so
badly needed. There is a vast literature on the technique
of the psychoanalysis of children. But there are many
forms of treatment other than analysis. Clearly they
involve technique and do not depend solely on the
wisdom and personality of the therapist. It is a pity
that this book, so good in other ways, should contribute
so little to our knowledge of the methods of treatment,
to an understanding of the therapist's part in the
work.

But it is not only those engaged in treating children
who will find this book interesting. It will almost
certainly appeal to parents with an interest in psychology
and it should add a great deal to their understanding of
psychotherapy and their confidence in it. Whether it
will help so much in other ways is more doubtful. The
parents, in the cases recorded, do not on the whole
appear in too favourable a light and it is possible that
this may add to the sense of guilt, the belief that " it is
all my fault " in any anxious parent who may read the
book. Moreover, in dealing with the parent-child
relationship there is considerable stress on the ill-effects
of parental mistakes. To take one example: " Just as
food fads in children and adults are frequently the
consequence of unwise feeding and weaning in infancy,
the common complaint of constipation and a variety of
' stomach ' troubles are often the result of the clumsy
handling of the child's bodily functions." Anxious, and
especially rather obsessional parents always tend to be
over-concerned about doing the right thing or the wrong
thing, and will perhaps here tend to find authority for
their anxious and obsessional attitude. Possibly greater
stress on matters that are more fundamental for the
child's good development, such as the parents' own
happiness in marriage, in work and friendship, might
have been useful. But these are small points.
To the very large number concerned with the mental
health of children this book should prove quite invalu-
able. It will introduce the beginner and prove a boon
to the experienced worker. It derives from long
experience and wide knowledge. It is free from pedantry
and written with a directness and clarity which make it
a pleasure to read.
E.N.
