Neurosis and the Mental Health Services
========================================

:Type: Reviews
:Author:  C. P. Blacker, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P. With a Foreword
by Sir Wilson Jameson, K.C.B., M.D., LL.D.,
F.R.C.P. Pp. 200. Oxford Medical Publications.
20s. net.

This is the most valuable survey in relation to outpatient mental health services in the country that has been
made so far. It was prepared with the object of finding
out what psychiatric out-patient facilities existed in
England and Wales, whether these were adequate, and
also whether there had been an increase in neurosis
among the civilian population as a result of war conditions. The work was begun in October of 1942 and its
ulterior purpose was related to the integration of the
country's Health Services after the war.

The survey, which was officially sponsored by the
Ministry of Health, was carried out in each of the eleven
Civil Defence Regions of England and Wales by Regional
Investigators who were assisted in their task by the
Regional Representatives of the Provisional National
Council for Mental Health, by two Inspectors loaned by
the Board of Control, and by the Psychiatric Social
Worker of Cefn Coed Hospital, Swansea. A questionnaire was circulated to 216 clinics ; of these 186
responded, and 145 gave information on all the questions
asked. The survey revealed not only the need for a
greater number of out-patient psychiatric clinics, but
also considerable inequalities in the distribution of
facilities throughout-the country. The south of England
was better served than the north: the aggregate number
of clinics per million of population in the two regions
in the North, i.e. Region I (comprising Northumberland,
Durham, and the North Riding of Yorkshire) and Region
X (comprising Cheshire, Cumberland, Lancashire and
Westmorland) was 3-74; the corresponding figure for
the three regions which form the south coast was 7-75.
Of a total of 101 Mental Hospitals, 25 had not established
psychiatric clinics.

It was possible to classify 45,201 new patients in terms
of diagnosis?neurosis, psychosis and " other The
figures showed that in 1942 the London clinics dealt
with the largest proportion of neurotics and the smallest
proportion of psychotics; the reverse was the case in
the provinces. Figures of clinics outside London for
1942, when compared with those for 1938, showed a rise
in the proportion of neurotics and a fall in those for
psychotics, which suggested that clinics were increasingly
dealing with mild or early cases, and that general
practitioners are as a whole gaining confidence in the
services provided by such clinics and are recognizing
their usefulness.

The neurosis survey produced figures for four years,
of which the last was 1942. No comparable data are
available for later years, so there is no means of knowing
if the trends described in the survey have been continued
or reversed. The majority of the Directors of clinics
who expressed definite views on the subject, held that
there existed in the civilian population latent neurosis
likely to disclose itself after the war. Dr. Blacker is of
the opinion that " well-grounded generalizations about
. real trends of neurosis will not be possible until diagnostic
and therapeutic standards are clearer and also more
widely understood " than they are at the present time.

Not only does the book give a complete picture of
existing out-patient facilities, but Dr. Blacker also
submits proposals for the organization of mental health
services dealing with the kind of provision that we want
and the scale on which it needs to be supplied. One of
the most valuable chapters contains suggestions for
dealing with a population of a million treated as an administrative unit. A hundred beds per million population
should, for a start, it is suggested, be provided outside
Mental Hospitals for psychiatric cases, either in Teaching
Psychiatric Units which form part of Teaching Hospitals
of University Medical Schools, or in non-teaching units
located in key towns. Over and above this provision,
additional psychiatric beds should be made available in
whatever ways are deemed appropriate in view of local
conditions and impending changes in procedure for cases
now admitted into observation wards. Child Guidance
Centres, established by Education Authorities, at the
minimum rate of one for every 20,000 children are
advocated and also three or four Child Psychiatric
Clinics per million population to form part of a central
psychiatric clinic under the Mental Health Services.
Other recommendations include a hostel for about fifty
unstable or difficult children in close association with the
most active child psychiatric clinic, and a children's
reception centre for the sorting and appropriate disposal
of homeless or destitute children. Accommodation in
Mental Hospitals should be suited to needs and staffs
increased, and colonies for mental defectives should be
provided on an adequate scale. Provision should also
be made for some 4,000 persons who will need community
care.

There is a section dealing with neurosis in industry
with suggestions for facilitating adjustment to industrial
life and recommendations regarding the continuance
of the Rest-Break Service, started as an emergency
measure during the war, and a careful system of selection
of foremen, heads of offices, works' managers, welfare
workers, and others in order to lessen avoidable stresses
among workers.

The factual results of the survey and a discussion of
their implications are to be found in Parts 1 and 4.
Part 2 contains the long term proposals for post-war
psychiatric services. These are particularly timely in
view of the fact that the National Health Services Bill is
now before the House.

The book is a model of arrangement and is written in
Dr. Blacker's own inimitable style. It is most lucid and
clearly set out, and contains a wealth of information.
It should certainly be read by every psychiatrist and every
psychiatric social worker and by all who are interested
in the future of the Mental Health Services of this
