Civil Resettlement of Ex-Prisoners of War
===========================================

:Author:  Brigadier L. Bootle-Wilbraham D.S.O., M.C.

_ Before I begin to describe the aims of the work of
civil resettlement as it affects repatriated prisoners of
^ar in the Army, I should explain my own position.

| am a serving soldier and I have little or no knowledge of psychology or psychiatry, other than the
experience I have had since I have been put in
charge of this work. I will, however, try to give
an accurate description of the organization and
administration of Civil Resettlement, showing
at the same time the difficulties which we are trying
t? smooth out for the repatriates.

In August 1944, the then Secretary of State for
War, Sir James Grigg, decided that the War Office
should undertake the task of correcting, so far
as possible, those special psychological disabilities
^hich inevitably arise from prolonged capitivity
Jn enemy hands ". It was to meet this demand
that Civil Resettlement Units were formed to look
after the repatriate during his transition from
military to civil life.

Records of the experience gained in dealing with
FePatriates in the last war were very meagre, but
11 had been recognized that in the months after
rePatriation men suffered from difficulties of concentration and loss of memory, from restlessness,
j[ntability or apathy and depression. Towards
he end of 1943 sufficient numbers of officers had
escaped from Europe to warrant an attempt to be
^ade to make a practical technique for their
r?nabilitati?n for continued military service. These
facers were all posted to one unit (W.O.S.B.)
vhere their difficulties were studied. In February
44, some 900 protected personnel were repatriated
j^d that afforded another opportunity of studying
^eir difficulties and trying to solve them over a
Period of four weeks. This is described as the
r?okham Experiment. Then in November 1944,
n experimental unit was formed at Derby. It was
r8anized to receive some 60 trainees. There
ere in fact two courses held, one of three weeks
nd one of four weeks, and the repatriates who
nderwent these courSes were not in these cases
k?lunteers. Finally in May 1945, No. 1 Civil
Resettlement Unit with the Planning Headbarters, was set up at Hatfield House. From
nucleus was built up an organization
hich covered Great Britain and Northern Ireland
nd involved some 20 units which were spread from
. dinburgh and Glasgow in the north to Sherborne
tn the south. It was finally decided that intakes
2 these units should be limited to volunteers,
f ny repatriate who has been a prisoner-or-war
t?r more than 61 days could, and can now elect
8o to a Civil Resettlement Unit, unless he has
o/ved for twelve months in the Army after the date
"is repatriation in this country. It is considered
that if he has served a year in the Army after
repatriation he should have sufficiently adjusted
himself to conditions not to need the services
afforded at a unit. There is one exception to this.
If a man is recommended by his Commanding
Officer and by the area Psychiatrist to go to a Civil
Resettlement Unit, he can still come to one if he
wishes. In addition, a repatriate may elect to go
to a unit as a civilian at any time during the year
after he begins his release leave.

I will endeavour to describe to you the problems
which we find common to prisoners-of-war and these
problems, it must be admitted, are by no means
peculiar to men who have been in captivity. They
arise not only from the circumstances of their
capture and imprisonment, but are due also to
long absence from home and to the life of routine
and discipline which all soldiers are subject to during
their military service.

r During his service before and after captivity,
the soldier has always been subjected to a routine;
his life has been ordered and subject to strict
discipline; his initiative has not been exercised so
much as regards his own personal needs as toward
the training and administration within the unit,
and ultimately for ordeal by battle; his more
personal problems have been looked after by the
unit system. The orderly sergeant and orderly
corporal have woken him at reveille ; they have
warned him for parade; they have inspected him
to see that he is properly dressed and equipped; in
order to help his memory there has been a daily
detail or some form of daily orders ; he has been
clothed by the Army; he has had no responsibility
for getting his own meals; his family allowances
and voluntary allowances have been paid for him
by the Paymaster to his relatives, and to this extent
the normal military routine has helped to undermine
the man's independence of thought. He has not
had to think about all those things which in civilian
life he will have to do for himself. Again, in the
Army he has had companionship; corporate spirit
and esprit de corps have contributed to the ordered
life of his unit which, in return, has given him a
measure of security. When he leaves the Army
he misses this companionship and he may feel a
lack of security. He may well wish at times to go
back to his old unit and to his old companions.
There are also the problems of the soldier's
domestic and social life. Most men in captivity
have painted a very rosy picture for themselves
of their "home and family waiting to receive them
on their return. The man himself in many cases
seems to be unaware of what the war has brought
to the civilian population in Britain, and he does
not know of the stresses and strains to which his
* Summary of an Address given to the Association of Mental Health Workers at Bristol on April 14th, 1946
family has been exposed. He little realizes the
actual physical dangers to which many civilians
have been subjected during the war in this country,
and he little appreciates the war weariness which
has touched the population. So when he finally
reaches home, after the first glow of reunion,
he is apt to experience a period of disillusionment
which may make him depressed or moody, irritable
and silent.

In their social relationships, men are sometimes
shy of meeting their old friends or of mixing in
crowds. As a rule there is a latent desire to meet
people, to make themselves known again and to be
brought up to date with the war history of their
locality, but, in spite of this, when it comes to the
point, men are overcome by shyness. This is
particularly noticeable in their relationships with
the other sex. Men become hypersensitive over
their ignorance of conditions at home when they
first get back from captivity.

After a man's leave is over, his first need is to
find employment. Many men do not want to go
back to the jobs they did before the war. Jobs in
the mines, cotton mills, and in the potteries are
generally very unpopular. Other men were only
boys when the war started and their training may
have been interrupted. These are now six years
older, and they have a problem to face as regards
how they are going to complete their training and
at the same time earn a living. Yet others have had
no training at all and are in need of it. These
factors are alarming to the man and help to undermine his confidence in himself. In fact the biggest
problem for many men is to regain their selfconfidence. They may doubt their ability to resume
the employment which they had before the war, to
get employment suitable to them, or to earn the
wages which will keep them and their families in
comfort. In their absence their wives have had to
assume responsibilities and cope with household
duties which used to be the man's obligation.
This has made the wives more independent. The
younger children do not recognize their father,
and the older ones may not accept his authority.
These all contribute to shake his self-confidence.
He finds that the relationship with his wife has
altered, which makes him self-conscious and shy
or resentful. These feelings may well be extended
to the circle of friends who live in the neighbourhood of his home. It is a great problem which
civil resettlement has to try and help the repatriate
to solve.

To summarize the aims of civil resettlement.
It is designed to give a period of temporary security,
during which a man can experiment in suiting
himself to a job and recover that independence
of mind and thought necessary to the conduct
of his life as a civilian; to make him assume the
responsibility for his own life. Civil resettlement
provides means by which he can test his skill at his
trade or get sufficient training to recover the skill
he may have lost. It also tries to make him
aware of his problems by means of discussion and
interview, and, lastly, it helps to make it easy for
him to carry his experiences in the civil resettlement
unit to his home and to be able to discuss easily
with his wife and family the problems which may
embarrass them.

I will now explain how the Civil Resettlement
Units deal with these problems. A unit is designed
to take 240 repatriates at a time. They are organized
in four syndicates, each of 60. There is a weekly
intake which may vary, but has a maximum of 60,
and that intake is divided equally between the
four syndicates so that you have in the same
syndicate men who have had four weeks or more
experience of the working of civil resettlement, and
newly joined men who have just been introduced
to it. The syndicate is presided over by a Syndicate
Officer. A man is entitled to stay four weeks at a
Civil Resettlement Unit or he may leave at any
time. If it is thought necessary, he may stay up
to thirteen weeks. In addition to the Syndicate
Officers there are, of course, the administrative
officers and a number of technical experts. The
A.T.S. have provided half the personnel of each
unit and the feminine influence is of great value
in the scheme.

The technical experts comprise the Doctor, the
Dentist, the Ministry of Labour Liaison Officer,
a woman Civil Liaison Officer (and trained Socia
Workers), the Vocational Officer and the Technical
Officer. There are five units described as Type
" B " units, which take in men who have been
slightly disabled, and they have a small increment
to the staff on the medical side which deals with
physiotherapy and helps such men with remedial
exercises.

From the moment a man joins a Civil Resettlement Unit we try to make him independent o'
Army routine. He is treated as an individual- .
There are no parades other than pay parade, there 1
is no reveille and there are no N.C.O.s to chase
him. He is encouraged to make his own appoint'
ments through his Syndicate Officer with the various
specialist officers, but if a man is, for any reason*
unwilling to go and see the doctor or to go and
see the Vocational Officer, he is not made to do soSuch discipline as is exerted is done by approaching
the man through group discussion, and to this
method there has been quite a remarkable response- (
It is public opinion rather than the R.S.M. which
enforces discipline in the unit, and I am glad t0
say that the morale in the units is, generally speaking
very high. In my visits I have frequently heard
old soldiers complain that there was insufficien
discipline in the unit. It is apt to shock theUj- j
On one occasion I heard of a number of Wejs^
Guardsmen parading themselves and marching
into camp, I presume as a protest at the way '
which things were done. The reason for *h
relaxation of military discipline has to be explaine
to them. Even so they are not always satisfiedThe Doctor's job is not limited to giving medic3
advice or treatment. He has an important functio
in conducting group discussions where he brinS
UP intimate topics with which men are concerned
and tries to dispel those illusions which they may
have engendered while they were in a prison camp.
Many repatriates have formed illusions as regards
sex and health, and it is important, particularly for
their relationship with their families, that these
should be put right. With one exception, units
do not have a Psychiatrist. But they can call on
the services of the area Psychiatrist when they are
needed. This is usually arranged on the basis of a
Weekly or fortnightly visit. The Civil Resettlement
Unit is not designed to take clinical cases which are
sent to hospital. Such cases are rare. There is a
^ Cental Officer at the Unit who is always hard
forked, and he is able to send men out to civvy
street in a proper condition.

The Civil Liaison Officer is a trained social worker,
^orne of them have taken psychiatric courses.
Their function is extremely important in helping
njen with their domestic problems. Housing is
the most common difficulty with which they have
to deal, and the Civil Liaison Officers get in touch
Wlth the local authorities and do their best for the
men. Then, of course, there are sadder cases of
njen who have unhappy homes and who are seeking
divorces. Divorce procedure under the poor
Persons' aid organization is desperately slow. As
a rule it takes three years for a man to get a decree,
tjnless he is in the position to pay a fee of about
, ?'5 when his case can be taken at the local assizes
jn about nine months. But the Civil Liaison
j Officer's happier task is to do her best to get the
n!en to bring their wives and families to visit the
ttnit and to act as a hostess on these occasions,
-he may make an opportunity to discuss domestic
^'fficulties with the family.

A Vocational Officer is there to give advice as
j regards employment. Where there is doubt as to
j^hether a man has already been employed to the
est of his ability, he may subject himself to tests
^nd advice will be given to him as to what occupat.on is most suitable for him to pursue. It is our
jt'rn not so much to get every repatriate employment,
. ut to see that he gets employment in the sort of
J?D that will suit him and in which he will be happy,
J" to get the training for that job. To this end,
ne Vocational Officer works hand in glove with
i Ministry of Labour Liaison Officer. The
pmistry of Labour have been extremely helpful
n all our work with them, and their Liaison Officers
t each unit are amongst the keenest of those taking
Part in civil resettlement. My only fear is that there
re times in their anxiety to get a man a job or train
lrn for a job, that they forget that if that job is
ot one to which the man is temperamentally and
Physically suited, he will not be happy in it and he
Vl'l not stay in it. The Vocational Officer, too,
?"ranges for job rehearsals. A man is sent out to
nrm to spend some days at work on the employTu111 that he thinks he would like to take on.
hese job rehearsals serve two purposes. Firstly, on
ne positive side, they serve the purpose of confining to the man that he really is suited and that
he really wants to do the job. They give him an
idea of the conditions of work, the type of companions with whom he will work, the management
under which he will work and the treatment that
he will get in good and bad times. On the other
hand, a job rehearsal may help to disillusion a
man who has set his mind on doing something for
which he is quite unsuited. I look on these
rehearsals as being extremely valuable.

Soon after a man reaches a unit, he is taken to see
an employment exchange. In the old days,
these exchanges did not have a good reputation.
They were associated with unemployment, the dole,
the means test, and latterly during the war, with
compulsory direction of labour to industry. It is
of the greatest importance to a man that he should
feel that when he goes to an employment exchange
he will be treated sympathetically and intelligently,
and I am happy to say that the great majority of
men on leaving a Civil Resettlement Unit feel that
they can get that treatment. Each man is interviewed by the Ministry of Labour Liaison Officer,
who, in conjunction with the Vocational Officer,
helps him to get the job or training for the job to
which he is most suited. If a man needs training
and is eligible under the Ministry of Labour rules,
he can apply for a course at a Government Training
Centre. This involves six months training at a
centre, followed by eighteen months attachment
to a firm. At the end of the two years a man can
become a skilled worker or tradesman. Men are
taken extensively on industrial visits where they get
a chance of talking with the operatives and of seeing
conditions of work in many varied industries.
Every attempt is made while a man is at a unit
to bring him up to date as regards the history of
the war. Each unit has a cinema, and educational
and old news reels are shown as well as a number
of the well known and best recreational films which
have been produced during the war period. This
helps to bring a man up to date with war conditions
in Great Britain. Each camp has a theatre in
which there is at least one entertainment a week,
and there are usually one or two dances a week
which help the men in their social contacts.
Arrangements are made for local inhabitants to
come to the dances at which the A.T.S. girls who
work in the camp are a very great asset.
Group discussion is used extensively by Syndicate
Officers, Seconds in Command and the Technical
Staff, and is considered of good therapeutic value.
The object of group discussions is to get the men
to express their feelings and disclose their problems
without embarrassment, with the hope that when
they go to their homes they will be able to discuss
their problems openly and without difficulty in
the family.

Units have been located regionally so that it
should be easy for every repatriate to get home at
the weekend. Every weekend is a long weekend.
The man leaves on Friday evening and must be
back at the unit on Monday morning. It is considered of the utmost importance, if the man is to
be properly resettled, that he should be able to
discuss with his family every week what has been
going on at the unit. At one time it was thought
that the wives of married men were, to a certain
extent, antagonistic to their husbands coming
to a Civil Resettlement Unit. They felt that their
husbands had had their leave and that it was time
that they came home and helped the family with
their domestic difficulties. Some wives too, thought
that the man was just having a nice cushy holiday.
So we have done our best to open the units to receive
the wives. In every camp there is one day a week
set aside for showing the wives round the camp and
showing what the unit sets out to do for their
husbands. In some places, where communications
are poor, a hut has been set aside in which the wives
may stay a night. In fact, every encouragement is
given to embrace the family in the process of resettlement. It has been possible on some occasions to
get wives to take part in group discussions.
Not least important in the unit are the workshops.
They meet two great needs. First of all the need
of the man to do something creative with his hands;
and secondly, they give a chance to those men who
are tradesmen to handle their tools again and to
regain some of the confidence which is necessary
to them before they take on their old job.
From time to time suggestions are made that
repatriates should be given certain privileges not
available to the public. I deprecate these suggestions. The aim of civil resettlement is to enable
the man to resume his place in civvy street as a
normal citizen and not as a privileged person. It
would be wrong if I gave the impression that the
men who come to a Civil Resettlement Unit are
particularly neurotic' or in need of psychiatric
treatment. This is not so. In my opinion a great
many of them have resolved their own difficulties,
if they had any. Others may well be able to resolve
theirs without coming to a unit. They are mostly
normal decent citizens, healthy in mind and body.
They have been through a peculiarly humiliating
experience in their imprisonment, and civil resettlement tries to eradicate the unpleasant results of that
experience. In a voluntary system it would be
invidious and impossible to sort out those who need
a course from those who could do equally well
without it. But even if it serves no other purpose,
the Civil Resettlement Unit treats the soldier who
has been a tiny component in the vast war machine
as a very human being. He leaves his war service
with a sweet taste in his mouth. The government
machine, which picked him up in the emergency
of conflict to mould him as a tool for victory, has
not scrapped him after the conflict is over. It is,
on the contrary, doing its best to put him back
where he started.

There are other interesting activities in connection
with these units. Each Unit has an Extension
Scheme which was originally designed to screen
the large numbers of men who were at one time
time kept waiting for some weeks before they could
be taken into a unit. It has now, however,
developed to advertise the value of the Civil
Resettlement Unit in the region which each
unit serves. It is felt that a great many men,
for one reason or another, are not acquainted with
the service which is offered them. We feel too,
that the service which we give is of real value, so
that we want to make absolutely certain that every
repatriate has at least heard of resettlement and
something of how it may be able to help himThe Extension Scheme is very largely dependent on
voluntary organizations and government services,
like the Ministry of Labour and the Police. Cooperation with the Red Cross and St. John Ambulance has been most fruitful. The Red Cross stands
very high in the opinion of all prisoners-of-war and
their families. A Red Cross welfare worker is
attached to each unit and works in partnership
with the Extension Officer and Civilian Liaison
Officer. Such organizations as the Red Cross,
W.Y.S., S.S.A.F.A., C.A.B., British Legion and
Regimental Associations are now helping us with
an ambitious scheme for a house to house visit
of all prisoners-of-war not now serving. It is
hoped by this means to make known to all eligible
repatriates the aims and services of civil resettlement. The Extension Scheme also serves in a
few cases to give after-care. Men are released
from a unit earlier than they would be otherwise
when it is known that they can get assistance from
the unit in their area, if it is needed.
One unit has been set aside to deal with the
problem of officers. On the whole, a very much
smaller number of officers have applied for a civil
resettlement course and, generally speaking, we
have found that their difficulties are more acute
than those of the other ranks. This, I think,
is very natural. On the whole, officers, all of whom
have been leaders in some capacity during the war,
would be less prone to seek help and more liable to
try to solve their own problems. It is at this unit
that there is a resident psychiatrist.

It might be of some interest to give some
figures. The last statistical statement gives the
following details: 15,650 men have been through
units; there are now 3,621 at units, and it is anticipated that there are another 5,000 to comeThis does not take into account those who may
come as the result of the activities of the Extension
Scheme, or those who may come as civilians during
the twelve months after their release from the ArmyI would like to take this opportunity to pay a
tribute to those who initiated this fine experimentThey are Dr. A. T. M. Wilson (Psychiatrist) and
Lieut.-Colonel E. L. Trist (Psychologist). I would
also like to couple with them the large number of
regimental officers who have put the scheme into
execution and in whose hands it now lies. Although
these are early days to say how successful Civ?
Resettlement has been, I am convinced that it has
proved of very great value to the large majority
of the men who have been through the units.
