Report on an Evacuation Hostel in Yorkshire
===========================================

:Author:  Irene Turgel, M.D.

Visiting Psychiatrist
This hostel, which was administered by the Joint
Hostels Committee, was set up as a special
psychiatric hostel in 1941, on the recommendation
of the Mental Health Emergency Committee,*
for those evacuated children who proved to
unbilletable in private foster homes and who were
also found far too difficult to be kept in ordinal
hostels.

The work of this Committee is now carried out by the Provisional National Council jor Mental Health.?E.D.
The Mental Health Emergency Committee acted
as an advisory body to the Ministry of Health,
and were generally responsible, along with the
psychiatrist, for selection of the children and
placement.

The hostel was not meant for mentally defective
children, though a comparatively large number
were of fairly low intelligence, but it was intended
for seriously unstable boys and girls of school age,
for children with behaviour problems and habit
disorders, neurotic and delinquent children.
The numbers were limited to 15. The staff was
specially selected, and had to be comparatively
large, a condition which unfortunately has had to
be abandoned during the last years owing to the
shortage of qualified staff. Individual treatment
has been given once a week by the visiting
Psychiatrist, who works in close co-operation
with the members of the staff, advising them in
aU general educational matters and planning with
them the handling of individual children. A
thorough discussion between psychiatrist and staff
takes place on every visit.

31 children have been treated and observed,
20 of whom returned to their families or were
transferred to other hostels or schools, for reasons
to be explained later.

The background of these 31 children is as follows:
9 were brought up in big institutions or
orphanages.
2 lived in various foster homes all their life.
15 came from broken homes (parents separated),
or from other undesirable home conditions.
5 children only had a fairly normal family
background.

Type of Problem
---------------
The problems which these children have presented
can be classified as :
?Anti-social behaviour:
Temper tantrums and aggressiveness, destructiveness, lying and pilfering.
Anxieties and Emotional Instability.
Negativistic behaviour:
Obstinacy, sulkiness, babyish behaviour, lack
of sociability and responsibility; selfishness
and greed; slyness.
Habit disorders:
Bed-wetting and soiling; masturbation; eating
disorders; nail-biting, thumb-sucking; speech
defects.

Sexual precociousness.
----------------------
It is understood that most of the children did not
show one of the disorders only, but a variety of
symptoms, the severity and violence of which had
to be experienced to be believed. They were in
fact quite uncontrolled and unresponsive to the
Usual methods of handling. We had among the
12 bed-wetters some children with delinquent
tendencies, others with symptoms of anxiety and
^security, excitable and aggressive children, and one
very intelligent, obstinate, greedy boy, with babyish
behaviour, masturbating and nail-biting as well.
Most of the enuretics grew better with the
improvement of their general symptoms; three
children are definitely cured, but two or three are,
in spite of good progress in their general behaviour,
only slightly improved.

Six children were admitted for delinquency
(mostly stealing)?three of them having been
placed on probation with a condition of residence
at the hostel for a specified period. Three of the
six belonged to the lowest group of intelligence;
one was a cunning little criminal, quite unresponsive
to treatment; he was transferred to a Camp School
with stricter methods. Another benefited very
much from treatment and community life, but was
taken home too soon against our advice. Three
of the delinquents, children of normal intelligence, have well improved, and will benefit from a
prolonged stay.

With regard to the underlying causes, we would
comment as follows:

Most of the children observed show to a greater
or lesser degree constitutional abnormalities (innate
instability, very strong instinctual forces, incapacity
to tolerate frustration, low intelligence). It seems
however, justifiable to say that, with the exception
of three or four psychopathic or prepsychotic
children, the behaviour problems were in the
main due to the very unfavourable factors of the
environment. They were nearly all children frustrated of love during their early childhood, with no
security and little individual care and attention,
and who had to face a world of hostility and rejection
at an early age.

They were shifted about in various foster homes
or hostels, and thus suffered additionally from
feelings of insecurity and inferiority, frequently
increased by backwardness because of lack of
continuity in schooling.

Some of the children had very severe shock
experiences; one witnessed his mother's suicide
when he was five; another the outbreak of his
mother's insanity; two children were deserted
by their mothers, one is an unwanted child, two
at least are illegitimate; many of them witnessed
alarming scenes between their parents; promiscuity,
even inside the family; and those with a fairly
normal family background suffered, with justification, from jealousy towards brothers and sisters,
and from wrong handling.

The hereditary conditions were not favourable
either. Insanity of one parent was reported in
the history of five children. Mental deficiency and
dullness exist in two or three parents. Syphilis
was reported in three cases, and two children have
been found to be affected. How many parents
showed temperamental and moral deficiencies
cannot be stated with certainty, but serious sexual
irregularities occurred in at least two cases.

The intellectual endowment of these children,
compared with a group of normal children, showed
a greater percentage of dullness. The distribution of
intelligence, as expressed by the I.Q. is as follows :
I.Q. 75- 85 .. 9 children.
85- 90 .. 5
90-100 .. 13
? 100-125 .. 4
Temperamental deficiency was found in two
children, who were so unstable and uncontrolled
that for the protection of the younger children they
had to be sent away; one boy, belonging to the
highest group of intelligence, was able to be transferred to a residential School for older difficult
children ; a very dull girl with dangerous outbursts
had to be sent to a mental hospital for treatment.
Some of the emotionally unstable children were
found to suffer also from metabolic disorder (e.g.
subnormal level of blood sugar), increasing their
restlessness, eating and sleeping disorders, and these
were helped by general medical treatment.

Summary of Results
------------------
Before discussing the form of treatment, here is a
summary of the results:

6 of the children returned to their families could be
called normal, and were likely to get on well provided their environment proved satisfactory.
8 had improved, but still showed behaviour
difficulties; prognosis depends largely on their
further experiences.

6 of the children who were transferred to hostels
for dull and backward children, to residential
schools, etc., showed only slight improvements
at that time, but partly adjusted themselves later.
At the moment the hostel is reduced to 11 children,
of these: 7 have considerably improved; 3 still
present serious problems; 1 has not been staying
long enough to allow a conclusive opinion.

Form of Treatment
------------------
The aim of the hostel is educational as well as
therapeutic; that is, to give the children security,
self-confidence, and confidence in the grown-ups,
who are their friends and comrades, not their
masters; to encourage independence, helpfulness
and responsibility ; to teach them the pleasure of
give and take and the appreciation of a decent life.
The methods are steady friendliness, respect for
their individuality, encouragement of their assets,
and a great variety of activities which serve as outlets
for their aggressive and destructive instincts, and
stimulate their constructive and creative power.
Woodwork, drawing and painting, gardening and
games, especially football, are equally popular.
The atmosphere is that of a happy big family,
the character of which is emphasized by the presence
of the two little children of the warden-couple,
who have called out in nearly all the hostel children
a protective gentle attitude. The members of the
staff understand the individual problems well and
try to give each child the responsibility and freedom
he needs, increased affectionate attention and
encouragement, or stricter supervision where this
is required. The children move freely in the village,
attend the two local village schools, mix with.
activities, and are accepted surprisingly well considering the difficulties.

The psychiatrist visits weekly. Treatment consists
in play therapy, which enables the children to give
expression to their inner tensions, their anxieties
and aggressiveness, and to gain insight into their
problems. With the older boys and girls direct
talks are used too. The relationship between
the children and the psychiatrist is one of friendship
and confidence, and the continuity of contact
contributes much to their feeling of security.
Though treatment interviews are often stopped for
weeks, where it seems no more necessary, they can
always be taken up again when lapses occur or
the child feels temporarily unsettled and in trouble.

Duration of Stay
------------------
The length of time spent at the hostel has varied
from ten months to nearly five years, with an
average stay of two years. Discharge, however,
was not only determined by an improvement of the
child's behaviour, but often by the parents' wish
to have their child back; while, on the other hand,
some children cannot be discharged in spite of
considerable progress because they have no families,
and are unsuitable for foster homes and institutions.
They feel secure and happy in the hostel and will
have to be kept there as a comparatively stable and
settled group ready to help difficult newcomers
to settle down and fit into the group-life. With
the experience of their own problems they are
somehow better suited to accept children with
anti-social behaviour or other difficulties than normal
children would be, who might either reject their
abnormal playmates or more easily be led by them.
Conclusions

1. In my opinion there is a definite need for
this type of hostel for children who have been
hitherto presenting serious social problems. There
should be no difficulty in keeping it filled.
2. Close co-operation with other hostels and
childrens' homes in the local county area is desirable
to help with special problems, and to enable the
authorities to arrive at the best placement possible,
according to the individual hostel set-up and the
special needs of the particular child. Indiscriminate grouping often interferes with success.

3. It is advisable that selection and placement
of the children should be the responsibility of a
psychiatric social worker and the psychiatrist.
4. In view of the necessarily small number of
children in any one hostel, if the sound idea of
family grouping is maintained, it would help if
two hostels could be near together, so that children
of similar age could unite for organized activities,
e.g. acting, games, Nature Club, etc.

Our experience has taught us that the efforts
above described have been well worth while, and
that the children who have a sound family background can return eventually and meet the demands
of normal life, and that the rest have developed,
and do remarkably well within the happy atmosphere
of the hostel.
