Handbook of Social Psychology
==============================

By Kimball Young,
Frotessor ot Sociology, l^ueen s college, New YorK.
Kegan Paul. 1946. Pp. 578. 21s.
The need for a sound social psychology is becoming
something in the nature of a necessity. The growing
interest in social relations under the pressure of current
events, the intrinsic development of psychology itself
and the menace to Society from international crisis and
the advance in technology, make it a matter of urgency
that students of psychology and sociology should have
a sound and guiding textbook which should shepherd
them through the morass of researches and theories
which have grown up during the last half a century.
Dr. Kimball Young's book should have been a very
timely publication. Does his attempt to bring together
within the compass of one book of recent researches
and views meet the needs of students ?
Dr. Young, not unexpectedly, gives much credit to
American pioneer work in the field of experimental
and observational social psychology and it is true that
many valuable researches have been carried out in the
States through excellent team work. The author also
gives due recognition to the work of MacDougall, and
Freud's hypothesis regarding the Origin of Society and
Social Ties is mentioned and the latter's psychopathology
utilized for the explanation of the basic mechanisms
of individual behaviour and their social reverberations.
The general pattern of the book tends to follow
orthodox lines, starting with a consideration of the
animal prototypes of human behaviour and followed
by an account of the various patterns of personality in
relation to culture. Logically, the section on Desires
and Emotions should have preceded this, so that the
later consideration of social cultural realities, Stereotypes
and Myths, would have fallen into an easy sequence.
The author's present arrangement may lead the student
into some confusion of thought and the begging of many
questions. For in the very nature of the subject it is
still a matter for speculation and careful discussion of
facts as to whether social or psychological criteria have
priority or, as may well be, social requirements do not
at all stages impose certain basic patterns upon human
conduct.
The author's manner of dealing with his data is some-
what discursively descriptive and nowhere does he
appear to seek for co-ordinating principles which would
have bound the subject together, thereby giving it not
merely cohesion but laying down a blue-print for further
study and research. The whole book contains a wealth
of material gathered from contemporary events and
problems, as well as from specific researches and the
studies of primitive societies. But we get the impres-
sion of a loosely patterned mosaic with little suggestion
of the large and sweeping processes which dominate
human behaviour unfolding itself in time and place.
There are few vital subjects which the book does
not deal with, sometimes at great length, such as
The Psychology of War and Revolution, Civilian
Morale and Forms of Mass Behaviour, Fashion, Public
Opinion and Propaganda. Because of its chatty and
discursive style, it is eminently readable and entertaining
It is true that the kaleidoscope of human social life
presents a bewildering, changing pattern, but we are
not likely to further social research and forge an instru-
ment for social improvement by presenting a glorious
technicolour film of the social scene. The present
book would have served a much more useful purpose
if some matter were cut down and formal discussion
of fundamental principles were put forward, even tf
tentative in nature.
The book can certainly be recommended for the
valuable bibliographies attached to each of the chapters.
Emanuel Miller.
