News and Notes
=============== 

The National Association for Mental Health
Readers of this Journal will be aware of the long
Protracted negotiations which have been taking place
concerning the final amalgamation of the three bodies
composing the Provisional National Council?the
Central Association for Mental Welfare, the Child
Guidance Council and the National Council for Mental
Hygiene?into one incorporated organization. The
?oal has at last been achieved, and on November 25th,
1946, the National Association for Mental Health
received its certificate of incorporation under the
Companies Act, 1929. Its inaugural meeting is to be
held on February 11th, when the Hon. Officers will be
elected.

The new Association, as its Medical Director has
Pointed out in his Editorial, is beginning to function
at a time when exceptional opportunities are opening
?ut for the development of a truly preventive Mental
Health Service, statutory and voluntary, and there is
a rapidly growing demand for mental health education,
lr?m individuals and from groups.

To meet this demand and to take advantage of these
?Pportunities, the new Association seeks the support
of a large membership representative of every part of
the country and of every class of the community, and
readers of this Journal are invited to apply for a pamphlet
Swing fuu particulars of the Association's programme
and of the terms it offers to those wishing to join as
^embers or associates. A Report of the activities of
j^s immediate predecessor?the Provisional National
Council for Mental Health?during the past two years
ls also available and will gladly be supplied on
aPplication.

Cental Health Conference, November, 1946
-----------------------------------------
So many applications were received by the Provisional
Rational Council for its Conference held on November
J4th and 15th, 1946, that the place of meeting had to be
changed at the last minute from the Caxton Hall,
Westminster, to the St. Pancras Town Hall with its
Jpuch larger seating accommodation. At each of the
?ur sessions there was an attendance of approximately
thousand, of which number some 446 were representatives of local authorities and voluntary organizations.
I?6Conference was officially supported by the Ministry
of e eahh, the Ministry of Education, the Secretary
1 State for Scotland, the Ministry of Health and Local
nf?cernrnent f?r Northern Irelajid, and the Ministry
p cat^on f?r Northern Ireland.

(1 t^ers were siven on the first day by Dr. J. R. Rees
vate Consulting Psychiatrist to the Army, and Medical
sector of the Tavistock Clinic) on " The Application
- the Civilian Population of Wartime Experience of
eurosis and Backwardness in the Forces ", by Dr.
n'Jr- Main (Medical Director, the Cassel Hospital) on
?the Employment of the Mentally and Emotionally
o andicapped " and by Professor A. J. Lewis (Professor
p.. Psychiatry, London University and Director of
Unical Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital) on " Comumty Care in relation to the Extended Powers of
ealth Authorities under the new National Health
rvice Bill The Conference also had the pleasure
jj Welcoming the Rt. Hon. Aneurin Bevan, Minister of
tin wh? addressed it on the new legislation in relaofn u? t^le Mental Health Services. The Chairmen
these two sessions were respectively, Professor
J. M. Mackintosh and Mr. P. Barter (Chairman of the
Board of Control).

The first session of the second day, under the chairmanship of the Rev. John H. Litten (Principal, National
Children's Homes), was devoted to papers on " The
Care of the Homeless Child " by Miss Lucy G. Fildes,
and "Juvenile Delinquency" by Miss Margery Fry,
J.P. In the afternoon, Miss Norah Gibbs (Educational
Psychologist) spoke on " The Integration of the Psychologic Services under the new Education Act " and Dr.
John Bowlby (Tavistock Clinic) on " The Future Role
of the Child Guidance Clinic in Education and other
Services ". The Chairman at this session was the Rt.
Hon. R. A. Butler, M.P.

A full Report of the proceedings is in course of preparation and applications for copies (price 3s. 6d.,
postage extra) are invited. The Report will be sent
automatically to all those who took inclusive tickets
for the whole Conference.

Child Guidance News
-------------------
Immediately following the Open Conference of the
National Association for Mental Health, a One-day
Child Guidance Inter-Clinic Conference was held at the
Caxton Hall, Westminster, on Saturday. November 16th,
1946.

This Conference, reserved for representatives and
professional members of staffs of Child Guidance
Clinics, dealt with three topics: " The Treatment of
Children in Clinics and Group Play-Therapy ", " The
Position of Training for Child Guidance " and " The
Treatment of Children in Hostels ". The Chairman of
the morning session was Dr. William Moodie (Medical
Director, Child Guidance Training Centre) and the
speakers were Dr. W. Paterson Brown (Medical Director,
Oxford Child Guidance Clinic), Miss E. M. John
(Educational Psychologist, Birmingham Child Guidance Clinic) and Dr. Kenneth Soddy (Medical Director,
National Association for Mental Health). In the
afternoon, Dr. Frank Bodman (County Psychiatrist,
Somerset County Child Guidance Clinics) presided,
and the speakers were : Miss M. W. Hamilton (Regional
Representative, National Association for Mental Health)
and Miss Clare Britton (formerly Psychiatric Social
Worker, Oxfordshire County Hostel Scheme).
The Conference was attended by 300 people, and
vigorous discussion?which would have been prolonged
if time had allowed?was provoked by the three papers.
A full report will be issued in due course.
Up-to-date information on the present position in
regard to Clinics in England and Wales has recently
been compiled by the Child Guidance department of
the Association. This is available to clinics and professional workers and to officers of local authorities at
a cost of 6d.

Three new Clinics have been recently approved
for the training of psychiatric fellows, bringing the total
up to 13. The number of applications for Fellowships,
from medical men and women, is three times as great
as the highest number received during the war years,
and facilities are now available for the training of 19
doctors per year wishing to specialize as Child Psychiatrists. In addition, at the present time, 9 holders of
Fellowships in Educational Psychology are in training
in selected Clinics.

Residential Nursery for Maladjusted Children
This Nursery, originally administered by the Provisional National Council for Mental Health, as a wartime
Residential Nursery for Maladjusted Children and now
approved by the Ministry of Education as a Boarding
Home, is shortly to be transferred from its present
emergency premises at Pewsey, Wiltshire, to a house
which has been recently bought by the National
Association, at Westerham, Kent.

Here 24 children will be provided for, at a weekly
charge of ?3 3s. per head. The age range is from 2 to'
7 years, but admissions are limited to children not
older than 5. The Home is at present full, but applications for the waiting list can be received.

Agricultural Hostels for Defectives
------------------------------------
The Agricultural Hostels for male defectives on Licence
from Certified Institutions, started experimentally
during the war by the Central Association for Mental
Welfare and now administered by the National Association for Mental Health, have been uniformly successful
and two new ones?bringing the total up to eleven?
are about to be opened in the East Riding of Yorkshire
in addition to the two already established there.
Although at the outset, some doubt was expressed
as to the ultimate success of such a venture, the County
Agricultural Executive Committees embarking on it,
have become fully convinced of its value and are eager
for extension.

Counties in which Hostels have been established are:
Gloucestershire (4), Hampshire (2), Shropshire (I),
and East Riding (4).

The Curtis Committee and the Training of Workers
It will be remembered that the Interim Report of the
Care of Children (Curtis) Committee, to which attention
was drawn in our last issue, urged the importance of
specialized training for the staffs of Children's Homes.,
and in the final Report (issued in September, 1946)*
there are many instances of failure in understanding
children's needs which have lack of training as their
fundamental cause.

The National Association for Mental Health has been
deeply concerned about this matter for some time,
and in the spring of 1945 an attempt was made to organize
a Six Months' Training Course. Owing, however,
to the lack of suitable candidates able to maintain
themselves during training without financial assistance,
this attempt had to be abandoned.

During 1946, the Association received from the
Ministry of Health sufficient financial support to organize
a twelve months' Course to meet the needs of Heads
of Homes and senior members of their staffs, and the
Institute of Education generously offered to co-operate
by supplying some of the members of its teaching
personnel. A further effort was thereupon made to
enrol students, followed up by an intensive enquiry
from a selected sample of Local Authorities as to the
possibilities of staff being released. In every case,
however, the reply received was that even if there were
staff who would benefit by training, it would be impossible
to release them for as long a period as a year; on the
other hand, if trained workers could be supplied, wellpaid employment as Heads and Senior staff workers
would thankfully be offered to them. Further it was
considered that the maintenance of students during
training was, a matter for the Government and not for
Local Authorities.

A deadlock is thus revealed which must in some way
be broken, for without trained staffs, the recommendations of the Curtis Report cannot be implemented.
The National Association still hopes to institute its
projected year's Course and it is convinced that there is
available a nucleus of young men and women with
valuable experience of work with children during the
war, who are ready for training provided they can be
financially maintained during it. Training facilities
are ready?on lines approved by the Curtis Committee?
and if the Government is prepared to give the support
needed, the scheme outlined above can be put into
operation in the autumn of 1947.

Meanwhile, however?so urgent is the immediate
need?the Association has been exploring alternative
possibilities afresh, and it is now in touch with two
Local Authorities eager to provide facilities for experimental courses of training to be given in existing Homes
in their areas.

A psychiatric social worker (Miss Clare Britton),
formerly employed under the Oxfordshire County
Hostel Scheme, has been appointed to take charge of
this new activity, and her advice and help in regard
to staffing and other problems, is being placed at the
disposal of Local Authorities from whom applications
are invited.

It will be remembered that the Curtis Committee
further urged the need for specialized training of Boarding Out Visitors or Children's Officers :

'' who must be capable of assessing the suitability
of a foster home for the needs of a particular
child ... of establishing friendly and helpful
relations with the foster parents and co-operating
with them for the good of the child; and of
recognizing quickly any change in the situation
in the home which might be detrimental to the
child and taking or recommending the necessary
action ".
As an experiment, the National Association organized,
in February, 1946, a month's course for Welfare Officers
engaged in the Boarding-out of children. Such provision
is in no sense a substitute for the comprehensive year's
course considered necessary by the Curtis Committee,
but it will be seen from the list given on page 81 that as
an emergency measure, another Course on the same
lines is being held in March for which over 30 students
have been accepted.

Attention is drawn to the publication by the Association of the evidence?collated and interpreted by Miss
Ruth Thomas, its Senior Psychologist?which it presented to the Curtis Committee. Copies may be obtained
from 39 Queen Anne Street, price 3s. 6d.

Memorandum on Boarding Out
---------------------------
A useful Memorandum on " Boarding Out of Children
and Young Persons " has just been issued jointly by
the Home Office and the Ministry of Health, which
amplifies and elucidates two new Boarding-Out Orders
recently issued, viz. The Children and Young Persons
(Boarding-Out) Rules, 1946, and the Public Assistance
(Boarding-Out) Order, 1946.

The Memorandum written " to encourage a constructive and resourceful approach " to the work,
discusses the whole problem in detail and makes
* H.M. Stationery Office. 3s.

suggestions as to methods of dealing with it, both from the
Point of view of the administrator and from that of the
Children's Officer engaged in day to day dealings with
the individual children concerned.

An Appendix lists the points on which the new
Children and Young Persons Rules differ from those
issued in 1933 which are now revoked.

This Memorandum can be warmly commended for
careful study by all who are concerned with this branch
?f children's work.*

Special Education Treatmentf
---------------------------
Section 8 (2) (a) of the Education Act, 1944, requires
Local Education Authorities to include in their educational programme, plans for providing special educational treatment for handicapped pupils, and Section 33
directs the Minister to make regulations as to categories
and methods.

In order to elucidate and amplify these provisions of
the Act and to follow up the Handicapped Pupils and
^chool Health Services Regulations subsequently issued,
this pamphlet has been written for the guidance of
Authorities and teachers confronted by new duties and
responsibiIities.

After noting the characteristics of the groups concerned
"7~the blind and partially sighted, the deaf and partially
deaf, the delicate and diabetic, the educationally subnormal and the maladjusted, the epileptic and the physically handicapped, and children with speech defects
and with dual or multiple disabilities?the pamphlet
discusses methods of provision for each group giving
some useful statistics as to the probable extent of their
varying needs. In regard to the educationally subnormal (as indeed is the case with most of the other
Sroups) no up-to-date figures are available, but it is
generally accepted that the proportion of these children
In the normal school population is 10 per cent.; it is
estimated that of these, ? 25 per cent will need boarding
chool accommodation, 1 per cent, will be best educated
n day special schools, and that for the remaining
or 9 per cent, special educational treatment in ordinary
chools will meet the need.

It may be noted with satisfaction that stress is laid
n the need for integrating the group of children receiving
nis special treatment, into the school organization:
" These children may need special help in
certain parts of their work. . . but they should
not be deprived of general activities with other
children which are suitable for their age. This
kind of organization presents opportunity for
experiment and careful planning which schools
will try out for themselves but clearly the defects
to avoid are, on the one hand, the isolation of a
special class, and on the other, too wide a spread
of age among children selected for special help.''''
tQVVherc, however, the pamphlet may be disappointing
teachers and administrators is that it fails to give
SD-Se anc* much needed guidance on the setting up of
Pecial classes, particularly in view of the high hopes
ised by Regulation 27 of the Handicapped Pupils
orations, which explicitly states that the number
cnildren in any one such class should not exceed 20.
0 this figure no reference is here made, and we read
^'y (para. 65) that the classes should be " small
Ahe section on maladjusted children draws attention
to the need for Educational Psychologists in the schools
and for Child Guidance Services, as well as for Special
Boarding Homes and Schools and for some system of
foster-home placement.

In a final section dealing with the preparation and
training of teachers of handicapped children, it is
observed that since special educational treatment may
now be given in any school, every training college
student should at least " be able to detect the presence
of a handicapped child in his class and know what lines
his education should follow if he is not removed to a
special school Those who wish to specialize in
the work must, it is noted, bring to it not only understanding and sympathy, but the equally important
qualities of:

" freshness and vigour and emotional normality
as a pattern or example, and a skill in instruction
that will make the most of their children's mental
or physical abilities " bearing in mind that
" despite all that can be done for the handicapped,
their way in life is likely to be hard, and they
must be encouraged to be self-reliant, optimistic
in outlook, hardworking, and so far as possible,
skilled ".

To this end a large increase in the number of Courses
on Special Educational Treatment will be necessary if
the relevant provisions of the new Act are to be effectively
put into force.

The fact that at the time of writing, the first edition
of this pamphlet has been exhausted, is proof of the
eagerness with which guidance and enlightenment on
its subject matter is awaited.

The Board of Control
---------------------
We are glad to be able to record that the Board has
now returned to London after its long sojourn in
Lancashire. The new address is: 32 Rutland Gate,
London, S.W.7. Telephone, Kensington 3456.
Mental Health workers also welcome the recent
re-publication of the List of Certified Institutions which
was suspended during the war years. This is obtainable
from H.M. Stationery Office, York House, Kingsway,
London, W.C.2, or through any bookseller, price 9d.
With the Board's Annual Report?publication of
which has also been resumed?we deal on another page.

A Picture Library for Hospitals
The Board of Control have drawn the attention of
Managers of Mental Hospitals and Certified Institutions
to a scheme organized by the British Red Cross Society
for bringing to patients who have to spend a long time
in hospital, reproductions of the works of great painters
?chosen as desired from a large selection, and changed
periodically.

The scheme is designed as a practical contribution to
rehabilitation and is the result of a successful experiment
carried out at King Edward VII's Sanatorium at
Midhurst, by Adrian Hill, an English painter, and Dr.
Todd, O.B.E.

It is found that many patients who had never before
thought of taking pictures seriously, have developed
through this scheme a keen interest in them even to the
extent of desiring to learn themselves to draw and paint.
In hospitals where the scheme is fully established,
such newly awakened interest is followed up by lectures
and talks on all aspects of art.

* Memorandum on Boarding Out of Children and Young Persons. H.M. Stationery Office. 4d.
t H.M. Stationery Office. 9d.
L
For Spastic Children
Two notable advances have been made recently in
provision for children in this country suffering from
various types of cerebral palsy (commonly called
" spastic paralysis ").

St. Margaret's School, recently opened at Croydon,
is recognized by the Ministry of Education (Medical
Branch) as a centre at which some 40 to 50 children
handicapped by cerebral palsy will receive both physical
and school education. Applications inevitably exceed
the accommodation at present available (for 30 boarders
and from 10 to 15 day children) and preference is being
given to cases in which there seems to be good prospects
of improvement.

One of the three medical directors of the school (a
physical medicine specialist) acts also in an advisory
capacity to the cerebral palsy unit at the L.C.C. Queen
Mary's Hospital for Children at Carshalton, a pioneer
unit which has been working for about four years
(the subject of an article in a former issue of this journal
by Mrs. Collis).

One of the physiotherapists and one of the occupational therapists on the staff of St. Margaret's School
have recently been in the U.S.A. to study the treatment
carried out at the Children's Rehabilitation Institute,
a centre near Baltimore, set up by Dr. Winthrop M.
Phelps, who initiated much of the cerebral palsy treatment being carried out in the States. A psychologist
(appointed by the National Foundation for Educational
Research) has also been in America to see the work
being carried out at the chief centres there and will have
a close contact with St. Margaret's and other similar
schools which may be established.

Besides research into the problems and best methods
of educating and rehabilitating children with this
handicap, it is intended that the centre at Croydon
shall also train workers to help to staff other centres
which may later be opened in different parts of the
country.

In December, the British Council for the Welfare of
Spastics (and those with allied conditions) was formed
under the chairmanship of Professor J. M. Mackintosh,
Dean of Public Health at the London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine.

The Council has been assured of support from all the
government departments concerned and is widely
representative of educational, medical, social and local
authorities' interests.

It will act as a central advisory, co-ordinating and
consultative body for all activities in Great Britain and
Northern Ireland directed to the welfare of children
and adults who suffer from the disabling effects of
cerebral palsy.

The Council is also interested in promoting the
provision of special treatment and educational facilities
and in fostering local associations of parents and others
interested in the work. Further particulars of the
Council may be obtained from Henry P. Weston, Esq.,
M.A., Hon. Organizing Secretary, British Council for
the Welfare of Spastics, 34 Eccleston Square, London,
S.W.I.

An Appeal
----------
Copies of the Annual Reports of the Central Association for Mental Welfare, for 1923-4 (Tenth) and 1924-5
(Eleventh), are urgently required for binding.
If any reader happens to have these, they would be most
gratefully received by the Librarian, 39 Queen Anne
Street, London, W.l.

Hostel Treatment for the Delinquent Child
-------------------------------------------
In a letter published recently in the British Medical
Journal, Dr. Sessions Hodge (Psychiatrist, Somerset
County Council) draws attention to the need for the
scientific investigation of delinquency, referring to a
paper read by him before the Electro-encephalographic
Society in which he recorded that of a group of 63 cases
referred from Courts of Summary Jurisdiction for
examination. 36-5 per cent, might, on complete
investigation, " be considered to suffer from epilepsy
or ' epileptic equivalents ' ".

The value of treatment in a controlled environment
for the delinquent child and the persistent offender may,
in future, be recognized, but Dr. Sessions Hodge points
out that the composition of such a controlled environment will be all-important and pre-eminently so in regard
to the resident staff, in whose selection he expresses
the hope that the advice of specially experienced
psychiatric social workers may be sought.

Training for Mental Nursing
---------------------------
In 1945 the Athlone Report of the Inter-Departmental
Committee on Nursing Services, made certain recommendations as to conditions of service, recruitment and
training for mental nurses, particularly in regard to the
existing examination system. These recommendations
have now been put into effect, and henceforth no further
candidates for training will be accepted by the Royal
Medico-Psychological Association.

The responsibility for such training is being taken over
by the General Nursing Council, and the names of all
nurses holding the Final Certificate of the R.M.P.A.
in Mental Nursing or Mental Deficiency Nursing will
be entered on the State Register for England and Wales
on applications received by the General Nursing Council
on or before December 31st, 1951.

Training schools in England and Wales approved
under the old system by the Royal Medico-Psychological
Association will be approved, for the time being, by the
General Nursing Council, although before final approval
is given they will be subject to inspection by that body.
The effect of these new arrangements should help to
break down the barriers which separate mental nurses
from their colleagues in general hospitals, by bringing
all types of nursing from henceforward, under one
single training authority.

Convalescent Home for Epileptics
---------------------------------
The fact that epileptics are excluded from ordinary
convalescent homes and that no special accommodation
is reserved for them, has long troubled social workers
who will welcome the news that the National Association
for Mental Health hopes to open within the next two
or three months, a small Home in a beautiful part of
Ashdown Forest (Sussex).

Adult epileptics of both sexes in need of convalescence
on discharge from hospital after ordinary illness or in
attendance as out-patients and needing rest and change*
will be eligible for admission. According to present
provisional estimates, the weekly cost per head will be
three guineas and this must therefore be the fee chargeable. It is hoped, however, that a small fund may
be available for meeting the needs of really necessitous
cases. The normal length of stay will be one monthParties of men and women respectively will be received
in rotation.

Further particulars may be obtained from the Nation*1
Association for Mental Health, 39 Queen Anne Street,
London, W.l.
