The Autobiography of David
=============================

Edited by Ernest Ray-
mond. Victor oollancz, London. 1946. 7s. bd.
net.
This intensely human and at times moving document
should he read by all psychiatrists, general practitioners,
psychiatric social workers, Local Authority Mental
Health Committee members and the framers of our new
National Health Service. It contains the edited writings
of a sufferer from a severe obsessive compulsive state,
whose main symptoms are fear of open spaces and a
compulsion to indecent exposure?crippling to any form
of social success?and yet that sufferer was for many
years prominent in Fleet Street as the London Editor \
of a leading Scottish Daily paper, and was the founder
of the " Arbitrate First ! Bureau
The book is remarkable for its obvious sincerity and
its studied understatement even when the author appears
to have legitimate cause for complaint. Tts main
professional interest lies in the sorry figure cut by our
best therapeutic efforts, in fact the only doctor in the
book who earns good marks is one who apparently
did no more than encourage the author to carry on
because " the sensitive always suffer
However it matters little that one doctor could bolster
up the patient platitudinously ; whereas an unfortunate
psycho-analyst, whose passion for truth outran his
bedside manner, was the reverse of helpful. The point
is that the entire system of doctors and hospitals com-
pletely failed to cope with this case, and the revelation
of how some of them set about the task is painful to
mental health workers.
Nor can we take refuge in the thought that most of
this happened twenty to forty years ago. We believe
that things are somewhat better now, but there is much
to be done before we have any right to complacency.
It is doubtful if a fellow sufferer of Mr. David 's
in 1946 would find adequate treatment unless he happened
to live in one of a few fortunate places or was financially
well off.
Many may feel that this book does more harm than
good by its damaging revelations and by undermining
that delicate growth?public confidence in psychiatry
and mental hospitals. But we must take our medicine
and redouble our efforts to improve our methods,
train more therapists and organize an efficient com-
munity care service and above all make preventive
measures our top priority.
This is no book for the student of psychopathology?
the author is not skilled in introspective analysis, nor
has he much insight into the nature of his condition.
The editing is most skilful as one would expect from
Mr. Raymond, but the very fact of editing still further
robs the book of interest to the analyst. As a descrip-
tion of symptoms it is very vivid, and the account of the
impact of various hospitals on a sensitive intelligent man
merits careful study. His years of solid achievement in
spite of all must command respect and give his story
an authority which it might otherwise lack. It is
definitely a book for the humanitarian and for the
professional mental health worker, and it is to be hoped
that they, rather than a sensation-hungry section of the
public will be the main readers. The text studiously
avoids cheap sensationalism and is presented with
dignity and restraint, but it undoubtedly contains
inflammable material.
Not the least of the book's virtues is that it is very
readable.
K.S.
