Active Psychotherapy
=====================

22 MENTAL HEALTH

By Alexander Herzberg, M.D.,
Ph.D. Heinemann. Pp. 152. 12s. 6d.
Dr. Herzberg has had a wide experience of Psycho-
therapy, both in Berlin and in London and in this book
describes a method of treatment devised by him to
shorten the psychoanalytic technique, especially in the
treatment of the psychoneuroses and the sexual per-
versions. How necessary and desirable this is, must
be obvious to everyone who is in any way concerned
with these all too common disabilities. If even the
fringe of the problem of readjustment to life of the very
large numbers of persons who require treatment now
and who will require it as the result of the difficult
transitions from war to peace, is to be touched, it is
imperative that some short method of analytical treat-
ment should be discovered.
The author discusses the classification of psychogenic
disorders, the originating causes and the importance of
repression in determining the neuroses and maintaining
them. He briefly discusses the psychoanalytic methods
necessary to disclose the structure of the patient's illness,
but is not content to leave the cure to the gradual freeing
of his inhibitions by allowing him to discover their
geneses and to work off his emotional entanglements
through the negative and positive transference on the
psychotherapist and the subsequent difficult resolution
of this transference. He believes that much more
direct methods are needed, and seeks to persuade his
patient to exert his will on the fulfilment of tasks which
are directed actively to break through these inhibitions
and to overcome the phobic and compulsive situations
which are responsible both for the geneses and main-
tenance of the conflicts.
He further discusses the causes of relapse and
suggests special methods to prevent these relapses. He
points out that where constitutional predispositions
are relatively important in the genesis of neuroses
compared to environmental influences, the prognosis is
less favourable, but even here he believes it is possible
to devise tasks to counteract these predispositions and
enable the patient to make a sufficiently satisfactory
adjustment to life.
He deals in a similar way with the sexual perversions
and holds that homosexuality is far the most difficult
problem to deal with in this field though other authors
do not share his view.
In the last three chapters he gives a general description
of his special technique and compares it with other
methods, and finally discusses the difficult question of
the moral responsibility of the physician in relation to
the advice he gives to his patients, especially in respect
of extra-marital relationships.
The general impression of this valuable contribution
to psychotherapeutic literature is that if Dr. Herzberg's
methods can be carried out they are of the greatest
value, but since the tasks involve supreme efforts of will
on the part of patients notoriously incapable of such
efforts, the teaching will not be of universal application.
This will be appreciated when it is realized that the
tasks imposed on the patient involve not only his forcing
himself to face phobic situations and to inhibit compul-
sive actions, but even to forego affections involving
conflict even though the patient may be unwilling to
abandon the love affair. Some psychotherapists may
have sufficient influence over their patients and enough
persuasive power to impose such tasks on them, and
and some patients will have sufficient strength of charac-
ter to carry out the tasks to a successful conclusion, but
certainly universal success cannot be expected. Never-
theless this book merits careful reading by all doctors
interested in abnormal psychological reactions and their
cure, and it is to be highly commended to everyone
engaged in the study of mental health and disease.
R.G.G.
