Problems of Family Life
=========================

:Author:  Agatha Bowley, Ph.D.
L. & S. Livingstone Ltd. Price 5s.

Dr. Bowley brings to her study of family life a wealth
of detailed material, culled from extensive case work
undertaken in her position as Senior Psychologist to the
City of Leicester Education Committee. She discusses
the problems which children present to their parents,
teachers and the psychological worker and the book
caters in part for each type of worker. There is an
admirable first chapter on the elements of happy family
life, which leads one to expect that here will be a useful
book for the inquiring parent, wanting immediate
guidance on specific difficulties. Thereafter, however,
the book falls between three stools. It gives very little
specific guidance for either parents or teachers and the
psychological worker, who has had to struggle with
recalcitrant children and anxious parents, finds it hard
to square her own experience of children's developmental
difficulties with the statistical summary which lays
a these difficulties chiefly at the door of environmental
circumstances.

Dr. Bowley notes that a large percentage of her cases
feel themselves unwanted and insecure, and that lack of
family affection is causative in a large number of
delinquent cases. " Delinquency or difficult behaviour
is the child's protest against such circumstances."
These statements, while true in part, read with a false
emphasis to the case worker who finds so many mentally
healthy children surviving poor circumstances and so
many difficulties occurring under good family circum-
stances. The child's phantasies and his imaginative
interpretation of his experiences receive almost no
attention throughout, and of a certainty these are very
fundamental factors in delinquency as well as in minor
cases of difficulty.

Dr. Bowley's emphasis on environment would be less
of a drawback to her book's usefulness if some study of
how parental attitudes, which are a large part of environ-
ment, can be changed, had been included; but it is less
than enough to say that " If mothers and fathers would
only consider more carefully the results of their ill advised
marriages and liaisons, many of the neuroses of children
could be avoided." This can only be the starting point
of child guidance. The question is, where do we go
from here ? Social legislation to improve material
circumstances is one fruitful direction. Another is to
make available the result of scientific child study to
parents through Parent Advice Bureaux. The important
factor in maladjustment is surely the way children react
to adverse circumstances by building complicated
unconscious phantasies to explain their hardships to
themselves. These are the real sources of their mal-
adjustment, and this is where the psychologist can help.
Child guidance, if it is to be effective, must be prepared
to use its influence on future social legislation, but its
immediate work is with distorted attitudes of children
and parents and, much less than it believes, with changing
environments which are dour and intractable things while
parental attitudes remain unmodified.
R.T.
