The Modern Approach to Criminal Law
=====================================

Collected Essays 
:Author:  L. Radzinowicz, J. W. C. Turner et alia.
Preface by Professor P. H. Winfield. MacMillan
& Co. 1945. Pp.511. Price 21s.

This volume is published under the auspices of the
Department of Criminal Science of the Faculty of Law
in the University of Cambridge, and is an outstanding
contribution to the well known series of English Studies
issued by the Department. The essays elucidate some
of the leading principles of criminal law and indicate the
main lines upon which the penal system in this country
has developed. They also illustrate the importance of
comparative studies in criminal law.

The volume is divided into four parts. The first
contains a reprint of an essay on the Italian Theory of
Crime and is a contribution to the work of Lombroso
by the late Professor C. S. Kenny of Cambridge
University. Although the essay was written about
thirty-five years ago it forms a fitting introduction to the
volume, as it is a tribute to its distinguished author and
to his subject, and is also a link between the past and
the present outlook on Crime and Criminals. Dr.
Radzinowicz and Mr. Turner follow with an essay on
the meaning and scope of Criminal Science, and introduce
its three branches, Criminology, Criminal Policy and
Criminal Law, with the precision and lucidity we are
accustomed to expect from the authors.

The second part of the book is concerned with
problems of criminal science and penal administration.
The essays deal with Present Trends of English Criminal
Policy by L. Radzinowicz; Punishment: (1) An Outline
of Developments since the 18th century by L. Radzino*
wicz and J. W. C. Turner. (2) The English Law of
Punishment by R. A. Wortley; Public Mischief by
W. T. S. Stallybrass; Police Search, by E. C. S. Wade;
Jury Trial To-day by R. M. Jackson; The Assessment
of Punishments by English Courts by L. Radzinowicz,
with further essays by the same contributor on the
English Prison System, The After Conduct of Discharged
Offenders, The Persistent Offender, and a Critical
Analysis of Criminal Statistics. The scope of this
review precludes any detailed acknowledgment of the
material dealt with in this important section. It may
be noted, however, that Dr. Jackson in Jury Trial To-day
states that: " A judge does not always ' gain experience '
on the problems of facts; he increases his self-assurance
and his self-confidence." Again, " Admittedly a jury
is not a perfect method (of trial), but a random selection
from the public at large is surely better than relying
upon a select group such as the judges." It may be
added that elsewhere the reviewer has called attention
to the fact that whereas medical men endeavour to
check the accuracy of their diagnoses, and the effects
of treatment on their patients, by follow up studies, the
legal profession does not seem to have devised any
comparable method whereby judges can appraise the
results of the sentences passed upon offenders who come
before them.

Part three contains essays by J. W. C. Turner on The
Mental Element In Crimes At Common Law, Attempts
to Commit Crimes, Assault at Common Law, and Two
Cases of Larceny; R. M. Jackson writes on Absolute
Prohibition In Statutory Offences, and on Common
Law Misdemeanours. D. Seaborne Davies discusses
Child Killing in English Law. The essay on The
Mental Element In Crimes at Common Law may
perhaps most interest the medical and lay reader. Mr.
Turner shows that as time passed the idea developed,
probably under ecclesiastical influence, that the infliction
of punishment for crime was necessary, and that liability
to punishment should depend upon moral guilt. In
course of time the moral test has been giving way to one
which bases the liability of the defendant on his foresight
of the consequences of his action. A brief consideration
of abnormal mental conditions under the heads of
insanity, infancy, and provocation is followed by
discussions on manslaughter and murder. Of this
section of the book Professor Winfleld writes: " Here,
Mr. Turner, Dr. Jackson and Mr. Seaborne Davies have
illuminated regions of the law that have been somewhat
obscured by doubts or inconsistent interpretations."
The reviewer may add that the essays are presented so
clearly that the lay reader can follow them with interest
and understanding.

The fourth and last part of the book is made up of two
articles on criminal science from the comparative point
of view. Dr. Stallybrass compares The General
Principles of Criminal Law in England with the Italian
" Progetto Nuovo ", and Dr. Radzinowicz discusses
International Collaboration in Criminal Science. Here
again one may quote from the Preface: " The value of
scientific comparison of various systems of law is that,
where the systems reveal a practical identity of particular
rules, this may be the foundation of international
unification of at least some parts of that branch of the
law; and where, as frequently happens, there are points
of difference or even of direct conflict, they may quite
well be instructive as throwing light on the national
characteristics of the particular States concerned."
It is to be understood that the essays are written
primarily for the use of teachers and students of criminal
law in English-speaking countries. But all those who
are concerned with the administration of criminal
justice, and who are in direct or indirect association with
the problems concerning crime and criminals should
have this valuable book at hand. They will often turn
to it for instruction and will seldom fail in their quest.
W.N.E.
