Some Lessons of Wartime Psychiatry.I
======================================

:Author:  KENNETH SODDY, M.D., D.P.M.
Medical Director, Provisional National Council for Mental Health
The intention of this contribution, which will
be concluded in the next issue, is to review some
of the lessons learnt by psychiatrists serving in the
Forces in the World War; to indicate certain
differences between the social conditions imposed
by war and by peace; and to advance suggestions
about the psychiatric service of the future. The
scope of the present article is to describe the special
contribution of the service psychiatrist to his own
sphere and also some of the peculiar features of
service life. In the next issue an attempt will be
made to apply these rather specialized experiences
to normal social conditions.

The subject has been dealt with more fully and
more authoritatively by Dr. J. R. Rees in his Salmon
Lectures of 1945, published under the title " The
Shaping of Psychiatry by War " (Chapman and
Hall). The only excuse for writing this article
is that it may reach a different public and spread
information on these topics. The writer is deeply
indebted to Dr. Rees for an opportunity to be one
of the military team and to work under his inspiring
leadership for more than five years of war.
The time is ripe, because the nations are now
ruefully counting the cost and making their first
attempts to repair the ravages of war. Therefore,
it is very appropriate for us to estimate the extent
of any benefits which may accrue from the last
seven years' experience. On all sides there are
reports of human misery, loss, disease, starvation,
the wrecking of hopes and the stultifying of progress.
Yet there may be benefits to salvage from the
wreck. It is at least constructive to turn over
the rubble and pick out such useful material as
may remain.

Certainly some aspects of Medicine achieved
progress during the 1914-1918 War. Though to
use war as a me&ns of social progress would be
wasteful, to say the least ; yet not all wartime
activities are destructive. It is the happy privilege
of Medicine that even during a world catastrophe it
can be constructive or remedial. In four great
fields?orthopaedic and plastic surgery, hygiene
and preventive medicine?opportunities were seized
making possible the striking advances of the interwar period. Psychiatry also benefited, being, in
1914, only in its infancy outside the mental hospital.
Psychiatry in that war had its first great chance of
dealing with mental disorder in the community;
and considering the scarcity of trained personnel,
its achievements were such that the small band of
workers may be justly proud of their record.

A New Orientation after 1918
One direct result of war experience was the
increase in professional and public interest in that
great group of human illness, which, although j
mental in origin, is not covered by lunacy and mentaj ,
deficiency practice. The phenomenon of " shell ,
shock " threw the subject into sharp relief and ideas j
were clarified about neurosis, psychopathic states*
and mental subnormality. It was realized that
good could be done provided the physician and the
social worker had the necessary special knowledge?
and (what is more important) the will and the
patience to try.

At that period, psycho-analysis was making & I
profound impression on the psychological world '
and public interest was aroused to such an extent |
by the urgent problems thrown up by war that in i
the 1920's psycho-analysis became a popular cult>
embarrassing to serious workers in this field. The \
effects of this premature popularity have been |
harmful in that it attracted much that was unhealthy .
and gave this serious science a reputation with the |
public which it did not seek and did not deserve- \
However, in the latter part of the inter-war period,
public curiosity found new diversions and the ,
bona fide workers were able to make their progress j
in comparative peace. Progress, of course, was not
limited to those entitled to call themselves psychoanalysts but was common to all those using an
analytical and experimental type of approach.

The Present Opportunity

It is claimed that during the recent war psychiatry
has made giant strides, particularly in menta'
hygiene and in prevention. As yet, the consider'
able public curiosity has not been gratified with sufficient information and sometimes the sohd 1
achievements are lost sight of in over-attention t0 ,
individual success or failure. There is novS| I
experience of the workings of a centralized menta1 j
health service, and the idea (reaffirmed in Dr' [
Blackers' Neurosis and the Mental Health Service j
of the appointment of " Medical Officers of Mentaj
Health " to a locality now has an established j
precedent. But it is a precedent with a difference" \
So that while psychiatrists with the appropria^ 7
experience warmly welcome this suggestion, ye, I
there are important differences of scope an
opportunity to be assessed and turned to advantage_ !
It will be noticed that the following descripti01;
refers to the army. This does not imply negleC
of psychiatric experience in the other Service^
but is due to the writer's own experience and als
because the army organization is bigger and in son1
ways more general and more nearly related to civl
life than the other Services.

Service Psychiatry at the Outbreak of War in 1939
To the Services themselves the inter-war period
was a melancholy one of starvation and public
neglect. The army in particular was aware of
public apathy, even of hostility, and was conscious
that the terms of service it could offer were not
attracting the best recruits?neither officers nor
men. The public can only blame itself if service
Planning was not progressive in mental health
matters?soldiers had little financial or moral
encouragement to make far seeing plans. In 1939
the only psychiatry practised in the R.A.M.C. was
the care of a few " mental wards ", where the duties
Were similar to those in civil mental hospitals.
A few months before the outbreak the Services
each appointed their consulting Psychiatrists, the
army having one for the army at home, and one for
the B.E.F. It is probably fair to remark that their
duties at that time were regarded as being within
the orthodox medical field. By this view, it was
Proper for the consultant to concern himself with
the establishment of special hospitals and outpatient clinics for dealing with psychiatric casualties,
and with the appointment of suitably qualified
Personnel to run them. Events turned out otherwise, because the consultants held the view that the
Proper function of Service Psychiatry was the
Prevention of psychiatric breakdown.

The Preventive View of the Problem
-----------------------------------
How can psychiatric casualties be prevented in
firne of war ? The answer is that they cannot be
wholly prevented, but their incidence can be very
much reduced by an organization which never
}?rgets the " human factor ". The requisites of
s?und mental hygiene in an army include :

(i) belief in the justice of the cause ;
(ii) belief in the soundness of the higher leadership;
(iii) efficient primary selection to exclude the
mentally unfit;
(iv) planned placing of men in roles for which
they are suited;
(v) efficient training methods and the inculcation of group feeling;
(vi) careful, skilled and considerate officers ;
(vii) planned indoctrination and up to date dissemination of information.

In 1939 the British Army was well off in the first
mentioned of these desiderata; the third and fourth
Vyere non existent; and the remainder were matters
?t individual chance?with often, it must be
admitted, a surprisingly high standard.
There were inherent possibilities in scientific
Election, which in the 1914-1918 war had achieved
Considerable success in the American Army. Also
was known that Germany had been pioneering
111 military psychology and both the British Army
and the R.A.F. had conducted small scale experiments in selection. But there was no plan for
aPplication of selection and nobody within the
organizations concerned capable of advances in
mis field.

General Problems and the Psychiatric Answer
The main shape of the problem was fixed by
circumstances. War was declared and the country
had unknown and possibly immediate military
hazards to face; conscription laws were passed and
operating ; several groups of militia were already
serving; there was a great rush of volunteers. Soon
the monthly intake was to exceed 50,000 men?a
figure far beyond the scope of any testing system
then available. All this made for a very embarrassed start for any proposed system of preventive
mental hygiene. As a background moreover was
preoccupation with the immediate campaign?
not an encouraging circumstance for long term plans.
The expansion of the army itself created a problem
the size of which is not generally realized. We
required a force of over three million men in the
field, whereas the peacetime strength of the army
was under 150,000 of which half were overseas,
the remainder being home garrison and training
units. Add to this the Reserve and the Territorial
armies, the former rusty and the latter only partially
trained, and the number did not exceed 500,000.
If only up to date fully trained soldiers were counted
on for training purposes the expansion was nearly
fifty-fold. And yet 350,000 British soldiers were
in action at Dunkirk. Where were the instructors
to come from ? If even one instructor was provided
for every ten men, who would meanwhile fight
the war ? The situation called for every quality
of improvisation on which the British pride themselves, and in addition, the most rigorously economical use of man power. Psychiatry contributed
its help to the latter.

The order in which these problems were tackled
was determined by the urgency described above.
The priority could be arranged as follows :

(i) the provision of a service to remove psychiatric battle casualties from the battle area
and to provide emergency treatment.
(ii) the elimination from the service of all men
mentally unfit to serve.
(iii) The proper selection of recruits on entering
the service and the selection of future officers,
N.C.O.'s and specialists.
(iv) The fostering of unit morale by help and
guidance on man management and the
solution of human problems.
(v) Care of psychiatric illness occurring apart
from battle stress.

Many readers may be surprised at the lowly
position of No. (v) and may not approve of the
seemingly scant respect paid to Medicine's traditional function. Yet taking the situation as a
whole, remembering that the security of the nation
was at stake, what other answer was possible ?
As problem and answer became more defined,
the psychiatric service grew up on an area basis.
It was not easy to obtain support for this at first,
because the natural plan would have been to provide
special hospitals for psychiatric in-patients and
specialist psychiatrists at the larger military hospitals
for out-patient consultations. It was an innovation
to insist on a service able to go to local units (like
the army hygiene authorities), and naturally at
this time there were few statistics to support the
contentions. The fact that just over a year from
the outbreak of war, in addition to a senior
psychiatrist at each Command Headquarters, an
Area Psychiatrist was stationed in each military
area, speaks well both for the efforts of the Consultant and for the adaptability of the military
authorities.

The early days of the area work were not
without their humours and perplexities for the
officers concerned. Although well indoctrinated
themselves, most were inexperienced in the ways
of the army, and there being no precedent, they found
that their senior officers usually had little idea how
to use them and at first they had to create their own
jobs. It is a common experience in the medical
and social world that the provision of a facility
reveals a demand not widely recognized?an incidence of this is in Dr. Blacker's Survey which shows
that the pressure on psychiatric clinics is greatest
where they are most numerous per head of population, and least where facilities are fewest. The
army experience bore this out, and in a very few
weeks psychiatrists were uniformly overworked
and had to be reinforced until there were more
than 300. The first reason for the rapid and maintained expansion was that psychiatry was able to
define and deal with the problems raised by the
dull and the unstable, which hitherto had had to
be borne by their fellow soldiers, to the serious
internal weakness of the service.

Special Problems and their Solution
-----------------------------------
It is only relevant to dwell on those aspects of
army psychiatry which bear immediately on our
post-war plans, and the problem of the battle
casualty can be summarily dismissed. The circumstances in this category are peculiar to warfare
and mainly concern logistics?getting the right
people to or from the right place at the right time.
It was not a major concern of the home army
during the early part of the war, and it was later
that this important task was tackled as part of the
overseas campaigns. Experience was rich and
varied, but more suitable for description in another
place.

Elimination of the Mentally Unfit
----------------------------------
(a) The Subnormal
The extent of the difficulties caused by the
mentally subnormal and the unstable came as a
great shock to the army and to that small proportion
of the general public who were interested. Yet
it could have been foreseen that at least 10 per cent,
of the population was too dull of intelligence to
learn modern soldiering. It would have been
reasonable to infer that men who in civil life had
remained unskilled labourers would not learn the
intricate handling of lethal weapons. Soldiering
had long outgrown the cannon fodder phase I
the days when digging was the most important '
task of the infantryman and the rifle his only weapon.
Anyone who doubts this had better learn the
infantry soldier's job?the use of the six or so complicated precision instruments which are his weapons
?learning to co-operate with Armoured Fighting
Vehicles of all shapes and speeds, and with the Air
Force?and not least the gentle art of killing and
not being killed, using two legs and such natural
cover as happens to exist.

It was not surprising that in the middle of the
rush expansion phase the army was embarrassed
by the dull and subnormal. One dull man hampers
the work of the whole platoon and draws upon ,
himself the impatience of his instructor and the |
irritation of his fellows who are forced to repeat
and repeat exercises for his benefit. Out of his
bewilderment and humiliation is born another
maladjusted and unreliable soldier. Nor is the j
formation of the so called " awkward squad ">
the segregation of the dull, either a truly humane
or economical answer; such a squad is scarcely
the pride of the army, which is not backward in
saying so ! But the most serious result was the
effect on the normal man, the waste of time and .
delay in training, the employment of instructors
on useless work. ,

The psychiatrist was able to supply the answer
because of his familiarity with the phenomenon j
of dullness. The inability of medical boards to
exclude dullards was the root cause of the problemThese boards were neither equipped with the
necessary technical procedure nor had the time
available to ascertain dullness, and (more important)
had no mandate either from authority or from [
public opinion to do so. The only exception was
mental deficiency so gross as to be obvious to even
a cursory verbal examination. The unintelligent
borderline defective was accepted for military
service, partly because there is little public informs- >
tion about the number and limitations of this class, j
and partly because of emotionally conditioned ^
thinking based on eugenic fears about the main |
burden of sacrifice being confined to our finest and ^
fittest young men. To the extreme upholders oi
the eugenic view it might seem logical to put
all dull and unstable men in the " front line "so
that the bulk of the nation's casualties will occur j
among the constitutionally inferior?thus improving I
the natural stock in the next generation. Such a ?:
view might have something to recommend it
(were an end to justify the means) had not the
national existence depended on the efficiency
the armed forces. Such men are bad soldiers, and
the retention of bad soldiers, whether as individuals
or as groups, endangers the security of the whole
and is not to be tolerated.

The solution lay in the creation of a separate
Corps whose main function was labouring?the
building of roads, railways and fortifications, and
Particularly docks and railheads with the various
Expeditionary Forces. Within this corps an
environment was created sufficiently uncomplicated
for limited ability and such Units usually quickly
showed all the signs of smartness and keenness
betokening good morale. Nor did they suffer
from the criticisms of other Units, who could only
Judge them by their results, which were good.

% this simple solution thousands of men were
Siven the chance of honourable and satisfactory
service instead of a life of frustration and trouble.
(6) The Psychologically Unstable

, The notion that men can be turned into soldiers
py a mere Act of Parliament has been proved wrong
lr* two wars. Yet the nation was enormously
9?mforted by the passing of the Conscription Act
ln 1939, apparently unmindful of the long period
?f training ahead before such conscripts would be
soldiers. In fact, Dunkirk and Singapore were
lQst and North Africa a somewhat chequered
military experience, before the fruits of that Act
}yere gathered. Behind this story of hope deferred
ues the story of the individual unsuccessful soldier
^hose presence delayed training and wasted
strength. Men in this group are of normal intelligence, and suffer from no disease known primarily
t? physical and somatic medicine. They are
Psychologically inferior?not capable of making
adjustments to the conditions of military life ;
arid their number runs to many scores of thousands.
The induction and training period is not easy for
the recruit and there is an inevitable incidence of
Neurotic breakdown. This phenomenon has little
direct relationship with bravery or cowardice in the
held. Few men are sufficiently long-sighted to
appreciate the future dangers of action while still
^ training. This is perhaps unfortunate for man?ind : maybe there would be fewer wars if
humanity were more farsighted ! The precipitating causes of breakdown are more subtle and
^ore intimately connected with the present.
The change of environment is much more drastic
^an the mere alteration of work and surroundings.
*o the loss of home life and of the immediate
SuPP0rt and love of relations and friends there is
added the loss of individuality. Perhaps the
hardest blow to the recruit is the loss of the
'^dividual esteem of those nearest him, and there is
a nasty gap before those other esteems, loyalties
a*?d affections are available which the army has to
^her, not ungenerously, to those fitted to accept
them. It will be difficult for those who have never
PjVen military service to understand that complete
Verification with the group which occurs in a good
unit. The sense of comradeship, of unity, is remarkaole and for many men will exceed in depth any
^otional relationship previously experienced.
Without this binding force, devotion to duty and
.self-sacrifice could not occur. Most men need a
angible love object and it is far easier to die for
0ne's mates than for an abstract idea, or for the
good of the country which may just then be dunning
one for income tax arrears.

Unfortunately this essential identification was
not universally attained. It requires a certain
basic emotional adaptability and those too heavily
dependent on previous attachments could not
achieve it. In mild form this resulted in the chronic
grumbler, the man who remained a civilian at heart,
often taking pride in this not entirely mature reaction.
In more severe form was the neurotic breakdown
and the psychopathic delinquent. The mild form
is usually kept in check by discipline with only
slight loss of efficiency. The severe form presents
an intractable problem, the cause of much wasted
time and effort unless handled with psychological
insight. The duty of the psychiatrist here was to
define the condition and arrange for swift and
unobstrusive removal, if intractable, from the
military sphere.

The decision to remove the unstable was hotly
debated, the Eugenists again resented the biologically inferior being removed to comparative safety ;
other unwilling soldiers disliked the way in which
these men could " work their ticketMost
people resented the way in which some of these
men on discharge lived at home and sometimes
earned four times as much money in industry?
though in fact the industrial history of such men was
rarely as rosy as that and as a class they are best
known to the National Health Insurance authorities
or Public Assistance. Fortunately sane counsels
prevailed ; the difficulty is one of fundamental
adjustment, no amount of dragooning can make
such a man a reliable soldier ; so that if a suitable
type of Army occupation could not be found, these
men were discharged. A certain amount of
effective placement was done, but in the main it had
to be remembered that the primary duty of the
Army was to fight the enemy and it could not carry
passengers.

The decision to discharge the unfit was possible
because army psychiatrists were able to assess the
degree of unfitness more accurately than any other
agency hitherto. But doctors are so used to
fighting the battles of their patients that this weeding
out and discarding came strangely to the majority
of psychiatrists, who were in this matter, acting
primarily in the army's interest and only secondly
in the interests of their patients. This necessary
bias, distasteful as it may seem to many, must be
borne in mind when attempting to assess the value
of the work done. So that, many of the stories told
about specialists being hood-winked by their patients
are wide of the mark, because the psychiatrist was
primarily engaged in assessing military usefulness.
In recommending discharge he did not necessarily
believe the " hard luck " story told him by a
disingenuous patient. Moreover, he was in no sense
engaged in moral judgment as to the worthiness of
the individual. Such stories always seem to imply
that discharge from the army is a reward to be given
only to deserving cases?an idea with which the
Army could by no means agree, nor did many
men so discharged feel that they had achieved
anything meritorious.

Vocational Selection in the Services
? In reducing the problem of the dull and unstable
to manageable proportions and in advancing a
planned procedure for such matters, psychiatry
made a major contribution to efficiency, and cleared
the ground for other important functions. The
care of the psychiatric sick was undertaken in its
acute phases, but, by arrangement with civil medical
authorities, was usually handed over to the
Emergency Medical Service when chronic, about
which procedure and its wisdom there are two
schools of thought. However, to proceed, the next
important contribution was the building up of an
efficient selection system. This function is of course
primarily the role of the vocational psychologist,
but in the early days of the war it came within the
purview of the psychiatrist, because the latter were
already working within the Army organization, and
able, by preliminary surveys and rudimentary
efforts, to create a demand which psychologists
could be called in to fill. Thereafter the two
branches worked side by side in their proper spheres,
psychiatry contributing work and advice on the
psychiatric aspects of scientific selection. The
principles followed were :

(1) to define in detail the various types of work
and life within the army ;
(2) to define the qualities needed to ensure a
minimum standard of efficiency in each job;
and further, the minimum personal qualities
to ensure reasonable efficiency and
(3) the examination of the individual soldier,
to determine where he could most usefully
serve.

Psychiatrists made a special contribution to the
selection of officers, a task requiring more detailed
care. Selection of soldiers for training to become
officers depends mainly on three points :
(1) an adequate standard of intelligence and of
general education ;
(2) proved efficiency as a soldier and
(3) possession of personality qualities enabling
a man to look after, lead and inspire other
men under conditions of difficulty, hardship
and danger.

Selections were made by close teamwork between
regimental soldiers, psychologists and psychiatrists.
The first named could assess military efficiency
and supply the soldier's view point on personality
qualities?a valuable contribution. The second
could assess intelligence and education by history
and intelligence tests and could define, by personality tests, the general structure of personality, and
the last named supplied clinical experience and the
interpretation of the data obtained by all three.
It has now been reliably established that this team
method of selection has given better results than
any other method hitherto employed.
Morale and Man Management J
The foundations of good morale in a service have ]
been enumerated above, and much can be achieved
provided that recruits have the necessary heart and
will. Such morale is derived from national need
and provided the basic structure of society is sound,
can be developed by adequate and wise training.
Nothing gives a soldier more confidence than
mastery of his craft, and psychiatrists were able |
to help much by advising on mass and individual
training problems. However, after training is i
complete and the soldiers are serving in the units
in which they will eventually fight, there is still |
much to be done-by the interpretation of sound
psychological principles to officers and men alike.
Area Psychiatrists, moving from unit to unit, t
living in messes, meeting and mixing with soldiers |
and, as far as possible, sharing their difficulties
and hardships, were able to make a valuable
contribution. They were constantly in demand
for consultation on individual disciplinary conun- |
drums, on court martial work and in discussion
with commanding officers and groups of junior
officers on the handling of men and their proper
indoctrination. This meant a considerable widen- |
ing of the sphere the psychiatrist would normally
call his own and involved study and thought. |
It was found almost universally that serving officers
welcomed the fresh light thrown on old problems
by those experienced in handling difficult psychological problems. No body of men can be trained I
in licensed killing without stirring up much that is
fundamental in human reactions, and in considering
the situations which inevitably arose, psychiatrists
as a class were possibly less prone to emotional
judgments than soldiers who had never received
any systematic training in dealing with emotional
problems. In general, it might be said that the
quality of the advice offered varied very much
according to the ability of the adviser himself to
absorb the fundamentals of the military situationThe undertaking of special surveys was a frequent
result of such informal talks. For instance, units
had at times found themselves worried by abnormally high rates of minor sickness or " epidemics '
of absenteeism, often traceable on investigation
to something sociologically unsound in the structure
of the unit. This could be ascertained and remedies
suggested. Special studies were undertaken on
enemy psychology and morale ; on the design and
use of new weapons or methods of warfare; on
the employment of the partially disabled; and on
rehabilitation of the sick and of returned prisoners
of war. It is impossible to enumerate all the
individual tasks undertaken in the interests or
mental health.

The value of these many contributions is still
a matter for careful assessment and debate, but
it cannot be doubted that those working in this
field have themselves learned much, and should be ?
able to profit both from their successes and their
mistakes. Much which has been learned is applicable
I [o both war and peace, because fundamentally
j ^ere is a similarity between the group structure
/ ?f an army at war and of a nation in its peacetime
w?rk. But there are differences to be borne in
^ind, one being that the army for most soldiers
Was a temporary phase in life. For such men the
army existed only for the specific purpose of beating
the enemy, and it did undoubtedly by its attitude to its
own psychiatric problems contribute, though unwillingly, to the problems to be solved in peace-time life.
In the next and concluding article it is proposed
to examine these differences rather more fully and
offer some speculations as to what can be done
by organized psychiatry in the future.
(To be concluded)
