The Necessity for Speech Therapy among Children
================================================

MENTAL HEALTH 43

Some suggestions as to methods of treatment
By FRANZ A. HEIMANN, M.D., L.R.C.P.Ed.
Assistant School Medical Officer to the County Borough of Bournemouth
AND
NORA O'DRISCOLL, L.C.S.T.
Speech Therapist to the Royal Victoria and West Hants Hospital,
Bournemouth
During the last five years 48 children, suffering from
speech defects, were discovered at Infant Welfare Centres
and at medical inspections, and were sent for treatment
to the Speech Therapist attached to the Psychiatric
Department at the Royal Victoria and West Hants
Hospital, Bournemouth.
This procedure now finds its confirmation in the
Statutory Rules and Orders, 1945, No. 1076, dealing with
handicapped pupils and the School Health Service. In
the Education Act, 1944, under the heading " Special
Methods of Education " it is stipulated that " the
methods of special educational treatment to be provided
for- handicapped pupils attending ordinary schools shall
include, in addition to special attention by the teacher
for a pupil suffering from speech defect, other than an
aphasic pupil, special training and treatment by a duly
Qualified speech therapist
In this article it is proposed to consider only three
types of speech abnormality, namely, Alalia, Dyslalia,
and Stammer. The term Alalia is used to describe
the state of a child over 2\ years of age who makes no
attempt to speak, beyond one or two words, but who
shows no other evidence of mental defect, and no signs
of deafness. The reason for excluding from considera-
tion the Dysphonias and the neuiological speech defects
ls that, among the cases under review, there were only
seven dysphonias?all post cleft palates?and three
childern suffering from speech defects of neurological
origin.
The effect of a speech defect on the child's adjustment
to school life is as follows:
Alalia (absence of speech)
A child who enters school unable to speak, or with a
very small vocabulary, will be unable to co-operate either
^ith his teacher or with his contemporaries. These
children soon begin to speak, but they suffer from
educational retardation. They may develop a feeling of
mferiority, with consequent timidity and lack of initiative,
?r they may attempt to compensate for their low place in
class by aggressiveness and disorderly behaviour.
Dyslalia (distortions of speech)
These children suffer in the same way as the former
group, though to a less severe extent. They are specially
handicapped in reading, as the sounds which are not used
by the pupil are not recognized by him in a phonetic
analysis, e.g. a word such as " sent " will not be correctly
analysed by a child who in his speech habitually pro-
nounces it as " 0ent " or " Ien
Stammer
The majority of stammerers are intelligent children.
Among 23 cases, we found that 11 were of high intelli-
gence, 8 were average and only 4 dull. These pupils,
put for their speech disorder, would hold a high place
ln class. Stammering unfortunately appears comic to
normal speakers, and the sufferers are ridiculed and often
bullied. They are unable to ask questions easily, and
generally stammer badly in answering in class. They
experience great difficulty in reading aloud and in
reciting. They are often aware of their superior
intelligence, but feel frustrated because they are
unable to express themselves adequately.
In conclusion: There is definite danger that children
who feel themselves to be frustrated and inferior during
school life may develop into adults whose attitude to
society is one of resentment.
Having shown the detrimental effects resulting from
untreated speech defects, we have to consider some of the
causes from which these disorders arise.
ALALIA
In the cases under review the apparent causes of
Alalia were:
1. Lack of stimulus to speak. A child who spends
most of his time alone, in a pram or play-pen, will not
hear any speech, and therefore has no model to copy and
no incentive to try.
2. Neglect. In a child who is neglected and ill-
treated, retarded speech may be part of a pattern of
general backwardness.
3. Overprotection. An overprotected child whose
mother, unwittingly, tries to " keep her baby ", will find
that he can obtain all the attention he needs by means of
grunts and cries of the first year.
4. Shock. In some cases there is a history of shock
?generally the birth of a sibling?which involves for the
child the sudden disappearance of the mother and her
return with a stranger, who receives the love and care
which were formerly his own property.
5. Partial deafness. It is difficult to be sure how far
partial deafness may be a factor in these cases. However,
two cases were observed in which the children watched
the lips of those who spoke to them and seemed unable
to understand if the speaker's mouth were covered.
These children expressed themselves very clearly by
signs. They were not grossly deaf as they reacted to
sounds made behind their backs.
DYSLALIA
In addition to the above causes, Dyslalia seemed to be
induced by:
1. Reversion to infantilism, which is often an attempt
to attract the parents' attention. A little girl was seen
whose mother reported that her speech had definitely
deteriorated when, at one year and seven months, her
baby sister was born.
2. Fear and insecurity. Feelings of fear and pro-
longed insecurity may retard the all round progress of the
child, and the speech retardation is part of the picture.
3. Illness, which acts by exhausting the child and also
by cutting him off from the stimulus of companions.
A boy of years was seen who had spent a long period
in hospital and was living in a Cripples' Home, where
i
44 MENTAL HEALTH
a great many of his companions were suffering from
spastic diplegia and paraplegia. The Matron of the
Home reported that his speech while under her care had
deteriorated.
STAMMER
The causes giving rise to stammering are obscure, but
it is generally conceded that anxiety is an important
factor in its aetiology. A stammering child often shows
other nervous symptoms, generally timidity and night-
mares. A state of anxiety may be induced in a child by
shock or unwise handling.
1. Shock. The parents of many stammerers report
a shock a short time before the stammer was first
noticed. It is necessary to be cautious in accepting the
evidence, but some of the reports seem impressive. One
mother stated that she first observed her son stammering
at the age of three years, shortly after he had been badly
frightened by the barber's electric clippers. Another
reported that her boy was a noticeably clear speaker
until the house was damaged by a bomb when he was
five years old. This patient is said to have used his first
word at the age of ten months.
2. Unwise handling: (a) excessive severity. A boy
was seen whose father habitually punished him severely
and for insufficient cause. The child was pale, nervous
looking, and, in addition to a'very pronounced stammer,
complained of persistent night-mares, all related to the
experience of falling.
(6) Overprotection. This was seen in the case of a
boy who was an only son. His parents were much
attached to him and his mother feared for him for these
reasons. His father stammered slightly and she was
afraid her son would inherit the defect; there was
epilepsy in the father's family, and the boy, at the age
of three, had had a convulsion. Her fearfulness led to
overprotection, and caused the boy to be deprived of
reasonable liberty and amusement.
(c) Mental instability in parent. A mother with a
psychosis, showing symptoms of religious mania, had
aroused terrible feelings of guilt and insecurity in her
boy. She was too ill to attend properly to her household
duties, and the home environment was one of wretched
discomfort. There was a perpetual conflict in the child's
mind between his natural instincts and his mother's
prohibitions.
(d) Lack of affection in infancy. A boy was seen
whose mother had wanted a girl and foolishly allowed
him at a very early age to know this. At the age of 17
he seemed to be unwittingly attempting to simulate a
girl. His pastimes were rather feminine, and he dressed
in the gayest colours he could obtain. His father, on
the other hand, continually urged him to assume a man's
responsibility. The boy was therefore subject to a
conflict of ideals, the daughter his mother wished for,
and the son his father wanted, and he never felt sure of
the affection of either parent.
TREATMENT
Having considered the possible causes of speech defects,
we can now make some suggestions as to treatment. It
is advisable that all children, who show any impairment
of speech, should be sent by their teachers for special
examination to the Minor Ailment Clinic, or be presented
at the school medical inspection. The education of
school children requires a closer collaboration between
teachers and school medical officers. In the Reports of
the School Medical Officer for 1941-1945 we find in
Bournemouth, with an average attendance of 11,005
children, 24 stammerers, or 0- 22 per cent. This percent-
age is much lower than the percentages quoted as
national averages in the annual Reports of the Chief
Medical Officer of the Board of Education for 1934 and
1937, entitled " The Health of the Child in which
one per cent, stammerers and one per cent, other speech
defects are mentioned. This large discrepancy suggests
that a number of cases have not been notified, and that
the children concerned have not received the help of
which they stood in need. Both medical officers and
teachers desire to keep the bodily and mental health of
their charges at a high level. The physician should not
only be consulted by the Education Authorities if, and
when, a child is in obvious need of medical treatment.
As School Medical Officers we are dealing much more
with healthy children and with the prevention of diseases,
but children exhibiting symptoms of maladjustment also
fall under the scope of our activity. Physicians and
teachers alike forget that health is something more than
not being ill; it is very often dependent on the environ-
ment which, if it is unsuitable, may produce mental
instability. If the teacher is only concerned with the
instruction of the children, he may overlook the fact that
their success and progress are only possible as long as
there is no interference with mental and physical health.
Speech defects are generally symptoms of neurosis and
the cause of the condition must be sought for; any
treatment which does not do this is wrong and useless.
Fear, anxiety, and apprehension will not be relieved by
telling the child that his stammer is only a " bad habit "
which can be overcome by " will power The duty of
the school medical officers is to convince the parents of
the necessity for treatment and not to leave the stammer
alone in the hope that the child will grow out of it.
As a stammer is a serious handicap for every child both
in school and in his later career, he should be helped as
soon as possible to overcome the defect which is retarding
his progress.
It is useless to treat these children with elocution or
with breathing exercises. Treatment in speech classes
or groups is insufficient; individual treatment is necessary
if the cause of the disorder is to be discovered.
All patients should be seen by a psychiatrist as soon as
possible after they are referred. This is especially
important in cases of Alalia because it is difficult to
differentiate between mental defectives and cases of the
type described. The speech therapist should co-operate
with the psychiatrist and adapt her methods to the needs
of the individual child. The environment must be
studied and adjusted. This must be considered in three
divisions:
1. Home. The parents of the child should be inter-
viewed, their difficulties sympathetically discussed and
suggestions made of ways to ease the tension in the
family circle. If one of the parents is neurotic,'he or she
should be encouraged to undergo treatment.
2. School. The teacher should co-operate by adjust-
ing class work so that the child is as little handicapped
as possible. If he is very backward in any subject,
remedial teaching should be arranged. If the subject
in question is reading the pupil should be withdrawn,
for a time, from the reading-class, and given short lessons
by himself in as friendly and informal an atmosphere as
possible.
3. Leisure. A play centre would benefit most of
these children, especially if run by someone with a
knowledge of play therapy. Those children ill-adjusted
at home would find a holiday camp invaluable.
Speech is the means by which the personality expresses
itself, and a child whose power of speech is limited or
defective is far more seriously handicapped than one who
has lost an arm or leg. The Education Act provides for
the relief of this most distressing condition.
