Unemployment and Mental Health
===============================

:Author:  Brigadier  General C. Menninger 
Consulting Psychiatrist and Chief of Neuropsychiatry Division, Surgeon General's Office, U.S. War
Department, Washington

, A'he opinion and remarks to follow, represent
r?e personal opinion of the speaker, based upon
ls professional and Army psychiatric experience,
and are in no way to be interpreted as officially or
Unofficially representing the viewpoint of the Army
0r the War Department.

When a physician attempts to present some phase
his medical work to laymen, it is important that
e omit the more scientific terms and that he insure
at the onset that his listeners have sufficient background to understand the content of his remarks,
/nis is even more essential when one discusses
Mental Health, because of the many misconcepl?ns concerning this specialty of medicine.
Twenty years ago, psychiatry was largely limited
state hospitals and the care of psychotic, i.e.
msane" patients. In the following years it
Emulated principles which may be applied in the
^veryday life of every man, far beyond its previously
^mited area of influence. There has been rapid
development of Social Psychiatry?the application
these principles to all types of social situations?
lndustry, education, recreation, child guidance,
Criniinology. Less than ten per cent, of all the
Psychiatric work in the Army has been concerned
^th psychotic patients.

In considering the relationship between psychiatry
and unemployment, it is important to recognize that
mental health and ill health can exist in varying
degrees and differ as radically as a mild head cold
and severe pneumonia. These variations, that is,
the state of mental health, are caused by an individual's way of life, the influence and effect of his
strivings and ambitions, of his pleasures and
disappointments, of his satisfactions and frustrations. All of these combine in the drama of life,
particularly as they relate to the people about him,
to determine the individual's state of mental health.
One can establish the basic premise that to be
mentally healthy, one must have a purpose in life,
and society must be so organized as to furnish him
the means of accomplishing that purpose. For the
average man, as head of his family, this purpose is
the building and maintenance of his home and the
facility to be supplied by society is the work for
which he shall receive the pay with which to achieve
his goal.

The problem of unemployment affects not only
the status of an individual, but much more important, the status of his family. The American culture
is based on the family unit with its personal and
group satisfactions, its participation in the
community and ultimately in the nation's affairs.
The father, as the head of the family, is the wage
earner and so the active leader of this basic social
unit. The mother is the custodian of the home and
Bit/ prepared for Hearing before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking and Currency re the Full Employment
l> 24th August, 1945.

children. A family can be happy and successful
and "normal " only if the parents are happy and
successful in their roles and so are " normal
Consequently, unemployment becomes a problem
concerning two generations?the adults and the
children. Probably the most tragic result of
unemployment from the mental health viewpoint
is the effect on the children. Many opinions have
been expressed regarding the causes of the high
neuropsychiatric casualty rates of this war and
some have assumed that American youth was
" degenerating". There is no evidence of this
although there is much evidence of a rather widespread social illness as manifested in a country
which has recently had eight million men unemployed. The effect of this unemployment on the
youth of these families is beyond calculation. We
know that an individual's personality and character
structure is very largely dependent on his early
family environment. Not only are his codes of
thought and behaviour established at this period
but also his habits of personal relationships are
developed. A healthy family relationship is essential to the development of "normal" children.
When that family is plagued with unemployment,
it is impossible to conceive of the children maturing
without some degree of warp in their personality
structure and consequently, subsequent difficulties
in their relations to people and to the community?
evidence of mental ill health.

There is fairly unanimous opinion among social
scientists that unemployment is a problem of social
organization and not one of individual personality.
It represents a defect in our social structure.
The unemployed as a group are not inferior,
defective individuals who do not want to work.
Recurrent business depressions with as many as
25 per cent, of the able-bodied workers deprived
of the means of livelihood, have shown the fallacy
of the assumption that the labourer is at such times
responsible for his plight. Despite the fact that
these are the facts as judged by our best social
scientists, there is a widespread tendency on the
part of the communities and individuals to regard
the unemployed as " bums * or inferior specimens
of humanity. By this self-deceptive attitude they
adroitly fail in the acceptance of their individual
and collective responsibility for our social organization.

Mental Health Problems with Unemployment
Many sociological and psychiatric studies have
been made of unemployed persons. It is variously
estimated that 60-80 per cent, of such individuals
manifest definite signs of mental ill health. The
great majority give conspicuous evidence of their
economic insecurity in their thinking and in their
relationships with other people. Many of them
are definitely anxious in regard to their future ;
they maintain a lurking fear that there is no escape,
no end to their predicament. In the majority of
instances, the father of the household appears to
be a " failure "?a failure in the eyes of his wife,
his children, his friends and the community, often
even to himself. Without a job, he, to some degree,
fails to be able to fulfil his purpose. Also, as a
result of his loss of work, he loses some of the
stabilizing factors in every working man's life?
the association with fellow workers, the routine?
the need to get up in the morning, and to be at a
particular place at a particular time, satisfaction in
work done, receipt of remuneration for his effort.
Mental ill health is reflected on the wife. In
many instances, in her effort to alleviate the situation, she shifts her role to being the wage earner
of the family, and so its source of authority and
leadership. There is inevitable marital friction
resulting from this shift which is further aggravated
by the presence of the husband in the home all day
and the uncertain division of responsibility.

More tragic is the effect on the children?'
physically, educationally, emotionally. Again, one
should stress the fact that unemployment becomes
a mental health problem which always affects two
generations. Studies have indicated the deleterious
effect on the physical health of the children. In the
majority of cases, their education is cut short.
Emotionally they become quite disorientated, not
only because of the marital friction but because of
the confused role of each parent in the home. They
are inclined to regard the father as a " failure '
and so lose respect for him. Under our previously
operated relief system, minor children gained little
or no independence if they did work, because the
amount of a large proportion of their meagre income
was automatically subtracted from the money
provided the family from relief sources. Certainly*
no part of the income of a child under sixteen
should be deducted from the family relief funds.
Finally, a major symptom of mental ill health of
the unemployed displayed in their social insecurityBecause of what they believe their friends think of
thom, they tend to avoid them. Because of what
their friends know, these friends tend to avoid themThe unemployed regard themselves as outcasts,
disapproved of and looked down on by societyThey often lose a fundamental necessity for good
mental health?self respect.

Mental Health Problems from Threatened
Unemployment
The threat of unemployment is of particular
significance at this time to our veterans. They are
the children of the last depression and they have
not forgotten it. This concern of veterans in regard
to their future is vividly described by Eli Ginzberg
in his book " The Unemployed". He pictures
them as having fought all over the world, willing to
make any sacrifice. They have had no doubt as to the
outcome of the war, " but when they think of peace
they are uneasy These soldiers recall that the
country fumbled badly in coming to grips with
that scourge of peace?unemployment. They
remember that pregnant women were dispossessed
from their homes ; that farmers were thrown oft
their land ; that husky men became soft from idlers. They remember all this and more, and they
fonder what will happen when they have won the
victory on the battlefield. They wonder whether
country will also win the peace. They are
uneasy but they are not pessimistic. They have
Seen much these last years. They have seen their
country suffer the consequence of an unpreparedJess, born of ignorance, and they have seen this
failure remedied with speed and efficiency. They
know there is nothing within reason that the
United States cannot do if it will.

The same situation will be equally grave for the
jyigratory war worker ; in fact, his problem may
"e even more acute. With the tremendous turner from war to peace industry, we must realistic% face the uncertainty which prevails in the mind
the worker as to his chances and the chances
tor his family.

Cental 111 Health and Employment
--------------------------------
All that has been said above about the effect of
Unemployment on mental health applies to a greater
e*tent to that group of individuals who have made
a Marginal adjustment to life?barely maintaining
delicate equilibrium between mental health and
I** health. One of the lessons from this war has
>een to indicate the size of this group in our nation.
11 attempting to select fighting men for a fighting
arniy, we found that 39 per cent, of all men rejected
at induction were suffering from some type of
Personality disorder,?1,825,000 out of a total of
>650,000 men. Most of these men were and are
?"le to get along in their civilian jobs, but, in many
nstances, one can be sure that if confronted with
?jneniployment the balance of equilibrium would be
efinitely thrown toward mental ill health.
The rigours of Army life and particularly of
?mbat are tremendous and to the above figure we
pust add an additional 300,000 men who have had
0 be discharged from the Army for neuropsychiatric
Masons, constituting the amazing total of 43 per
r^nt. of all discharges for medical reasons. We
*nust further add the 130,000 men who were disharged on an administrative basis because of
nadaptability or ineptness?another way of
ndicating that personality factors did not permit
,nem to fit into a job in the Army. Many of these
atter two groups may find difficulty in staying
niployed. Of all the obligations that we owe,
?ne is greater than to our disabled veterans,
ncluding the neuropsychiatric casualties. In a
Urvey made six months ago in the Office of the
prgeon General, of approximately 5,000 soldiers
'Scharged for psychoneurosis, 85 "9 per cent, were
niployed as compared to 93 per cent, of the same
Sr?up prior to their induction. This survey was
*nade at a time when jobs were plentiful. If jobs
ere scarce, it is likely that only a small percentage
1 these men would find employment.

?With demobilization of the Army and War
dustries, unemployment will confront us shortly
nd not only will we have the inherent problems
of unemployment, but these will directly contribute
to making many of this group of veterans into
confirmed invalids. If there were assurance of
sustained employment opportunities for all, this
possibility would be of less concern.
Our Army experience has revealed the immense
scope of the problems to be found in a select age
group. We must assume that these figures would
be greatly increased if all age groups were included.
Recommendations

From a psychiatric point of view, it is an established fact that unemployment produces a manyfaceted mental ill health problem of serious proportions. Therefore, it would seem imperative to
establish an employment system which takes into
account very specific consideration of:

(1) Methods of insuring the basic mental hygiene
factors of security, gratification and selfrespect for every individual.

(2) The fact that every home affected by
unemployment involves two generations, with
the children probably suffering more than
the parents.

(3) The known facts regarding the incidence of
personality disorders as we have learned them
from experience in the Army with special
consideration given to employment opportunities of all types of medically disabled
veterans, including neuropsychiatric discharges.
(4) The type of relief programme, if any. If
such is necessary, a strenuous and extensive
educational campaign should be made to
correct community attitudes and individuals
towards the unemployed.

(5) The integration relief and work referral on
the assumption that if a job is available for
which a man is qualified, he will take it?
If no job is available, the relief system is so
managed as to avoid gestapo technique
whereby the unemployed are hounded and
deprecated to a point of severe mental ill
health.

Again quoting Dr. Ginzberg's survey of an
unemployed group "it is tragic paradox that these
unemployed men found their salvation in America's
entrance into World War II ; that their return to
work was made possible only because American
industry was called upon to produce an everincreasing volume of death-dealing instruments ;
that the unemployed man and his family were
rescued from the community of outcasts only
because of the holocaust which covered the earth.
"Yet there is meaning in this paradox and it has
a moral not only for war but also for peace. Once
this country accepted the challenge and actively
entered the war, we surprised ourselves and confounded our enemies. Goals were set which
brought jeers from the Axis and questions from
our Allies. These goals were met and in many
cases exceeded. Overnight, millions of men were
mustered into an Army, equipped with the most
modern arms, and trained according to the latest
doctrines. Planes rolled off the assembly lines and
millions of tons of shipping were floated in the
Atlantic and the Pacific. Clearly, there was no
challenge too great for this country to meet. The
people understood and they did not hesitate.
Nothing frightened them.

" Money was needed?untold billions ; it was
found. Manufacturing plants had to be converted ;
it was done. Traditions had to be disregarded no
voice was raised in protest. Faith gave the country
strength.

"So it was in war ; so it must be in peace.
The men who went forth to fight, and, if need be,
to die, did so that the country might live, and their
fathers, brothers and sons could labour to build a
perfect union and a more perfect world. ' It is for
us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to the
unfinished work which they who fought here have
thus far so nobly advanced.' "
