Scottish Lunacy and Mental Deficiency Laws
==========================================

74 MENTAL HEALTH

This Committee, under the Chairmanship of
Lord Russell, was appointed by the Scottish Office
in February, 1938, but in July, 1939 its sittings
were suspended and not resumed until October,
1943. Its terms of reference were to inquire into
the existing law of Scotland relating to Lunacy
and Mental Deficiency and to make recommenda-
tions as to amendments.
1. Lunacy
After a historical review, the Report discusses
the present situation and makes a number of recom-
mendations, amongst which the following may be
cited as being of special interest to non-Scottish
readers:
(a) That the terms, " lunatic " insane person "
and " person of unsound mind" should
be dropped and superseded by the term
" mental patient " and that no more precise
definition of this term should be attempted
other than of " any person who on account
of mental illness, is certified by two medical
men to be a person requiring to be detained
for the purposes of care and treatment
(b) That the system of voluntary treatment in
use in Scotland since 1862, should be con-
tinued and that the English Mental Treatment
Act should be adopted in respect of its
provisions for temporary treatment.
(c) That the validity of a Certificate of Emergency
should be extended from 3 to 7 days.
(d) That lunatic wards in Poorhouses should be
discontinued.
(e) That senile patients should not be certified
under the Lunacy Acts except when other
arrangements cannot be made.
(/) That there should be a special department
of the Central Health Authority to deal with
Mental Health in all its branches.
(g) That Local Authorities should have an
" advisory and rehabilitation department with
psychiatric social workers, and that there
should also be psychiatric social workers
attached to asylums, one or more being on
the staff of each asylum according to its size ".
(,h) That Observation Wards should be attached
to General Hospitals, properly equipped and
staffed.
(i) That all asylums should have a special recep-
tion unit and that there should be more
mental clinics attached to General Hospitals.
2. Mental Deficiency
After an examination of the Mental Deficiency
and Lunacy (Scotland) Act, 1913?passed at the
same time as the English Act?the Report devotes
a chapter to the question of mental defectives
accused of criminal offences. The desirability of
making mental defect (as well as lunacy) a " plea
in bar of trial " is discussed, but in view of the fact
that a Jury can pronounce a defective as being
" unfit to plead ", the Committee did not consider
that there was need for any further safeguarding
in this respect. (From this view, Professor D. K.
Henderson dissented in a memorandum published
at the end of the Report.)
It is recommended, however, that the provisions
of Section 8 (1) of the English Mental Deficiency
Act, 1913 (giving Courts power to send a defective
to an Institution instead of committing him to
prison or to an Approved School) should?with
appropriate adaptations?be added to Section 9 (I)
of the Scottish Act, which already makes some
provision.!
It is further recommended that there should be
established a centrally situated State Institution
for mental defectives of dangerous or violent
propensities (at present the only accommodation
of this kind consists of a few beds in the general
prison at Perth). Facilities for transfering such
defectives from a Certified Institution to the State
Institution for a period of 6 or 12 months, which
are available to English Local Authorities, should,
it is suggested, be adopted in Scotland.
Other recommendations include:
(a) That the definitions set forth in the English
1927 Act should be used, with the exception
of the " moral defective " grade. In adopt-
ing them, however, it is suggested that the
categories should be referred to merely as
A, B, and C, respectively. Further, that
children who are educable in Special Schools
should not be termed mentally defective.
Appended to this recommendation is a note
on the need for legislation making provision fof
the training and supervision of unstable adolescents
and adults displaying behaviour disorders, but not
certifiable under either the Mental Deficiency or
the Lunacy Acts:
(b) That Local Authorities should be authorized
to deal under the Mental Deficiency Act>
with M.D. children under 5 years of age*
with the consent of the parent or guardian*
but that each such case should be reviewed
on attaining the age of 5, and re-certification
should be necessary if the child is to remain
* Report of the Committee on the Scottish Lunacy and Mental Deficiency Laws. H.M. Stationery Office, London
and Edinburgh. 2s.
t See Report, page 69, para. 379.
MENTAL HEALTH 75
in a certified institution, or under guardianship.
That the duty of providing education and
training for trainable defectives up to the age
of 16, should be laid on Education Authorities
and not transferred, as at present to the
Public Assistance Authorities (responsible
for Mental Deficiency Act administration).
From this view, two members of the Committee,
Lord Provost John Phin, LL.D., and Professor D. K.
Henderson, M.D., dissent, stating in a Memorandum
that mental defect should be regarded primarily
as a medical and not an educational problem.
(c) That the duty of dealing with defectives over
18 requiring continued care and training,
should be transferred to Mental Health
Committees representing Education, Public
Health and Public Assistance, with a Sub-
Committee for mental defect only.
(d) That the provision for Statutory Supervision
of Mental Defectives made by the English
Act, should be added to the Scottish Mental
Deficiency code.*
(e) That a Central Index should be set up con-
taining the names of all cases certified under
the Mental Deficiency Act, all children sent
to Special Schools and notified on leaving
school at 16, and all defectives over 16
discovered by the Courts.
The Report raises some interesting questions for
discussion and includes recommendations likely
to be controversial. Some of its recommendations
are, of course, bound up with the recent Scottish
National Health Services Bill and the Education
(Scotland) Act 1945 by which they will be directly
affected.
This refers to defectives found " subject to be dealt with " but not actually certified.
