Hypnoanalysis
==============

Reviews

By Lewis R. Wolberg, M.D. London:
William Heinemann Ltd. 1946. Pp. 342. 21s.
The term Hypno-analysis, like its congener narco-
analysis, is either a legitimate if somewhat misleading
term, or it is a contradiction in terms. It is a contra-
diction in terms if it implies that a true psycho-analysis
can be conducted in combination with a variety of
hypnotic techniques. If, however, it merely indicates
that an ad hoc " mental analysis " can be directed under
such conditions, it is appropriate enough; although
it may give rise to a misleading impression, namely
that the analysis in question is psycho-analysis. What-
ever " analytical " labels may be employed?convulso-
analysis, pedagogic-analysis, exhortatory-analysis,
occupational-analysis, selection-analysis, group-
analysis, " active" analysis?the same distinction
applies. In principle, there are only two forms of
psycho-therapy?suggestion and psycho-analysis. Every
so-called combination of psycho-analysis with non-
analytical methods is a form of suggestion, even if
employed by psycho-analysts.
Had the author of this book been content to use the
term " analysis " in its popular sense, or, better still,
had he frankly entitled the book, " The Technique of
Hypnotic Suggestion ", he would have done himself
more justice. For he shows great skill and ingenuity
in manipulating hypnotic rapport in the interests of
rapid psycho-therapy. It is true that the devices
themselves?trance induction, dream induction, auto-
matic writing and drawing, and " conflict " induction?
are not original, but the author's system of regulation,
spacing and dosage, constitute a considerable advance
in hypnotic treatment. I imagine this is as good a
book on the manipulative aspects of hypnotic therapy
as we are likely to see in a generation. For this reason,
Dr. Wolberg's work is to be heartily recommended to
those who have hitherto been content with hit or miss
methods of hypnosis.
But Dr. Wolberg steers a more ambitious course.
Obviously guided by his interest in psycho-analytical
theory and, no doubt, encouraged by the work of
several psycho-analytical colleagues, in particular Dr.
Kardiner (who contributes a Foreword and a lengthier
chapter of dynamic interpretation), he sets out to demon-
strate in practice that psycho-analytical techniques are
compatible with hypnotic procedures, and in theory
that this compatibility is little short of an identity.
Even Dr. Kardiner, who is at pains to distinguish between
the methods, cuts the ground from this distinction by
maintaining that an element of speed and directness is
added to " unconscious " therapy without altering its
dynamics.
Dr. Wolberg is well aware of the criticisms that may
be directed at the theoretical part of his work. One
cannot but recall that Freud himself, who foresaw the
time when a mass demand for rapid psychotherapy
would lead to various combinations of analysis and
hypnosis, was under no illusion as to the nature of such
combined methods, and that his last word on the subject
was to the effect that the best way of shortening a
psycho-analysis was to carry it out properly. The
demand for short-term therapy has become more
insistent since the war, and experience of short-term
methods has shown clearly that history-analysis,
symptom-analysis and life-problem-analysis, can be
much more effectively employed if the therapeutist is
thoroughly conversant with psycho-analytical technique,
can assess the locus and nature of resistance, and has a
flair for symbol-interpretation.
But the success of all this lies in the avoidance of
transference analysis. Should a transference neurosis
develop, it is left for all practical purposes untouched.
Short-term analysis differs from other forms of suggestion
in that the suggestions are based on analytic inter-
pretation. In all other respects, it is a rapport-therapy.
Judged by the standards of a true psycho-analysis, it
belongs to the category of " wild analysis ".
Herein lies the main danger of the methods described
and of the title applied to them by the author. " Wild "
analysis we are quite familiar with; it will soon be neces-
sary to coin the term " wild hypnosis ". For if the
techniques applied by Dr. Wolberg were used by thera-
peutists unfamiliar with analytical values, they would
be just as haphazard in direction and as uncertain in
effect, as any other form of wild psychotherapy.
Edward Glover.
