Observation in Children's Homes
===============================

By W. FURSTENHEIM, M.D.
Psychiatrist, Hampshire County Council Child Guidance Clinic
It is the aim of this paper to stress the value of
observation in Children's Homes and the help that
can be given by it.
Such help implies that the helper must know the
child and his individuality better than he does
himself, and probably better than his parents,
teachers and relatives do. But how can this
knowledge be gained ? Only by observation.
And who should carry out this observation ?
Psychologists ? Or Wardens and Foster-mothers
of Homes ? Or both ? The answer is " Both
working together in close co-operation.
At the outset of the Child Guidance movement
such co-operation was missing. The Psychiatrist
had to rely entirely on his own methods, and before
these were scientifically developed, on his
impressions only, and it was on his judgement alone
that what was likely to be the best environment for
the child was decided. So far so good. But each
child was seen under special conditions by a special
kind of personality, and both these factors might
have influenced the picture made of the personality
of the child. Might not this picture change in a
different environment, under continuous observa-
tion by another kind of person ?
Observation and Investigation
It follows that there are two methods of examina-
tion, both of which contribute to our knowledge
of the child's personality.
First, there is that of investigation, often confined
to a single interview ; and secondly, that of observa-
tion, which is continuous. The former involves
the use of special methods ; the latter should be as
simple and unobtrusive as possible, for children,
like adults, modify their behaviour as soon as they
feel they are being observed.
There are so many different features which go to
make up a child's personality that certain aspects
only should be chosen specially for the Warden s
observation.
First, a distinction has to be made between the
more permanent characteristics of the child's make-
up, and those that are variable. The permanent
characteristics are part of his (or her) natural
disposition, the skeleton or framework of the per-
sonality ; the variable ones are acquired, and change
with the environment.
Investigation is specially directed to acquiring f-
knowledge of the child's disposition, that which
rules and conditions the success of his daily life J
Observation is concerned with his physical and
emotional modifications, under home influence-
The two are complementary and should help and
complete each other.
Investigation includes a careful case history, the
use of intelligence and other special tests, a physical
examination, questioning and analysis. A single
interview can be enough for the purpose of making
a right decision as to a home and thus saving many
costly detours, but just because it is a relatively
shoi't method, observation should confirm, criticize,
correct or at least improve upon and complete the
preliminary judgement, based on the investigation-
Skilful observation helps to determine how great
has been the influence of the environment on the
child's make-up. It also gives valuable help
reporting facts which further confirm the conflict
revealed by the scientific investigation ; and
stressing its seriousness. For example, a clever
child from a broken home may accuse his mother
of unfair handling, and of giving punishment
without reason. The investigation may rais6
doubts as to the boy's reliability, but it is th6
observation in the children's home which may sho^
him to be such an unreliable character and dotf1'
inated by his spitefulness. Plans originally made
for placing him in a camp school can then be changed,
* / wish to thank the various foster-parents, Wardens and Superintendents of Childrens' Homes in Hampshire for th&r.
kind interest and helpfulness shown towards me when writing this paper; also Dr. Cronk, County Medical Officer, a'1
Dr. Mary Capes, Director of the Clinic, for reading and revising it.?W.F.
MENTAL HEALTH
a?d a school chosen where special psychological
treatment can be given.
^he Difficulties of Observation
Wardens who are not used to collaborating with
a psychologist are sometimes inclined to feel that
desire for methodical observation is a new
burden. They emphasize the difficulties of the
^sk before they really study and understand the
Method. These difficulties should be discussed
under their various headings.
?-ack of time
. This difficulty cannot be underrated at the present
tune, when Homes are understaffed, and when
duties, some specifically related to the war, are many
a?d distracting. Even in peace there is always
Plenty to do. Further, the children are away from
early in the morning, and possibly they only return
ln time for tea, which is followed by various duties
and occupations lasting till bed-time. All observa-
t'on has to be carried out "as unobtrusively as
Possible", for reasons already mentioned, and
unally it is desirable that some time should be left
t? the children for completely free play, or play, at
anV rate, unhampered by observation.
discipline and Observation
as has been noted, observation of which he is
avvare will change a child's behaviour, how much
^ore will discipline do so ! And, as every psychol-
ogist with some practical experience will agree,
U'scipline is necessary to keep order in the small
c?nimunity of the Children's Home. But discipline
be good or bad, and this can readily be observed
while watching the children's behaviour.
? Bad Discipline may either be too lax, leading to
disorder, with disturbances in the relationships
etween children and adults, and between the
cjuldren themselves ; or it may be too strict, which
e,irninates the value of observation by placing too
J^uch emphasis on naughtiness and mischief, and
,eaving no scope for little acts of sympathy, mutual
e'P and unselfish sharing, or for initiative and
enterprise. Too strict discipline interferes with
^tural and permissible self-expression, and even
auses this to take an asocial turn.
. Good Discipline may be called " free " discipline,
0r its purpose is to teach the proper use of freedom
nd liberty. Discipline is a means to an end only,
nd a certain amount of liberty is a necessity to
^t its success. The more freedom a warden is
ole to grant, the greater is the measure of his
Uccess. For example, it is always a good sign if
tuidren can talk freely to each other during meals,
an ^ rernember their good manners, whether an
uult is with them or not.
i ^rouP Discipline and individual discipline. There
turther the question of the discipline of the group
ersus that of each individual. Some children can
Vvh'kept *n order with a minimum of discipline,
hile others need much firmer handling.
General discipline implies a regular daily routine,
which is wholesome for all members of the Home,
in which the older children help the younger by
word and example. But this does not mean that
the routine should be the same in every detail for
all. For example, older children should stay up
longer. A highly strung, sensitive boy, with
interests of his own, may be encouraged to spend his
spare time with his hobbies, while others do group
work under the supervision of an older boy. The
children will not resent this if the situation is tact-
fully handled, and the little dullards will really do
and feel better if their leisure is organized.
This differential discipline, whether for varying
groups or for individuals, will never interfere with,
but will find its limits within, the general discipline.
Observation, useful in judging the value of general
discipline, is indispensable for differential discipline.
Awareness of this may help to overcome a last
important difficulty, that of unwillingness.
Unwillingness
Wardens who are willing to report will learn to
do so quickly, and are often eager to tell what has
been of long-standing experience. But an interesting
problem is presented by those who frankly state
that they do not wish to approach the problem from
a psychological angle, and who, by passive resist-
ance, try to discourage the psychologist in his
endeavour to bring about co-operation on equal
terms.
Further, some wardens, often very good ones,
seem reluctant to " give away " their children, or,
like some parents, wish to keep their faults and
little offences a secret within the home circle.
Young workers, especially sometimes feel guilty
for the faults of the children in their charge, and
fear blame for them. This particular form of
unwillingness usually disappears with increasing
understanding.
The most serious form of resistance is that of
workers who are unable to enjoy detached observa-
tion of children. Perhaps their interest lies in
technical rather than in personal matters, as with
the teacher who may be an excellent mathematician
or historian, but is quite unable to understand the
differing personalities of his pupils. Others may
be so self-centred, so engrossed in their own
problems and sorrows, that they lack, at least at
the beginning, the equanimity, humour and kind-
ness indispensable for such observation. Such
people often have real difficulty in controlling
their own tempers, and may vent their moodiness
on the children, under the guise of strict discipline.
Such discipline intimidates the children and deprives
them of their spontaneous, naive behaviour, and
thus all opportunity of learning from observation
is lost. For such unhappy men and women, very
often themselves the victims of too severe and
unindividualized discipline, there is no better help,
apart from psychotherapeutic treatment, than that
of forgetting themselves in the observation of
children.
10 MENTAL HEALTH
Methods employed in Observation
Observation should not be occasional or casual.
It should always be steady and methodical, whether
it is being practised for the purpose of answering
the questions of a psychological collaborator, or
whether the observer is acting as far as possible for
the psychologist when he is not available. The
more numerous and more accurate the facts known,
the clearer will be the psychological picture, and
the easier will it be to distinguish between the
transient reactions in the child's personality,
caused by environment, and the permanent features
of his temperament. Such observation, then, is
of invaluable help in estimating his probable future
reactions in other circumstances.
No observation is unimportant in this connection,
and incidentally this provides a partial solution to
the problem of lack of time. Opportunities for
observation are found in the shared life of the foster-
parents and children. It is of significance to know
how the different children behave while getting up
in the morning, while washing, dressing, and helping
each other ; how they behave over meals, in their
different jobs and games, what parts they take in
little plays, in telling fairy tales round the fire, or
reading together. It is unnecessary and unwise for
the whole group always to be together, and it is
important to notice the differences of behaviour in
the smaller and varying groups. The observer,
though doing his own work, will soon know which
child is the pluckiest, which the humourist of the
group, which the most helpful to the smaller ones ;
also who is the grumbler, who lacks endurance,
and who always knows better than his fellows.
The important thing for the observer to realize
on these occasions is that he is not there as a police-
man, a representative of authority, or a teacher.
He is there to observe. He is a student of
psychology, interested in the differences of physique,
intelligence and character of the different children.
Opportunities for observation are thus unlimited,
but some scheme and method is needed to ensure
useful results. The following plan has proved
satisfactory in the writer's experience and is offered
as a suggestion. Nobody should feel bound to
use it exactly in this form.
Three main fields of observation are considered :
Health, Behaviour, and Achievement.
Health means physical development, (as far as
the layman can judge it), progress in height and
weight ; sleep, (dreams and nightmares) ; appetite,
motions, micturition; masturbation ; mental
health, (as far as immediately recognizable
to the layman), moods, (evenness and oscillation),
daydreams, fits, tempers, tics, nailbiting, faults of
speech, thumb-sucking.
Very soon the observer learns to distinguish
between spontaneous, periodical inner changes, and
more incidental reactions to outer stimuli (which
should be noted).
Behaviour and conduct, (a) Towards Objects,
(tidiness, carefulness or the opposite), manual
interests, hobbies, phantasy, persistency; (b) to-
wards plants and animals, (cruelty or otherwise)!
(c) towards persons. Here a distinction should be
made between social behaviour towards adults
(superiors, visiting parents etc.), and that towards
other boys and girls, (aggressiveness, placidity?
friendship, faithfulness). Other social features,
like a child's courage should be noted. Is he a
good or bad mixer ??an informer, ringleader,
follower, isolationist ?
Achievement in all directions, (a) Intellectual
progress at school, (general progress and interest in
specific subjects) and outside school, (choice of
books, letters, share in plays and pantomimes,
puzzles); (b) Progress in sports and outdoor games,
walks, wrestling, dancing, swimming ; (c) Tech-
nical progress, (housework, needlework, handi-
crafts).
Unusual features, not in these categories, such as
pilfering, truancy, etc. may be mentioned in a las1
paragraph.
A useful procedure for the observation itself Is
to work for a while with the children, and then to
sit aside, near enough to keep some contact, while
not interfering with their liberty, and to write down
notes. Observations on each individual child
should be entered from time to time on a report
sheet with the headings for the personal data-
The main part of the sheet has, besides a margin for
filing purposes, a not too broad column, with the
abovementioned or similar headings. These are
a useful aid to memory, even if they are answered
by a free report on the larger blank part of the sheet-
Quarterly reports, complementary to school reports,
show the child's progress or regress. They help
in handling him, they are a record of measures
taken by the Warden and his psychological helpers,
and provide signposts for future judgements.
Summary. We have considered in this paper,
the purpose, difficulties, and methods of observation
in Childrens' Homes. Three distinct attitudes
observers were noted : that of the policeman,?
keep order, that of the student,?to understand >
that of the friend,?to guide. These three functions
should be combined in the person of the Warden-
J
