Forty Years in an Institution
============================== 

1 y.ro:c\U--

By F. DOUGLAS TURNER, C.B.E., M.B., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
Late Medical Superintendent, Royal Eastern Counties' Institution, Colchester
Though I was in the service of the institution
f?r only forty years, I have known it all my life.
% father began his work there in 1864, and my
earliest recollection is going there to an entertain-
ment. I am to try and tell you of the changes in
trends and attitudes which I have noticed during my
forty years. They are the memories of a " has been ".
After qualifying as a medical man, I had five
years in general practice before again making the
institution my home. I believe it would be an
advantage if all holders of whole time appointments
could have this general experience of medicine
before specializing.
There have been four stages in the history of
defectives in England. First, a "do nothing "
stage, when defectives were just neglected or
became the butt of their neighbours. Then in the
early years of the reign of Queen Victoria came the
second stage, when it was believed that defectives,
or idiots, as all were then called, could be cured
and made into useful citizens by suitable training.
During this stage the five larger charitable institu-
tions were established, of which the Royal Eastern
Counties' Institution established in 1859 was the
second, and towards the end of it a number of small
homes. The five institutions were founded to
MENTAL HEALTH
educate the idiot so that he could again take his
place in the world. They were not intended to be
custodial institutions. It was, however, soon found
that permanent care would be necessary for a
considerable proportion of the total number
received, and by a system of re-election and life
election this was afterwards provided, so far as the
limited charitable funds allowed. To this stage
but years later in 1899 belong the establishment by
the Education Authorities of special schools for
feeble-minded children. These schools have
undoubtedly enabled large numbers of such
defectives to become self-supporting and useful
citizens.
The third stage is generally known as the
" alarmist " stage, both here and in the United
States. It was believed by many well-meaning
people that if something were not done to check the
birth of defectives they would soon become an
intolerable finanical burden. Not much was then
known of human inheritance and genetics, and the
fear is understandable.
It helped towards the passing of the Mental
Deficiency Act, in 1913 and later to heated debates
on sterilization.
One looks back on these days with some wonder.
Greater knowledge of genetics has shown, that
though there may be an humane reason for its
limited application, sterilization by itself could
have no appreciable affect in reducing the incidence
of mental defect, and that the whole problem is a
far bigger one including, as it does, the best way of
dealing with the so-called " social problem group
For a time, however, this fear had its effect and the
provision of permanent institutional care for all
grades of mental defect was accepted as the best
means of dealing with the problem.
Later, however, we realized the injustice of con-
demning large numbers of the higher grades of
mental defect to life-long care in an institution
and the fourth stage was gradually evolved. This
laid it down as an axiom, that the institution for
defectives must get away from the idea of permanent
care for a large number of its inmates. It must no
longer be a stagnant pool, giving excellent care no
doubt to the limited number of defectives lucky
enough to get in, but oblivious of the far greater
number, who needed care and training. It must
be a flowing stream for training and stabilizing
defectives with the object of returning as many as
possible to the outside world. Fortunately, the
provisions of the Mental Deficiency Act allowed
this, and a system of prolonged licence was evolved,
by which selected patients were placed out in the
world under sheltered conditions on trial. Owing
to the shortage of labour during the war, the number
of cases on licence from institutions has greatly
increased, but I believe a still wider extension of
this method is possible, and is probable in the future.
This change in my own outlook is one which
gives me more pleasure than anything I can
remember. It was in 1919 that I began sending
patients out on licence or, as it was then called
" long leave of absence Holidays had, of course,
always been given. That was essential in a volun- j
tary institution, where patients were admitted, j
because their parents wanted them to come, but
licence was a new beginning. (It is curious however,
that as long ago as 1864 licence was used in the
institution, though that had been entirely forgotten-
I have never been able to find out why it was
stopped.) At first I do not think the Board of
Control was enthusiastic about the placing of (
patients out on trial for months and years on end-
Probably their attitude was due to a legal outlook, I
which doubted if patients could be said still to be
in need of care and supervision, when earning their
living. I have little doubt that we have to thank
Dame Ellen Pinsent, for consent to go on with
the experiment for she saw the special need,
viz. : that the control must be continued, to <
ensure success. I began the experiment with a
good deal of trepidation, though unknown to me,
someone else was trying it out about the same time,
but it has been a tremendous success and all institu-
tions now use this method of trial. It has enabled
thousands of boys and girls to return to the world
successfully and there to earn their living honourably
and well. It has given a new outlook and a ne^
hope to those who still remain in the institution-
It is horrible to think that we ever believed that the
only future for these higher grade boys and girls
was permanent care in an institution. It has saved
the authorities many thousands of pounds a year
in maintenance, and freed many beds for the
admission of further cases without further capital
expenditure. I believe we have now gained so
much experience that its further extension is not
only possible but essential. >
For a successful system of licence there must be
hostel branches both for boys and girls. Most of
them still need further stabilization and further 1
experience by going out to daily work before having
a trial completely outside, and many of them have
no suitable homes of their own to which they can
return. In the future, every large institution will
be expected to have a hostel branch in every town y
in its area for girls and several country areas f?r
boys. The extraordinary success of the Agricul- i
tural Hostels for defectives, established under the |
management of the Central Association for Mental j
Welfare, has demonstrated the willingness of
farmers to co-operate and the ability of these boys
to succeed. It seems likely that these Agricultural
Hostels may help to provide a solution for other
types of social problems, though success in these
may be harder to obtain, because of the lack of that
control which the Mental Deficiency Act gives-
Some hostels for boys will also be established i1?
towns, so that those who do not take to agricultural
work, have an opportunity of industrial employ
ment, but I would not put a boy's hostel and a
girls hostel in the same town. '
When I became Medical Officer to the Institution
in 1905 it consisted of one not very large Central
Institution known as Essex Hall, and a seaside
1
MENTAL HEALTH
home at Clacton. There were about 250 patients.
Forty years later it consists of a larger Central
Institution and nine branches and there are 2,150
Patients.
In 1905 nurses, or as they were then called
attendants, had no training courses, nor was there
any text book to which they could turn for instruc-
tion. They had to learn by doing, but some of the
?ld type of staff were wonderfully good in managing
Patients, and in knowing when a low grade patient
was not well. Wages were not good. Nearly all
staflF were resident and during the first year the cash
wage was only ?8. A male charge nurse living out
received a guinea a week. Now his wage is ?6 10s.
a week.
The Royal Medico-Psychological Association
fought out the first text book and established the
frrst examination for mental deficiency nurses.
I helped to draft the book and draw up the syllabus
and was partly responsible for the fact that the
^amination provides for other types of nurses
than those who merely look after physical illness,
f have always held, that a mental deficiency nurse
ls one who is looking after those whose illness is
Rental deficiency, and not merely one who looks after
jhe much smaller proportion of defectives, who may
nave a physical illness. It necessarily follows that
jhe chief part of the syllabus and examination should
f devoted to training and management and not to
Physical illness. The present examination allows
'he training staff to become certificated. In my
?Pinion they are fully entitled to be considered
^tirses and I deprecate the present trend to class
|heni as mere artisans. A nurse who can teach a
j?y how to be a Scout, to sole a pair of boots, to
ay a brick properly, or teach a girl a new dance
tep or to make her frock, is infinitely of more use
^nd is more used in a mental deficiency institution,
"an someone who can nurse a case of pneumonia
help at an operation. It is difficult to get those,
who have been brought up to believe that nursing
|^[eans only the care of people suffering from
Physical disease, to understand this point of view
unfortunately Parliament has committed the
uture of nurses to those who have this outlook.
In those early days, we no doubt did many things
nich would not be thought right nowadays.
r- '8ht nurses were only provided in dormitories
?r low grade or sick patients. In other bedrooms
ne of the staff slept in a corner of the room, not
^ a cubicle, and was responsible for patients during
the night.
..All able bodied patients had beer with their
inner and the Head Attendant of those days spent
^ost of each morning in the cellar drawing the beer,
nd making sure that it was up to standard. I was
y?ung and was rather horrified at this wholesale
eer drinking, and soon offered money which
Proved very popular, instead of beer. The
lnners were good, but there was little variation,
breakfast and tea consisted of bread and
argarine only, with occasional jam, and cake
nee a week. There was no fruit, no salads, little
milk, no fish, bacon, eggs, butter, etc., and vitamins
were unknown. It was only after Dr. Branthwaite's
well known report on feeding in mental hospitals
that there were changes, but from then onwards
great improvements were made.
Many other things in life have changed for
defectives in the past forty years. Then parole
outside the institution existed only for the few.
Now every well behaved boy and girl expects it,
though in the same town I have not allowed boys
and girls outside on the same day. It has always
been the case however, that each patient had his
or her clothes as personal belongings. There is
no difficulty about this, and anyhow it is worth
while in the additional pride taken by the patients
in their appearance. The defective has always been
the under-dog outside, and the first thing to teach
them is to " swank ". It is for that reason that
a really large mirror is essential in every single room
in the place, bedroom, dayroom, lavatory. In the
early days clothes were more drab and uniform than
now. Now the aim is to get colour and variety.
We allow lipstick and rouge (I wonder what my
father would say) provided the latter is not too thick.
The staff use it, why shouldn't the girls ? I have
not yet allowed smoking in the institution by the
girls?for one thing they prefer to spend their
money on lipstick and extra clothes,?but no
restrictions in connection with it are placed on girls
on licence. (Anyhow, they could not be enforced.)
All working patients receive real money as wages
not tokens. In all workshops there is a basic wage
and in most of them a bonus on output.
Games are much more organized than years ago.
In 1938-9 we held four football cups won
against outside teams. Entertainments and dances
are far more frequent and there is the weekly
cinema. Scouts, Guides, and summer camps
outside the institution area have been a tremendous
gain and I cannot speak too highly of them.
Plays given to the outside public and charged
for, are almost routine everywhere now. They are
of greater value in training than any other single
factor. One thing has not changed. For 31 years
I have been Father Christmas on the afternoon of
Christmas Day, as my father was before me, and I
used the same wig, beard and gown. My audience
however has grown.
Educational methods have changed. In the
schools the higher grades were always taught the
three R's and by professional teachers, but in the
early days little else, and there was no emphasis on
physical exercises or dramatics. For the lower grades,
school meant only trying to make round O's on a slate
month after month and when you had mastered
that, you went on to a's. That has all been altered
and the then Headmistress of the Lower School
and I, invented many of the gadgets and stunts now
used in occupation centres.
In those days in the shops, machines were seldom
used. Partly because we did not realize the good
work defectives could do when trained, and partly
I am afraid because if they got through their work
MENTAL HEALTH
too quickly, more work had to be cut out by the
staff. There were no electrical cutting-out knives
and it was all very leisurely and rather lazy?in fact
not very good training for living in the world. Now
everyone who can use a machine is expected to have
one. If anyone still believes in making a shirt or a
frock, or button holes by hand let them try it, but
don't compel the poor defectives to do it, because
they know better.
Even illnesses have altered. Appendicitis and
cancer were almost unknown then, but repeated
outbreaks of scarlet fever, diphtheria and ringworm
were a trial. In 1926 I began the immunization of
all patients against diphtheria and eliminated it.
I believe you can do this successfully in a compara-
tively closed community, provided all new
admissions are immunized, and re-immunization
is carried out when necessary. Ringworm has
disappeared and scarlet fever is very mild. The
chief killing disease in those days was Pulmonary
Tuberculosis. There was then no open-air treat-
ment and patients with Tuberculosis were nursed
in the ordinary sick ward and not isolated. I began
open-air treatment on one patient in 1905 and used
to go and look at her several times a day and
wonder what would happen to me, if she died from
the cold. But she was always warmer than I was.
For the three years before I returned to the Institu-
tion as Medical Officer the death rate from Tuber-
culosis was 60 per thousand. That scarcely seems
possible nowadays. For many years before this
war it was 3 per thousand and for the war years it
has been further reduced to an average of 1 ? 9 per
thousand. The figures over the years, make it
clear that the reduction was due to two causes
acting at different times. In 1905 the whole system
of ventilation was remodelled and I went round
personally every night for years to ensure its being
used. That, combined with isolation caused a
marked reduction in incidence till the first Great
War, when the poor dietary in institutions sent it
up again with a bound. After that war the new
dietary brought the incidence down again and to a
far lower level, than that achieved by ventilation
and isolation.
In the early years there were no standardized
tests of intelligence. Experience was the only guide
we had. The invention of these tests was hailed
with enthusiam but their use became too mechanical
in the certification of defectives and they were given
more weight than they should have borne. There
are many people in the world below average .
intelligence, who are doing good work and whom
no one would think of certifying as defective. There
are also others who on these tests have an average
mental age and who yet are undoubtedly certifiable
as defective. The statutory definitions of mental
deficiency are social ones, and until a satisfactory
test of social deficiency has been evolved, experience
will still have to play its part in assisting the certifying
officer. We have admitted for many years
temporary patients, both under the Idiots Act and
the Mental Deficiency Act without certificate.
This is now recognized as supplying an essential
need. Some come for observation and report. 1?
some cases only prolonged observation can decide
if a particular case is, or is not certifiable-
Defectives, like other people, need holidays, and
the seaside home has been partly used to give those
from outside the institution a holiday by the sea-
Parents of a defective sometimes need a rest. The
removal of the defective, especially a low grade
case, from the home for a month or two is often
an inestimable boon and enables the parents to
carry on again. Some of these have come each
year for many years.
The evolution of the social sciences is compara'
tively recent, but among these the science of caring
for defectives socially and outside an institution #
in the forefront and has evolved further in England
than in the United States. The cause of this waS
the foundation in 1914 of the Central Association
for Mental Welfare and the extreme good fortune
which secured Miss Evelyn Fox as the Hon-
Secretary from its foundation. To her vision and
insight, her genius for getting things done and her
power to lead and inspire her staff, are due most ot
the advances which have been made in this ne\v
science. Teachers, doctors, and psychologist
have been given, not merely essential training, but
new outlooks ; holiday homes, agricultural hostels?
homes for difficult children have been established ?
the technique used by social workers in making
enquiries, provision for their specialized training
and many other things have resulted. I am happy
to have helped in the original choice of Miss Fo*>
and in having been allowed a part in the activities
of the Association.
In England it has been our way, that so many
worth while advances have first had their origin in
the efforts of Voluntary Associations. It was so
in this case, and it was so in the foundation of the
early institutions for the care of defectives. Later*
sometimes much later, when the need has been
proved, the State steps in, and many of the Voluntary
Associations founded by the C.A.M.W. have been
taken over by a particular local authority. Soipe'
times the same end is attained, by collaboration
between the Voluntary Association and the
Local Authority. The latter has been the method
of evolution in the case of the Institution at
Colchester. The Institution was entirely charitable
for the first fifty-five years of its existence, then f?f.
the next twenty odd years it provided practically ar
the institutional beds for defectives in the areas it-
served, ihough the Authorities paid for maintenance
and a rent for each bed occupied. But in 1^/34 the
Auihori ies extended their co-operation further by
providing ?200,000 to build the extension novV'
known as Turner Village, on land belonging to the
Institution, and provision was made for furtheI"
extensions. The charitable side of the Instituti?Jj
still remains an effective part of the work, though
the Authorities now nominate a proportion- of the
Directors. To those who are fearful of the eff?c
of local authority representatives on voluntary
MENTAL HEALTH
"iumiuees, as lor instance tnose 01 voluntary
J^?spitals, I would say, we at Colchester
? Ve tried out this method. It has resulted
!n the happiest possible combination and it
'ntroduces valuable experience and often a wider
?utlook.
I have lived literally in the middle of an institution
or forty years. That is not supposed to be a good
ttung for a superindentent. It is said to narrow
nis outlook. I suppose it does but I have never
re?retted it. You are much more in contact with
f?ur patients and staff and you know more of what
,s going on. I could through many years
?ear patients being got out of bed at night. Even
a* had its use, because one night I heard a nurse
backing a patient. Seen the next day she of
ourse denied it, until I told her the actual words
used. She went. Living like this, in charge
01 a Voluntary Institution has no doubt moulded
and I think leads to the patriarchal type of
^ministration which is now disappearing. I have
ways looked upon myself as the father of the
t
iamny, coin sian ana pauenis, ana someumes,
like most fathers, I was too strict, sometimes too
lenient. But a voluntary type of institution has
advantages for the superintendent. The friends
of patients for instance expect more, and if the
institution is dependent on subscriptions they
must get what they expect. They expect to be seen
every time they come and be given an individual
report. Letters must be sent out immediately,
even for minor illnesses and they will not put up
with printed impersonal notices.
In conclusion if I had to recommend one book, and
one only, for all Superindents and Matrons, and even
Headmasters and Headmistresses, I would without
hesitation recommend "Dear Robinson" a book
written by E. R. Johnstone, the Director of The
Training School at Vineland, New Jersey. It
helps more than anything I know, to live up to the
Vineland Motto " Happiness first, all else follows "
which is not a bad motto for all other institu-
tions for the care and training of those who will
never grow up.
V.
