Juvenile Delinquency and the School
=====================================

By W. C.
Kvaraceus. World nook uo., Mew York. London
Agents, Geo. G. Harrap & Co., Ltd. 12s. 6d.

The title of this book might suggest that here again
is another on the subject of juvenile delinquency which,
as in the case of so many before, describes a " fractional
attack " on the problem. As a contrast, however, to
the more usual segmental approach, influenced by
prevailing trends of interest, this account of an attempt,
and a surprisingly successful one, at a really constructive
policy of prevention, not merely acknowledges, but
maintains as a central guiding principle, the fact that
" delinquency is a dynamic process of interaction
between the total personality and the total environment ".
The account of the quest for causes neglects neither
the exogenous nor the endogenous factors. The
conclusions reached that " . . . . the delinquent act
itself may be relatively unimportant; it may have
significance only as a symptom of a deeper mal-
adjustment ", serves as a basic principle underlying
the development of the work of the Passaic Children's
Bureau.

Duplication of existing services is not the aim of the
Bureau. The contributions of education and welfare
agencies are not merely acknowledged, but every effort
is made to adapt and integrate, as far as possible, their
methods and aims in a community-wide attack on the
problems to which juvenile maladjustment gives rise.

The staff of the Bureau represents from various
aspects the interests of the community and so includes
representatives of education, health and social agencies,
the police, child guidance and other bodies interested
in the physical, social and intellectual development of
young people. Without the active interest and support
of these bodies, the work of the Bureau would not have
progressed as it did.

The author does not deprecate the work of " co-
ordinating councils " but from experience has found
that such committees tend to have a rather " high
mortality ". It is for this reason that Mr. Kvaraceus
considers that no agency is better adapted to preserve
continuity in progress and maintain public interest and
support than the school.

The study describes how investigations were made
into such matters as the health history of families, their
size, their economic and social status; the effects of
broken homes and disharmony; school and work records
and achievements and the intelligence of children whose
difficulties brought them to the notice of the Bureau.
The writer makes clear however, that the results of
exhaustive inquiry indicated that the subjective elements
in family life were found to have an even greater influence
in many cases than those factors which lent themselves
more readily to quantitative analysis.

Inevitably, to some extent, the work described re-
emphasizes and corroborates the results of previous
studies. Once again the fact that the percentage
incidence of subnormal intelligence found was greater
than that in a cross section of the general population
is made clear; that serious educational retardation
occurred almost three times as frequently and that
truancy was five times as prevalent among these mal-
adjusted children as among those who were socially
more stable is also demonstrated.

An interesting feature of the report is that each of the
factors investigated is assessed, not in isolation, but in
relation to the situation as a whole. Throughout the
development of the Bureau's work the emphasis and
attack is upon the causes and not merely upon the
symptoms of social maladjustment.

The account of the work in no way suggests that
further inquiry would be redundant. The author, as
former Director of the Bureau, does not fail to point
out that much work remains to be done. The book
is written from a healthily self-critical standpoint.
There is no attempt at suppression of data which does
not fall in line with the principles which informed the
work. Sufficient space is given to supporting statistics
to illustrate the discussion, but quantitative assessment
does not supplant the qualitative aspect.

The book offers stimulating and provocative reading.
An ample bibliography is proved, though inevitably
the references are mainly to publications which are at
present difficult to obtain from U.S.A.
M.I.D.
