What are the Essential Personal Qualities Required? For Success in Mental Nursing?
==================================================================================

By LEONARD S. HEAL
Staff Nurse, Herrison Hospital, Dorchester
Winner of the 1945 " Lord " Memorial Prize and Medal
(awarded by The National Council for Mental Hygiene)
Professor Joad continually emphasizes that the answer
to any problem " all depends upon what is meant by "
the terms of the question. In this case the expression
" success in mental nursing " calls for discussion and
definition before the personal qualities of the nurse can
be considered.
What then is meant by success in mental nursing ?
Is it rapid promotion from student nurse to matron or
chief male nurse ? No, for this may be the fruit of skilful
Place-seeking rather than good nursing. Is the achieve-
ment of brilliant recoveries, especially when the prognosis
js unfavourable, to be regarded as success ? No, brilliance
rather for the psychiatrist and the research specialist
than for the nurse. Again, is the avoidance of accidents,
of untoward incidents, and the prevention of sickness
by vigilance and foresight to be regarded as the criterion
?f success ? Not entirely, for, commendable as these
may be, successful mental nursing is more than this.
. There are many more pointers to success and fields
which the nurse must succeed. There is the nurse
?f whom every patient speaks well and whom the visitors
Praise, but popularity is not the only hall mark of sound
w?rk. Another may have the gift of being able to
Manage a difficult case, but this is success in one field
only. Is good administration, cleanliness and order,
a quiet ward and disciplined patients the standard of
efficiency ? Surely not, for these attributes alone do not
necessarily mean happiness and well being. The ability
induce patients to employ themselves usefully, to
benefit from occupational therapy and thus assist their
?wn recovery is but one form of treatment.
Remembering that sick nursing is an important part
01 mental nursing, a good nurse can help to ease suffering
and prolong life when one less skilled may have let
tie patient slip beyond human help. He should prevent
soreness and complete degeneration in the case of a
erminal dementia or dementia paralytica. He may have
nursed the patient through a severe illness and back to
good physical health. A potential suicide has perhaps
een treated for some self-inflicted injury and then
j^'Ped back on to the road to complete physical and
Rental recovery. The mental illness is sometimes
ssociated with some physical disorder which, if carefully
Ul?ed and treated in co-operation with the medical
sl^n 'eac* to cornP'ete relief. Technical nursing
tL11 under medical direction in the use of insulin shock
yerapy, prolonged narcosis, induced hyper pyrexia,
ectro convulsant therapy or post-operative care in
Pre-frontal leucotomy, or participation in some other
?rm of modern mental treatment may be contributory
0 the success of the medical staff. Important as these
Accesses may be, they are still only one aspect of success-
'menta, nursing.
of. .Ur objective cannot be limited to any one field or set
1 C|rcumstances. No one method or group of results,
ven the recovery of some patients, can be rightly described
s complete success. Indeed a 100 per cent, success
may never be apparent, for the achievement of allevia-
tion of the severity of the illness or the remission of the
signs and symptoms must be regarded as good and
successful nur^pg. This achievement is a multiple
one which includes all the partial and individual successes
we have discussed, and which perhaps seem impossible
of attainment, yet there are mental nurses who are able
to secure some success in all these fields and claim the
title of a successful mental nurse. What personal
qualities then are required for the attainment of this
goal ?
St. Matthew and St. Mark record the details of an
incident when the disciples of Christ were asked to cure
a sick boy. The boy had some violent recurrent mental
illness and his father in the absence of Jesus asked the
disciples to help, but they were quite unable to do so.
Jesus himself however, upon his return was immediately
able to calm the boy. Now the disciples having failed
were anxious to know the secret of success and were
told by their Master that " this kind can come forth by
nothing but by prayer and fasting ". In this story
there are perhaps many things that we cannot understand,
but one thing is perfectly clear and that is that the
disciples lacked those elements in their character that
could only be nurtured by "prayer and fasting". Now
what the ancients described as " prayer and fasting "
we would call character training and self-discipline.
For the modern mental nurse, as well as for the ancient
disciples, success is only assured by character that is
well balanced, disciplined and unshakeable. Tt is
well known that the mental nurse requires nearly all of
the virtues, but any one, or all of them without their
counterpart are insufficient and in fact, if carried to their
limit, can be a fault.
A detailed consideration of the qualities involved will
reveal this. Perhaps, first and foremost, tact is required,
but the time comes when patients must be told truth
which they do not realize, and helped to face facts as
they really are. Conversely, however desirable truth
may be it can be hard and cruel if met too suddenly.
For example, there seems to be a most undesirable
practice among general practitioners, public assistance
officers and others of deliberately deceiving patients in
order to get them to the mental hospital and accordingly
causing considerable mistrust and suspicion in the minds
of patients when they discover the real situation. This
is tact carried beyond its right and useful purpose, when
a kindly explanation of the real facts is needed.
Patience, that supreme virtue of all nurses, can out-
stay its uses, for there are times in the treatment of a
patient when he can realize that his caprices will not be
endured by a right minded society and must not be
inflicted upon his fellow patients and nurses. Take
for example a case of hypomania ; the bustling activity
and interference in the affairs of others should not always
be endured with patience, but checked for his own good
and that of his fellows. Similarly tolerance cannot
stand alone, for although mental nursing would be
impossible without an almost inexhaustible fund of
tolerance for the idiosyncrasies and special needs of
those being nursed, there is at times behaviour that is
intolerable and that must be rebuked and stopped.
Now to take a few of the many other highly to be
desired virtues, necessary as they are none of them
can stand alone and none of them can be used without
the limitations of their own opposites. The mental
nurse must usually persist upon a given course, whatever
hindrances or abuse may be met, but there are occasions
when the nurse should curtail these activities and allow
the patient to continue upon his own way for the solu-
tion of his own problems, in other words, persistence
must not degenerate into obstinacy. Cheerfulness is
often regarded as a characteristic of a good nurse,
yet a becoming dignity and seriousness of manner can
sometimes be more encouraging than a facile optimism.
Sympathy is not always solely desitftble, especially
in the case of the self-centred hypochondriac and the
hysteric. Ingenuity, ability in games, music and
handicrafts have an important part to play, but they do
not tell the whole story. Vigilance is necessary, but
patients do not like to feel that they are being watched
continuously. Versatility must be balanced by stability.
Co-operation among hospital staffs is highly necessary
and the ability to co-operate readily is a valuable gift,
but even so individuality and independence are equally
necessary. The present generation often regards poise
and personality as being the most desirable personal
qualities in any walk of life. In mental nursing these
qualities are exceedingly valuable, and in fact a con-
siderable amount of success depends upon the person-
ality of the nurse, but unless it is based upon sound
character it can be but a hollow mockery. Thus it becomes
apparent that as success in mental nursing is a composite
achievement, however brilliant some of its triumph
may be, complete success cannot be claimed without
including many and various humble jobs well done ;
so the essential personal qualities are many and varied,
no one quality standing alone or taking pre-eminence,
but depending upon sound well-balanced mind and
character.
There are two other very important aspects of mental
nursing. A nurse is not completely successful if her
personal life is adversely affected by her work and
unusual environment. A woman who herself becomes
depressed, neurotic, hysterical or even sour, embittered,
coarsened and frustrated has not made a success of
mental nursing, for her own character and personality
have suffered and she herself has become a minor
casualty. It is highly important that the mental nurse
should '?maintain her own sweetness and integrity of
character, and soundness and vigour of mind by the
routine methods known to her and by full and free
association with normal society away from the hospital
and its staff. This applies equally of course to the male
nurse. The man who, however well controlled he may
be on duty, goes home and lets out his pent-up anger
and irritation upon his family in not himself a personal
success. The man who has allowed his horizon to
become limited by the mentality of his patients, his
outlook on life cynical and his mind and body too
exhausted by the strain of his work to take his proper
place as an active citizen of his town or community,
has not made a success of his vocation, but has rather
become a victim of it. If, when retiring after thirty-
three years, he himself has acquired a slightly warped
personality, success has eluded him and also the adminis-
trators of our mental hospitals. And so again the
qualities demanded for success are balance and
stability; in other words, the essential personal quality
demanded of the successful mental nurse is sound
mental health.
The other important factor in mental nursing may
best be described as public relations. This is the day of
opportunity for developing the voluntary system, and
the attitude of the voluntary patient, and of the certified
patient too, depends a great deal upon public opinion
and its general attitude towards mental hospitals and
mental illness. The man who is on the verge of mental
illness sometimes avoids having anything to do with
the mental hospital, or even the out-patient clinic,
because he fears the " stigma of insanityThe
certified patient in hospital fears to face the world again
because he has been in a mental hospital. Relatives
too feel that a major disaster has descended upon the
family. Even the mental nurse himself is not always
regarded as a quite desirable member of society. Now
this attitude is very slowly being dispelled and it is very
important for the successful nursing of mental illness that
these ideas should be quickly and completely removed.
The prevailing attitude towards the mentally sick must
change, mental illness generally must be better under-
stood by the public, research and treatment must be
better supported and psychiatrists and mental nurses
accorded a more proper recognition of their work.
The persons most numerous and best able to effect this
change are mental nurses themselves. The success of
mental nursing depends upon their being good ambas-
sadors of their vocation, on their advocacy of balanced
living and enlightened judgement on matters of health,
both mental and physical, above ail on their own essential
sanity.
HEADLEY BROTHERS, 109 KINGSWAY, LONDON, W.C.2 J AND ASHFORD, KENT
