Some Lessons of Wartime Psychiatry. II
=========================================

:Author: Kenneth Soddy, M.D., D.P.M.
Medical Director, National Association for Mental Health
In the previous issue the work of psychiatrists in
the services was described in order to apply the
lessons learnt there to the problems of peacetime
reconstruction.

Psychiatrists made a distinctive contribution to
the work and life of the armed services in addition
to the traditional role of treatment of mental illness
by furthering a positive mental health policy, by
selection, elimination of the unfit and by advice on
leadership, on the handling of men and on morale.
It was quickly realized that psychiatry would not
do its duty by the service if it merely provided
treatment for the mentally ill. Even if successful,
soldiers so treated are of limited use subsequently
and the time consumed in treatment is uneconomic.
These considerations placed prevention of malad-
justment at the top priority for psychiatrists, and
although this is a break with the tradition that the
patient must take the initiative in consulting the
doctor, it does but follow the precedent so success-
fully established by the Public Health Authorities.
The aim of prevention of mental ill health led
straight to the investigation of the factors producing
it, to study of the raw material of the army and the
way in which the service treated this material.
The most important objects for study were the
fitness by personality and past experience of the indi-
vidual for the role in which he was cast, the
quality of training, the leadership, the indoctrina-
tion of the soldier and the foundation of good
morale. These studies represented a very practical
application of the principles of preventive psychiatry.
In order to undertake the above studies and prac-
tical duties psychiatrists became much more closely
identified with army life than would have been the
case by the mere provision of psychiatric hospitals
and special clinics.

They were established as officers within the
military hierarchy, and were concerned with any-
thing affecting private or public mental well-being.
These officers were not attached to hospitals, but
had their main linkages with the various military
formations in their sphere of operations, where
by the use of the appropriate channels of command
much could be achieved in an authoritarian society.
Some Differences between the Military and the Civil
Social Orders

What worked well in the army may not necessarily
work as well in civil life, for the army is a closely
knit authoritarian hierarchy which exists (in time
of war) only for the specific purpose of destroying
the enemies of its own society. It is, therefore,
a group within a group, charged with particular
functions, and apt to be narrowly intolerant of the
larger issues confronting the community proper,
because of the peculiar psychological strains of
its own function.

This authoritarianism does not rest only on
traditions handed down from an earlier social order,
it is also the dynamic result of at least two strong
psychological forces. First, entering the army
involves the recruit in a clean break with his civilian
past. Henceforth the army is his life, his emotional
ties with his past life are largely severed and those
with his family considerably modified. That
this is interpreted by the individual as a dangerous
threat to the continuity of his personality is suggested
by the boredom, the emotional emptiness of the
recruit's early days in spite of the novelty of his
life. It is remarkable, however, how quickly
this disinterested and rudderless phase is followed
by one of identification with an idealized father
figure, in this case the authoritarian society ; and
so the mutilated personality finds itself again.
Secondly, when the recruit embarks on the
career of licensed homicide for which he is trained,
not only is he exposed to danger, injury and death,
but also to blood guiltiness. A strong father
figure now becomes doubly necessary, the organiza-
tion which punishes him as severely as this must
also protect him not only from destruction, but
also from his own guilt. Hence the preoccupation
of the army with welfare and day-to-day care of
the soldier, the development of the strong fraternal
spirit of comradeship, and the deep dependence of
the soldier on his organization.

The authoritarian character of military life is
therefore a natural development mainly growing
out of the dynamics of the situation, and being all
pervading affects the military psychiatrist equally
with other officers. He is inevitably invested
to some extent with the attributes of the father-
substitute, independently of any individual trans-
ference. In other words, the soldier expects,
needs and looks for the type of " directive
psychiatry " which the army provides.

On the other hand civilian society normally has
none of this special mission and, with an intimate
personal tradition handed down the generations,
it is more stable and can survive with a far less
degree of rigid organization. The civilian is &
the same time more individualistic, more matur6
emotionally, and more firmly embedded in tradi'
tion than is the soldier. Being a member
civilian society for his whole life he is also more
deeply affected by changes therein. Love and hate
are not organized and directed on to specif^
objects as they must be in the fighting services-
The adult civilian must deal with his emotion3'
problems himself and cannot pass them up for
solution by higher authority.

Father-substitutes in civilian life are many and
varied, there is no over-riding intimate homo-
geneous personal loyalty except at the remote
distance of the state itself. So that with civilian
society a man can be in it but not of it, and the
community will not feel menaced ; eccentricity
and exclusiveness can be tolerated. It is not so
in service life where a soldier who fails to identify
himself with the group becomes a menace to the
Security of the whole, and, as stated in the previous
article, has to be disposed of.
By discharging maladjusted soldiers to civil life,
with severed ties and with no alternative attach-
ments formed during service life, the services have
contributed, though unwittingly, to the psycho-
logical problems of the post-war period. In
addition to this emotional dislocation, such men
have to re-establish their ties, only to find that they,
their families and the environment have altered
meanwhile. Moreover there can be no future
discharge from civil life into some other body,
this easy solution of the problem of the misfit is
denied to a permanent society, which must absorb
and carry its own misfits.

Some segregation is in fact attempted in civil
life, mental defectives go to colonies, psychotics
to mental hospitals, neurotics to various private
homes and communities, psychopaths when delinqu-
ent go to prison, but only a very small proportion
can be permanently excluded from society. That
segregation is not the final answer to mental ill
health is obvious because the discharge rate of
Psychotics from mental hospitals is now 70 per
cent. of the current admission rate ; nearly all
neurotics and criminal psychopaths return to
circulation sooner or later, and 80 per cent, of
mental defectives are never effectively segregated.
Common responsibility for these human beings
must be recognized whether they are segregated
?.r at large. The future life of the misfit in the
civilian community constitutes one of the main
challenges to mental health work.

The Place of the Psychiatrist in Society
It has been claimed that when a service psychiatrist
}\as effective it was mainly attributable to his
identification with the organization in which he
served. He shared the life, fitted into the autocracy
and adapted his methods to those of an authori-
tarian paternalistic society. Surely the same
Principle holds good for civil life, a psychiatrist
?ust adopt protective colouring and fit easily into
me general structure.

. It is undoubtedly true that the psychiatrist in
civil life is still thought of by the community as a
J^an apart. He has the reputation of sitting in
Judgement on his fellow men and of being pre-
occupied exclusively with morbid reactions. It is
now being proved that this can be overcome by
adapting the psychiatric service to the structure
of society, but civilian society is so vast and so
complex that it is difficult to know where to start.
The mere establishment of a large number of regional
psychiatrists at a fairly high level in the public
health services, will not necessarily provide the
answer, unless the officers concerned manage to
establish the closest possible relations with non-
official society. The creation of a race of psychiatric
super civil servants enjoying wide administrative
powers would doubtless do well enough in a
bureaucratic society, but British society is not
entirely bureaucratic, at least not yet; Regional
Commissioners of this and District Controllers
of the other have not up till now been noted for
their close contact with the community which they
serve.

The Shape of the Future?a Social Service ?
A psychiatric service, if based on wartime experi-
ence, would need strengthening on the social side ;
it is possible that it should even be based on social
service and that the clinical and curative measures
should be regarded as ancillary. An eminent
trans-Atlantic psychiatrist lately remarked that
even if there were 200,000 more psychiatrists all
engaged on treatment in the United States they
would still be unable to cope with neurotics and
misfits as quickly as the combined forces of heredity
and environment were producing them. The same
holds true in proportion for Britain, and if the main
answer is psychiatrically based social work (as many
believe) it can no longer be the prerogative of a few
charitably minded people, but must be a wide
activity demanding a team comprising all those
interested in humanitarian and social issues.
In Dr. Blacker's Neurosis and the Mental Health
Services, a list is given of eleven functions of the
proposed Medical Officer of Mental Health. If
he fulfils all these functions this official will have
contributed greatly to the well-being of the com-
munity by dealing with psychiatric illness, ascertain-
ment, community care of mental defectives, criminal
psychiatry and delinquency, industrial psychiatry,
special schools, mental health propaganda, surveys
and follow-up. This is an enormous sphere of
action in all conscience, and it is difficult to see how
a member of the Public Health hierarchy can
adequately combine all these functions in his own
person, and especially the last three on the list.
The Charter of the World Health Organization
agreed to by 61 nations defines health as "a
condition of complete physical, mental and social
well-being, and not merely an absence of disease
This wide definition demands a broad view?the
establishment of well being and not, primarily,
the tackling of disease.
As with the army at the outbreak of war the
problems of mental ill health in civil life are too vast
and pressing, the resources too limited, to admit
of a laisser faire policy. The atomic bomb bogey
hangs over us, the urgent need is to improve the
state of mental health of mankind before it is too
68 MENTAL HEALTH
late. Can there be any higher priority than this ?
Our chief contribution naturally lies with our own
people. Are we right in attempting to build up our
clinical and treatment facilities and allowing social
provisions to grow out of them ? Or should we
concentrate on social work based on sound psychi-
atric foundations and build our hospital services
and treatment facilities thereon ? Provision of the
latter depends largely on sense of public urgency
and there could be no creator of public conscious-
ness more effective than a good social service of the
type projected.
It is submitted that a case can be made out for
concentrating on the social aspects of a proposed
psychiatric service, and by this is meant a com-
prehensive service of which psychiatrists will be the
clinical directors and the main work carried out
in the community by psychiatric social workers
and their assistants. As remarked above psychiatry
is already greatly oversold, and the claims made
for it, now conceded by the public, cannot be met
adequately for many years. But in the building up
period, a strong psychiatric social service would
make a positive contribution to health while acting
as a stimulant to complete evolution.
The Social Effects of Psychiatric Illness
The provision of psychiatric hospitals and out-
patients clinics is certainly of very great importance
but it does not go to the root of the matter. Psy-
chiatric illness when it occurs in a home strikes a
more intimate and deeper blow than can be parried
by giving only the patient special treatment. It
undermines security, creates tensions, and arouses
fears in the minds of all who have an emotional
relation with the sick person whose cure, even if
achieved, will not automatically dispel the unrest
and disquiet which has been aroused.
This is now recognized by very many people and
has led to the appointment of psychiatric social
workers at many clinics. These workers do an
invaluable job in attempting to deal with the family
and domestic problems arising out of psychiatric
illness, but it seems doubtful if the fullest potentiali-
ties of psychiatric social work can be achieved in
close identification with the clinic and all that
means in terms association for the patient and
his relatives.
The Services' After-Care Scheme
Arising directly out of war experience the Services'
After-Care Scheme has built up a nation-wide
system of intimate social work available to all those
discharged from the Services with psychiatric
illness. Lately this scheme which has now accepted
10,000 cases and operates from 15 different centres
has become progressively more civilian in character.
This is partly due to the fact that the erst-while
soldier is now a civilian, and partly to the number
of referrals and enquiries coming in from purely
civilian sources, as people begin to realize what such
a Service offers.
This After-Care Service has had the usual diffi-
culties in securing staff with adequate previous
experience and also suffers from the general shortage
of social and clinical facilities. The great burden
of responsibility has fallen on to the psychiatric
social workers, and it has not been possible hitherto
to provide the everyday close co-operation with
psychiatrists which a medical project of this sort
requires. The appointment of psychiatrists region-
ally as consultants to this organization would
immediately transform its whole scope and enable
it to make a striking contribution to Mental Health.
The position of these psychiatric social workers
in the After-Care Scheme is in some ways analogous
to that of the Area Psychiatrists in the army. The
latter found that their main attention inevitably
became attracted to attacking social and psycho-
logical causes rather than attempted patchwork on
individuals. Similarly the psychiatric social worker
finds herself or himself enquiring more and more
into causes, which itself involves (as in the army
experience) closer and closer identification with the
community in all its daily ramifications.
A Social or a Clinical Service ?
In the proposals for a National Health Service
there is some danger that in the interests of organiza-
tion, opportunities may be missed of creating the
most effective instrument possible for the further-
ance of Mental Health, by regarding social work
as merely an adjunct to clinical treatment. It is
a natural stage in medical organization that the
central point should be conceived of as the clinic
or hospital, from which all other services radiate?
a conception inherent in the current practice of
controlling all medical education from hospitals.
The question to be asked is whether this should
apply also to Mental Health Services, or whether
it is possible to devise a method whereby those
in need of help can consult a community service
which can take responsibility for the case before
special treatment is necessary (if this be possible)
and retain contact until assistance is no longer
required. Special hospital and clinic treatment
under such a system would be a derivative of the
organization and not its central point.
If this idea were accepted we should need to face
certain differences of emphasis discernible between
the needs of an organized clinical service and those
of community care. The former must be integrated
into the general hospital system of the community.
It is not desirable to have psychiatric clinics
divorced from surgical, orthopaedic, medical,
children's and tuberculosis clinics or any others.
Medicine has been all too prone to accept arbitrary
divisions based on textbook pathology which make
for ease of hospital organization and economy
of equipment but have the weakness of sending
the patient from clinic to clinic. Such a system
is confusing to patient and doctor alike, and the
Mental Health Service must avoid this error.
?
MENTAL HEALTH 69
A Suggested Form of Psychiatric Service
Plans so far made public indicate that the National
Health Service in the mental field is designed to
provide a nation-wide clinical system of special
hospitals, out-patients clinics and their derivatives.
Community care is to be the responsibility of the
local Health Authority as part of its general welfare
functions with due provision for the co-operation
?f social workers based on clinics in suitable cases.
It is argued here that it would be a better arrange-
ment to make the division of responsibility in a
different place ; to take a much broader view of the
social or community aspects and to organize a
nation-wide social psychiatric service under the
general supervision of psychiatrists which will take
wide responsibilities for mental health. This
service active in health and disease will send patients
to its sister Clinical and Treatment Service (which
?f course is no less important), and then later in
the history of each case, take it back for after-care
and prevention of recurrence. But whereas the
Treatment Service is more within the traditional
Medical field, the Social Service is somewhat of
an innovation.
The Clinical and Treatment Service
The special administrative requirements of the
elinical service must not be under-estimated.
Psychiatric hospitals need a certain scale of equip-
ment and premises, only understood by specialists.
^.Uch an organization lends itself to the crea-
tion of a hierarchy. It will not be difficult to
introduce at an appropriate level in the National
health Service administrative medical officers
Responsible for the organization of psychiatric
'eatment facilities.
In parenthesis it is observed that no large
^ganized medical service has yet solved the pro-
ems raised by the fact that the more senior
appointments inevitably become administrative ;
t is very rare for a doctor in public service to attain
a senior position and yet retain active clinical
0rk. Such a system puts a premium on un-
nthusiastic doctoring, encouraging a flight into
oministration?a less disturbing, worrying and
^acting task than the care of patients. This
endency does not lead to high morale within the
ervice. It is a problem which must be solved
ejore the National Health Service will be a success.
The creation of a chain of command within the
Psychiatric treatment service presents no special
'hiculties. Professional staffs need control,
?spital property must be administered, patients
,e bound by the terms of treatment to conform
rules, and provided the essential doctor-patient
tationship is safeguarded, there seems no reason
% an organized service on a normal service
Pattern should not function smoothly. But if
t stops there and treats the social aspects of its
Vn f-as secondary to the treatment of disease it
111 fall far short of what is required.
(b) The Psychiatric Social Service
The National Health Service includes Mental
Health. It is suggested that top priority be given
to the creation of a really adequate psychiatric
social service for the community in the homes,
factories and schools. Such a service, although
not undertaking remedial treatment itself, will
be in close touch with the therapists, and will act
at all times as a social agent to implement recom-
mendations made in the clinics. It should provide
a medium of stable friendship available to all
who need it; neurotics, psychotics and psychopaths
are essentially lonely people whose contact with
their social environment is poor. Armed with its
knowledge of the patient and of local conditions,
such a service could participate actively and
indirectly in negotiations with employers, Govern-
ment departments and with other social agencies,
with the object of explaining both sides to each
other. Maladjusted people have peculiar difficulty
in making themselves understood, and the education
of officials and employers alike in the particular
needs of this class of person is an important function.
In the role of adviser and mediator this service
will make the positive contribution of finding
suitable places in the social system for many who
are a social problem at present.
Secondly, such a service will have an unrivalled
opportunity for undertaking public education in
the interests of mental health. Just as the Health
Visitors and District Nurses in their different ways
exert a powerful influence through their personal
contacts; so the psychiatric social worker will
have equally good chances of being a real power
for good. This will supplement present propaganda
methods of lectures and meetings which never have
more than a superficial effect. There are also
challenging possibilities of research into social
causative factors of mental ill health which these
workers will be able to take up.
Thirdly, this Service can make a direct contribu-
tion to the morale of the community, both by solving
the problem of the misfit and by its ability through
its close links with the neighbourhood to discover
causes of friction and unrest and of making concrete
suggestions. It should command the confidence
of dissatisfied elements in the community as well
as the respect of the majority, and will be in an
unrivalled position to carry out surveys, enquiries
and social experiments into the causes and effects
of diseases, disabilities, popular movements, pre-
judices and cults; many and varied problems of
interest to physician, sociologist and politician alike.
Rehabilitation is a fashionable term at present.
Eradication of the last effects of illness and re-
establishment of health must include attention to
the mental attitudes which have arisen during
illness, not only in the patient but in all his human
contacts. Industrialists are all too prone to think
of a man as so much production; doctors see him as
a background to a disease; social workers as the
possessor of an economic or domestic problem.
70 MENTAL HEALTH
The army has known for many years that when the
soldier enlists the entire family enlists too?or
does so in effect. Similarly the entire family is
involved in illness; so that the modern conception
of psychiatric social work must be far wider than
the present orthodox practices in follow-up, after-
care or convalescence; it recognizes the necessity
to mobilize the entire family in the active pursuit
of health, the finest form of insurance against
future breakdown.
The Type of Organization Required
Arguing from experience, the officers of the future
psychiatric service will need to be more intimately
concerned with the daily life of the ordinary man
than is likely in a service with a hospital or a
centralized type of organization. It will not be
sufficient to give the Medical Officer of Mental
Health an office in the local County Hall or Regional
Board Headquarters, and to identify him completely
with the Government. He will not do his best
work by controlling his patients. If he is doing his
work properly they will consult him as free agents
at a stage when there are still many alternative
courses of action to be considered?not at the last
moment when hospital treatment is the only possible
course left. He must not represent the government
?or any other institution. He will measure his
success by his degree of identification with the people.
For similar reasons it would be wise to avoid too
close identification with hospitals and clinics,
because it will take some years yet for the public
to accept mental illness without nervousness. The
present reaction of the public is still mingled with
fear and hostility, the wish to segregate, or in other
words to deny its existence in ordinary life. What-
ever may be the ultimate ideal, at present close
association with hospitals will hamper the psychia-
tric service in gaining the complete confidence of
the public.
While the treatment service can be organized on
a normal pattern within the general provisions
this should not form the main pre-occupation of
the Medical Officer of Mental Health. To be sure
he will need to work in closely with it and exert an
influential advisory function, but he should have
ample responsibilities in the social field to extend
him. Since from the very nature of his work he
can rarely issue orders and has no legitimate means
of enforcing compliance (except extreme legal
sanctions) there seems little point in granting him
a high place in the direct chain of command of the
total Health Service. This argument does not
constitute a plea for an entirely independent status
because he must obviously be very closely responsible
to the community he serves.
According to this view his main task is the
organization of a community psychiatric service,
in which psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric
social workers, sociologists, and teachers would
co-operate with general practitioners and with
psychiatric clinics. The aim is to provide as a
permanent feature a service able to accept responsi-
bility for the well-being of all who need psychiatric
help. It should be able to " take on a case " and
keep in touch with it, and with the family during
the whole of its career until a settlement of the
problem is reached. At different phases, clinic or
hospital treatment can be arranged, or the Ministry
of Labour contacted or many other services given
designed to aid recovery, but the Community
Psychiatric Service should be, as it were, the sheet
anchor of the case. This does not deny the right
of the general practitioner to deal direct with the
psychiatric clinic, or of the latter to conduct its
own social work on its active cases as the clinical
situation demands ; obviously close co-operation
would be essential and in many areas interchange
or even sharing of part-time personnel would occur.
But if it is accepted that in any case of psychiatric
illness not only the individual but also the family
and the social group is affected, it is logical to
provide the main service to give over-all cover and
to have clinics and hospitals as a special technique
ancillary to the social service.
Naturally, a central organization will be necessary
as it it will not be possible for local bodies, especially
in the early stages independently to judge quality
of work or policy. Supervision of standards of
employment of personnel and co-ordination between
districts will be unavoidable. But the Medical
Officer of Mental Health should be directly respon-
sible to the community which he serves, which could
be represented by a Mental Health Committee.
The possible advantages of making these com-
mittees voluntary rather than administrative bodies
are for consideration.
The finest organization would be defeated if it
is not accepted by the public and it is therefore
important to make the greatest use of all available
assets and to build on existing goodwill, rather than
attempt to organize a new scheme from scratch.
In the present services' after-care scheme there is a
nucleus readily capable of expansion, and it is to
be hoped that full advantage will be taken of this
in the immediate future. Later on the work can
be transferred to the appropriate local bodies as
the latter become ready to undertake it, if desired.
In this way sturdy growth and continuity can be
assured.
This projected Mental Health Service, to be a
success, must stand on its own feet and be built up
by the community as an organization belonging
to them, whose services they can command and
whose activity they can control. It must avoid the
label of too great officialdom, it is not there to
serve the interests of the National Health Service
as a whole, nor to foster the cause of psychiatric
hospitals and clinics. It has no concern with the
efficiency of either of these for their own sakes,
but it is deeply concerned with the complete physical
mental and social well-being of individual human
beings and of the families to which they belong-
Only on such a basis will the community psychiatric
service of the future reach its full stature.
