Classification and Education of Afflicted Children
===================================================

By Felix Arnold, Pd.D., Ph.D.,
New York City.
Classification in general. From an educational point of view,
afflicted children may be defined as all children who are prevented
from taking up regular class work with normal children because of
mental, moral, or physical deficiencies. I use the term "afflicted"
as a general category including all types of abnormal, defective,
delinquent, or backward children who are not up to the average
qualifications of the normal child. In the organization of special
classes, as well as in many recent discussions of defectives, the
difference between children, who have been usually lumped together
as "bad," "incorrigible," "defective," etc., have been ignored and
these different types of children forced to work in the same tread-
mill under a single teacher. To be specific, I recall a small school
set aside for the incorrigibles, truants and bad boys, from the
neighboring schools in the district. It was a sort of half-way
house between the regular school and the truant school. There
I found various types of boys shoulder to shoulder in the same
class. [Feebleminded children, underfed boys, criminal types,
mentally dwarfed children, and the usual "bad" boys worked side
by side. The dangers of such a lack of classification need hardly
be emphasized. One or two vigorous criminal types, a few bad or
wild children, several feebleminded children,?and the nucleus of
a gang of thieves, pickpockets, etc., is formed. Further evils of
a lack of proper classification I shall note in the course of this
paper.
I would suggest the following classification of afflicted chil-
dren:?(1) backward children, (2) crippled children, (3) deaf
and dumb children, (4) blind children, (5) feebleminded children,
(6) delinquents, and (7) moral defectives.
Backward children are those who seem unable to do the regular
grade work even when minimum requirements are demanded.
Three classes of such children may be distinguished according to
the causes of their backwardness. In the first class may be placed
(180)
EDUCATION OF AFFLICTED CHILDREN. 181
children or normal ability, who, because of change of residence,
transfer from school to school, travel, ill health, etc., are not
in the grade they should be when measured by the standard of
age, general appearance, and general intelligence. Thus, I recall
instances in which children fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, and even
seventeen years of age were only in the seventh year of school,
(first half), because of the reasons given above. Little would have
been needed to bring these children up to the work of the eighth
year. As it was, they were forced to do work far below their
general ability. In the second class are children of foreign-born
parents who may know the subjects of school instruction in their
native tongue, but lack such command of English as enables them
to express themselves properly and to understand the instruction
given. Thus, children of fourteen, or over, may be compelled to
struggle along in the fourth or fifth year of school, and finally to
leave a year or two later. In the third class are children who are
below mediocrity in intelligence, who are slow to understand the
work, or who, because of nervous disposition, are unable to do the
routine work, and to withstand the stress and strain of mass teach-
ing. I may note that this class does not include such children as
are specially gifted along manual or naturalistic lines. It is wrong
to measure such children by the Procrustean bed of the "three R's"
and to declare them unfit.
Crippled children are those who are unable to walk without
the aid of crutches, braces, or other assistance. In addition to
their crippled condition they may be sickly, afflicted with tuber-
culosis in some form, weakened through malnutrition, etc.
Usually they are extremely nervous and excitable when first taken
in hand. Many crippled children are normal as far as intelligence
and morality are concerned. Up to the present they have been
practically shut out of the public schools because of the lack of
adequate school furniture and means of transportation.
Deaf and dumb children need no special description. Usually
a number are cared for in asylums. Many, however, remain at
home, and, shut out of the public schools,. are denied the advan-
tages of an education open to normal children. The same is true
of blind children.
Feebleminded children are those who are deficient in mental
equipment. They range all the way from idiots and imbeciles to
children of weak intelligence. They should not be confused with
the insane. As Barr1 points out, one who is insane may be cured.
^arr, M. W., Mental Defectives, Ch. III.
182 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
One who is feebleminded, however, has some defect which renders
him incurable. The term, "mental defective," is not advisable
for several reasons. In the first place, deaf and dumb and blind
children are defective. In the second place, some children are
morally defective. Finally, "feebleminded" is an expression less
repulsive than "idiot," "imbecile," or "defective."2
The worst cases of feeblemindedness should have no place in
the school. Idiots who are helpless and untrainable, and idio-imbe-
ciles who are improvable. only to the extent of self-help and of
training in simple, automatic actions, belong to the asylum. Imbe-
ciles of a higher grade, feebleminded children, and those who have
mental defects, however, should be cared for by the public school.
Such care and education are especially needed when these children
remain with their parents. In such cases they are often used as
household drudges and may drift into vagabondage and crime.
Without a proper education this is often their only means of
living.
Delinquents should be distinguished from moral defectives.
Delinquents are normal children who, because of improper home
training, of evil surroundings, etc., have little or no appreciation
of the social standards of right and wrong. Such children may
vary from the truant and disorderly child, to the child who, asso-
ciating with adult criminals, may pilfer, steal, and commit petty
crimes under the guidance of his elders.
The delinquent is the product of his environment. The moral
defective, however, is such because of his inheritance and birth.
Even if he has proper home surroundings, with a perversity which
is innate, he will seek evil companions and do wrong because it is
natural to him. If a moral defective is likely to become a social
menace, his place is in some special institution.
Education in general. The education of special classes of
children is possible under at least four conditions. They may be
cared for, (1) in a private asylum, (2) in a public institution
devoted wholly to one class of individuals, (3) in the home under
private care, or (4) in classrooms in the regular schools. A word
or two is necessary to bring out aspects peculiar to each of these
conditions.
In general it is advisable to regard the education of special
classes from the same economical and educational standpoint as
that from which the education of normal children is regarded.
Thus, in the latter case, the state undertakes to educate the child,
*ma., 88.
EDUCATION OF AFFLICTED CHILDREN. 183
but it does not undertake to feed,3 clothe, and shelter him into the
bargain, when the parents are able to make adequate provison.
On the other hand, if the state determines to educate its children,
it should not neglect those who are afflicted in any way. The
same rule should apply to all, weak and strong alike.
If a child is defective, crippled, etc., his parents may, as stated
above, entrust him to the care of a private asylum or public insti-
tution. If the cost is met by private or public munificence, the
care of the child is taken out of the parents' hands, and they are
relieved from all expense. Children are sent to such institutions
because of the educational and other facilities offered. If, how-
ever, only the education of the child is in question, then the parents
should undertake the other duties of feeding, clothing, and shelter-
ing their offspring.
Another objection to the institution which undertakes full
charge of afflicted children is the relatively small area which it can
conveniently cover. There are very few institutions devoted solely
to one or another class of afflicted children. Children can not
attend daily and so must usually either live at the institution or
give up its advantages. In the first case, the child becomes a
public charge soon after its birth while at the same time it loses
the advantages, however poor, of home life and free association
with children of normal social attainments. In the second case,
the afflicted child becomes practically useless because of its lack of
a proper education.
Education through private tuition is practically out of the
question. Most families have all they can do to bring up their
children in the usual way without the additional expense of private
instruction and care. Special classes in the public schools, or
small schools properly distributed, are a better solution of the
problem.
Some care is needed to secure the proper location and dis-
tribution of these classes. There should be a class for each type
of afflicted child within reach of all the children concerned. If the
city or town is divided into a number of school districts, there
should be a room in at least one school in each district for each
of these special groups of children. Each district would then have
a number of schools within easy reach of the children of the dis-
3Where of course normal children are partially fed, as with milk,
soup, etc., the same should apply to afflicted children. I refer here
rather to the total support of afflicted children that is given in some
asylums.
184 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
trict, one school with, a class for crippled children, another with
a class for deaf and dumb children, a third with one for mental
defectives, and so on. By this means there would be a number of
special classes so distributed as to be within reach of all the chil-
dren in any district.
Instead of having special classes distributed in this manner
among the regular schools, it might be advisable to have a special
building put up in each district and fitted for the various classes
of afflicted children. Another plan would be to have small, one-
story buildings put up for each of the special classes of afflicted
children. Whichever plan is followed, the classes should be so
distributed that all the afflicted children may be conveniently
reached.
The purely pedagogic aspects of the training of afflicted chil-
dren require some consideration. The accommodation for the
entrance and dismissal of the pupils will depend upon the special
class concerned. I shall deal with each class under the appropriate
heading. In general, however, the classrooms should be on or
near the ground floor. Pupils should be dismissed a quarter of
an hour before the rest of the school, and should come a quarter of
an hour after the regular pupils. In this way contact with the
regular pupils will be avoided, and, moreover, the sessions being
shorter the strain will be less.
The teachers selected for special classes should possess the
spirit of the kindergarten. Before appointing a teacher regularly
for special work the authorities should try him for one or more
terms. As work in a special class requires unusual patience and
fitness, no disgrace should be attached to a teacher's failure. If
he does not succeed he should be appointed to a regular class,
provided of course he is otherwise qualified. It is better to have
regular teachers qualify for such positions than to have raw stu-
dents by the usual examiner's tests. There is however some danger
that the deadening routine of the grade may be carried into the
special class and kill its spirit and purpose. It seems needless
to add that properly qualified teachers of special classes should be
put 011 salary schedules higher than the regulation schedules. If
not, they should receive a bonus, or be permitted to work under
specially favorable conditions. Teachers should not be assigned
to special classes because they seem good for nothing else, or
because a special class is a convenient means of getting them out of
the way or of punishing them. Special qualifications over and
above the regular qualifications must be required.
EDUCATION OF AFFLICTED CHILDREN. 185
Instruction must by the nature of the case be largely indi-
vidual. The size of the class will depend upon its kind. In no
case should it exceed fifteen or twenty pupils. It may be limited
to as few as five or ten pupils.
As regards the subject matter of instruction there seems to
be no reason why the children should not receive as much as, if
not more, than is given to normal children. They should there-
fore be carried as far in the regular course of study as their mental
and physical strength will permit. As a minimum they should be
taught such expression as is necessary for human intercourse.
In addition, if possible, they should be taught some pursuit, trade
or occupation, by which they may become self-supporting. More
specific suggestions on this point I shall give below under the
different heads. I may here note that the usual methods of learn-
ing handicrafts are beyond the reach of afflicted children. The
special methods which are necessary for routine instruction are
necessary likewise for instruction in a trade, industry, or profes-
sion. Because of the practical impossibility of learning a trade
or industry outside of the school, most afflicted children are left
helpless, a burden to either their parents or the public, and often
an object of ridicule to the neighborhood.
In general the periods of instruction should be shorter than
normal periods. In the matter of program the teacher should be
left free to do practically what he pleases. So long as the chil-
dren are happy and contented, and are progressing in their work,
no fault should be found with individual programs or arrangements
of instruction periods, so long as the official requirements are met.
The discipline in special classes should be especially mild and
humane. Patience is here a cardinal virtue. The rigidity and
uniformity which are forced upon normal children should have no
place in special classes. Healthy children manage somehow to
live through it all, but weakly or afflicted ones would be crushed
beneath its weight.
The suggestions thus far are more or less general. More
specific directions are conditioned by the particular class of afflicted
children treated. I shall briefly take up each class separately.
Backward children. A class of normal children who are back-
ward in one or more subjects because of change from school to
school, or of illness, etc., should contain not more than fifteen or
twenty children. Individual instruction should be given in those
subjects where the child is backward. In such subjects more time
should be spent than in subjects in which the child is normal. The
186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
work of the teacher should be guided by the individual needs of
the children. As soon as a child has made up what he has lost
or failed to get he should be returned to the regular class.
Children who are below average ability and intelligence should
not be classed with those above mentioned. A class of twenty should
be divided into two or three groups according to the age, ability,
and attainments of the pupils. The regular school work should be
pursued with special reference to practical application, and with
special emphasis upon manual aids. Individual instruction should
predominate. To encourage the children and to indicate their
progress in some way the teacher should promote them from group
to group and give them different books with each advance. As soon
as a child has covered the minimum requirements of the course of
study he should be allowed to graduate with the rest, even though
he has done all his work in the special class.
Foreign-born children should form a class by themselves.
Emphasis should be placed upon oral and written English. As
soon as a child seems able to do the regular work he should be given
special instruction for a few weeks in the grade work of the class
which he seems ready to enter. He should then take up regular
work in his proper grade.
A few misconceptions and some doubtful practices may be
noted. The backward child is not one who can be hurriedly pushed
through enough school work to make him eligible for working
papers according to the law. Tie is less fitted to go to work than arc;
his companions and so should be kept in school as long as possible.
The school is not an instrument of selection (i. e., a machine for
crushing the unfit), neither is it an institution for developing
intellectual specialists or polishing material of finer fibre. Every
child should receive the full benefit of everything which the school
has to offer. If a child goes through the work more slowly he
should remain at school so much longer, though not necessarily
in the same grade.
Another doubtful practice results from the application of the
"three R's" fallacy to such special classes. It is just the barren
and useless nature of much of these subjects which retards the
backward child and makes him more eager to leave school. To
narrow the curriculum in this manner will drive the backward
child more quickly out of the school. An instance comes to my
mind in which a class of backward pupils was given in charge of
one of the most mechanical teachers in the place, and driven along a
road composed of the dry bones of arithmetic, grammar and spell-
EDUCATION OF AFFLICTED CHILDREN. 187
ing. Such a scheme is often very convenient for a principal,
since it rids him of objectionable pupils, children who will not show
up well in examinations, and who may cast a shadow on the intel-
lectual halo of the school. Under cloak of the Pecksniffian excuse
of helping children to get their working papers, a principal may
rid himself in this manner of pupils who are not wanted.
A pernicious scheme which has been brought to my notice is
to advance older pupils and to keep back younger pupils, even
though the younger children may be far ahead of the older in school
work. In this way, it will be seen, a principal can proudly point
to the few children who are over age in the lower grades. Over-
age pupils should no doubt be advanced as rapidly as possible, but
the younger pupils should not on that account be made to suffer.
Crippled children. The chief problem in the case of crippled
children is their transportation and their feeding at noon. They
should be carried to and from school in stages. At noon they should
be given a hot meal. Milk should be supplied at all times.
Sessions should begin a quarter of an hour later than the regular
sessions and should end a quarter of an hour before the regular
sessions. If children remain at school for lunch the sessions
should begin a half hour after and close a half hour before regular
sessions.
A class should not exceed twenty pupils. Boys and girls ot
all ages may be instructed together. If there are two or more
classes in a district it might be well to send the boys to one class
and the girls to another. Groups in a class should be formed
according to the ability and .attainments of the children.
The children should be carried ahead in the grade work just
as far and as fast as their physical and mental condition will
allow. A healthy child may cover the course in the regular time,
or if he is beyond the normal age on entrance, he may, by reason
of his greater maturity, cover it in less time. If some mental
defect accompanies the child's disabled condition, much less can be
accomplished.
Deaf and dumb children. Classes for deaf and dumb chil-
dren should not exceed ten children, especially in the early stages
of instruction. When the children are more advanced, classes
may be somewhat larger.
Pupils should be instructed in the German or oral method of
expression and also in the sign or manual method. The two should
go side by side. In the oral method the children learn to read the
motions of the lips of one speaking and also to talk. In the latter
188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
case they are guided by feeling the throat muscles, etc., and by
closely watching the position of the mouth, lips, tongue and teeth,
of one talking. Lip reading and talking, however, are somewhat
difficult, and all can not obtain the same proficiency in them.
The sign or manual method is the one in use among the deaf
and dumb themselves. An ingenious method of finger language,
devised by Dalgarno in 1680, and revived by Bell, enables mutes
to talk into each other's hands. Each space between the finger
tips and portions of the palm corresponds to a letter of the alpha-
bet,.4
Individual instruction should be used so that brighter pupils
may not be kept back by the others. The regular course of instruc-
tion should be followed, the teacher, however, being allowed great
freedom in mapping out and presenting it to the class. Promo-
tion should be from group to group, if there is only one class.
When a pupil has finished the minimum requirements of the
course he should be allowed to graduate with the regular class.5
Blind children. Much of what has been said in the preceding
section holds for classes of blind children. Classes should num-
ber not more than ten pupils. Advanced classes may be slightly
larger. As regards the transportation to and from school the plan
pursued in the case of crippled children might be followed.
Children should be taught how to read raised print and words
in braille or point alphabet. They may also be taught how to
print and write. The regular course of study should be pursued,
with special emphasis upon music and manual work.0
Feebleminded children. Children who are feebleminded?
mental defectives as they are sometimes called?are usually marked
by features and expression varying greatly from the normal.
Asymmetric, flattened, or misshapen head, deformed ears, flattened
or rudimentary nose, large, coarse mouth, thick lips, thin, inex-
pressive lips, bnd teeth, these are some of the stigmata. In addi-
tion there may be imperfect articulation or stammering, shambling
gait, weak powers of attention, erratic conduct, marked ability in
some special line with complete lack of power in other subjects,
etc.7 jSTo child should be assigned to a class for such defectives
4See Love, J. K., Deaf Mutism, 23fi.
BFor special methods see Arnold, T., On the Education of the Deaf,
Revised and Rewritten by A. Farrar.
"For interesting accounts of the education of blind children see Keller,
Helen, The Story of My Life; Howe, Maud, and Hall, Florence Howe,
Laura Bridgman, and others. (See bibliography in last named.)
'See Barr, M. W., Mental Defectives, Ch. V.
EDUCATION OF AFFLICTED CHILDREN. 189
until he has been tried under a number of teachers and until his
case has been diagnosed by a competent specialist. Some investi-
gation should be made into the conditions surrounding the life of
the child, his birth, family history, health, peculiarities, etc.
The notion that a "class" is simply a roomful of children,
should have no place in the organization of classes of defectives.
I recall in this connection a somewhat miscellaneous collection of
such roomfuls, in which defectives proper were placed side be-
side with moral defectives and with normal children, who
happened to be "bad" boys or boys who were unruly in the regular
classes. To make matters worse, these various aggregations were
placed in charge of new, inexperienced, and substitute teachers,
who had neither special preparation nor special aptitude for the
work. The main object seems to have been achieved when these
children were removed from the regular classes of the neighbor-
ing schools in the district.
The room and the school surroundings should be made as
cheerful as possible. Physiological conditions should be looked
after. Exercise, play, bathing, and feeding should form a part of
the class work. Milk and bread should be supplied. According
to Barr,8 "statistics show that 10 ounces of bread and 1 pint of
skimmed milk equal in nutriment a diet composed of 8 ounces of
soup, 2 ounces of beef, 2 ounces of potatoes, 1 ounce of turnips,
4 ounces of bread, % ounce of butter, and 1 cup of coffee contain-
ing 1 ounce of new milk and l/o ounce of sugar."
The only limit to the instruction given should be the pupil's
capacity to profit by it. Instruction should lay special emphasis
on manual aids, as coarse weaving, simple modeling, easy shop
work, and the like. Abstract work should be reduced to a mini-
mum. Artificial incentives, mild discipline, and patient repeti-
tion are necessary. Games, entertainments, dancing, athletics, and
other means of spontaneous expression may be directed and used
for purposes of instruction and discipline.9
Delinquents. Delinquent children are those children who,
otherwise normal, have not had proper bringing-up or who do not
respond properly to the regular school regulations. They include
the truant, the incorrigible, the spoiled child, and the child who
8Ibid., 170.
"Ibid., Ch. VI. See also Seguin, Idiocy: And its Treatment by the
Physiological Method, Columbia University, Teachers' College, Educational
Reprints; Tuke, Hack, A Dictionary of Psychological Medicine; "Idiots and
Imbeciles," The Psychological Clinic, 1907, 1908.
190 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
has fallen among evil companions and criminal surroundings. A
class should number about twenty pupils. Before putting a child
into a class for delinquents he should have a fair trial with three or
more different teachers.
Instruction should place emphasis upon manual aids, athletics,
games, social entertainments, etc. On the side of discipline a
special course in moral instruction and practice should be system-
atically followed. Class control should be mild and humane.
The class surroundings should be pleasant and agreeable.
The medieval notion that fear and intimidation are effective
in guiding and correcting delinquents seems to have a hold on
officials even to-day. In a report otherwise modern we find this
astonishing statement, which, I may note, voices the sentiments of
many. "For a disciplinary class the room should be as nearly
like the rooms of the grade as possible. I do not belive that pure
disciplinary cases should be 'interested' by special attractions,
either in the way of classroom fittings, or extra and especially
attractive subjects. . . . Care must be taken not to make
the class so attractive that the boys seek admission or to remain in
the class."10 As regards the last statement, I should think that
if the disciplinary class was such a success that pupils sought it,
the regular class teachers might with advantage make a study of the
methods followed in such a class.
Individual help and instruction should carry the pupils along
as far and as fast as they can go. If they seem fit for it they
should be placed in a regular class. If the home and the other
surroundings are too strong to be overcome by the school, if
criminal associates still guide the child's conduct out of school,
he should be taken out of his surroundings entirely and placed in
some institution founded on the cottage plan.
Moral defectives. Moral imbeciles and defectives should be
treated much like delinquent children, though they should be
placed in a separate class. The physiological treatment suggested
for mental defectives should also be given. Frequently moral
defectives are also mentally defective. Instruction and discipline
should then follow the method of educating mental defectives.
Should a child prove to be beyond school control, and should the
welfare of the community be endangered by his actions, he should
10Bro\vn, E. G., "Report 011 Special Classes for Defective Children,'
Seventh Annual Report of the City Superintendent. New York City, 1905.
EDUCATION OF AFFLICTED CHILDREN. 191
be placed in some special institution, or in some school for the
purpose run on the cottage plan.11
Some general considerations. With schools overcrowded, with
thousands of children in part-time classes, any extra demand on
the schools may seem out of place. If the schools can not provide
room for all the normal children who apply, if regular classes are
filled to the limit, fifty, sixty, or even seventy children being
crowded into a single room, it may reasonably be asked how room
for extra classes can be formed. The only answer possible is,
Build more schools. The fact that hundreds, perhaps thousands
of afflicted children have heretofore been neglected does not justify
continued neglect of them.
So long as the public allows afflicted children to be born into
the world and to live, the only logical thing to do is to educate them
on a par with normal children. !NTot to do so is to act in much
the same spirit which impelled the ancient Greeks to expose chil-
dren who seemed to be a hindrance to the state. In fact a sudden
death in infancy is in many cases much better than the prolonged
privation and misery which afflicted children have to suffer because
of a lack of training, education, and occupation. So long as school
boards look upon the school as instruments for turning out cheap
clerks, salesmen, and the like, it is highly probable that plans
for the education of afflicted children will meet with considerable
opposition from them. Some steps have been taken in the larger
cities, but the movement has not as yet gained much headway. In
the meantime the afflicted children can do nothing but stand and
wait.
"See Snedden, D. S., Administration and Educational Work of Amer-
ican Juvenile Reform Schools, Columbia University Contributions to
Education
