Youth: Its Education, Regimen, and Hygiene
============================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By G. Stanley Hall,
Ph.D., LL.D., President of Clark University and Professor of Psy-
chology and Pedagogy. New York: D. Appleton & Company, 1906.
x -f- 379 pp.
President Hall has rendered a great service to the many teachers
interested in his work and opinions, by culling from the exhaustive
treatise on "Adolescence" the data and conclusions which he considers
of the most practical pedagogical value. With the exception of the
last chapter on moral and religious education, "Youth" is a repetition
and rearrangement of certain parts of the larger work. The more
technical portions are omitted, as well as much that is interesting chiefly
from the poetic or emotional standpoint. Enough of the latter re-
mains, however, for President Hall throughout the smaller as well as
the larger work makes quite as strong an appeal to emotion and sentiment
as to the scientific spirit.
Though President Hall has recognized the necessity for simplifi-
cation in this popular edition of the two ^volume treatise, he evidently
could not quite bring himself to sacrifice all of his characteristic and
sometimes unique verbiage on the altar of simplicity. He has, how-
ever, compromised by adding a glossary for the explanation of such
terms as rabulist, chrestomathy, ephebic, eviration, paleopsychic, and
temibility.
Hall's basic theory of education is that at every stage of a child's
life the environment and instruction should be closely adapted to the
degree of the child's mental and physical development. This ideal
education can, of course, only be realized by a system founded upon a
comprehensive biological and psychological understanding of the de-
veloping child. To attain this vantage point the author has collected
a vast amount of data from every available source.
The biological standpoint is established in the first two chapters.
The school life of a child is divided into two periods, the pre-adoles-
cent, from eight years of age until twelve, and the adolescent from twelve
upward. During the first stage health is at its best, weight, activity,
vitality and endurance are increased, the brain has attained nearly
its adult size, and perception is very acute, while reason, jestlietic
enjoyment and love are still but slightly developed. The qualities
first to appear are the inheritance from remote ancestors, while those
developing during adolescence are neo-atavistic. The early, more
or less savage instincts, should in Dr. Hall's opinion be given an oppor-
tunity to realize themselves. If they are suppressed at this, their
natal season, they are apt to burst forth later in much more dangerous
(235)
236 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
forms. Herein lies the danger of precocity, which should be warded
off by methods similar to the Aristotelian methods of catharsis. If the
environment forbids a natural method of satisfying these tendencies,
the child should be told stories of primitive peoples and their customs,
and encouraged to live as much as possible out of doors and among
the trees, flowers and animals.
In the school room all appeal to interest and understanding should
be postponed until after the age of twelve. In the years between eight
and twelve the child is peculiarly plastic and susceptible to drill
and discipline. "It is the age of external, mechanical training. Read-
ing, writing, drawing, manual training, musical technic, foreign tongues
and their pronunciation, the manipulation of numbers and of geomet-
rical elements, and many kinds of skill have now their golden hour.
. . . Pedagogic art consists in breaking the child in to them be-
times, as intensely and as quickly as possible with minimal strain,
and with the least amount of explanation or coquetting for natural
interest, and in calling medicine confectionery. . . . The auto-
matic powers are now at their very apex, and they can do and bear more
than our degenerate pedagogy knows or dreams of."
With the dawn of adolescence comes a complete change, both
physical and mental. Rate of growth is greatly increased, while the
growth of individual parts and organs is less uniform. On the psychic
side the more distinctly human qualities are born and the time has come
to make a direct appeal to the child's reason and emotion.
President Hall, however, is of the opinion that many of the qualities
usually associated with puberty may develop earlier; that in this respect
the order of development in the individual often departs from that
of the race. Dr. C. Ward Crampton, in an article entitled "The
Influence of Physiological Age upon Scholarship," which appeared in
The Psychological Clinic, Vol. I, No. 4, claims that psychological
age should be substituted for age in years in all grading and classifi-
cation of children between the ages of nine and seventeen years. If
Dr. Hall's conclusion is correct, the physiological age would be no
surer index of mental development than the chronological.
Great stress is laid upon the necessity for well-planned and well-
timed muscle training, nearly one-third of the volume being devoted
to this subject. The muscles of the body are grouped in two classes?
the fundamental, which control the movements of the trunk, limbs,
neck, etc., and the smaller accessory muscles which govern the move-
ments of the hand, tongue, face, organs of articulation, etc. The
fundamental muscles are earliest called into activity and should be
much exercised during the pre-adolescent period. The accessory mus-
cles might be called organs of thought, the thought playing upon them
by changing their tension. They are small and may be combined
in action in various ways. These muscles should be sparingly exer-
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 237
cised in pre-adolescence and in early adolescence. If they are exercised
too much or too early, nervous-muscular irritability will be the result.
Such a state is perhaps the best physiological characterization of pre-
cocity. As the number of habitual movements increases, the necessity
for inhibiting and organizing the movements arises. This is not
accomplished without great effort; only gradually does the child gain
control over the muscular powers which it has developed.
Methods of motor education are treated under four headings,?
industrial education, manual training, gymnastics, and plays, sports
and games.
In industrial education diversity of training should be the aim.
It should exercise all those muscular activities which, since their de-
velopment through the early struggles of the race with the environ-
ment, have been the inherited tendency of mankind. Young people who
till the soil, build, manufacture, etc., are repeating the history of the
race and thereby laying the best foundation for intellectual careers.
The middle and later "teens" is the age best adapted for this sort of
training. The best industrial schools in the land, in Dr. Hall's opinion,
are some of the institutions for negroes, Indians and juvenile delin-
quents. . .
The principle which underlies the manual training of to-day
is "Keine Kentnisse ohne Fertigkeiten." Man excels the higher anthro-
poid apes almost as much in hand power as in mind, and as the manual
areas of the brain are contiguous to the psychic zones, the develop-
ment of manual dexterity is also potent in opening the intellect. The
prevalent methods are at fault in laying too much stress upon the
development of the smaller muscles, at the expense of those of the
legs, back and trunk; also in concentrating too exclusively on technic,
sacrificing content to form, and thus falling into the error which has
always marked degeneration in education.
A good system would extract basic types of work from all the
manual occupations in which men now engage. It would adapt these
types to the nature and needs of the youthful body and will at each
stage of its development. Each operation and each tool would be
studied with reference to its orthopajdic value, bilateral symmetry, the
muscles it develops and the habits it forms. Finally, uniformity of
method would give way in every instance to individual adaptation.
As yet there has been no effort to develop such a system. Sloyd
claims to have accomplished it for woodwork; there has been, how-
ever, hardly an attempt to give either a physiological or psychological
justification for a single step in the graduation or correlation of the sloyd
exercises. Moreover, it is largely handwork and absolutely unadapted
to the needs of early adolescence.
Gymnastics is treated from the historical standpoint. The four
ideals which underlie the physical culture idea are discussed. These
238 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
are, (1) The training of all possible bodily movements, (2) The develop-
ment of voluntary control of all movements, (3) The training of those
muscles which are seldom used, and the exercise of extensor muscles
in order to produce a buoyant mental attitude, (4) The training of
muscles for the purpose of attaining symmetry and correct propor-
tions, the norms being the averages laid down by anthropometric tables.
The "need [of modern gymnastics] is radical revision and coordi-
nation of various cults and theories in the light of the latest psycho-
physiological science . . . The present academic zeal for physical
development in in great need of closer affiliation with anthropometry.'''
The ideal gymnasium should offer thorough courses in methods of
taking anthropometric measurements, in anatomy, physiology, hygiene,
and the history of gymnastics. President Hall also thinks it would
be wise so to expand these courses that they could in large measure
satisfy the requirements for the A. B. degree. Such a step would, ho
thinks, broaden the sphere of the college and would supply the grow-
ing demand for physical trainers.
Play is considered as an expression of those instincts inherited
from remote ancestors, it is a re-enactment of race habits, not a prep-
aration for future adult activities. This is why play is entered into
with such zest and enjoyment. Gulick's idea is quoted, that those
activities are most interesting which at some time in race history were
necessary to survival, and it is shown that such activities, although no
longer necessary from the point of view of utility, are necessary for
the full development of the body, which has its present form only
as the result of its racial evolution.
In games, as in all other muscle training, children must be led
to exercise first the fundamental muscles and later the accessory.
'"Hereditary momeiita really determine, too, the order in which nerve
centers come into function. The oldest racial parts come first, and
those which are higher and represent volition come much later." Hugh-
lings Jackson is quoted as having pointed out how this is exemplified
in the early development, by the acts of mastication and degluti-
tion, of the muscles destined to be used later in speech. Perhaps it is
the necessity of this preliminary muscular exercise for the normal
development of the power of speech which partially accounts for the
fact that many feeble-minded children, who have not passed beyond
the bottle stage of feeding at the age of five, six, or even eight years,
have failed to develop the faculty of speech; especially as it is also
a fact, that after such children have been trained to eat solids, it is possi-
ble in many cases to teach them to talk.
Great stress is laid upon the educative power of rhythmic move-
ments. It is suggested that rhythm may have been the great basic
tendency from which play, art, and work all spring. Adolescence is the
period of greatest susceptibility to rhythm, and dancing is extolled as
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 239
the best of rhythmic exercises. When used aright dancing "can cadence
the very soul, give nervous poise and control, bring harmony between
basal and finer muscles, and also between feeling and intellect, body
and mind. It can serve both as an awakener and a test of intelligence,
predispose the heart against vice and turn the springs of character
toward virtue."
The rhythm ol work and relaxation among primitive peoples and
adolescents is contrasted with that of the adult adapted to modern
conditions. The dislike of regularity and continued work, so evident
in youth, may be simply an expression of a phase of individual develop-
ment corresponding to a more primitive era in race history.
The results of many interesting investigations on the subject of
children's plays are presented.
Play itself is idealized. "All true play," says President Hall, "is
love and prayer," and again, "play is, at bottom, growth, and at the top
of the intellectual scale it is the eternal type of research from sheer love
of truth."
The chapter on faults, lies and crimes consists largely of reports
of investigations on these subjects. It is pointed out that educational
advantages often increase crime among young people, introducing new
and complex kinds, of which they were incapable when more ignorant.
Youthful crime is an expression of educational failure, for the ultimate
verdict concerning the utility of school will be determined by its moral
efficiency in saving children from vice and crime. Ignorance is not
incompatible with virtue, and President Hall condemns the idea that
any merely educational training can moralize. How to deal with
juvenile delinquents, he considers the great question of criminology,
and he believes it should be made the basis of the study of ethics, which
should work its way through this concrete beginning to a larger and
higher philosophy of conduct than is commonly taught to-day.
Much information as to the nature of adolescents is gleaned from
biographical and autobiographical studies of youth. The youthful char-
acteristics of many well-known men are sketched, and autobiographies
of a number of men and women are quoted freely. Such literature,
President Hall thinks, should have a place of its own in the history
of letters and criticism, and much of it should be used as reading matter
for the young.
The gradual change in the character of the social ideals, as the
child grows older, is shown by a presentation of the results of some
thirty investigations, many of them made by the questionaire method,
on the subjects of children's ideals, ambitions, ethics, property, judg-
ment, crimes and social organizations. As children advance in age
they tend more and more to choose their ideals from among public
or historic personages, and to depend more largely upon ethical, artistic,
240 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
intellectual or military qualities. Girls are very apt to choose men
as ideads; this President Hall regrets, and advises that lives of great
women be substituted for those of men in their courses of study. But
why, when girls name men as ideals, is it necessary to believe that
they wish to be men? It may mean only that they admire the par-
ticular virtues which those men possess. A girl who chooses Marcus
Aurelius for her ideal may only mean that she values highest such moral
qualities as he displayed.
In treating of intellectual education, Dr. Hall places first in
importance the study of the vernacular language and literature.
Both high school and college students, he finds, have a very poor
command of their native tongue. This fact he traces to four errors
in educational method:?(1) Too much time is given to the acquisition
of other languages at the period when attention should be focused on
the native tongue. (2) There is an over-emphasis of grammar and form
at the expense of literature, a subordination of content to form. "The
great teacher who, when asked how he obtained such rare results in
expression, answered, 'By carefully neglecting it and seeking utter
absorption in subject-matter,' was also a good practical psychologist."
(3) The neglect of oral language training, and the substitution of too
much book-work and too many written exercises. (4) The neglect of
training in abstract thought which is a consequence of the concrete
teaching methods of the day.
Without the power of abstraction and generalization high mental
development is impossible, and thought is of that elementary, half-
animal kind which consists of imagery and lacks even the elements
of creative imagination. "It is as if what are sometimes called the
associative fibres both ends of which are in the brain, were dwarfed
in comparison with the afferent and efferent fibres that mediate sense
and motion." The facts of aphasia are cited to prove "that the soul
of language as an instrument of thought consists in this non-presenta-
tive element." In progressive aphasias, words designating objects and
acts familiar to the patient are first lost, and only later those words
used in abstract thinking. The reason of this President Hall thinks
is obvious and states it as follows: "It is because concrete thinking
has two forms, the word and the image, and the latter so tends to take
the place of the former that it can be lost to both sense and articula-
tion without great impairment, whereas conceptual thinking lacks
imagery and depends on words alone, and hence these must persist
because they have no alternate form which vicariates for them."
It is obviously necessary for coherence of thought that the words
for abstractions be retained, but it is not quite so obvious why this
necessity should determine the seat of the brain lesion, or if the modern
theory of definitely circumscribed speech centers be abandoned, why
a slight functional disturbance should necessarily wipe out concrete
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 241
verbal thought rather than abstract. Abstract thought is a later de-
velopment, the result of more complex processes, and therefore in a
degenerative process it might be expected to be first effaced.
The failure of the schools to initiate students into the art of
abstract thinking at a period when their development requires it, is well
brought out in the returns of a number of questionaires on the subjects
of children's slang, interest in words, stories, etc. These show that
there is a natural tendency at adolescence toward abstract thought
and that when appropriate words are not presented, any words are
adopted which express concisely, accurately and forcibly the ideas
?and feelings which are dominant. Slang words have these qualities
and in consequence they make a strong appeal between the ages of
twelve and fifteen. During the same period is developed an intense
enthusiasm for books, which increases steadily up to the age of sixteen,
girls usually preferring books written by women, and boys those written
by men.
The results of several interesting studies on children's memory,
point to the conclusion that power of memory is correlated with age
rather than with intelligence, increasing as the child grows older.
In closing the chapter President Hall urges the need of investi-
gating the mentality of adolescents in almost all its phases, and ex-
presses the opinion that school boards and teachers' associations should
-aid in making such investigations possible.
In discussing the education of girls Dr. Hall insists that just
as educational methods must be adapted to the stages of the child's
biological development, so must they be adapted to the characteristic
differences of the sexes. He believes that co-education, especially in the
high school, is apt to have a bad effect on both boys and girls. If the
girls predominate, as they usually do in the high schools, the curriculum
is likely to become feminized, which means that content and utility
must give way to form and method; the boys become restless and drop
out of school or they grow content with mechanical memorizing. Con-
stant intercourse with girls also lessens the power of the latter to charm
and interest. The effect on the girls is considered bad, in that it threat-
ens her femininity by encouraging the adoption of masculine ideals, also
in that familiar intercourse with boys of her own age at a time when
her earlier maturity would make older men more congenial, tends to
lower her opinion of men. It does not occur to Professor Hall that one
of these evils might neutralize the other.
President Hall believes that woman has proved her intellect to be
the equal of man's; he objects, however, to the conclusion that because
woman can do many things as well as man she should do them.
He sketches in broad outline a plan for the education of girls.
This he bases upon a conception of woman's nature, which though just
in some respects, is tremendously exaggerated and even false in others.
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
This conception is partly based on data contained in such autobio-
graphical outpourings as those of Stella Ivlive, Mary MacLane, Ililma
Strandberg, and Marie Bashkirtseff, whom he calls "veritable spies
upon woman's nature; [who] have revealed the characterlessness normal
to the prenubile period in which everything is kept tentative and plastic,
and where life seems to have least unity, aim, or purpose."
Few people who are moved to write autobiographies are altogether
normal, and those mentioned are surely not exceptional in this respect.
I feel confident that to many commonplace women the first intimation
of the existence of sentiments akin to those expressed by Mary Mac-
Lane was received through the pages of her book or those of President
Hall.
The plan for girls' education is in brief as follows: Its end and aim
should be to prepare for motherhood. Perfect health should be the
desideratum. There should therefore be plenty of exercise both in the
open air and gymnasium and as little physical strain as possible. Stress
should be laid upon manners and effort made to inculcate a regard for
the feelings of others. The purely mental should be held back to give
opportunity for the deepening of the intuitions. Religion should be
emphasized and its aisthetic side not neglected. Only the rudiments of
mathematics and the sciences should be taught, and these concretely
and out of doors when possible. The study of animal life should lead
up to that of heredity, which should have a dominant place and be
followed by studies of myths, customs, beliefs, domestic practices of
savages, and animal traits in infancy and childhood, always with the
chief emphasis on great results and basic principles. History should
be taught largely through biography, and sociology should have a promi-
nent place. Art should be presented with the aim of cultivating a dis-
criminating taste. In literature, myth, poetry and the drama should
lead, and Greek, Hebrew and Latin give place to German, French and
Italian. Metaphysics, epistomology and logic should have a small place,
genetic psychology should be taught and developed through the love of
infancy and youth. Domesticity, child study, pedagogy and a course in
maternity and nursing complete the curriculum. Finally, the methods
throughout should be objective and concrete, book study-should be lim-
ited, examinations reduced to a minimum and "everything be as sugges-
tive and germinal as possible. Hints that are not followed up, informa-
tion not elaborated, seed that is sown on the waters with 110 thought of
reaping . . . training which does not develop hypertrophied mem-
ory-pouches that carry, or creative powers that discover or produce?
these are lines 011 which such an institution should develop."
President Hall prophesies that if ever a woman Descartes does
arise, her watchword will be not cogito, ergo sum, I think, therefore I am,
but sum, ergo cogito, I am, therefore, I think. This is probably true,
but it is also true that there are plenty of women to-day, not Descartes
NEWS AND COMMENT. 243
by any means, who already realize the force of sum ergo cogito, who,
because they exist, must think, and for whom such a smattering
of many things as is outlined above would be entirely unsatisfying
and incomplete. In the chapter on intellectual education President Hall
has pointed out that such concrete sensory training as he advises for
girls, produces a mind incapable of any but infantile thought; in the
chapter on moral and religious training he shows that, "only great con-
centration and prolonged efforts in one direction really train the mind,
because only they train the will beneath it." "Only the sense of power
and effort which made Lessing prefer the search to the possession of
truth . . . counts for character." He therefore practically advises
that woman be given an education which will necessarily make her a
fine physical creature, dominated by emotion and sentiment, but child-
ish and primitive in thought and without will or moral force.
In the final chapter on religious and moral training, it is shown
how important it is to supplement all training by a conscious effort
to develop the will. This may begin in the cradle by awakening the
power of love, and continue throughout early childhood by a careful
guidance in the formation of habits, and an effort to inspire sentiments
of religious awe and reverence. If in intellectual fields the work be
prolonged and thorough in one direction, and if this be supplemented
by systematic muscle training, the youth will find himself at the dawn
of manhood capable and self-controlled.
The great strength of the book is its pedagogical value, which is
twofold,?(1) It points out unerringly and convincingly many weak
points in the present educational system; (2) It gives precise and
illuminating advice as to the direction and methods of research which
will be of most value in overcoming these defects.
Its weakness is its incomplete, sentimental conception of woman
and her educational needs, and the distinctly unscientific appeal to
the emotional nature which is conspicuous throughout the book and
decidedly detracts from its force.
C. H. T.
