Mentally Defective Children 11st The Public Schools
====================================================

By Walter S. Cornell, M.D.
University of Pennsylvania.
The almost unprotested presence in tlie public schools of
mentally defective children, many of whom should be in institutions for the feeble-minded, is accounted for by a didactic, nonpractical training of teachers in anatomy, physiology and psychol?gy, by their disinclination to give precious time to a problem
which has had as yet no administrative solution, and by the confusion at present existing as to the meaning of the terms used to
describe mental defect in its various grades.
Happily each of these causative conditions shows signs of
speedy improvement. The demonstration of school children's
physical defects through the inauguration of general medical inspection, and the problems arising therefrom, will without doubt
revolutionize the training of teachers, showing as it will the necessity for a more useful knowledge of the structure and functions
of the human body. Clinical psychology is an expression of the
same advance in the study of the mind.
The demonstration of these defects is likewise inciting educators and physicians to devise measures for their relief, with the
natural consequence that standard terms for description and classification will be universally adopted in the near future.
In attempting to discuss conditions actually existing in the
schools of a large city, such as Philadelphia, it is necessary to use
some system of classification for the purpose of a common understanding; and the lack of such universal standard, already commented upon, has led me to adopt the following one, which evades
the use of such terms as "retarded," "defective," "pseudo-backward," "atypical" and "exceptional."
It may be said that mental defect in school children exists in
four groups of cases:?
1. Children in whom defect is only relative. That is to say,
children with good intelligence, who have not attained their best
development because of poor general health, poor eyesight, or
improper home surroundings.
2. Dull Children. Those who are poor in school work' and
(75) .
76 the psychological clinic.
slow mentally, but who appear intelligent in their behavior and
ordinary conversation. Sometimes the cause of the poor school
work is evident,?physical defect, poor nutrition, poor home, foreign birth, etc., etc. These children are numerous and in round
numbers comprise ten per cent of the younger school children.
3. Backward Children. Those who are very deficient intellectually and possess associated traits which mark them as abnormal in their whole mental make-up. Physical defects are
frequent in these children, but their removal cannot effect a cure,
?only a possible improvement.
4. Feeble-minded Children. All those of lower mentality
than the backward children. The two classes merge into each
other and the border line cases are definitely classified in one or
the other group.
The grading of mentality roughly corresponds in each group
to a degree of intellectual development, and the latter in its turn
may be fairly gauged by the child's school work. In classifying
children by this method, however, the associated symptoms are
also considered, because the item of scholarship alone may give
rise to an erroneous judgment.
It should never be forgotten that lack of mentality is in some
cases simply a secondary symptom of some curable physical ailment or the natural result of poor home surroundings, while in
others it is the expression of inherent brain defect and therefore
primary in character. Thus some young children classified as
dull may temporarily be inferior in attainments to others who are
backward, but who by reason of organic brain defect or inferior
nervous constitution are incapable of great ultimate improvement.
Relative Mental Defect. By this is meant the educational
discount suffered by the average child on account of poor eyesight,
deafness, poor nutrition, nasal obstruction and other bodily ills.
Since the correspondence of mental defect with physical defect is
a rule to which there are numerous individual exceptions, statistical studies are necessary to demonstrate it beyond controversy.
Those have of late years been numerous. In a previous number
of Tiie Psychological Clinic/* I reported studies of my own,
covering several hundred cases, showing that eye strain and nasal
obstruction definitely lower the scholastic standing of the pupils
suffering from them, if these pupils be considered as a class.
Recently several other statistical papers have appeared,?notably
?Vol. I, No. 8, January 15, 1908, p. 231.
MENTALLY DEFECTIVE CHILDREN. 77
one published in the Report of tlie London County Council for
the year 1907.
Dull Children. The proportion of mental defectives to the
whole school population is at the present time estimated from
teachers' reports, which claim recognition rather for conscientious
effort than for accuracy. The reasons for this have been already
commented upon. Particularly is error liable to occur in estimating the number of children who are only slightly defective.
The number of dull children is estimated at about 10 per
cent of the whole school population, with the majority of the cases
stagnating in the four lower grades.
So far as I know, the first attempt in America to gain accurate information on this point was that of Will S. Monroe, of the
Westfield (Mass.) State Normal School, who, in 1893 or thereabouts, addressed letters of inquiry to numerous teachers throughout the State of California. The replies to his circular, covering
10,842 children, showed an average opinion that ten per cent of
all school children were mentally dull, and two and one-half per
cent feeble-minded.
More recently the Scotch cities of Edinburgh and Aberdeen
made a similar inquiry, classifying the children as excellent, good,
medium, dull and deficient. Although gathered independently,
the results were practically the same, and therefore trustworthy.
Edinburgh. Aberdeen.
Per cent. Per cent.
Excellent   17.50 )
Good   40. I
Medium   30.33 32
Dull   11-50 9
Defective  83 0
Passing to the personal examination of these dull children, it
has been my good fortune to examine physically six classes of them,
numbering 235 total cases, during the last year. The fact that
they had been officially recognized as below average capacity, precludes the charge that enthusiasm and the personal equation might
have led to my selecting at random those dull children, scatteied
through the schools, who possessed evident physical defects. The
conclusion to be drawn from the examination of this large number
of dull children is that curable physical defects, such as poor
eyesight, deafness and poor nutrition, exist in these children in
78 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
far greater proportion than in average children. By inference
they are the cause of much of the dulness, but this cannot be
stated as a proven fact until improvement in scholarship following medical treatment has been shown.
The classes of dnll children first examined by me were two
in number and have been already commented upon in a previous
paper here quoted:?
"An investigation on slightly different lines was made possible by
the existence in the Claghorn School of fonr classes of the same grammar grade, which had been so made np at the beginning of the year
that the brighter children constituted two classes, and the duller children the other two classes. The latter were smaller, so as to afford more
opportunity for individual instruction. A comparison of the physical
condition of the children is instructive:
Class 1 Class 15 Class 9 Class 11
Bright Children Dull Children ^u
Children
"Number of children   50 39 x 32 29
Normal   3G 32 20 13
Defective   14 7 12 16
Percentage of normal children 72% 82% 02.5% 44.8%
"An effort was made to determine the exact degree of influence of
defects of the nose and throat. The harmful results of these have been
recognized in recent years. In the Claghorn School the four classes of
bright and dull children were examined again. Their eyesight proved
to be about the same (averaging *L|?, 5i?, *^?} 5^?). Enlarged tonsils
adenoids, deafness, and nasal catarrh occurred much more frequently,
however, among the two classes of duller children. In many the adenoid
expression was written only too plainly on their faces. The following
table shows the findings:
Class 1 Class 15 Class 9 Class 11
Bright Children Dull Children
Children
"Number of children   50 39 32 29
Nose and throat conditions:
Number defective   G 4 9 9
With single or combined defects, viz:
Tonsils   3 4 3 3
Adenoids   2 1 5 6
Deaf   2 .. 5 1
Catarrh   . . 2 3
Percentage of children with nose and
throat defects   12% 10.2% 28.1% 31%"
MENTALLY DEFECTIVE CHILDREN. 79
Several months subsequent to tlie examination of these children, another along the same lines was made in the William McKinley Primary School. Here, for the sake of better instruction,
a large number of dull children had been grouped by the principal, Miss McKinney, into four so-called "special classes." They
practically represented that twenty-five per cent of the school
population which stood lowest in school work, the retardation in
several instances being as much as three years. Although, as I
have said, 1hese children were spoken of as belonging to special
classes, the term was simply one of convenience, for none were
feeble-minded and only a very few really backward. The proportion of physical defect, however, was surprisingly large, particularly the cases of poor eyesight and adenoid nasal obstruction.
Thus, in 174 pupils, 188 physical defects (G8 eye-strain, 40 nasal
obstruction, 80 miscellaneous), necessitating notices to parents,
were discovered; and G9 additional minor defects were noted upon
the registration cards. The distribution of these defects among
the 174 children was as follows: One hundred and sixteen children received parents' notices urging the correction of one or more
defects, 2G children possessed minor defects, and only 33 passed
muster with a clean physical record.
The condition of the children in these four classcs in the
McKinley School is shown in the summary on the following page.
Experience gained from the systematic examination of about
7,000 children leads me to believe that dulness during school life
arises principally from physical defects, poor nutrition, and environmental causes, such as improper home surroundings and
frequent change of residence. Instances of these are so numerous
in the work of medical inspection that they soon cease to excite
more than passing comment and routine official measures for their
relief. To those less familiar with the subject, a few illustrative
examples may prove interesting. Lack of space forbids more
than the barest comment upon each. All are in attendance in
public schools and were examined by myself quite recently.
Mt. Vernon School.
1. Girl, aged 13, dull memory. Anaemia, poor nutrition, defective
vision, adenoids, stoop shoulders, flat and rachitic chest.
2. Russian girl, dull mentally. Enlarged tonsils, adenoids, nasal
catarrh.
Fleiclier School.
3. Girl, aged 8, dull mentally. Extremely poor nutrition, defective
vision, enlarged tonsils, adenoid nasal obstruction.
80 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Summary of Four Special Classes in the William MoKinley School.
Number of pupils
Grade
Average age of class, in years
1. Number of children in whom no
noteworthy
was observec
noteworthy physical defect
2d
2. Children with slight visual defect, or nasal obstruction, not
sufficient to justify official
recommendation for treatment
3. Children with physical defects
which necessitated notices to
parents.
2a. Number of slight defects for
which notices were not issued
3a. Number of defects for which
notices were issued
Poor vision
Nasal obstruction (adenoid);
majority with nasal catarrh
and slight deafness
Hypertrophied tonsils
Marked deafness and discharging ears
Poor nutrition
Badly decayed teeth
Round shoulders and flat chest
Other defects .
Total number of defects for which
notices were issued
Total number of defects, including
both slight and serious
39
Hi
29
19
43
12
13
4
1
4
1
6
2
43
62
II
45
3?
11
30
17
19
11
2
3
5
5
2
3
50
67
III
44
21
10
10
27
16
50 43
18
4
2
2
8
2
4
3
43
IV
46
H
8?
10
29
17
52
19
12
3
1
5
5
2
5
59
52
69
Total
174
33
26
115
69
188
257
MENTALLY DEFECTIVE CHILDREN. 81
Washington School.
4. Italian-American boy, dull mentally. Poor nutrition and tubercular family history. (Mother, brother, two paternal uncles and one
paternal aunt had consumption.)
BurJc School.
5. Boy, dull mentally. Adenoid obstruction, nasal catarrh and secondary conjunctivitis from extension through the nasal ducts.
Miller School.
6. Girl, aged 10 years and 8 months, dull mentally. Deaf, adenoid
nasal obstruction, very defective vision,
Nebinger School.
7 and 8. Two Italian boys, dull mentally, probably backward. Principal cause environmental (poverty and foreign nationality). The
smaller one has never had a bath. The older one has been five years in
the first grade.
Backward and Feeble-Minded Children. Bearing in mind
that the term backward children in the definition here adopted
refers to those whose poor intellect is associated with suspicious
signs of general mental defect, it is seen at once that this class of
children is affiliated more closely with the feeble-minded than
with the dull group. As these children are on the borderland
between normality above and abnormality below, many assigned
to the group of backward children by one examiner, may be
designated as feeble-minded by another. To a certain extent it
is a compromise class for debatable cases. Many children exist,
however, who correspond clearly to the idea expressed in the definition. They are tainted children.
Since the diagnosis of these cases rests more on psychical
than on physical grounds, and the theoretical limits of the class
varies slightly with each examiner, the number of backward children in the schools is difficult to determine. Furthermore, the
predisposing influences of race and social condition combine to
produce a larger proportion of mental defectives in some communities than in others, and this fact makes the value of statistical studies, based on official reports, rather uncertain.
The following sources of information on the proportion of
truly backward and feeble-minded children are as trustworthy as
any:??
1. The working rule adopted by those officially interested,
82 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that one of every five hundred of the entire population is of feeble
mind. A fair proportion of these find their way into the public
schools.
2. The Report of a London Commission several years ago,
stating that one per cent of the school population is mentally defective. I have often seen this statement, but have not been able
to ascertain its trustworthiness.
3. A very painstaking study by Miss Dendy, of Manchester,
England,* in which expert examination of 44,000 children showed
2SO (over l/j per cent in the schools) to be of feeble mind. An
equal number of children nominated for examination by the
teachers were diagnosed by the examiners as simply dull or backward.
4. The existence in New York City of 41 special, ungraded
classes for truly backward children, containing 731 children officially committed to these classes by a medical examiner. These
children do not represent all the pupils of the New York schools,
as the report from which these figures are taken (New York City
Superintendent's Report, 1008, page 628) covers only six months'
work of the medical examiner in 69 schools. To utilize these
figures we may assume these schools to be the large ones in the
poorer districts, averaging 1200 enrollment, which would result
in a percentage of 0.9. The backward children contain among
their number an appreciable proportion of feeble-minded.
5. The examination by the writer of 63 truly backward and
]2 feeble-minded children in 13 Philadelphia public schools, of
10,100 enrollment. As all of the pupils in eight of these schools
were not systematically examined by me and as the cases were
referred to me by teachers, the number of backward children is
certainly too small. It should be nearer 80, which would give a
percentage of 0.8. The 12 feeble-minded children doubtless represented all of this class, so that the proportion in this case would
be 0.1 per cent of the school population.
?Of 100.322 children in the public elementary schools of Manchester,
in 1808. 44.403 were under the direction of the School Board, and were
inspected to ascertain the proportion of those who were mentally defective.
The accuracy of these figures is undoubted, since the case reports were all
passed upon by Dr George Shuttleworth, and the children were all personally examined by Dr Asliby, a leading Manchester physician. Five hundred and twenty-five children with suspected mental defect were noted by
the teachers and by Miss Dendy. and 500 of these were examined by Dr.
Ashby. Of these latter "214 were dull and backward, 270 were mentally
feeble, 4 were deaf mutes and 5 did not appear sufficiently behind hand to
come under any of these terms." (From Report of Conference of Women
Workers, Edinburgh, 1902, p. 110, paper read by Miss Dendy, of Manchester, England.)
MENTALLY DEFECTIVE CHILDREN. - 83
In view of these facts, it may be asserted with fair accuracy
that 10 per cent of public school children are dull, often from
removable causes, 0.5 per cent to 1 per cent are truly backward,
and 0.1 per cent actually feeble-minded.
A few cases may be cited, illustrating the general characteristics of backward and feeble-minded children. They serve particularly to emphasize the actual presence in the schools of a class,
who not only derive no benefit from the regular school curriculum,
but also subtract from the efficiency of teachers and the instruction of normal children.
In Philadelphia schools, among other special classes, there
is one at the Wharton School, Fifth Street and Washington Avenue, organized by Miss Maguire, the school principal, under the
direction of District Superintendent Brelsford. This class I examined with the kind assistance of Miss Devereux, its teacher.
At the time of examination the class numbered 22 children,
mostly of foreign parentage. Practically nil of them presented
abnormalities of physique or facial expression, betraying more or
less the mental defect existing. Physical examination showed that
children possessed three-fourths or less vision, the vision in one
case being one-twelfth. These poor vision cases included four
cases of strabismus. Seven others possessed minor defects of
vision. Only four had normal visual acuity. Defects of the
nose and throat were as numerous, fourteen of the children suffering from adenoid nasal obstruction of pronounced degree. This
nasal obstruction was associated with enlarged tonsils in one case,
with enlarged tonsils and nasal catarrh in two cases, and with
nasal catarrh alone in seven others. There were five cases of
deafness and discharging ears, all apparently being secondary to
nose and throat defects, since all the sufferers were adenoid cases.
Very poor nutrition existed in seven children. Miscellaneous defects and disorders of various degrees were plentiful.
The mental faculties were judged by the perception, memory,
and reasoning power of the children. The perception was fair in
five instances, poor in ten, and very poor in seven. The memory
was fair in seven, poor in seven, and very poor in eight. The
reasoning power was fair in eight, poor in ten, and very poor in
four. After three months' instruction by object teaching, paper
cutting, mat and wood work, designed to stimulate the motor
power, co-ordination, and reason, some improvement had undoubtedly taken place in seven of the children. Some of these were
working part of the day in the regular first, second, and third
grade classes.
84 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The Wharton School, from which this class is recruited, is a
very large one, numbering seventeen hundred children. Practically every school, however, has one or more of these backward
children in its lower grades. The following instances not only
serve as descriptive cases, but illustrate this fact as well:
Fletcher School.
9. C. H., aged 14 years. Mentality "backward." Defective vision.
Enlarged tonsils, and adenoid nasal obstruction. An undoubted history
also of epilepsy or some kindred psycho-motor disturbance. He has
slowly worked his way into the fourth grade. Last year, through the
efforts of my colleague, Dr Smith, eyeglasses were provided and the
adenoids and tonsils removed, but with no apparent resulting improvement in scholarship. Temperament placid and behavior always good.
Mt. Vernon School.
10. D. W., aged 12 years. Mentality doubtful (between backward
and feeble-minded). Height three feet six inches. This child has no
perception of number, form, or color, juged by the ordinary tests, but his
Italian nationality and the illiteracy of his parents made these inconclusive. I am inclined to believe that this was a backward case rather
than one of feeble mind, and fairly trainable.
11. M. H., aged 7 years and 7 months; parentage German; is
in first grade. Inspection showed fair sized boy; nutrition good; extreme adenoid expression of the face, with mouth wide open. Teeth
possibly of the Hutchinson type. It was impossible to determine the
acuity of vision because of bis low mental development. His nose was
completely obstructed by adenoids, with resulting deafness and catarrh.
He betrayed a condition of nervous instability, shown by a continual
restlessness, jumping up and down, and a superficial curiosity regarding
objects around him. Facial expression usually lifeless, but animated
when interested. Temperament placid, timid, and affectionate, and
teacher reports that he is always well behaved. The motor power and
the control was good, but co-ordination only fair. He had some difficulty in buttoning his jacket when asked to do so. There was a great
variability in his promptness of movement, he was often decidedly slow
and occasionally remarkably active. Speech was rapid and indistinct,
due to inability to form many of the consonant sounds, and his voice loud
and high pitched. His words, when understood, were found to be fairly
intelligent. He has no perception of color, form or number, no power
of attention, and poor memory. The school work accomplished is practically nothing. Teacher reports that he sits idle all day. During halfhour examination he sat swinging his legs constantly and looking idly
around, laughing good-naturedly when spoken to. There is a history
in this case of a fall at five years of age, for which he was two weeks
in a hospital.
MENTALLY DEFECTIVE CHILDREN. 85
Diagnosis:?Feeble mind, due, in part at least, to deprivation. The
existence of deafness and adenoids may possibly make this case one of
extreme backwardness only, but this is not probable.
12. S. M., Russian Hebrew, aged 7 years. Mentality, feeble mind.
The primary cause here appeared to be poor nutrition. It was impossible to determine the visual acuity, a coincident blepharitis being due
more probably to the constitutional condition that to eye strain. The
mind of this child appeared almost blank, a condition again due to the
general inanition. The best that could be elicited was that 1 and 1
made 2, and the statement of his own name.
Miller School.
13. K. A., 15 years old, in the first grade. "She makes no progress
whatever. She appears to be fairly nourished. She has a slight squint
in the right eye. Her mouth is always open, but there appears to be no
na8al obstruction. There is no deafness. Her teeth are good but not
clean. She is round-shouldered. Her facial expression is heavy, with
a dull, foolish smile. Her skin is muddy; temperament placid, generally
good-natured, but is sullen when crossed; re-action to commands is
slow; she is able to dress herself and says she can sew. Her grip is
poor, gait shambling, her speech slovenly, not clear. She does not
recognize colors except black and red; does not know coins; can add
1 and 1, and occasionally 2 and 2. Attention, memory, association and
judgment poor." (L. E.) This case is one of high grade imbecility.
14. W. B., aged 9 years 8 months, white; father, a city fireman;
mother, stated by the teacher to be peculiar. One brother in school,
who is dull and has repeatedly failed of promotion. This brother has
defective speech and is stated to be peculiarly obstinate at times. One
older sister, now out of school, who is also dull in her studies. Physical
condition good, no physical defects of the skull, ears or limbs. Vision
one-third normal. Tonsils slightly enlarged. The left nostril entirely
obstructed by adenoid growth, the right nostril partly so, with resultant
nasal catarrh. The sense of hearing was studied with great difficulty,
owing to the poor attention and mentality of the boy. It was necessary
to shout to attract his attention when not looking, and the fact that he
observed the movements of the speaker's lips and leaned forward to
hear proved that deafness was pronounoed. His teacher, however, states
that he appears at times to hear much better than at others. Whether
this was true could not be ascertained. An endeavor to test his hearing
with a watch was an absolute failure, as he said he heard it, or did not
hear it, as he fancied the form of the question demanded.^
The expression of the face was an habitual silly smile, with con
stant twitching of the facial muscles. This was associated with almost
continuous nervous movements of the hands and fingers.^ His tempera
ment was quiet and good natured, but exceedingly obstinate. During
the past two years his nervous condition has improved under careful
86 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
school discipline. Ilis motor control was fair, being very slow and
clumsy, but good enough to allow him to button his clothes and handle
a pencil stiffly. His grip was good. His speech was so defective that
half his words were not intelligible; he apparently made no effort to
use his lips and the tones showed plainly the effects of the nasal
catarrh.
An endeavor to test the mental faculties showed no perception of
color, an inability to concentrate the attention for more than a few
seconds, no apparent reasoning power, and no ability at number work.
His memory, however, was good, and he recognized letters and easy
words readily. He has been two years in the first grade, with a probability of continuing there indefinitely.
The diagnosis in the case is not possible without preliminary expert
examination of the eyes, nose and ears. The deprivation in this case,
by reason of the deficient sense organs, makes the diagnosis of imbecility
a little uncertain. There is no doubt, however, from the family history,
the multiple association of physical defects, and the nervous condition,
that some degree of true feeble-mindedness exists.
15. J. A., aged 13 years, 8 months; German parentage. Father
dead, mother and sisters illiterate. Has attended German-American and
parochial schools until seven months ago, when he entered this school.
He was placed in the third grade because his size and age made it
inadvisable to allow him to associate with the youngest children. He
has made absolutely no progress, and is actually unfit for first grade
work. Inspection showed a large boy with coarse heavy features, dull
facial expression, slouchy carriage and shambling gait. His forehead
is low, owing to a coarse growth of hair, and despite his age he already
has a growth of hair on the upper lip. Vision, by the illiterate test
card, is apparently normal; hearing normal. Response both in actions
and words is very slow. His speech is indistinct, with an inability to
pronounce "th." Vocabiilary small, due probably in part to German
family. Examination showed his grip to be fair, but not good. He
buttoned his clothes very readily. The perception is fair, and attention
apparently good. His imitation is also good, as he can readily copy
from the blackboard. Memory very poor. Number work so poor that
he could not multiply 2 times G. Other school work, such as reading, is
entirely beyond him.
Diagnosis: Feeble mind. This is a typical institution case.
