The Relation of Physical to Mental Defect in School Children
=============================================================

:Author:  Walter S. Cornell, M.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.

The age of our race between six and fifteen years is a distinctive one, from the fact that the problem of diet, so important
in infancy, decreases with the corresponding increase in bodily
activity. So, also, the prevalence and effect of contagious diseases suffer a reduction. For these reasons the mortality rate
decreases progressively, and the probability of survival becomes
steadily brighter.

The age of development, however, is one in which the subsequent physical and mental welfare is largely predetermined.
Though the child's life be fairly safe, his fortune still lies largely
in the hands of his parents, his environment, his teacher, and his
physician. First must be met the burdens of heredity, producing
thousands of sickly, deformed, and neurotic children. A perpetually (or rather, life-long) acting force is here to be combated and reckoned with. Second to heredity is a poor city
environment, with its lack of fresh air and its improper diet of
canned foods. Exposed to these influences, healthy infants succumb and join the ranks of those already suffering from rickets,
anfflmia, and adenoid nasal obstruction. Finally, the ignorance
of parents causes indifference to the damage already done, and
adds premature decay of the teeth to the existing list of evident
' physical imperfections.

Are these injuries to the health of the child also harmful to
his mind ? Will he ultimately pass through their pale of influence more or less scarred, but possessing the same knowledge and
mental faculty that make for power, as his more vigorous
neighbor ?

Backward and subnormal children approach so nearly the ?
ordinary child that the connection between physical defect and
brain defect is often not demonstrable at all in individual cases.

In these the acting influences are of minor degree, being principally poor eyesight, deafness, and poor nutrition (adenoid
growths are included in the latter two). We may either assume
that the rule of a sound mind in a sound body is a natural law,
and so reason by analogy that it operates in these cases, or by a
study of a large series of cases draw positive original conclusions from this very class itself. The latter is well worth proving,
if it be possible to do so.


In the special classes for backward children conducted by
our large cities, the reports show that almost every backward
child exhibits physical defect of some sort. In these classes the
proportion of defective children is given by one authority as 95
per cent of the whole number.

That the physically defective among ordinary school-children show subnormal mentality is the converse of this proposition
and should be capable of demonstration.

In the following investigation I have endeavored to clearly
establish this relationship. The children studied were those of
three Philadelphia public schools, whom I had previously physically examined in prosecution of the official work of medical
school inspection.

The first step was the recording, in each school, of the name,
physical record, and scholarship of each child. The last mentioned datum was obtained by using the previous term-marks iii
three of the school studies, from which an average mark was
easily calculated.

The average term-mark of the whole school was first obtained
by the simple process of adding the term-marks of all the children together, and dividing by the number of children. For example, in the Claghorn School this was 73.1.
The record-cards of the children were then divided into two
collections: one of the healthy or normal children, the other of
the general group showing some noteworthy physical defect. The
average term-mark (the scholarship index) was then calculated
for each group separately, and the two compared, first with each
other, and then with the term-mark of all the children previously
calculated.

The results showed that in each school, and in each individual branch of study in each school, the healthy or normal
children stood higher in their classes than the average children,
and the physical defectives, taken as a class, stood lower than the
average children.

Allison School?219 Children, Both Sexes, G to 12 Years Old.
Average
Normal child :  75
Average child   74
General defectives   72^
Adenoids and enlarged tonsils  72
Deaf   67.2
Ninth Street Primary School?84 Children, Both Sexes,
G to 10 Years Old.
Language Arithmetic Spelling Average
64 cases normal children   72.9 75.5 75.4 74.6
84 cases average children  70.5 74 72.8 72.4
21 cases general defectives  G3.3 70 64.8 6G
8 cases adenoids   GO G6.7 65 63.9
No cases deaf.

Claghorn School?252 Children, Both Sexes, 12 to 15 Years Old.
GeographyLanguage Arithmetic and Average
History
179 cases normal children  74.4 72 76.6 74.3
252 cases average children  72.7 70 76.5 73.1
73 cases general defectives   71.4 65.1 76.2 70.8
An investigation on slightly different lines was made possible by the existence in the Claghorn School of four classes of
the same grammar grade, which had been so made up at the
beginning of the year that the brighter children constituted two
classes, and the duller children the other two classes. The latter
were smaller, so as to afford more opportunity for individual
instruction. A comparison of the physical condition of the children is instructive:
Class 1 Class 15 Class 9 Class 11
Bright Children Dull Children Chil^-en
Number of children  50 39 32 29
Normal  36 32 20 13
Defective   14 ? 12 16
Percentage of normal children 72% 82% 62.5% 44.8%
In June, 190G, the school medical inspection corps of Philadelphia was directed by its chief, Dr Thomas J. Beatty, to make
a comparative study of those bright children exempted from their
annual examinations, and those children whose lower scholastic
standard necessitated their examination for promotion. The proportion of physical defects recorded in the two groups was made
the basis of comparison. I am indebted to Dr Beatty for per2U THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
mission to publish the figures which I submitted to him at that
time. It will be observed that, on averaging the five schools, the
brighter children showed the lower percentage of physical defect.

Exempt Children Non-Exempt Children
Normal Defective Normal Defective
Ninth Street Primary School  5G 28 39 38
Ilutledge School   87 35 75 34
Allison School    128 65 81 49
Camac School   183 71 103 75
Claghorn School   193 61 127 66
647 260 425 262
Percentage defective .  28.8 per cent. 38.1 per cent.

An effort was made to determine the exact degree of influence of defects of the nose and throat. The harmful results of
these have been recognized in recent years. In the Claghorn School
the four classes of bright and dull children were examined again.
Their eyesight proved to be about the same (averaging 5-~y
~). Enlarged tonsils, adenoids, deafness, and nasal
catarrh occurred much more frequently, however, among the two
classes of duller children. In many the adenoid expression was
written only too plainly on their faces. The following table
shows the findings:

Class 1 Class 15 Class 9 Class 11
Bright Children Dull Children cwitlre^i
Number of children  50 39 32 29
Nose and throat conditions:
Number defective   6 4 9 9
With single or combined defects, viz:
Tonsils   3 4 3 3
Adenoids   2 1 5 6
Deaf   2 .. 5 1
Catarrh   .. 2 3
Percentage of children with nose and throat
defects   12% 10.2% 28.1% 31%
The conclusions to be drawn from the foregoing facts are
very evident. The educational result in our public schools suffers
a discount of about G per cent in the case of the physically defective children, as well as a waste of the time rightfully belonging to the normal children. The drain on the teacher's energies is
more than proportionately increased by the presence of such children, because of their associated nervousness or stupidity.
Note.?This article is from a chapter of a book in course of
preparation, entitled "Medical Inspection of School Children."
