A Mind that Found Itself
==========================

By Clifford Whittingham Beers. New York
and London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1908. Pp. 362.
"A Mind that Found Itself" is a wonderfully graphic account of
the wandering of a mind set adrift, recorded by that mind after it had
once more found its moorings. The author describes, as only one who has
experienced them can describe, the vividly realistic hallucinations and
terrifying illusions which continually harass the victims of certain
forms of insanity.. He gives some telling illustrations of how quite
common sounds are misinterpreted and grow in significance until they
become positive proofs in support of some elaborate delusion which
colors the whole thought and conduct.
He impresses upon us, not only by these vivid pen pictures, but also
by a pitiful tale of the lack of tact and understanding of those in charge
of him, how necessary it is that such mental states should be understood
by all practical workers with the insane. The book should be read by
every nurse and attendant in the land. It would then accomplish its
mission, the improvement of conditions in hospitals for the insane, more
surely than if it led to the wholesale investigation which it recommends.
Mr. Beers pleads passionately for more human treatment at the
hands of hospital attendants. This lack of humanity is in reality
grounded in their absolute inability to understand the mental life of
the patients. Such understanding could scarcely be expected in a class
of men utterly untrained in that most difficult of all arts, the understanding of human nature. The picture of cruelty drawn by Mr. Beers
makes us feel that many attendants are utterly devoid not only of tact,
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 117
but of heart and feeling as well. The work must be taken from such
hands and entrusted to a higher type of individual. But such individuals
do not want the work, to the majority it is simply revolting. The real
solution of the problem lies, first, in the education of the people to a
realization of the demand for capable workers in the field, and secondly
in the training of a class of young people along the lines of abnormal
psychology, which will fit them to deal tactfully and sympathetically with
minds so confused that one ill chosen remark may sever the last thread
which binds them to the old life. Mr. Beers tells how a promise partially neglected caused him to lose belief in the identity of his family
and friends, and how a careless remark, "We shall soon straighten you
out," carried with it the sinister meaning of an impending execution.
He shows innumerable instances of how his progress depended almost
entirely upon the words and actions of those around him. A more
telling argument in favor of the psychic treatment of the insane could
scarcely be written.
The weakness of the book lies in the wholesale condemnation of all
methods which were not suited to Mr. Beers's particular case. Mr. Beers
represents a type of insanity in which the mind remains active, though
confused, therefore its treatment should be on a rational basis and guided
by the utmost tact. There is another type of insanity, however, in
which mental activity is nearly abolished, the little that does remain
manifesting itself in impulsive seizures, in which the patients throw
themselves about irrespective of surroundings, and are apt to sustain
serious injuries. An appeal in words is here obviously useless, and the
only treatment possible is some form of restraint which will protect the
patient from self-inflicted injury. Thus a method of restraint which
was a cruel and unnecessary torture to Mr. Beers, would be the most
humane treatment for this demented type of patient.
The book is so very well written that with its deep human interest
it is sure to attract widespread attention. When it does, we feel that it
cannot fail to awaken an understanding of the insane mind and a realization of its needs keen enough to react favorably on existing conditions.
Clara Harrison Town.
