Retrospect and Prospect: an Editorial
======================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. 2. No. 1. March 15, 1908.
With tliis number The Psychological Clinic enters upon
the second year of its existence. The journal was founded with two
objects in view, not always easily harmonized. It was proposed
that the journal should maintain a high scientific standard in the
quality and selection of its leading articles and reviews, and yet
should appeal to a wide circle of readers.
At the end of this, its first year of existence, our readers
include practising physicians and medical specialists, professors
of pedagogy and psychology, superintendents of education, grade
teachers and teachers of defective children, social workers, and
others interested in modern philanthropic work for the relief of
poor children. It would seem that there is a growing appreciation
of the possible service to be rendered by this journal in a field of
work which is only just beginning to be clearly defined.
To define a new field of research, to develop suitable methods
of investigation, and at the same time to enlist the sympathy and
active support of those who have not yet fully recognized the
significance of the problem, is a precarious undertaking. I did
not venture to begin the publication of a journal until I felt
assured that the number of scientific articles in view was sufficient
to carry the journal through its first year at least. For these I
was compelled to depend upon my own work and the work of
former students of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania.
I have been more than gratified, however, to find that it is not
necessary to rely exclusively on this small group of contributors.
The first volume, which is now completed, numbers among its
contributors Dr Coriat of Boston, who writes on "The Mental
Condition of Juvenile Delinquents," Dr Crampton of New York,
on "The Influence of Physiological Age upon Scholarship," and
Dr Cornell of Philadelphia, on "The Relation of Physical to
Mental Defect in School Children."
(l)
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
A number of the articles which appear in the first volume
open up new fields of inquiry. This is true of several articles
demonstrating the applicability of the clinical method to a study
of the results obtained from the training of retarded children.
The statistics of retardation in school work, as presented by
Superintendents Bryan and Cornman, will sooner or later challenge comparative statistics along similar lines from the superintendents of every state and large city in this country. Dr.
Crampton's original report on "The Influence of Physiological
Age upon Scholarship," has opened up for investigation the question of the relation of physiological age to chronological age.
Wherever age enters as an item into statistical comparisons, Dr.
Crampton's conclusions must be taken into consideration.
With the opening of the second year, The Psychological
Clinic promises a wider range of contributions. In this number
Dr Margaret K. Smith, of the New Paltz State Normal School,
New York, begins an important study of the "Sixty-two Days'
Training of a Backward Boy." This work not only invites the
interest and attention of every teacher of a defective or normal
child, but it also presents a very clever application of the clinical
method, one wTell worthy to serve as a model. The editor has
articles on hand and in view which would enable him to double
the present size of the journal. This increase will be undertaken
as soon as there is the financial support to warrant it.
The Psychological Clinic is propagandist in spirit and
welcomes every effective contribution to the cause which it supports. For this reason it hails with enthusiasm the work of Dr.
Thorndike on "The Elimination of Pupils from School," published by the National Bureau of Education, and the report on
the "Physical Welfare of School Children" by the New York
Committee of the American Statistical Association. Other work
of at least equal importance is in progress in New York City and
elsewhere. Dr Ealkner's report, as Commissioner of Education for
Porto Rico, presents a valuable analysis of the distribution of school
children according to age and grade. In the last report of the
Superintendent of the State of New York will be found the first
attempt to investigate this problem throughout the schools of a
state. There can be little doubt of the existence of a group of men
and women, at present small, but soon to grow to large proportions, who are actively engaged in investigatory work, and to
whose efforts we can confidently look for results which will some
RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT. 3
day transfer the center of interest in education to a new set of
problems,?those that immediately concern the child and his
progress, in contradistinction to those of organization, curriculum
and method.
The Psychological Clinic proposes to urge upon the school
the realization of its possibilities as a social force. The school
must take its place as a social institution second to none, an
institution whose purpose is the development of the individual
citizen and the progress of the human race. If the social institution, called the home, is as essential as we believe it to be for the
development of the mental and moral qualities of a child, then the
school must go into many homes and make them worthy of the
name, fitting them to become the training place of future citizens
of the Republic. If insufficient food and unhealthful environment make the progress of a child impossible, the school must
bring these facts to the attention of the public, and must see that
some satisfactory solution is offered. If adenoid groAvths and
remediable defects of sight and hearing are obstacles in the path
of many a child's progress, the school must be quick to detect their
presence and to take the necessary measures for their removal. If
there are feeble-minded children in the public schools (and there
are in Philadelphia several hundred such children, some of them
as low in the scale of intellectual development as the low grade
imbecile), the school must make this fact known, must inform
us of their number and location, and must actively assume the
task of awakening public opinion to the point of furnishing
adequate provision for their institutional care and training. If
there are backward children in the public schools, not properly
called feeble-minded, but yet incapable of making normal progress
with other children in the grades, the schools must study the
causes of backwardness and provide special schools and classes
for their educational treatment.
The number of backward children ranges from one to fifty
per cent, depending upon our definition of backwardness. In
other words, under present conditions, up to fifty per cent of the
school population is unable to take full advantage of the opportunity for mental training afforded by the public schools. Mental
retardation does not necessarily imply mental defect. The
Psychological Clinic does not restrict its interest to the mentally defective child. Any child who is still in the sixth grade,
when he is old enough to be in the eighth, is retarded, and if the
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
education afforded by tlie schools is really a significant factor in
developing a child's mental and moral character, this retardation
in school progress is tantamount to a permanent arrest of development. The child who does not enjoy to the full the developing
influences of the school during the formative period of childhood,
reaches adult age at a lower level of efficiency than he might
otherwise have attained. If, as some assert, the mentally gifted
child gets less from the public school than any other child, because
no provision is made for his more rapid progress, then many a
child who passes through the elementary and secondary schools
with flying colors at the head of his class, may also be mentally
retarded as he enters upon the period of adolescence. Our problem, therefore, is the investigation of the causes that favor and
hinder the development of adult efficiency. It is my belief that
we shall more profitably investigate these causes by the study of
the individual than by the study of masses. A statistical inquiry
doubtless must be undertaken before conclusions of general applicability can l)e formed, but the most convincing statistics will be
obtained from individuals who have been subjected first to a clinical
examination. This point of view is also taken by Dr Thorndike
in a recent contribution, to which I have referred, and a review
of which appears in this number of the journal.
It is a mistake to suppose that this journal is devoted to a
study of pathological conditions. There is no sharp line to be
drawn between the pathological or abnormal on the one hand, and
the normal on the other, and it is precisely the borderland cases
which will furnish us with the best material for study. The
Psychological, Clinic is not a journal for the study of the
abnormal child, but a journal for the study of the individual child.
Wherever we are concerned with the training of an individual,
i. e., with liis mental and moral development, we are confronted
with a psychological problem. It is the object of this journal to
make known the nature of this problem.
