News and Comment
===================

The School Hygiene Association.

The American School Hygiene Association holds its second congress at Atlantic City, N. J., April 17-18. This association, which was
organized at a meeting held in Washington May 6-7, 1907, has nearly
doubled in size during the year. It now has 170 members, of whom
102 are founding members.

Its objects are,?
(1) To stimulate research and to promote discussion of the
problems of school hygiene.
(2) To take an active part in movements wisely aiming to
improve the hygienic conditions surrounding children
during school life.

The program for this meeting, which deals with a variety of topics,
will be of interest to educators, physicians, and parents. The following
is a list of the papers that will be read at the meeting:?
Preliminary report of committee of medical inspection. John J.
Cronin, M.D., First Assistant Chief Medical Inspector, New York City,
Chairman.

Medical and Sanitary Inspection of Schools in Vermont. Henry
D. Ilolton, M.D., Secretary State Board of Health, Vermont.
The Medical and Sanitary Inspection of Schools and their Relation
to the Tuberculosis Problem. Samuel G. Dixon, M.D., Commissioner
of Health, Pennsylvania.
Medical Inspection in California. Joseph Chamberlain, LL.B., San
Francisco.

Medical Inspection in the Schools of Baltimore. H. Warren Buckler, M.D., Medical Inspector, Baltimore.
Recent Medical Reforms in Massachusetts Law. Curtis Guild, Jr.,
Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

Statutory Enactments relating to the Medical and Sanitary Inspection of Schools. A. C. Yandiver, Counsel for the Medical Society of
the County of New York.

Playground Legislation. Joseph Lee, Boston.
The Status of Hygiene in the American College. George L. Meylan,
M.D., Adjunct Professor of Physical Education, Columbia University.
Provision for Exceptional Children in Public Schools. J. H. Yan
Sickle, A.M., Superintendent Baltimore Public Schools.
What do the Histories of the cases of Insanity teach us concerning
Mental Hygiene of the school year? Adolf Meyer, M.D., Director
Pathological Institute, State Commission in Lunacy, New York.
A Brief for the Organization of Departments of School Hygiene
within Boards of Education. Luther H. Gulick, M.D., Director of
Physical Education, Public Schools of New York City.
Schoolhouse Construction, as affecting the Health and Safety of
Children. R. C. Sturgis, B.A., Chairman School House Committee,
Boston.

The Inspection of the Yentilating and Lighting of Cleveland School
Rooms. Martin Eriedrich, M.D., Health Officer, Cleveland.
School Illumination. Myles Standish, M.D., Professor of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School.
The Readjustment of the Elementary and High Schools upon the
basis of Physiological Age. C. Ward Crampton, M.D., Assistant Director of Physical Education, Public Schools, New York City.
Medical Inspection in the School of Education, University of Chicago. Joseph E. Raycroft, M.D., Medical Examiner, University of
Chicago.

Physiological Psychology.

The 1908 report of the Commissioner of Education for the State
of New York contains a discussion of the causes of backwardness in
school children and of the elimination of pupils from the grades, which
cannot fail to interest and instruct. The Psychological Clinic has
already called attention to the value of this report, and there will be
occasion in the future to refer to some of the statistics which form the
basis of Dr Draper's discussion. The report, however, contains a paragraph whose meaning is not quite clear. In presenting the causes of
the failure of children to profit by the work of the schools, Dr Draper
says,?

"There is altogether too much so-called 'psychological science,' too
much fanciful exploitation and illustration, too much method and dress
parade in teaching. The cold and sad fact is that men and women
whose knowledge of physiology is utterly repudiated by our experts in
physiology and whose reasoning is ridiculed by our leaders in logic, are
assuming with entire confidence to teach physiological psychology in
the schools. If the professors in the colleges enjoy it, and their students
will stand it, perhaps we can let it alone, for they have the means of
correcting it within their own number, but it is high time to protest
when primary teachers are led to believe that they are bound to know
all about this mass of superficial stuff and that they must inflict it
upon the children in the elementary schools."

Does Dr Draper mean to imply that teachers in the elementary
grades are teaching physiological psychology to their pupils? If they
are making this attempt it is undoubtedly true, as Dr Draper would
have us believe, that they are poorly equipped to give such instruction.
Very few of our universities and colleges are giving to-day adequate
instruction in physiological psychology to their students. Many normal
schools are from ten to twenty years behind the times in the instruction
which they offer in modern psychology. It would be safe to say that
there is still much professional prejudice against the teaching of
physiological psychology to teachers and normal school pupils.
What is physiological psychology? Its opponents have at the best
but a hazy notion. In some quarters the scope and intent of physiological psychology are completely misrepresented. Thus, in the February number of the Pennsylvania School Journal is a remarkable article
by the late superintendent of public schools of Philadelphia, Dr Edward
Brooks, on "The Nature of Physiological Psychology." From this article
is culled the following gem of purest misinformation:

"Physiological psychology begins with the study of the brain. It
finds it composed of two hemispheres divided into two parts called
respectively the cerebrum and the cerebellum. It finds the brain to
consist of gray mater and of white matter, and holds that the gray
matter is concerned in mental action and the white matter in the motion
of the members of the body. The gray matter is found principally in
the cerebrum in the form of cells and connective fibers, while the white
matter is found in the cerebellum and consists mainly of nerve fibers.
The cerebrum is the seat of mental action and the cerebellum of bodily
action."

This paragraph is distinguished by the fact that it does not contain
a single true statement, with the possible exception of the statement that
"it finds the brain to consist of gray matter and of white matter." Dr.
Brooks is the author of a work on "Mental Science" which presumes to
give an outline of the facts and principles of psychology. While this
book is perhaps the worst that could be put into the hands of teachers
for the purpose of instruction in modern psychology, it is not the only
work which fails to comprehend the nature and scope of this modern
field of scientific work.

Special Training in Camp Schools.

Mr. S. G. Davidson, of Mount Airy, Philadelphia, at the request
of the editor of The Psychological Clinic, writes as follows concerning
his work and experience in training difficult cases at his vacation camp
and school in Cliocorua, N. II.,?

I had for twenty years been connected with the Pennsylvania School
for the Deaf, located here, for most of the time as special teacher of
language, and had loug been impressed with the belief that the difficulty
the deaf child experienced in mastering English was not so much due
to the lack of hearing in itself, as to imperfect mental development, due
in the first place to the mind having lain stagnant owing to deafness
during early childhood, and secondly to his isolation from the actualities
of life during the period of his instruction. Under ordinary conditions,
teaching must be done in the class room, under artificial conditions,
apart from the thing taught, without the inspiration, the suggestion and
the interpretation of personal experience. In order to experiment with
a view to overcoming this latter deficiency, I opened a small camp school
for deaf boys in the White Mountains, where the climate would enable
them to live an active outdoor life during the summer. We had two
hours a day of classroom instruction, devoted rather to the cultivation
of concentration, application and interest, than the imparting of knowledge, although it soon proved that the child learned more in this time,
under the conditions of camp life, than in the ordinary school day of five
or six hours. The rest of the day was spent out of doors, in active
exercise, in long tramps to points of interest, excursions, picnics, bathing, fishing, etc., the pupils being at all times accompanied by their
instructors both for their protection and to utilize every opportunity
for training and instruction. The results exceeded my expectations, for
the boys not oidy made remarkably rapid development during the
summer, but on their return to school did far better than before in all
their' studijes. One boy who was so backward as to be considered by
some of his teachers as feeble-minded, and who had been repeatedly
dropped back in the classes, was found fit for promotion, and spending
succeeding summers in the camp, was able to graduate with credit in the
class into which he was put. Another boy who had been doing poor
work and was very unruly under the restraints of school life,?I was
warned not to take him as he would make it uncomfortable for everybody,?developed under the influence of this free outdoor life and sympathetic companionship into the best boy in the camp, a favorite with
everybody, and took the prize offered for manliness. What is better,
he no longer made life a burden to his teachers on his return to school.
There was a corresponding improvement in every case. I found the
task of teaching boys from my own classes much lightened, and the
teachers and principals of schools from which other boys had come
reported similar progress.

The second year, the father of one of my deaf boys, who had been
gratified by tlie improvement in his son, asked me in the middle of the
season to take his hearing son, who had been dropped from a farm school
to which he had been sent as incapable of improvement. The boy had
been tried in many schools, but always discharged as unable to learn,
and his parents wished my opinion as to whether anything could be
done for him. None of us expected any results in the short time he
was with us, but by fall he showed such signs of physical and mental
improvement that we were encouraged to continue the same methods,
as nearly as possible, through the winter and the summer and winter
following. He was then entered in an ordinary school and made satisfactory progress.
Since then we have taken more and more hearing children, until
they are largely in the majority, and in every case parents and
teachers have expressed themselves as gratified by the results. Some of
these boys were more than ordinarily bright, but even they have done
better for a summer of this camp life. Others were backward from
physical causes, some from lack of proper restraint and training in the
family life, and some from poor teaching. One case was a boy from
a private school for backward children in Massachusetts, whose principal has sent us a number of her pupils for several summers past. This
boy was pigeon-breasted, stunted, flat-footed, and wasted almost to a
skeleton, as well as backward in his studies from other physical causes.
He grew strong and hearty, the trouble with his foot was largely overcome by manipulation and exercise, and he returned to school an
altogether different boy.

Causes of Retardation.

Data of a quantitative character on the causes of retardation are
scarce and any light upon the subject is welcome. In the fall of 1906
the Boston Board of School Superintendents made an inquiry into the
causes of excessiye age in the case of all pupils in the three primary
grades who, on September 12, 190G, were ten years of age and over.
According as the pupils are in the first, second and third grade, they
represent different degrees of retardation, as follows:

Pupils 10 yrs. Minimum reand over. tardation.
Grade 1   38 3 years
Grade 2   104 2 years
Grade 3   477 1 year
G19
The causes assigned by the school superintendents in these G19
cases were as follows:?
Entered school late   91
Foreign children   131
Came from private schools   43
5G THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Came from other town or cities   61
Parents moving about   31
Illness and absence caused thereby  115
Absence for other causes    29
Mentally weak or slow   107
Deafness   3
Blindness  1
Laziness   1
Neglected  3
Inattention . ..".    1
Truancy   2
019
The foregoing figures are printed in the Minutes of the Boston
School Committee for December 31, 1906.
A Social Service Department.

Following the example of the Massachusetts General Hospital, the
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania has established a Social
Service Department. The work of this department comprises:?1.
Friendly visiting; 2. The placing of patients in hospitals and of convalescents in homes; 3. The giving of instruction in hygienic methods of
living to patients and their families suffering from certain diseases,
notably tuberculosis; 4. The employment of patients and convalescents.
A trained head worker and four volunteer assistants constitute at present
the staff of the Social Service Department. This supplementing of
medical treatment through practical social work is an important sign
of the times. The best exemplification of the uniting of medical, educational and social work in a single great movement, will be afforded next
September by the National Congress of Tuberculosis, which meets in the
city of Washington.
