Some Fukther Considerations Upon the Re-Tardation of the Pupils of Five City School Systems
==============================================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. II. No. 3. May 15, 1908.

By Roland P. Falkner, Ph.D.
Commissioner of Education for Porto Rico, 1904-07.
In the February issue of The Psychological Clinic, Dr.
Oliver P. Cornman presented a valuable discussion of the Retardation of Pupils of Five City School Systems.* His study is based
upon tables showing the distribution by ages of the pupils in each
grade of the elementary schools of the cities of Camden, Kansas
City, Boston, Philadelphia, and New York. The text and tables
display with admirable clearness the great diversity of ages in
the several grades and establish the fact of retardation by unmistakable evidence.
Instructive as are the facts stated and the conclusions drawn
from this valuable statistical material, they by no means exhaust
its possibilities. It is the purpose of the present article to inquire
what further facts can be elicited from this material, to quarry
out if possible additional information which may be embedded in
it. To do this will involve a scrutiny of the tables, not only in their
general outlines, but in their individual parts. Such a scrutiny
may also serve to illustrate the maxim that in a statistical study
every figure should be challenged?not for its accuracy, but for
the purposes of interpretation.
The tables compiled by Dr Cornman show a general resemblance to one another, and much difference in detail. It is our
purpose to call attention to both resemblance and dissimilarity.
In the first place, it may be pointed out that the distribution of
the ages among the different grades shows greater variations than
in the several school systems as aggregates.
If we direct our attention to the total number of children of
each age, as reported in the tables, we note a marked similarity
*The Psychological Clinic, I, p. 245 ff.
(57)
58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
in tlie series for the different cities. In each, the numbers between the ages of 8 and 12 are very nearly identical, growing
smaller, however, as the age of 12 is reached. But in every case
the numbers fall off somewhat at the age of 13 years, and much
more obviously at 14. The following figures are drawn from the
tables:
Children in School at Certain Ages.
Av. Age Camden Kansas City Boston Philadelphia New York
10-12  1,401 3,228 7,G71 18,162 62,360
13   1,102 2,812 6,575 15,150 49,840
14   656 1,868 3,959 7,913 29,450
15   322 904 1,524 2,856 10,587
Av. Age
' 10-12   100 100 100 100 100
13   79 87 86 83 80
14   48 55 52 44 47
15   23 28 20 15 17
This table shows that the falling off in school begins at 13,
and that at 14 only about one-half of those who are in school at 12
are still present. At 14 very few have entered the high school; at
15 this number is not inconsiderable, and we should have to add
high School figures in order to determine how many had dropped
out of school. From these facts we can draw the conclusions that
dropping out of school depends more upon age than upon the
degree of advancement in school studies. This is quite as true of
Boston, where, according to Dr Cornman's conclusions, retardation is least prevalent, as it is of Camden, where it appears to be
most frequent.
This fact is of cardinal importance in the study of retardation. It dispels at once the conclusion, not infrequently drawn,
that retardation increases the number of children in school. One
can readily see how retardation would swell the number of school
children, if all were obliged to remain in school until their courses
were finished. But this is not the case. After the end of the
compulsory school age, generally the fourteenth birthday, they can
leave when they please, whatever their stage of advancement.
They in fact do so in large numbers, and as the falling off at 13
years testifies, some of them anticipate the fourteenth birthday.
Thus Dr Cornman says,* "Boston is now able to make the
proud boast that she has a seat in school for every child able to
?The Psychological Clinic, I, p. 254.
THE RETARDATION OF PUPILS. 59
attend. This condition may be due in part to the smaller percentage of retardation. Were the stream of children through the
grades less rapid, perhaps she would have her thousands or tens
of thousands upon part time, while empty benches yawned for
occupancy in the highest grades. Damming the stream of children passing through the grades of our schools subverts the purposes of the public educational system and causes a wasteful
expenditure of the public funds." And again, "The child that
takes ten years to complete an eight-year course, costs the state
25 per cent more than one who gets through 011 time. Complete
statistics of retardation would furnish the data upon which might
be made a fairly accurate computation of the cost of this delay
in the grades. It is safe to assert that the total loss to the community would be found to be surprisingly large."
In these sentences we find the problem of retardation brought
into relation with the problem of accommodation, and with that
of cost.
]STow it is perfectly clear that if Boston must accommodate
all her children till they are twelve years old inclusive, and in
addition at least 85 per cent of those thirteen years old, and 50
per cent of those fourteen years old, it matters not what the stage
of academic advancement may be, they will under all circumstances require the same number of seats.
Looking at it from the standpoint of cost, it is equally plain
that it will cost just the same to teach Boston children, whether
they are well along in their studies or far behind. The argument
in the final quotation seems convincing and is true for the specific
case mentioned. But the specific case does not represent the
average case. The child does not generally take ten years to
finish an eight-year course. lie simply does not finish.
Indeed there is some ground for believing that if retardation
were wholly eliminated from our schools the cost would be increased. If there were no retardation and all the children in their
fourteenth year were in the seventh grade, there is good reason
to believe that a much larger number would be ambitious to finish
the work of the common schools, and that we should have a much
larger number of children in their fifteenth year in the school than
we have at present.
It is not my purpose to minimize the evils of retardation,
but cost is not one of them. I quite agree that it causes a "wasteful expenditure of the public funds" because it is an ineffective
expenditure. The expenditure is not greater than it otherwise
would be, but the results are painfully less.
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The fact that has the greatest significance for society is not
that retardation means a prolonged education measured in time
for the few, but that it means a shortened education measured in
distance for the many. Thus, if in Camden we find 317 pupils
of eleven years of age in the third grade, the sad fact is not that
they will be sixteen years old when they reach the eighth grade,
but that the vast majority will never get there. They will reach
their fourteenth birthday in the sixth grade, and most of them
will disappear at that time. Retardation, whatever its causes,
means that comparatively few children finish the work of the
elementary schools. If remedial measures can be made effective,
a larger number of our children will receive a full elementary
education, as provided in our common schools.
The age at which children begin school is as important as
the age at which they leave it, since between these two points
lies the possibility of advance. We have seen that the five cities
compared show substantially similar results so far as the decrease
of the school population after twelve years is concerned. But do
the children begin equally early in the several cities ? The answer
of the figures is as follows:
City ? years g years 7 years 8 years
and under
Camden   611 1,270 1,556 1,434
Kansas City  3,502 ' 3,109 3,104
Boston  2,835 7,500 8,284 8,764
Philadelphia   8,611 16,583 17,769
New York   2,446 36,797 53,789 61,367
Here, as elsewhere in this study, information not directly
derived from Dr Cornman's tables has been obtained from the
original reports of the respective cities. The addition of the
group "five years and under," when it appears, divides the group
"six years and under" in Dr Cornman's tables. In Kansas City
and Philadelphia no information is available as to the children
under six years of age, if there are any who have been included in
the tables. The figures apparently show two types; the first three
cities in the table above showing but a slight increase of the children seven and eight years of age over those of six years of age,
while in New York and Philadelphia these ages are much more
numerous than the six year old children.
An examination of the tables in Dr Cornman's paper will
show that the figures for Camden appear to be reported in September and those for Kansas City in June. As a matter of fact,
THE RETARDATION OF PUPILS. 61
the two tables are identical, and neither is what it is labeled. In
both cities the official school reports show that the figures relate
to all children admitted to the schools during the year ending June,
1906. In both cases the ages are those recorded at the time of
admission. As by far the greater number entered in September,
the figures for Camden are very nearly, though not exactly, what
they purport to be, i.e. the ages in September. The basis of
enumeration, for Kansas City and for Camden, is identical, but
it is quite distinct from that used in the other cities. In Boston,
Philadelphia, and New York, the figures are taken in June, and
hence the children are recorded at a time when they were ten
months older than those of Kansas City or Camden. Children,
who in September were five and six years old, are now mostly six
and seven. In Philadelphia, the admission of children to the
grades when less than six years of age is infrequent, and as the
figures are given in June, it is not improbable that those who
entered the schools in September at six years of age were nearly
all seven when their ages were recorded. The six year old children present in June would represent to a large extent those who
came in with the second term in January. In New York, admission at five years of age is more frequent, hence we find in June
a larger proportion of six year old children present in the schools
of that city than in Philadelphia. In Boston, however, the admission of five year old children is very frequent. There wTere as
many as 2,885 in June, 1906, and an even larger number of six
year old children, despite the fact that the ages were recorded
in June, showing the presence earlier in the year of a very much
larger number of these young children. This explajins why
Boston appears to conform to the type of Camden and Kansas
City, although the children were recorded at the end of the school
year instead of predominantly at its beginning.
This examination of the first factor in the tables, that of
age, has shown that the several tables, though similar in form,
are quite distinct in substance. They are not so directly comparable as they would appear. If the aggregates of the age columns are affected by these differences, the details must also be
affected, and it becomes necessary to inquire whether the conclusions drawn by Dr Comman in regard to ages within the grades
must not be modified, in part at least.
Before doing so, it will be well to inquire whether the tables
presented are comparable in every respect as to grades. The time
of the enumeration is not without influence upon this factor also,
but there are other and less subtle differences revealed by a careful
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
examination of the tables. If we compare tlie number of pupils
in each grade in the several cities, we note that in Camden,
Kansas City, and Boston, the first grade is the most numerous,
while in Philadelphia and New York the second grade is the
largest. Indeed, in Philadelphia the second grade contains more
than twice the number of children found in the first, and in New
York also the second grade is very much the larger. A reference
to the actual figures shows:
Grade Boston Philadelphia New York
June, 1906 June, 1907 June, 1908
First Grade   13,669 13,353 57,893'
Second Grade   10,276 29,929 81,780
Obviously the Philadelphia and New York figures do not
represent a normal grade distribution, but this incongruity is not
explained by the figures themselves. In both cases the school
authorities count the children after the June promotion. To be
specific, the first grade pupils reported do not comprise all of those
who have been in the grade during the year, but only those first
grade pupils of the school year 1906-07 who will begin the year
1907-08 in the same grade. In other words, the grade distribution reported in June is that with which the next school year
would begin in September, provided no pupils dropped out during
the summer and no new pupils were admitted in the fall.
Our five tables, apparently so similar, are in fact very
diverse, and this diversity apparently affects the numerical relations which we arc studying. Let us therefore examine closely
just what each table represents, and how their differences affect
their comparability in detail. Our five tables represent at least
three distinct methods of enumerating ages and grades:
1. All the children entering school during the year, grades
and ages being reported as of the time of entrance (Camden find
Kansas City).
2. All the children in" school at the end of the year, the ages
reported being those at the end of the year and the grades those
of the last half of the year (Boston).
3. All the children in school at the end of the year, the ages
reported being those at the end of the year and the grades those
of the next year (Philadelphia and New York).
In general it may be said that the tables differ widely on
account of this absence of consensus of opinion as to the precise
meaning of such simple phrases as the age of the child and the
grade in which the child is found.
THE RETARDATION OF PUPILS. 63
The first method of enumeration, which is employed in Camden and Kansas City, and which counts all the children admitted
to school in the grades in which tlicy are admitted, has certain
advantages and disadvantages. Its advantages are found in a
more accurate determination of ages at the time the record is
made. Its disadvantage lies in the fact that while the bulk of
the record is made in September, it is spread over the entire year.
The age record can be made in the school books by asking
the child its age, or the date of its birth or both. Boston, Philadelphia and New York record the date of birth and can thus
compile ages accurately at any time. This is always to be commended, but is by no means universal in the school records of
American cities. If a child is recorded in September, 1907, as
having been born in January, 1900, we know that in March, 1908,
it belongs in the eight year old class. If, however, it is recorded
in September, 1907, as being seven years of age, we do not know
in March, 1908, whether it is still seven or whether it has reached
eight. If the record, as is frequently the case, is a double one,?
Born, January, 1900, age seven years?accuracy is possible at any
later date, but unless special pains are taken to secure such
accuracy, the question as to the age of the child is likely to
elicit the answer that it is a seven year old child, whether the
question be put in September, 1907, or in March, 1908. The
teacher is apt to report the recorded age without calculating the
actual age. When, therefore, the ages are reported as of the date
of June or any date later than the registration date of the pupils,
there is always some doubt as to their accuracy. In the matter
of ages, inaccuracies are notorious. Under either system there
may be errors in the original entries. The less care taken in
making such records, the more frequent such errors will be. We
are not dealing here with such original errors, but with secondary
errors arising from mistakes or carelessness in transcribing the
facts from school registers.
These considerations lead us to believe that if the ages of
children entered in September Were reported on October 1st as
of the date of registration, they would in a great majority of
cities represent more accurately the school records, than if they
were reported in June as of that date.
But if, under the system pursued in Camden and Kansas
City, the bulk of the age figures refer to a specific date- in the
school year, namely, in September, many of them do not. The
school register of September is continually growing through the
year. In this system of records both age and grade are reported
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
at the beginning of the child's school life for the given year. In
the great majority of cases this will be in September, but in quite
a number of cases it is later. In Camden, during the year in
question, the total registration in elementary schools was 12,801,
but the average registration was only 9,864. From the manuscript records of his office, Superintendent Bryan has furnished
me with the following interesting record of the growth of the
total enrolment, showing the exact number of pupils enrolled from
the beginning of the year to the end of each month during the
school year 1905-1906, from which the monthly accessions can be
derived:
End of Total Enrolment Accessions
September, 1905   11,117 11,117
October, 1905   11,627 510
November, 1905   11,822 195
December, 1905   11,952 130
January, 1906   12,122 170
February, 1906   12,400 278
March, 1906   12,508 108
April, 1906   12,696 188
May, 1906   12,719 23
June, 1906   12,801 82
It appears that of the pupils registered during the year, 86.8
per cent, or very nearly seven-eighths, were in the schools in
September and were recorded that month as to their ages. Accessions were numerous in October and over 90 per cent of all
enrolled were recorded before November 1st. There is, however,
a scattering contingent whose ages are recorded at later dates
down to the close of the year in June. Evidence that similar
conditions existed in Kansas City is found in the fact that among
28,564 children entered in the schools, there were 6,076 who
attended less than half the school year, many of them doubtless
because they entered after the year's work was well under way.
What has been explained at some length in regard to age
distribution is true also of grade distribution. The facts were
reported when the child entered school, and subsequent changes
were not noted. It may be observed that in the case of a school
system having half-yearly or more frequent promotions during the
year, this method offers considerable difficulty. Who shall report
the child?the teacher who has him under her care at the end of
the year, or the one who began with him? Obviously, the more
THE RETARDATION OF PUPILS. 65
definite system adopted by tlie city of Boston avoids tliese difficulties.
A second method of stating the facts prevails in Boston.
Here the statistics are prepared semi-annually on January 31st
and June 30th, and the grades reported are those in which the
pupils have been during the previous five months. The ages
reported are those of the date of enumeration. In Dr Cornman's
paper the analysis is based upon the June figures of the year
1906*
We have here two important elements of differences from
the first method. It is fair to presume that some of the pupils
who in September were over-age have dropped out. This would
have a tendency to reduce the number of over-age pupils were the
ages reported those of September. But all the pupils recorded
are nine or ten months older than they were in September, and
this would increase the number of over-age pupils. Fortunately
we have some means of estimating the force of these conflicting
tendencies. In table VI Dr Cornman prints percentages for
Boston in January, 1906, as well as those of June, 1906, though
he does not comment upon these added figures.
In June, 1906, the percentage of over-age pupils in Boston
as a whole was 21.6 per cent, but in January it was only 15.4 per
cent. In the first grade there were in June 9.7 per cent pupils
over-age, but in January only 5.7 per cent, and corresponding
differences are found in all the grades. In short, the January
pupils are five months younger than the same pupils in June. In
September the pupils are again five months younger.
This is strikingly shown in the figures for the youngest children in school. Thus we find, comparing January with June,
1906:
Ages Number of Children
January June
4 years of age  67 20
5 years of age  5,470 2,815
G years of age  8,242 7,500
Since most of the five year old children were nearing the age
of six in January, they decrease more rapidly in number than
the other age classes in the following five months. There are no
comprehensive figures for September, 1906, but a special investi*It is to be noted that in the year 1906 there were nine grades, the
ninth grade containing 4,408 pupils, of whom 795 were over-age. As the
percentage of over-age pupils tends to diminish in the upper grades the
inclusion of the ninth grade would have slightly reduced, in the decimal,
the percentage of over-age pupils. Dr Cornman confines his table to the
first eight grades.
GG THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
gation of pupils ten years of age and over in the three primary
grades, enables us to establish the following comparison:
Pupils Ten Years of Age and Over in 1900.
January 31 June 30 Sept. 12
First Grade   74 81 38
Second Grade   246 429 104
Third Grade  1,099 1,789 477
The figures are arranged chronologically. The last, which
represent the beginning of the school year 190G-07, are very different from those of June, representing the end of the school yeark
1905-190G. They show us a much lower percentage of retardation, and were figures available for Boston on the same plan as in
Camden and Kansas City the contrast with the two latter would
have been even more striking than that reported by Dr Cornman.
Among the five cities compared, Boston has a unique place.
Elsewhere one-half of the children are above normal age, but in
Boston this proportion appears to be only one-eighfh. The comparison is highly stimulating to those who are seeking to diminish
the proportion of retardation in our schools. It would appear
that these gratifying results are due to the habit which prevails
in Boston of sending many children to school at the age of five.
It is a well nigh universal practice for children to be in the first
grade soon after the sixth birthday. This early start in school
life permits a child to be held back a year or so, in many cases
even two, without bringing it into the over-age class.
The tables for ISTew York and Philadelphia present a third
method of statement much less satisfactory than the preceding,
but .one which is capable, in the absence of other data, of throwing a great deal of light upon the conditions in those schools. The
moment chosen for the enumeration is the least representative
of general school conditions of the year. It is the moment of
closing school in June when a large number of pupils are credited
to higher classes, which they will not enter until school commences
in September.
Compared with Boston, the ages are the same?those at the
end of the year?but the grades to which the children are credited
are in many cases more advanced. We have approximately a
September grade distribution and June ages. Let us see how.
close we approach to a September grade distribution. It would
be an exact one if the children all came back in September and
no new pupils entered. Of course many pupils will not return in
THE RETARDATION OF PUPILS. 67
September. Of those who fall out some will be in the upper
grades. Of these it is not unlikely that the over-age pupils will
be the most numerous. The tendency to leave school after fourPHILADELPHIA.
Estimated Figures for September, 1907, for Distribution of Pupils in the Grades by Ages.
teen is very strong. There is
no doubt that it is stronger
among the relatively unsuccessful than among those "who
have reached a place in the
school corresponding to their
ago.
On the other hand, many
new pupils will appear in
September. The ranks of the
first, grade depleted by the
June promotions will again
fill np, and this grade will
be the most numerous in the
entire system. But accessions
to higher grades will be relatively few. They will offset
the losses, but it is not to be
surmised that they will change
the general age distribution
in the grades from the second
to the sixth inclusive.
If therefore our figures
represent approximately a
September grade distribution
with the exception of the first
grade, we must add to that
grade in order to make a
closer approach to the real
facts. Among the added pupils it is safe to assume that
only a very small proportion
will be nine years of age, all
the rest being younger. The
ages of our table, however,
will still be those of June,
just which day in June is not
apparent, but probably not as
late as the thirtieth of the
month. !Nor will the schools
G8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
open precisely on September 1st. There is an interval of somewhat more than two months: to he on the safe side let ns assume
that it is three months. Now of all the children of eight years and
less than nine, it is safe to assume that three months later onefourth of them will have passed their ninth birthday. Raising
one-fourth of the eight year children to nine years and so on
throughout the entire table, the Philadelphia figures for June,
1907 (Cornman's table, Vol. I, p. 249), are transformed into the
table for September, 1907, which is given on the preceding page.
The full import of this table can only be seen by comparing
its main results with those published by Dr Cornman, as follows:
Percentage of Enrolment Above Normal Age.
Camden Philadelphia, Pa.
Grades mainly June, '07 September, '07
September, '06 Estimated
8   45.2 23.9 31.6
7   61.0 31.1 39.3
6   59.1 41.5 48.6
5   63.7 45.1 51.7
4   63.6 43.0 49.8
3   55.5 39.3 46.1
2   44.4 28.3 34.2
1   26.8 36.5 37.9
Totals   47.5 37.1 42.5
In general it will be seen that the estimated figures for
September are from five to six points higher than those of June
and that they thus approach the figures for Camden, N". J., and
Kansas City. If the first grade figures (and therefore the total
figures) contain a large conjectural element, it should be remembered that in the upper grades this is much less. But the broad
fact remains that if the grades had been stated in the manner
employed in Boston the percentage of retardation would have
appeared larger than had the Camden method been employed.
Proof of the latter statement is given by Dr Cornman in
table VI. In this table he gives three percentages for New York,
showing a total retardation in June, 1904, of 39.0 per cent, in
June, 1905, 32.0 per cent,* and in June, 1906, 30.0 per cent.
Dr Cornman suggests that improvement has followed calling attention to the problem. The ~New York reports, however, show in
?From N. Y. City Report, erroneously printed as 30.1 in Dr Cornman's
paper.
THE RETARDATION OF PUPILS. 69
1904 the pupils before promotions, as in Boston, but in the following year, for some unexplained reason, the method was changed
and the grades were noted after the promotions had taken place.
The facts are presumably about the same in each case, but the
former method gives a percentage nine points higher than the
second.
We have examined the figures thus carefully in order to
eliminate as far as possible the discrepancies due to differences
of method. Bringing all the figures as nearly as possible to the
total enrolment basis employed in Camden and Kansas City, we
have the following result:
Percentage of Retardation
Different Methods Total Enrolment
Camden   47.5 47.5
Kansas City   49.6 49.6
Boston   21.6 12.5*
Philadelphia   37.1 42.5*
New York   30.0 35.0*
*Estiinated.
A possible cause of variation among cities may lie in the
extent to which ungraded classes were represented in the city
schools systems. If all the backward children were put in such
classes, retardation would disappear from the regular grades.
Only a beginning has been made with such classes, and their
influence upon the general result is not very great. Thus at the
time of the enumerations cited we find the following:
In Regular Grades In Special Classes
Boston    71,377 2,680
New York  500,076 19,679
Information for Philadelphia in June, 1907, is not available. On December 31, 1906, there were 833 children in special
classes, about two-thirds of whom were in classes for truants and
incorrigibles and about one-tliird in classes for backward pupils.
The aggregate elementary school population at that date was
155,763.
If all the special classes were added to the backward children
in New York in 1906, the total proportion of backwardness would
be something over 32 per cent instead of 30 per cent. It is to be
noted that the figures reported for 1905 are 32 per cent and that
in that year there were no special classes.
70 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
It may seem to some that this discussion of statistical
methods has been unduly prolonged, but only by such discussion
can the true meaning of the figures be ascertained. It is certainly
most unsatisfactory to have to deal with divergent figures which
can be made strictly comparable only by introducing conjectural
elements. In view of the increasing interest in the problems involved, it would certainly bo gratifying for all concerned were
school men to follow the same method.
Which method is to be preferred? Among the three whicK
have been discussed, that of Boston has the merit of the greatest
simplicity. Its disadvantage is that it records facts at the end of
the year. If a particular time is to be selected to describe a given
grade, it is clearly not the end of a year which is most appropriate.
The proper expression for the population of Boston in 1907 would
be neither that of January 1, 1907, nor that of December 31st,
but plainly that of June 30th, in the middle of the calendar year.
Attention has already been called to the difficulty of transcribing
accurately at the end of the year the facts as to age as they are
commonly reported in American school registers.
Again the moment after the June promotions selected in
Philadelphia and New York is distinctly not typical of the year.
ISTo other date in the whole school year is less characteristic than
this. The total enrolment recorded in Camden and Kansas City
does not, as it is presumably intended to do, represent the year as
a whole, for it records ages and grades at a wide variety of dates.
Recognizing the superior principle involved in the Boston
method, it seems to the writer that the faults of that method would
be obviated by applying it on October 1st. By that date the
regular fall registration is complete. At that period of the year
a transcription of the age record will be at least as accurate as
the original entries, whatever be the method of making those
entries. Another consideration of moment is that the school population reaches its maximum about the first of October. As the
year progresses some of the children drop out and while the places
of some are filled by new recruits, the accessions do not counterbalance the losses, and at the end of the year the school population is at its lowest ebb. The ages of the pupils who drop out
and the effect of such losses upon the age distribution is something
which, so far as I have been able to ascertain, has not been determined. It is safe to infer that the ages of those dropping out are
on the average higher than those of the new accessions. The accessions always contain a large proportion of beginners. On the
THE RETARDATION OF PUPILS. 71
other hand, the losses contain at least a considerable number of
those who leave school never to return, again,?who are, in short,
over-age pupils. This does not, however, account for all the
losses. It does not explain why the first and second grades are
frequently less well filled at the end of the year than at the
beginning. In the years of optional school attendance before eight
years and after fourteen, there is undoubtedly a greater movement
in the school population than in the ages eight to thirteen inclusive. Of course losses of pupils over fourteen years of age are
not. compensated by accessions, while losses of those under eight
are largely offset by additions to the register.
The advantage of recording the pupils at the beginning rather
than the end of the school year lies in the fact that on a yearly
promotion basis all the pupils are beginning for the year the grade
to which they are credited, while at the end of the year they are
finishing it. "When a half yearly promotion system prevails, the
difference between the two methods is less. On the whole, the
children have a more permanent relation at the beginning of the
year to the grade in which they are reported than at the end.
In a discussion which is perhaps more theoretical than I
could have wished, it may seem out of place to inject purely
practical considerations. 33ut nevertheless I would like to point
out from practical experience in administering a school system
the great advantage of making such detailed statistical records
early in the year, so that they can be accurately summarized and
analyzed in the scliol report.*
Too much emphasis cannot be laid upon simplicity and uniformity of method. If an agreement could be reached upon this
topic, it would greatly promote our knowledge of the subject. Such
criticisms of method as have been the chief theme of this paper
would be avoided and we should have more time to study the facts,
to probe after the causes, and to test possible remedies.
Up to the present time the statistical study of retardation
has largely been confined to a' discussion of the facts. It is perhaps too early to seek to measure causes. Those who have given
?The writer's practice in the schools of Porto Rico wliere the facts
are recorded on the first of March was not in accord with the suggested
date. The reasons for selecting a later date in Porto Rico was that \\ e
had to do there with a mixed system of town and country schools, that
tlie schools, and especially those of the rural districts, were often la e in
getting under way and that March represented the maximum eniolment of
the schools of the island as a whole. The maximum for town schools was
found there to be in October. In a purely city system this fact should
determine the time of making the record.
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the matter attention have indicated a certain number of causes
without trying to estimate their relative force. In this connection
the article of Dr Cornman, on which the present study is based,
is highly suggestive, and I am tempted to add a few considerations 011 this part of the subject.
It might be noted that in his introductory statements, Dr.
Cornman unconsciously falls into the error of explaining retardation by the fact that pupils are not promoted regularly. Is it
not better to insist tljat "retardation" should always be used to
express a fact and is not an explanation ? "Retardation" means
a lack of correspondence between grade and age. Unless it is so
used, late entrance into school cannot be given as an explanation.
A boy who entered school at ten years of age and advanced regularly would be "retarded" in the technical sense, though his
progress would be normal and he would not be held back by
failure to secure promotion.
Later on Dr Cornman says, "A certain proportion of the
retardation is due to the fact that pupils are already over age on
entering school," and cites the proposal to make the age of compulsory attendance seven instead of eight years. While the advantage of an early start in school is undeniable, as the experience of Boston amply proves, it is doubtful whether so slight a
change in the law as that noted, would have any appreciable effect.
It is to be noted that in Philadelphia and New York, at the very
end of the year, the number of eight year old children is not much
larger than that of seven year olds. New Jersey, as well as
Massachusetts, makes school attendance compulsory at seven, yet
Camden and Boston show vastly different results.
There is another factor bearing upon the retardation of pupils
which has thus far received scant attention. It is the irregularity
of school membership. The school population contains many
fluctuating elements. One of the fundamental conditions of
regular advance is membership throughout the year in the same
school. It is surprising to those who have never examined the
subject closely to find how large a proportion of all the children
enrolled in the schools are there for periods less than the school
year. Some, as we have already seen, come in late. Many others
drop out in the course of the year. In so far as the latter are
younger than fourteen years, it is quite likely that they will return
to school after an interval. Such a loss of time, whether caused
by illness or other reasons, puts the pupil behind in his work and
swells the number of over-age pupils. While we have no exact
THE RETARDATION OF PUPILS. 73
measurement of the force of this factor, there are some interesting
indications that it is one of considerable moment.
In Camden in 1905-06 the total register grew from 11,117
at the end of September to 12,801 at the end of June. There
were therefore 1,694 accessions during the year. But at the same
time there were children falling out during the entire year, and
in the month of June there were only 9,729 children on the rolls.
This shows us that of the 12,801 children on the rolls only 8,035
were registered continuously throughout the year. In addition
to these, as we have already seen, 1,604 came in after the year
had opened, while 3,072 left during the course of the year. As a
matter of fact, although the statistics refer to 12,801 children, at
no period of the year were there so many children in school.
From manuscript records Superintendent Bryan has furnished
me the folloiwng interesting figures:
1905 Total Roll for Month 1906 Total Roll for Month
September   11,118 January   11,072
October  11,584 February  11,221
November  11,393 March  11,073
December   10,935 April  ...... 10,934
May   10,548
June  9,729
Somewhat less complete but equally suggestive are the figures
available for Kansas City. In the year 1905-06, there were 28,564
registered, though the average daily membership of the schools
was only 22,720. The following table is given of the length of
attendance:
Attended 200 days  1,367
Attended 180 days and less than 200 days  12,276
Attended 160 days and less than 180 days  4,000
Attended 140 days and less than 160 days    2,059
Attended 120 days and less than 140 days  1,437
Attended 100 days and less than 120 days  1,349
Attended 80 days and less than 100 days  1,273
Attended 60 days and less than 80 days  1,130
Attended 40 days and less than 60 days  1,123
Attended 20 days and less than 40 days   1,314
Attended less than 20 days   1,236
28,564
74 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Now it is to be observed that attendance and school membership are not identical. It is quite possible that the 17,643 children who attended 1G0 days or more were continually on the roll,
and also that they received substantially the benefits of a year's
teaching despite occasional absences. But when the attendance is
much less, this is due to the fact that some children were on the
rolls of the school but a short time. If, for instance, we can
expect 90 per cent of the pupils to advance in their grades, this
could only be anticipated of those who had enjoyed substantially
the year's work. Those who entered for shorter periods must go
to swell the number of over-age pupils.
The facts to which attention is here called are found in all
our cities. Boston, for instance, had in 1905-06 a total enrolment
of 89,130, but on June 30, 1906, the number in the schools was
78,465. New York and Philadelphia show a similar state of
affairs. It is not for the purpose of demonstrating its existence
that the figures have been cited, but to bring out the strong bearing of this irregular membership on the problem of retardation.
The subject of retardation in our elementary schools has too
recently gome into the foreground of public interest to essay a
comprehensive plan for the study of the facts and their causes.
The analysis of the figures presented from five different cities
shows that, whatever form of stating the facts may ultimately win
general approval, there can be no doubt that a uniform method is
highly desirable. As to what that method should be, it is the
belief of the writer that the enumeration of the children actually
in school at a given date soon after September 1st presents decided advantages, especially from an administrative standpoint,
over other methods which have been followed. In the matter of
statistically measuring the causes of retardation, we are entirely
in the experimental stage. It has therefore seemed worth while
to call attention to the influence of irregular school membership,
in order that this important factor may not remain unnoticed by
those who are giving their time and thought to the problem in all
its aspects.
