News And Comment
==================

In a statement of the Commissioner of Education for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 1907, and issued September 14, 1907, occurs the
following paragraph of great interest to those who are studying the
pedagogical retardation of school children throughout the United States:
"An inquiry into the places where the help of this Office is most
needed has brought to notice the fact that one of the great weaknesses
of our educational system is in the matter of school attendance, and
further inquiry shows that the question of school attendance is closely
bound up with questions of child labor, of hygiene and sanitation,
in school and out, of parental neglect in many forms, and with others
of the same general group of questions. It is clear that educational
improvement is conditioned upon many things affecting the general
welfare of children, and that this Office should do much to diffuse
information and spread a wholesome influence touching these things.
To this end the appointment of a highly competent specialist in the
welfare of children is desired and recommended."
Investigations made in the Philadelphia schools last year by Dr.
Wessels, a medical inspector working under the Bureau of Health,
showed that many children were retarded in school progress because
268 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of eye strain or other eye troubles which could have been easily corrected by glasses. A large number of these children, however, were
too poor to pay for glasses, even of the cheapest make. Some of them
were provided with glasses by the School Nurse, from a fund collected
for that object by the Visiting Nurse Society. A long step in the direction of relieving many other children whose eyes are defective, has
recently been taken by Dr Joseph S. Neff, Director of Public Health
and Charities, who obtained an appropriation of three hundred dollars
from City Councils to purchase glasses. The prescriptions will be
filled by a local optician, and the words "Bureau of Health" will be
stamped in the frames of the glasses, for identification in case they
should be lost or stolen.
On Dr Neff's urgent recommendation Councils further created
the position of school ophthalmologist, to which Dr L. C. Wessels has
been appointed. Dr Neff also urged the creation of a department
of school nurses and the appointment of a neurologist, to serve in
connection with the medical inspectors in the examination of backward
children who are mentally defective. This department of school nurses
has been organized through appropriations made by Councils to the
Board of Education. It was not possible, however, to secure the appointment of a neurologist for the current year. The expenditure
of the amounts appropriated for the year 1908, and the administration
of the various departments under Dr Neff's direction, will not only
help the school children of Philadelphia dii ctly, but will serve to
educate public opinion and show the necessity for a more generous
appropriation for another year.
