Mind in the Making
==================

A Study in Mental Development. 
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
:Author:  Edgar James Swift. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1908. Pp.
x, 329.

This book deals with many important problems of mental and moral
development during the formative period of childhood. It is a striking
example of the application of psychological methods of investigation to
a new field. It is the product of a method of work set going by G.
Stanley Hall, and developed by a group of modern psychologists who
owe their inspiration and to a large extent their training also to President Hall and his associates at Clark University. It is a book that
should be read by every teacher, parent, or social worker interested in
the welfare of the child. It is a popular treatise in the best sense of
the word, easily read by anyone, presenting material that makes a
broad appeal to many human interests, and yet dictated by a spirit of
scientific deliberation and reserve.

It would be impossible within the range of a brief review to give
a satisfactory notion of the contents of the book and of the conclusions
reached by the author. In one chapter on "Standards of Human Power,"
Professor Swift will give many a reader pause, who is inclined to think
that facility in mastering school subjects is an indication of mental
power. Professor Swift marshals a long array of men who were slow at
their school work or indifferent to instruction, and who yet even during
the school period showed latent talents which escaped the notice of their
school masters. "All children," says Professor Swift, "are exceptional,
and it is this varying personality that makes the life of the educator
alike so fascinating and so perplexing." He does not tell us,?nor could
we justly require of him that he should solve the problem of ministering
to the exceptional individuality of each child in class rooms of fifty and
sixty. It is sufficient at the present time to have clearly stated the problem, and to have indicated the probable great waste of good material
through the ignorance of teachers and the inadequacy of the modern
curriculum.

No chapter in. the book is more timely than the one dealing with the
"Criminal Tendencies of Boys." There can be no doubt that the study
of the instincts will lead to an entirely new psychology of development.
The foundations of this psychology are scarcely laid. It will take at
least fifteen years of further inquiry before it will be possible to write
a satisfactory treatise from the genetic standpoint. Such text-books as
have been written dealing with genetic psychology are largely delusions.

They are written by the student of a static psychology, who recognizes the
necessity of a dynamic or genetic psychology, and who proceeds to evolve
one by reflection from his inner consciousness. This is not Professor
Swift's method. He deals with facts, with the actual phenomena of boy
life. He puts before us the instincts of the truant, of anger and fighting,
the instincts that lead to theft and depredations of various kinds, and
other tendencies which we have been led to consider as criminal. Dr.
Stoddard, in a recent address before the American Neurological Association, presented the view that the insane manifest the same mental
characteristics that are common to the sane mind. Every form of
insanity finds its prototype in the sane mind. Similarly, we may say
that every form of criminality is found to exist in some normal boys,?
boys who show their normality by developing into a normal manhood of
standard morality.

The chapters on "Reflex Neuroses and their Relation to Development," and on "Some Nervous Disturbances of Development," are the
best statement of the subject matter of these chapters available to the
teacher. They should form the point of departure for further investigation on the part of every teacher and superintendent. In the chapter on
"The Psychology of Learning," Professor Swift presents the results of
an experimental investigation of several types of learning,?(1) physical:
the acquisition of skill in a complex muscular act, tossing and catching
balls; (2) physical and mental; the acquisition of skill in typewriting;
and (3) mental: the acquisition of knowledge in beginning a language.
Another chapter on "Experimental Pedagogy," presents the striking
results of some experiments made in the St. Louis schools and elsewhere.
The later chapters of the book are devoted to an interesting critique of
educational method with a view to applying the lubricant of new ideas to
the stiff joints in the machinery of the school master's mind. The book
is from one point of view all the more interesting because it is so
largely the product of Professor Swift's own work and thought. It
loses somewhat in not adequately presenting the results of other investigators in the same and cognate fields.
