The Elimination- of Pupils from School
=======================================

By Edward L. Thorndike,
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
Professor of Educational Psychology, Teachers7 College, Columbia
University. Bulletin No. 4, 1907, Dept. of the Interior, Bureau
of Education, pp. 66.
The amount and the cause of the elimination of pupils from school
is treated by Prof. Thorndike from the standpoints of grade and age
in the study of elementary and high schools, and from the standpoints
of grade, age and sex in the study of high schools and colleges.
Prof. Tliorndike's ideal of such a study would necessitate a complete record of the school life, from 8 to 18 years, of from 500 to 1000
children in each of from 20 to 30 communities. As such records are
not attainable and could, probably, only be secured by a systematic
registration of such data with this definite aim in view from the
beginning, Prof. Thorndike has utilized the regular school registration
statistics by grade, age, and sex. Such statistics from the public
schools of 23 American cities, from 49 additional high schools and from
34 colleges form the basis of the study.
In the section on elimination by grades it is shown that only 8 per
cent of the pupils entering school reach the last year of high school.
The elimination is a steady and gradual one after the fourth year,
there is no sudden elimination at any one grade, there is no especially
large falling off between the last grammar grade and high school, and
the age limit has no apparent effect. This is most interesting when
compared with conditions existing in England and Germany. In these
countries there is a sudden marked withdrawal of pupils at the close
of the last year of grammar school, only those of certain social standing
passing on to the high school. This marked difference explains the lack
of interest in trade and continuation schools shown by the American
people. The class of children for whom England and Germany find it
necessary to provide instruction at times other than working hours, are
with us in regular day schools, enjoying educational advantages denied
to those of their age and class in foreign lands.
It is shown that of 100 children entering school, the greatest elimination occurs in the grammar grades, the least in the high school; that
of 100 children in each grade the greatest withdrawal is after the first
year high school, and the next after the third year high school; if the
eliminating force is considered as increasing grade by grade by the
addition of new causes and the retention of old, the greatest increase
comes in the sixth year, the last grammar grade and the first year high
school; the least in the fifth year and last two high school grades.
(23)
24 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The causes of elimination are not clear. Among them poverty,
lack of interest in school work and intellectual inability are evidently
important. The two latter causes are probably responsible for the withdrawal of such large numbers after the first year of high school. The
fault may lie in the curriculum.
There is a great variation among the cities both as to the amount
and the time of elimination, which is attributed to differences of
efficiency of the school systems or to differences in the character of the
population. The latter cause is most important in Prof. Thorndike's
estimation.
In the section on elimination by ages it is shown that 70 per cent
of the pupils remain in the school until 14, 47 per cent until 15, 30 per
cent until 16, 15.5 per cent until 17 and 8.6 per cent until 18 years of
age. These figures again prove that a large proportion of children
remain in school beyond the legal age limit,?they also prove, when
compared with the grade statistics, that many do not advance as far as
they should in the time spent in school.
Considering the eliminating force as increasing by the addition of
new causes and the retention of old as in the previous study, the
greatest increase in force is at the fifteenth year, the next at the
fourteenth.
Comparing the high school statistics in regard to sex, it was found
that about 100 girls enter high school for every 75 boys; that 30 per
cent of the girls and 34 per cent of the boys leave during the first
year, 25 per cent of the girls and 27 per cent of the boys during the
second, and 14 per cent of each sex during the third. Only */4 of the
boys who enter finish, and only 31 per cent of the girls.
In the colleges the elimination is much less than in the high
schools. It is estimated that about 66 per cent reach the fourth year,
68 per cent the third year, and 79 per cent the second. Withdrawal is
most frequent during the first year and least frequent during the third.
The loss during the first year is probably due to laziness, lack of interest
and incapacity. The conditions in the colleges for women are about
the same as in those for men.
The records of schools for colored children in five cities were also
studied. It was found that, although these children did not reach as
advanced grades as white children, they remained in school until a
later age. Though less capable, they are apparently more ambitious.
It was also found that the elimination in the late high school grades
of the colored schools was no greater than in the parallel grades for
white children. This fact may indicate a greater variability in capacity
for school work among the colored than among white pupils, which would
mean, says Prof. Thorndike, a greater possibility of racial improvement
in the future.
