Some Factors Affecting Grade Distribution
=========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. II. ISTo. 5. October 15, 1908.

Leonard P. Ayres,
General Superintendent of Schools, Porto Rico, 1906-S.
In Charge of Backward Children Investigation,
Russell Sage Foundation.

Students and critics of our public school systems are giving
more and more attention to the record of the figures printed in
the annual reports of superintendents and school boards. They
ft re seeking to discover whether the record which lies embedded
in the statistical statements of actual conditions is one of accomplishment or of failure. As they thumb the pages of school
reports in quest of evidence, they cannot escape the impression
that the records are only fragmentary. Born of real or fancied
administrative necessities, colored oftentimes by a local point of
view, the printed statistical tables may throw light upon educational questions, but it is incidental to their main purpose. As
the published figures are analyzed with a view to gain an answer
to specific queries, the consciousness deepens that the light which
the figures shed is rarely simple and pure, but is highly complex?
a synthesis of the most varied elements. It is not with any pretension of exhausting the subject, but in the hope of clarifying in
some degree current conceptions as to the elements which enter
into one of the simpler statistical statements regarding schools,
the number of children in each grade, that the present study has
been undertaken.

In recent discussion much has been made of the falling off
in the number of children in the successive grades, from the first
to the eighth. Writers, who have otherwise the most varied points
of view, have perceived in such numerical decrease a test of the
efficiency of school systems. Those of a more gifted imagination
have seen in them evidence of a conspicuous failure of our schools
to accomplish the purpose for which they are designed, while
those more cautious by nature have not hesitated to make it a
reproach upon certain cities that their upper grades contained relatively fewer pupils than those of other localities.
The feeling that these grade records embody facts of farreaching consequence is widespread. It reveals itself in a more
general publication of the figures in question. Such tables are
appearing in reports of city schools, where they have heretofore
been lacking. The latest report of the Commissioner of Education of the State of New York contains a summary of the facts
for the cities of the State, and the forthcoming report will go into
further details, giving not only the number in the grades, but the
ages of pupils in each of the grades for the cities of the State. The
Report of the United States Commissioner of Education for 1906
gives the grade distribution of the school children in 127 cities.
The report now in press will, we are advised, contain similar data
for 1907 for upwards of seven hundred towns and cities. The
Russell Sage Foundation has in preparation a compilation of these
and other data from the reports of the hundred largest cities in
the United States for the past ten years.

Side by side with this more abundant presentation of the
original data have appeared certain attempts at an interpretation.
In the school reports we find an occasional, not always a very
enlightening comment upon the reasons of this falling off in the
grades. It is in part upon an interpretation of such figures that
Commissioner Draper of New York State bases the cogent argument for industrial education which gave such marked distinction
to his last annual report. ISTor will it be forgotten that the interpretation of such figures added to the heat if not to the light of
the discussion at the meeting of the Department of Superintendence at Washington in February last.
The most conspicuous effort to interpret these figures is found
in Dr E. L. Thorndike's study of the "Elimination of Pupils
from School," published by the United States Bureau of Education as a bulletin in February, 1908. It appears that the distribution of pupils in the several grades is the basic fact of his discussion. Seeking by complicated and unexplained processes to eliminate from these figures all other elements, he deduces from them
certain general propositions as to the number of pupils who leave
school at each grade. There has not been an universal acceptance
of his conclusions. There is a feeling that in some cases at least
there is no such exodus from the schools and at such early grades
as his conclusions indicate. Unfortunately, the published study
does not afford the means of verifying or confuting the concluFACTORS AFFECTING GRADE DISTRIBUTION. 123
sions. Nor does it afford a means whereby other cities not included
in the computations can be compared with those which are so
included.

Yet there can be no doubt that Dr Tliorndike's contribution
has stirred up a great deal of interest, and has led to such a
scrutiny of the grade statistics as they have not received before.
It prompts to further study. It is clear that the grade figures are
the resultant of a considerable number of forces. Among these
forces Dr Thorndike selects one, that of elimination, and seeks
to detach it from the elements with which it is associated. He
clearly recognizes the existence of these other elements, but it may
well be that the concentration of his study upon one element only
has led to an undue emphasis and an exaggeration of its importance. Be that as it may, it would appear to the writer that the
treatment of important elements, incidental only to the main theme
of Dr Tliorndike's study, is perhaps too scanty for those who have
not given this matter the long and patient study which Dr Thorndike tells us he has devoted to it. The general proposition that
the grade distribution of pupils in the public schools is the resultant of several forces may be readily assented to by many who
have no very clear idea of what those forces are. It is the purpose
of the present study to make clear, if possible, some of the forces
which produce this complex result.

In our study we shall proceed from the known fact of unequal
numbers in the several grades. It will be our purpose to exhibit
the various factors which tend to increase or decrease this inequality. "We shall see, moreover, that many of the causes at
work have nothing whatever to do with the efficiency of the school
system, and others have little relation to it.

In the course of his study of elimination, Dr Thorndike
reaches the conclusion that the amount of elimination is comparatively unrelated to the efficiency of the school system and deprecates any inferences as to the latter from the rate of elimination
which results from his studies. Our studies have led us to similar
results in comparing the grade inequalities of different cities. Any
conclusions as to the relative merits of different systems should be
reserved until all the elements entering into the observed grade
inequalities have been carefully gauged.

Figures showing grade distribution in city school systems
form the simplest and most common sort of statistical information
bearing on this subject. Wherever such figures are printed their
most prominent characteristic is the diminution in the numbers
of children in the successive grades. Thus the report of the Board
of Education of Chicago for 1906 gives the average membership
in that city as follows:
First grade  43,560
Second grade  34,330
Third grade  32,814
Fourth grade  30,004
Fifth grade  28,056
Sixth grade  22,540
Seventh grade   17,643
Eighth grade   12,939

Here the most casual inspection of the figures shows us that
the second grade is far smaller than the first, the third considerably
less numerous than the second, and so on until we reach the eighth
grade, which is considerably less than one-third as large as the first.
'Nor should it be supposed that Chicago is exceptional in this
respect. On the contrary, very many cities show even greater
disparities in their grade distributions.

The natural conclusion of the casual student of such figures
is that the pupils are dropping out of school all the time, and hence
the number in each grade diminishes as the grades advance. In the
cases cited, that of Chicago, the immediate interpretation of the
figures is that of each forty-three children entering the first grade,
no more than thirteen reach the eighth and still fewer graduate.
That such a conclusion is not justified is made evident by a study
of some of the factors contributing to bring about the disparity in
numbers noted in the several grades. The assumption that the
grades should normally be about equal in numbers rests upon the
very common idea that substantially the same number of children
enter school each year, that they advance with fair regularity from
grade to grade, and that they remain until the completion of the
elementary course.

In fact, all of these suppositions are erroneous. To begin
with, there is a certain natural decrease in the number of children
with advancing age which is due to death; so that we may always
expect to find fewer persons with each advancing year of age.
Secondly, there is an increase in the size of each successive and
younger generation of children which is due to the natural increase
in population. Looked at from the standpoint of the age fourteen,
each younger generation is larger. Looked at from the standpoint
of the age seven, each older generation is smaller than the preceding. It is obvious that there are in New York State more five
year old children to-day than there were five years ago, and hence
at the present time more five-year-olds than ten-year-olds. These
two elements?that of death and that of the increased size of
each succeeding generation?contribute to form the factor of
population. '

All children do not advance regularly from grade to grade;
some of them are left behind to repeat a year or two. This is the
factor of retardation.

All children do not complete the elementary schools. In
some localities few and in others more leave the early or primary
grades, but in all localities great numbers leave the grammar grades
upon reaching the age of fourteen years. This is the factor of
elimination.

It is not denied that other factors may and undoubtedly do
affect the size of grades in certain cases and localities. Among
such possible factors may be mentioned the influx of children
whose schooling has already been begun in other places, the tide
to and from private and parochial schools, and the enrollment of
immigrant children who enter the schools at comparatively advanced age. But such factors are local and irregular in their
influence and undoubtedly compensatory to a certain extent in
their action. On the other hand, the three factors of population,
retardation, and elimination are always present.

Population.

Two elements contributing to form the factor of population
have been mentioned: decrease by death and the natural increase
in successive age generations caused by an increasing population.
If for the moment we assign an age to each grade, beginning with
seven years as the age of pupils in the first grade, and if we
suppose for the sake of argument a stationary school population in
which 1000 pupils enter school each year, none die, and none
drop out, we have a grade distribution as follows:

Grade Distnbution in a Stationary Population with
No Deaths.
First grade    1000 children 7 years old
Second grade   1000 " 8 "
Third grade  1000 " 9 "
Fourth grade  1000 " 10 "
126 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Fifth grade  1000 children 11 years old
Sixth grade  1000 " 12 "
Seventh grade  1000 " 13 "
Eighth grade  1000 " 14 "
In the United States the annual death rate for the ages of
five to fifteen is 3.8 per 1000. It is not, of course, exactly 3.8 for
each of the ages, but for the sake of simplicity and because of its
relative insignificance we may apply it equally to note its effect.
Grade Distribution Showing Decrease Through Death.
First grade  1000 children 7 years old
Second grade  996.2
Third grade  992.4
Fourth grade  988.6
Fifth grade  984.9
Sixth grade   981.1
Seventh grade  977.4
Eighth grade  973.7
9
10
11
12
13
14

It will thus be seen that the element of death alone will
account for a decrease of some 26 or 27 in the progress of each
1000 children from the first grade to the eighth.
But death is a far smaller element in making up the factor
of population than is the increase of population. How great a
factor the two together constitute we may perhaps roughly measure
by applying to the problem the figures given for each age group
from seven to fourteen years inclusive in the aggregate population
of the United States according to the late census.

At that time there were in the United States 1,787,019 children seven years old. Those fourteen years old numbered 1,556,112. There are plainly two reasons why the children fourteen
years old are less numerous than those seven years old: First,
there were fewer children born fourteen years ago than seven
years ago; second, of the children born fourteen years ago a larger
proportion have died than among those born seven years ago. In
less degree this is true of the eight year old children compared
with the seven-year-olds. So those of nine will be slightly less
numerous than those of eight. The number of children at each
age from seven to fourteen will gradually diminish. By dividing
the number of fourteen year old children by that of those seven
years old, we can readily find how many fourteen-year-olds there
are to be expected when there are, say, 1000 seven-year-olds. By
means of such relative figures we may show how many children
there are in the United States as a whole at the ages of eight,
nine, etc., for each 1000 at the age of seven. Stating this in the
form of a supposititious grade distribution, we have the following:
Grade Distribution as Influenced by the Two Elements,
Death and Increase of Population.

First grade  1000 children 7 years old
Second grade  985 " 8 "
Third grade  964 " 9 "
Fourth grade   938 " 10 "
Fifth grade  920 " 11
Sixth grade  904 " 12
Seventh grade  889 " 13
Eighth grade   871 " 14
The foregoing shows most conveniently the tapering off in
numbers of the population as the age increases. As before explained, this tapering off, resulting in an apparent diminution in
the upper ages, is in reality caused by successive increases in the
lower ages. Were we to state it in other terms to make this clear,
we might take the age of fourteen as the basis for computing our
relative figures. In that case, instead of saying that for each
1000 children seven years old there are 871 at the age of fourteen, we should say that for each 1000 at the age of fourteen we
may expect to find 1148 seven years old. This is simply the
same proposition stated in different terms.

It is not claimed, of course, that the figures in the table
constitute an absolute measure applicable to any school system.
Their value lies rather in giving a typical measure of the attenuation to be allowed for from influences of population under normal
circumstances. The age distribution of the population is not, of
course, uniform throughout the country. In some localities in fact
very considerable variations from the standard are found. Neither
do school grades correspond exactly with ages. Nevertheless, if
children enter at the age of seven they will be at least fourteen
upon reaching the eighth grade, and we shall not be far out of
the way if we state that under perfect school conditions of progress
and retention of pupils we could in no case expect to find more
than 87 per cent as many children in the eighth grade as in the
first grade. This is a constant and very considerable factor in
bringing about disparity in the number of children in the several
grades, and it is one which has been entirely overlooked in much
of the current discussion of the problem.

Retardation.
It is almost a truism to say that all pupils do not advance
regularly from grade to grade. It is a fact of which all educators
are keenly aware. But just how many pupils fail to advance and
at what points in the school course, and most important of all,
for what causes, are questions as yet relatively unanswered. There
is not even any general agreement as to how "percentage of promotions" shall be computed, and indeed practice is very diverse
in the matter. Some information on the subject may be gleaned
from a study of school reports. The most recent reports from five
large cities give the following statement:

ritv Per Cent of
Promotions
New York  70
Chicago   83
Cincinnati  80
Columbus  78
Kansas City, Mo  71

From these figures it appears that we shall not greatly err if
we assume that it is reasonable to expect that about 80 per cent
of the pupils in a system will be advanced at each regular time of
promotion, and that 20 per cent will fail to be so advanced. If
each year 20 per cent fail, the first grade will contain in our
supposititious case the 1000 pupils just entered, as well as some
who entered the year before, some who entered two years before,
and a few who entered three years before, or even earlier. The
actual number in the first grade will be 1250 and not 1000.
ISTow, if the same rules hold for the other grades, and no pupils
drop out, that is, if all stay to complete the course, no matter hovr
long it takes, each grade will contain the same number as the first,
namely, 1250. In other words, if we have four-fifths of the
normal progress, or that planned by the course of study, we shall
have five-fourths of the normal number of pupils in each grade.
That is, if the factor of population were inoperative, we should
have under these conditions the following grade distribution:
Grade Distribution when 80 Per Cent of the Pupils are
Promoted, All Finish, and the Population
Factor Does not Enter.
First grade  1,250
Second grade  1,250
Third grade  1,250
Fourth grade  1,250
Fifth grade  1,250
Sixth grade   1,250
Seventh grade   1,250
Eighth grade  1,250
10,000
But we know that these conditions are never found. Pupils
who find themselves in some grade lower than the eighth at the age
of fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen do not remain to complete the
course. They drop out. This brings us to the third factor, that of
Elimination.

A study of the age distribution of pupils in the schools of
the five largest cities in the United States shows, after allowing
for inaccuracies of age returns, which are proverbial, that in the
main the decrease in the ages of school children in these years is
slight, following substantially the laws of population already explained. There is a relatively marked falling off at the age of
thirteen, followed by a very marked decline in numbers at the
ages of fourteen, fifteen, and sixteen. That is to say that comparatively few pupils will remain in school after the age of
fourteen, many drop out at that age, and some anticipate it and
leave at the age of thirteen. The data from these cities gives us
very nearly the following table when the figures are reduced to
relative terms:

Children of 10 years  104
Children of 11 years  102
Children of 12 years  100
Children of 13 years  90
Children of 14 years    50
Children of 15 years  25
Children of 16 years  12

From these figures we may assume as a reasonable approximation, that in the elementary schools 10 per cent of the children
will have left at thirteen years of age, that 50 per cent will have
left at fourteen, half of the remainder at fifteen, and again half
of these at the age of sixteen.

]STow, if pupils in school advanced with substantial regularity,
so as to reach the upper grades by the time they attained the age
of thirteen or fourteen, it is evident that elimination would not
be a very powerful factor in bringing about grade disparity, and
would be operative only in the highest grades. But we know that
pupils of these ages are found in the intermediate grades in no
inconsiderable numbers. This brings into operation the factors
of retardation and elimination in combination.

To show what the result is we may have recourse again to
a supposititious case, but one this time which more nearly approaches conditions as found in our schools than do those cited
heretofore. Suppose we have a school system where the population is stationary, where 1000 new pupils enter the schools at the
ag4 of seven each year, where there is a uniform rate of promotion of 80 per cent, and where 10 per cent of the pupils leave at
the age of thirteen, 50 per cent by the time they are fourteen, 50
per cent of the remainder at fifteen years, and half of those left
drop out at sixteen years of age. Under these conditions we shall
have the following age and grade distribution:

Age and Grade Distribution. Stationary Population. Retardation and Elimination both Operative.
Ages.
Grades 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Total
First   1000 200 40 8 2 1250
Second   800 320 96 25 5 1 1247
Third   640 384 150 50 13 1 1238
Fourth   512 413 203 72 14 1 1215
Fifth   410 412 221 57 11 1 1112
Sixth   328 356 137 36 8 865
Seventh   237 184 74 22 517
Eighth   105 84 38 227
1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 998 900 498 206 69 7671
In this table we have for the first time a grade distribution
closely approximating those commonly found in the school systems
of our cities. The familiar characteristics are present: the falling
off in size of the successive grades, the presence of substantially
equal age groups until we reach the age of thirteen, when there is
a slight falling off followed by a much sharper drop; and the small
size of the eighth grade as compared with the first. We have well
illustrated, too, the fact that while retardation results in holding
in the first and each of the other primary grades many more
children than the number entering school each year, in the upper
grades the combination of retardation and elimination accounts
for the depletion which is so noticeable; yet the result is not, as
has been so often stated, to bring into our schools a greater number
of children than those who would be present if all progressed
normally. To state this in terms of school administration, doing
away with retardation would not do away with the problem of
"part time," nor would it have the effect of reducing the number
of school sittings or -schoolrooms required, nor would it result in
any financial economy. The economies effected would be educational rather than material. They would consist in giving a more
extended education to a larger proportion of the children entering
school.

Summarizing our three modifying factors of Population,
Retardation, and Elimination, we may compare in one table the
effect which each one of these separately, and finally the three
working together, will have on the grade distribution of a community, when 1000 children enter the first grade.
Grade Distributions Showing Modification by Different Factors.
No Death Retarda- Population,

Grades Modify- Death and In- tion and Retardation
Ing Fact- Only crease of Elimina- and
ors Population tion Elimination
First 1000 1000 1000 1250 1250
Second  1000 996 985 1247 1228
Third   1000 992 964 1238 1193
Fourth  1000 988 938 1215 1138
Fifth   1000 984 920 1112 1023
Sixth   1000 981 904 865 782
Seventh   1000 977 889 517 459
Eighth  1000 973 871 227 198
Total   8000 7891 7471 7671 7271
This final distribution which we have as the resultant of the
combined modifying influences of the factors of Population, Retardation, and Elimination, may well appear extreme to anyone
who has not devoted considerable study to the phenomena of grade
distribution. At first siglit the disparity in numbers between the
1250 children in the first grade and the 198 in the eighth seems
unreasonably large, while on the other hand the total of the eight
grades, 7271, seems too small when we remember that the first
grade contains 1250. Are similar conditions really found in our
city school systems ? We may gain light on this point by comparing our supposititious case with the grade distributions found
in some of our cities, taking in each case 1000 pupils in the first
grade as a base and using relative figures to facilitate comparison.
Grade Distributions on Basis of 1,000 Pupils in First Grade.
Supposititious

Grades Case?AJ1 three Jersey City, N. J. Newark, N. J. New York City
Factors operative 1903 19j3 1907
First   1000 1000 1000 1000
Second   982 756 871 838
Third   954 614 784 823
Fourth   910 519 635 768
Fifth   818 445 477 690
Sixth   625 344 361 525
Seventh   367 226 236 375
Eighth   158 166 174 262
Total   5814 4070 4538 5281
We have here the answer to our question. Very evidently
the grade distributions found in our city school systems are not
radically dissimilar from the distribution resulting from the application of our several hypotheses in the supposititious case. One
characteristic difference, however, is noticeable. Whenever we
take figures giving the grade distribution of an actual school system, we find a greater disparity between the numbers of children
in the first and second grades than we do in our supposititious
case. In city school systems we invariably find very many more
first grade than second grade children. In our supposititious case
we find only a few more. But it must be remembered that the
difference between the figures in our supposititious case is largely
the result of the modification resulting from the influence of the
population factor, whereas in actual school systems the percentage
of promotion from the first grade to the second is almost invariably
lower than it is in the case of the higher grades A larger proportion of children enter the first grade late in the year and so fail of
promotion, than is the case in the other grades. As the conditions
in this respect vary greatly in different localities, it is obvious that
any standard which has for its basis the number of children in the
first grade will be of little utility as a criterion for judging the
number we may fairly expect to find in each of the other grades.
To have recognized in our hypothetical case the unequal distribution of retardation by grades?being greater in the lower, and less
in the upper grades?would have introduced complications into
our calculations which were deemed unnecessary, since our purpose
was rather to demonstrate the existence of these factors, than to
propose an exact measurement.

As a result, then, of our study we may formulate the following general rules which will serve as tolerably accurate criteria for
judging the grade membership in American city school systems
under substantially normal conditions of population and school
administration:

(1) During the eight years following their entrance into the
school system we may count on about 27 in each
1000 of these children being removed by death.
(2) Owing to the factor of population, composed of the two
elements of death and increase of population, we
may expect to find normally for each 1000 children
in the first grade no more than 871 in the eighth.
(3) A not uncommon measure of advance in our large city
school systems is to have four-fifths of the pupils
promoted at each regular time of promotion, and to
have one-fifth fail.
(4) It is safe to count on 10 per cent of the children leaving
on reaching the age of thirteen years, 50 per cent
by the time they are fourteen, 50 per cent of the
remainder at fifteen, and again 50 per cent of the
remainder at the age of sixteen.

In general it appears, then, that the grade distribution is the
resultant of such diverse elements, that without the most careful
analysis conclusions as to any of these elements are liable to go
astray. The reader who is familiar with school reports and current
educational discussion will not fail to recall instances in which the
existence of one or more of the modifying factors has been ignored.
We shall have accomplished our purpose if we have brought out
clearly the simple fact that at least three factors have an important
share in producing the distribution of pupils by grades which is
commonly observed in our elementary schools.
