Sixty-Two Days' Training of a Backward Boy II
==============================================

The Psychological Clinic.
Vol. II. No. 2. April 15, 1908.
By Margaret Keiver Smith, PhD.
State Normal School, New Paltz, N. Y.
Twenty-third day, Friday, Oct. 18th, 1907.?Today Willie
noticed Miss Cora's absence and inquired anxiously where she
had gone. lie read a page of his primer very well and asked
intelligently about certain words. The writhing of his body was
less marked than usual.
His speaking voice is not nearly as strong as his reading
voice. He enjoys reading but dislikes talking. For the sake of
the rhythm and as a means of developing his voice, he is required
to repeat many Mother Goose melodies. He smiles frequently and
sometimes laughs outright at the jingles.
He asked today for the story, "The House that Jack Built,"
and when it was shown to him in a book, he tried to read it. He
persistently said "clock" instead of cock. "The cock that crowed
in the morn" seems to him to tell the time like a clock.
When reading, Willie may miscall a word or may fail to
pronounce it. Miss S. does not correct him or pronounce it for
him. She merely waits with the pencil on the word. He does
not look at the word again but gazes at the window or the ceiling
and after a half minute or a whole minute, he will pronounce
the word correctly. He seems to see the word during all this
time. This may possibly be explained by the persistence of the
positive after-image.
Twenty-fifth day, Tuesday, Oct. 22<2*.?To-day a fire oc-
curred about 10.80 a. m. on the mountain side. The blaze could
be seen from the windows of the First Grade room. Willie was
the first to notice it. When he came to Miss S. he could talk of
nothing else. He exclaimed excitedly, "The mountain is burned
up!" Miss S. said, "Oh, no, only a house was burned." He
?The report of the twenty-fourth day is combined with that of the
twenty-fifth.
(29)
30 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
asked, "IIow it get .afire ?" Miss S. said, "I do not know, perhaps
a little boy was playing with matches, and set it on fire." Again
he questioned, "Where the people go?" (Willie cannot nse do
or did with a verb.) Miss S. said, "Oh, the people are all safe.
They went to the large lionse." He asked, "What they go to
large lionse for ?" Miss S. answered cheerfully, "They went there
because they would be safe*and warm in the large house." This
seemed to satisfy him and he tried to read, though his attention
wandered. lie could not use the word little intelligently.
Miss S. showed him a AVebster's Dictionary and asked, "What
kind of book is this ?" iTe said promptly, "A dictionary." (ITe
certainly had never said this word before, although he must have
heard it.) Miss S. said, "Yes, it is a dictionary, but as to size,
what kind of book is it?" lie answered, "It is a great, big-
book." (Great \s a new word.) Miss S. held up the primer and
asked, "What kind of book is this ?" He answered quickly, "It
is a little book." "Yes," said Miss S., "now let us find the word
little in our lesson." (From this time the word little has given
him definite pleasure. He likes to say it very distinctly.)
To-day Willie tried to sing the scale. His voice was very
weak, and he seemed to have 110 perception of the difference
between the notes. When he left to-day, he ran across the street.
Twenty-sixth day, Oct. 23 d.?To-day Willie read four pages.
"When he read "He wants bread," he asked quickly, "Who wants
bread?" Miss Cora answered just as quickly, "The boy wants
bread." He was interested in reading about a dog. When
asked what he would do with a dog if he had one, he said that
he would make him draw things. He read, "Is a dog good to eat ?"
paused a moment and laughed intelligently. Then he asked Miss
S. the question. She made him answer it for himself. He said
"]STo," as if the question were absurd. He read, "I am a boy, I
am not a girl,"?then he read it again with much emphasis.
In reading, Willie has a tendency to run one sentence into
the next. To-day Miss S. pointed to the period and said, "Willie,
this little dot says, 'please stop here.' " He read the next sen-
tence, paused, and said doubtingly, "The dot not talk." Miss S.
said, "No, not as you talk, but when we see it we know that it is
saying 'please stop a bit.' " After that he paused at the end of
the sentence. Later his mother came in to watch him at work.
He went to her, and told her that the dot at the end of the sen-
tence talked to him.
This is the first attempt at "make believe" that Miss S. has
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 31
ventured. Willie lias never played voluntarily, and lias appar-
ently never imagined anything that could give him pleasure. Up
to the present, his imagination has merely served to increase his
nervousness and fears.
In reading, he desired to turn the leaves and read an ad-
vanced lesson. Miss S. said, "^vo, we shall read every word (to
a certain mark) and then we shall stop for to-day." lie settled
down and read patiently line by line. lie asked to read "The
House that Jack Built" and had great difficulty in pronouncing
the word worried. He pointed to a picture and asked, "What is
that ?" Miss S. said, "That is the cock that crowed in the morn."
"ISTo," said he positively, "that is a rooster."
To-day he sang the scale with Miss Cora, and did a little
better than before. He was required to call "charcoal" in a loud,
full tone, and then to call the echo (one octave higher). This
amused him greatly. He laughed heartily. When the time came
to go, he seized his book, lunch box and cap in one hand, shook
hands with the other, said "Good bye," and rushed off quite like
a real boy.
Twenty-seventh day, Oct. 24/7/.?To-day Willie read four
pages in his primer. lie still has difficulty in reading a sentence
which is not all on one line. He generally pronounces the words
laboriously, then reads the sentence fluently to get the meaning.
He knows nearly all the letters, so that when he comes to a new
word, he spells it and leans over expectantly toward Miss S. to
get the full pronunciation. Miss S. allows him to spell the
words, .as this affords just that much more needed exercise in
articulation. Sometimes after spelling a word aloud, he pro-
nounces it without help.
Miss Cora sang the scale very slowly do, do, do, re, re, re,
mi, mi, etc. By reason of the repetition, Willie was able to get
the notes, and he really sang a little. He then gave the calls in
"The Charcoal Man." As this pleased him, Miss S. suggested
that he sell other things as well as charcoal. She taught him to
call Fresh Fish! Fresh Mackerel! Fresh Strawberries! He was
pleased with the calls, but also a little frightened at so much
noise.
He repeated "Jack and Jill." Miss S. asked, "Are you sorry
for Jill ?" He said, "Yes." When asked why, he smiled and
said, "Because she broke her head off."
We are beginning to forget Willie's habit of keeping his
mouth open, it is so often shut. Indeed we often forget that he
32 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
is not normal. He moves quickly; liis cheeks are pink; his lips
are red. He does not. pay the best attention, but neither do
normal children.
Twenty-eighth day, Oct. 25th.?To-day Willie read four
pages. Miss Cora being absent, he missed her and was very
restless. He persistently asked for her. "Where is she? What
she go for ? Is she in the Annex School Ground ?" It seems that
he had seen her there one day out of school, hence his attempt
to locate her.
He was slipping back and forth restlessly on the edge of his
chair. Miss S. said, "Willie, you are not sitting comfortably on
your chair. Sit back further and make yourself comfortable."
He pushed himself back as directed. Miss S. asked, "Willie,
what does comfortable mean?" He was silent a moment, then
answered, "Much sit."
Twenty-ninth day, Monday, Oct. 28th.?Willie read four
pages in his primer, then asked, permission to read "The House
that Jack Built." He read "This is the man all tattered and
torn" and paused. After a moment he asked, "How he get ?"
(Meaning how did he get all tattered and torn.) Miss S. said,
"Perhaps his coat caught on the nails in the fence." He went on
reading. "That tossed the dog," and asked, "How he toss?"
Miss S. tried to show by gestures how this catastrophe might have
happened. Then he sang the scale and showed some improvement.
Willie has now been in the First Grade twenty days, but we
have no word of his doing anything in the class.
He is very obedient. He never hesitates when told to do a
thing. Unless it is quite necessary, Miss S. never directs or tells
him what to do, as jshe wishes him to develop the power of self-
direction.
Thirtieth day, Oct. 29th.?To-day upon entering, Willie
pointed to the board and asked clearly, "What you write that on
the board for?" (It was something that he could not read, and
he has an idea that everything written on the board is for him.)
He was restless and wished to stop reading very soon. Miss S.
said, "Oh, please, let us read so far" (pointing to the bottom of
a page). He looked resolute, and perhaps obstinate, but he bar-
gained, "I read to there, you stop ?" Miss S. promised and shut
the book at the right moment. Then she said, "Now, Willie, fly
and get the story book," but added, "Oh, poor little boy! You
haven't any wings, you can't fly." Willie looked back over his
shoulder, and flapped his arms suggestively. "So you have
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 33
wings," said Miss S. in a matter-of-course tone, "then fly for the
book." He read "The House that Jack Built" and told Miss S.
that the man's coat was torn on the fence, and that the cow tossed
the dog on her horns. He left very determinedly.
Thirty-first day, Oct. 30th.?To-day about 10.30 a. m. the
teacher of the First Grade came down to say that Willie seemed
to be in a kind of fit. He was making unpleasant grimaces and
his body was writhing. Miss S. went to him, but found that the
attack had passed. He appeared to be weak and languid. He
wished to go with her "to read." When Miss S. told him that
she was busy and would like him to wait until the usual time, he
consented, quite satisfied.
When he came, he read as usual and talked quite freely. A
sentence suggested the parts of his body, and he exclaimed, "I
have two feet, two hands, two eyes, and one head." Later he
added, "One nose, one mouth and one chin." This seemed to
amuse him.
Miss S. told him that as soon as he had finished reading she
wished to take him to the office to look at something there. He
became much interested and asked whether the something could
walk. The "something" was a spirometer with which Miss S.
wished to test his breathing. When he saw the instrument, he
rushed toward the door in terror, screaming "Don't put it beside
me" and held his hands over his ears. Miss Cora, thinking to
quiet him, began to sing softly. The singing seemed to add to
his terror, and he gazed around the room like a hunted animal.
Miss S. stood quietly beside him without speaking. In a few
minutes he begged to go back to "our room," and once there,
became quite calm. When Miss Cora sang the scale, he tried to
sing with her as usual. He asked permission to sell the "Fresh
sings" as he called them, and called loudly,?"Fresh Straw-
berries! Fresh Blueberries! Fresh Blackberries! Fresh Rasp-
berries!" He suddenly ceased calling and asked Miss S. whether
she had heard the fire-bell last evening. He said, "A stove burned
up." Miss S. said, "No, Willie, it was only a blazing lamp that
frightened the people." Later, he interrupted a story to ask,
"What was burned?" Miss S. answered cheerfully, "Nothing
was burned, Willie. The flame of a lamp blazed high. Nobody
was hurt." This satisfied him, and he did not refer to it again.
This is the second time that he has shown an interest in the out-
side world. He seems to have a morbid dread of fire.
Willie went home very tired and nervous. This was a dis-
M TILE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
couraging day. The child's month was open and his head moved
much as on the first day. The writhing of the body was greatly
aggravated. The only hopeful thing is that he was able to talk
off his excitement. A month ago, however great his fear, lie
could not have spoken a word.
Thirty-second day, Oct. 31st.?To-day the children of the
First Grade had a festival. Miss S. and Miss Cora went up to
observe Willie as a social being. He was sitting alone, eating his
portion of some very primitive refreshments, and looking ex-
tremely bored while the other children ran about greeting teachers
and playfellows with much chatter and laughter. Willie imme-
diately asked to bo allowed to go to "our room" and read. As
he was very uncomfortable among the children, he was taken down
stairs, where he began to read with every sign of satisfaction. He
read three pages of his book. Miss S. told him that she thought
it best to omit the story to-day as he was tired with the excite-
ment of the morning.
He sang the scale with Miss Cora and did fairly well. Then
he leaned over toward Miss S. and said very persuasively, "Let's
talk about the story." The story was postponed, however, and he
and Miss Cora .sold "charcoal" with much energy. Miss S. (the
purchaser) called from another part of the room, "How many
bags full?" Miss Cora sang in reply, "One bag full" (do-re-mi).
Willie sang instantly "Two bags full." Miss Cora sang next
"Three bags full." Then Willie in great glee sang "Four bags
full." This duet continued until Miss Cora sang "Twelve bags
full." Here Willie refused to sing any more, and would give no
reason for stopping. Miss Cora then began to sell "Fresh Fish!
Fresh Shad! etc." In a moment Willie caught the time and with-
out stopping called the names of fifteen vegetables. These vege-
tables had not been named by us and we know that he had never
spoken the names before. The list included "fresh beans, peas,,
cabbage, corn, potatoes, turnips (pronounced turmps), carrits
(meaning carrots), beets, celery (pronunciation blurred), oyster
plant, parsnips, parsley, pumpkins (pronounced in one syllable),
squash, cucumbers, tomatoes" (pronounced o-ma'-toes).
In seeking an explanation for Willie's knowledge of these
words, we learned from the Kindergarten teacher that last Thanks-
giving (1906) she had had an exhibit of fruits and vegetables in
the Kindergarten, and. that these had all been named by the
teacher and the children. She remembered that Willie was pres-
ent, and she also remembered that he would not attempt to say a
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 35
single word. We could only think that he learned the names at
that time and had remembered them ever since. Also he must
have heard fruit and vegetables mentioned at home, but probably
never in such a series as he reproduced just now.
Upon the whole, the excitement of the last two days seems
to have done him good. His mental life seems to be greatly
quickened. As yet, Willie has not spoken to a single child in his
class upstairs. When Miss S. asked him whether he liked the
girls and boys in his class, he answered emphatically, "Yes."
Thirty-tliird day, Nov. 1st.?To-day Miss Cora was absent,
but Willie made no remarks. When asked when she would return,
he said on Monday. He evidently expects that she will be absent
on Fridays. To-day he spelled and pronounced the new words
for himself. He read, "The cow does not like to play," and asked
immediately, "Why she not like to play ?" Miss S. pointed to
the next sentence "Because she is too old." He read, "She does
not like dogs," and asked, "Why she not like dogs ?" In a moment
he answered his own question, "She too old." He next read from
his "jingle book,"?"A was an apple pie, B bit it." He asked,
"Why he bit it ?" Miss S. asked, "Why do you bite your pie ?"
He replied, "To eat." Then he read, "B bit it, to eat." He read,
"C cut it," and added "to eat" (with satisfaction). He read
"One little Indian" through to "Ten little Indians," and asked
"Where the little Indians are?" (He evidently wanted a picture.)
He read "The House that Jack Built" and at a suggestion from
Miss S. began to declaim it. This pleased him greatly. His
tone became much fuller and stronger. Miss S. asked, "Willie,
how did the cow toss the dog?" Willie smiled and said, "He
punch him. He put his eye out." He would not say that he was
sorry for the dog.
Having finished with his book, he said very engagingly, "Now
we sing the charcoal." After this he and Miss S. sang "One bag
full," "Two bags full," alternately. When Miss S. sang, "Twelve
bags full," he stopped just as he did yesterday. Miss S. said
persuasively, "Willie, do tell me why you will not sing "Thirteen
bags full." Willie replied in an obstinate tone, "Too heavy!
Not get all in. Break the wagon!" Miss S. admitted the reason-
ableness of this view and suggested that they have a larger and
stronger wagon for the next time. He promised to sing "Thirteen
bags full."
He next asked to sell the "fresh sings" (things). Miss S.
agreed to this if he would lead, so he chanted "Fresh bread!
? '
36 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Fresli rye bread! Fresli Graham bread! Fresh corn! Fresh sweet
corn! Fresh pop corn! Fresh feed com!" Miss S. only named
the things after he had sung them. He sang "Fresh 'omatoes."
Miss S. responded dully and inattentively. Willie shook her arm
impatiently, saying emphatically "Fresh o-ma'-toesthen Miss
S. chanted carefully and properly "Fresh tomatoes."
To-day he voluntarily remained longer than his usual time.
Finally he put on his coat, shook hands and went out. As he
made his way home, he was no longer the jolly little chap who
had made Miss S. sing and chant, but again the timid, solitary
little soul, shut up within himself and shrinking from every one.
In talking with the Kindergartner, Miss S. learned that the
previous year she had taken the children into a room where corn
was being popped. It took her twelve minutes to persuade Willie
to go into this room. She also remembered talking to the children
about feed corn, but he took no part in the conversation. This,
however, explains his calling the different kinds of corn.
Tliirty-sixth day, Wednesday, Nov. 6th.*?To-day Willie an-
swered no questions. He was asked whether he knew that yester-
day was election day, a fact known to every boy m the village.
He did not answer. He read four pages. He spelled and proj
nounced by himself the words, liking, making, giving, having,
talcing, coming.
He asked for the story of "The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries"
and told much of it himself. He sang the scale with Miss Cora
and then sang it alone. Then he sold vegetables and fruits. Not
content with this, he began to sell trees. He sang the names of
the following trees, which, so far as we could learn, he had never
spoken before, though he must have heard them:?Elm, birch,
maple, magnolia, pine, hazelnut, cedar, hickory, spruce, persim-
mon, mulberry.
Thirty-seventh day, Nov. 7th.?To-day Willie read four
pages. He read the sentence, "You may have some, too, Will."
Miss S. asked, "Who is Will?" He replied promptly, "I am."
When he began his work with us, he was by no means certain of
his name. Miss S. told him a new story to-day, "Frau Holle."
He did not seem to care for it, though later he became very fond
of it and called it "The Daughter Story." He sang the scale
very well. His voice was musical. He sold vegetables and fruits,
then suddenly began to buy. He sang: "How much for one quart
?From this time on the records of certain days will be omitted. This
means that nothing new developed on those days.
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 37
of raspberries ? I will take one pound of butter; I want one peck
of potatoes; I want one gallon of oil." Probably he lias visited
the shops with his mother. jNTo person in the school has mentioned
measures to him.
Thirty-eighth day, Nov. 8th.?To-day Willie read four pages.
He tried to give the echo of the charcoal cry. He asked for "The
Daughter Story," but made no comment.
Thirty-ninth day, Monday, Nov. 11th.?To-day Willie men-
tioned a fire which occurred last night. Fires appear to be the
only things in the outside world which interest him. He read
four pages. He sang the scale ascending and descending very
well, and sold his charcoal in a musical voice. He asked for "The
Daughter Story." He seems to have outgrown "The Bonnie Bush
of Blackberries" and "The House that Jack Built."
His voice is much improved and his memory is unusually
good. Having been told a word, he seldom forgets it, and if a
direction is given him he seldom needs to be reminded of it. He
loves routine. His tendency is to do things again and again in
exactly the same order. He really enjoys reading. He has no
social sympathy.
Fortieth day, Nov. 12tit.?To-day Willie read five pages and
asked many questions. He read the sentence "See me row" and
asked, "What he be in when he row ?" Miss S. said "Perhaps he
was in a boat." He said, "No" and was dissatisfied. He could
not imagine rowing. He read, "Look at that e-e-1" and asked,
"What is eel?" Miss S. said, "It is a long, slender animal that
wriggles in the water as snakes do on the land. Did you ever
see a snake, Willie ?" He seemed to know nothing about snakes.
He read, "Mother is canning fruit" and asked "What kmd of
fruit?" Miss S. asked, "What kinds of fruit are good for can-
ning?" He answered quickly, "Plums, pears, peaches, cherries,
strawberries." Then he asked, "What we do with apples?" Miss
S. answered, "We eat them raw, and we eat them when they are
cooked. Apples are very good fruit."
He found the word thing in a sentence. "Thing," he said,
"what is thing?" Miss S. said, "This book is a thing; this table
is a thing; now, you name a thing." He began, "That picture is
a thing; that pan is a thing; that flag is a thing." He was much
pleased with this and pronounced the word carefully. Before
this he has always called it "sing."
His enunciation is much improved. He often watches Miss
S. when she is talking, and finds it amusing to say a word exactly
as she does. The accuracy of the imitation is rather startling.
38 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Forty-fifth day, Nov. 20th.?To-day Willie began to learn
the names of the days of the week and the months of the year.
He was in a hurry to begin reading. He read the sentence "How
many feet has a sheep ?" and wished to know the answer to the
question. He seemed to have no idea of what a sheep was. While
reading, he stopped suddenly to ask where that thing was that
frightened him in the office. Miss S. talked to him about it,
taught him the name Spirometer, and finally he promised that
if it were brought to "our room" he would blow into the tube.
He read the sentence, "He labors much for little pay ?" and asked,
"What does it mean, 'labors much' ?" The spirometer was
brought in, but Willie could not be induced to go near it, though
he was not so frightened as before.
He read, "She sighs" and asked, "What is 'sighs' ?" Z\Iiss S.
sighed, Miss Cora sighed. Finally Willie sighed, and laughed,
lie has never forgotten the word sigh.
Forty-ninth day, Tuesday, Nov. 2 6/7*.?To-day Willie
seemed like a very normal, obedient and happy little boy. ITe
read four pages and asked the meaning of the words end, mail,
and sake. The words were explained by illustration. It is doubt-
ful whether he understood the word sake. He was puzzled over
the word oalc. He had seen it before, but could not say it. It
was suggested to him that he name all the trees that he knew.
He did so, rtnd when he mentioned the "oak," he went back to
his book and read intelligently the sentence in which the word
occurred. He showed great pleasure in articulating correctly.
After reading, he showed an inclination to talk freely. Miss
S. asked him casually, "Willie, do you remember a little boy who
came into this room every day, and who would not talk to me ?"
lie answered promptly, "Yes, me." Miss S. continued, "Willie,
why was it that you would not. talk?" He looked at Miss S. and
with great candor answered, "I couldn't hear good."
It is a question whether the child's hearing has improved
since the operation, or whether there has been a kind of clearing
of consciousness. At first it seemed as if his conscious state was
very confused. ISTo one image seemed to be of more importance
than another. The condition of definiteness began to be manifest
before the operation, but he has improved greatly in this respect
sinco that time.
To-day he finished his primer and was much concerned. He
exclaimed, "The end is here, what I do?" lie was comforted
when told that his mother would give him a new book on the
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 39
morrow. After the book was finished, Miss Cora sang a new
song. Willie listened carefully and suddenly exclaimed, "Oil,
where I sing that? Where I sing that?" He was still a minute,
Miss Cora waiting. Then his puzzled little face cleared and he
exclaimed, "The Kindergarten!" Then he sang vigorously.
During the year in the Kindergarten he had heard singing
every day, but he did not attempt to sing a word. This is another
indication of his excellent memory.
Fifty-first day, Monday, Dec. 2d.?To-day Willie did every-
thing with a dash that made him quite a new boy. lie brought a
Ward's First Header and gaily opened it, pointing to a picture.
Miss S. asked, "What do you see, Willie?" He answered
promptly, "Girls, women and a baby."
He spelled the word "lesson" and pronounced it distinctly.
He read the sentence, "The leaf is narrow," and asked quickly,
"Narrow, what is narrow?" Miss S. showed him narrow surfaces
and wide surfaces. Finally he said, "Narrow is not far across?"
Then he was required to describe objects, using the words long,
short, wide, narrow.
He read, "Stand in the corner," but could not grasp the
word stand. Miss S. went and stood in a corner. He read the
sentence again, markedly emphasizing the word stand and
laughed heartily. He read "Toe the mark" and could not under-
stand. He was required to place his toes against a line. Then
he was anxious that Miss S. and Miss Cora should do the same.
He sang vigorously to-day, keeping time by shrugging his
shoulders. He sang all his songs (three) and the scale, then he
begged Miss S. and Miss Cora to say "funny" things. Miss S.
and Miss Cora have often said "funny" things to him and he
would not move a muscle. Now he shouted with laughter at the
right places.
He took great pleasure in singing "charcoal" in Mark Haley's
voice (from Trowbridge, "The Charcoal Man"), also in singing
it as Mark did when he saw Martha, and as he did to the baby,
as well as in imitating the responses of Martha and the baby.
He really did this very well.
As yet Willie has neither spoken to a child in his class up-
stairs, nor does he talk to his mother when lie goes home.
Fifty-fourth day, Dec. 5th.?To-day Willie read four pages.
After reading he sang so well that Miss S. applauded him by
clapping her hands. He was greatly pleased. Miss S. asked,
"Why do I clap my hands, Willie ?" He answered smiling,
40 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"Because it is so nice!" Then lie and Miss Cora sang the lines
which loaded Mark Haley's wagon with charcoal. They sang a
long time. The last line was "Fifty bags full." Here he pro-
tested against overloading, although the new wagon is much
larger than the old one. This play is very pleasing to Willie,
lie takes it so seriously that there is danger of the imagined
thing being more real than the thing perceived. A story that
appeals to the imagination and also to the understanding is more
agreeable to him than a mere jingle.
To-day Miss S. said, "Willie, on Monday you shall have a
new story." "Yes," he said appreciatively, "And what will it
be about?"
Fifty-fifth day, Monday, Dec. dth.?Willie's morning greet-
ings are now made in a loud, full voice. He read and sang to-
day with energy. After singing he clapped his hands in imitation
of Miss S.'s applause yesterday.
He read the word cripple and asked what it meant. Miss S.
tried to explain and in doing so, said "a lame person?one who
limps may be called a cripple." He slipped from his chair and
asked to be shown how to limp. He limped around the table and
up and down the room.
Miss S. told him the story of "The Three Bears" and he
immediately began acting the parts. He growled like the "Big
Bear" and whined like the "Little Bear."
The "Tillich blocks" came to-day and Miss S. has begun to
give him a careful, systematic course in numbers. He showed
himself quick and accurate. He took great pleasure in judging
the relations of the blocks to one another, by touch alone, holding
the blocks behind his back.
Fifty-sixth day, Dec. 10th.?To-day Willie was inadvertently
detained in his class upstairs. When he came down he was much
displeased. He told Miss S. that he had been waiting for her a
"long time." In reading, he came upon the word litnp, where-
upon he left his seat and repeated the limping performance of
yesterday. Then he returned and continued reading. He read
the word ship. He exclaimed, "What is skip ? I want to see it."
Miss S. showed him how to skip, then he insisted that Miss Cora
should skip with him. A little later, he called for Miss S. to
join him. In a few moments they were all skipping merrily,
while Miss Cora hummed a tune. Miss Cora tried to teach him
to jump, but he could not learn it to-day.
He spent some time with the "Tillich blocks," but suddenly
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 41
announced that he must stop or he would not have time to sing.
He sang with energy, beating time on the table, and applauded
himself vigorously.
Miss S. began to talk to Willie about his social relations.
She asked, "Willie, do you like the boys upstairs?" "Yes," he
said. "Then," said Miss S., "why do you not walk with them
when you go home ?" He was silent for a few moments, then he
exclaimed, "I like Miss Cora, I like Miss S. and I like myself!"
After a pause, he added, "Miss Cora is good, Miss S. is good,
and I am good!" His idea seemed to be that there was no need
for him to think about any other persons. Miss S., thinking to
bring his family at least into his circle of friends, asked, "Who
are the people at home, Willie?" He was on his way to get his
coat. He paused and said, "My mamma is my mother. My
papa is my father. Myrtle is my sister. Grandma"?a pause?
"she's grandma." "Well," said Miss S., "how many people do
you like?" He answered, "Miss Cora, Miss S. and myself."
Miss S. asked, "What next?" "Next," he said, "why?first my
rubbers, then the overcoat, then the lunch box, then the book, then
shake hands, then my cap." Miss S. did not press the matter of
family relations.
Fifty-ninth day, Monday, Dec. 1 Qth.?To-day Miss S. asked
Willie whether he had seen the snow yesterday. He said, "Yes,
I went out and I tumbled head over heels in it." This seemed a
very unusual expression for Willie. Later a somewhat similar
expression was found in his reading lesson, "He tumbled over
and over in the snow." He probably had read his lesson at home,
and had liked the sentence, so that it had colored his answer. We
could not find that he was in the snow at all yesterday. It is
possible that what he reads is more real to him than his actual
experiences. Except singing, at present, he likes nothing so well
as reading.
He came upon the word leap and the inevitable question fol-
lowed, "What is it, leap ?" Miss Cora illustrated and he imitated
her. When he returned to the table he remarked, "Leap means
jump." He read, "There is some apple pie in the pail. I spied
it." He exclaimed, "What is it ? I want to see some spy!" Miss
S. and Willie went to the opposite corners of the room. Miss S.
put her hands up telescope fashion to her eyes and called, "I spy
von." Willie did the same, to his great satisfaction.
42 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
To-day Miss Cora taught Willie a Christmas song:?
"Once unto the shepherds seated on the ground
Came a heavenly message, glory shone around
And the shepherds listening, heard the angels say
Christ is bora among you, Christ is born to-day."
lie did not know the words, but he knew the tune and imme-
diately began singing other words to it. Probably he heard the
words which were sung to this tune in the Kindergarten last year.
When putting away his blocks to-day, Miss Cora tried to
have him sing while arranging them. At first he could not do it,
but later he succeeded.
Willie knows the days of the week and the months of the
year. He pronounces these words fairly well.
Sixtieth day, Dec. 17th.?To-day Willie brought his first
important piece of work from his class upstairs. lie had written
the words "Merry Christmas" very large, and he showed the
paper with much pride, though he would not say a word about it.
His reading to-day was fluent and intelligent. He read, "You
look pale," and immediately exclaimed, "What is pale ? I want
to see it." Turning to Miss S., he said, "I want to see you look
pale." When the word was explained to him he asked "Do I
look pale?"
The reading was interrupted by a boy bringing in the scales.
We wished to have Willie weighed, but we did not know whether
he would be frightened at the apparatus. Miss S. and Miss Cora
in turn stepped on the scales and were weighed. Then the boy
was weighed, and the number of pounds commented on. Finally
Miss S. remarked casually, "Perhaps Willie would like to be
weighed," whereupon, without a word, he stepped on the scales
and watched the adjustment with great interest. He weighs
fifty-three pounds in his ordinary clothing.
His singing to-day gave him much pleasure. He kept time
with his whole body. He begged Miss S. to sing. She told him
that she could not, and he immediately began to teach her. He
sang a phrase or a line and waited for her to imitate it.
Every effort is made to have him do things for other people,
as this is probably the only way in which he will develop social
interest. He is so accustomed to having people do things for him
that he expects help as a matter of course. He does not show a
sign of gratitude. He is being trained to say "Thank you," but
he says it very mechanically without any appreciation of its
meaning.
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 43
When lie finished teaching Miss S. to sing, he asked her to
dance with him. Just then Miss B., a student, entered. Miss S.
suggested that he ask her to dance. lie went to her and without
a sign of his usual timidity, he said, "You dance with me?"
This is the first time he has asked a favor of a stranger. At the
close of the dance Miss S. tried to make him understand that the
young lady had been very kind to him, but his "Thank you" was
very perfunctory.
Miss S. asked whether he would include Miss B. in the
number of people that he liked. He immediately began a kind of
chant,?"I like Miss Cora, I like Miss S., I like myself, I like
Miss B." Later he repeated this formula, putting Miss B. next
to Miss S. and mentioning himself last. It was next suggested
that he include the members of his family in this list. lie named
them all quite willingly, but when Miss S. asked, "Now, how many
people do you like?" he answered, "Four."
We have not yet discovered his reason for separating his
family from school, but to his understanding, the two groups
are very different.*
Sixty-first day, I)cc. 18th.?To-day Willie read as usual, and
sang all the songs that he knows, viz., four, including the Christ-
mas song which Miss Cora has recently taught him.
The work of putting away his number blocks takes some
time. To-day he sang as he worked, at first "tra, la, la," a refrain
of one of his songs, later, he fitted his own words to a kinder-
garten tune?thus, "This is the way we play with our blocks?
play with our blocks, play with our blocks, play with our blocks
all on a Wednesday morning." The last phrase was suggested
by Miss Cora, as he could not make a refrain that suited him,
though he tried several times.
Miss Cora danced with him, while he sang appropriate words
to the same tune, "This is the way we dance to-day, we dance
to-day," etc.
Again to-day Miss S. asked him how many people he liked.
He immediately chanted his litany:?"I like Miss Cora, I like
Miss S., I like Miss B., I like myself." A little later he said,
"And I like Miss N.," adding with a laugh, "That makes five."
(Miss N". is his Kindergarten teacher whom he has never men-
tioned before.)
*This is not an unusual case. Children like Willie receive no pleasure
from intercourse with their family and naturally have no affection for them.
Usually it is the trainer who first awakens in them a modicum of filial
affection.?Editor.
44 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Again Miss S. had him name the members of his family.
Then she said, "Willie, you like nine people." He would not
speak. Just as he was leaving, Miss Cora said, "Now, Willie, be-
fore you go, tell me how many people you like." He answered very
positively, "Four." He ran across the street, looked back at his
friends in the doorway, and laughed.
He left behind him his paper upon which he had written
"Santa Klaus" very large. Miss S. called him by name, holding
out the paper. He did not look around. A man on the street called
to him, "Hi! Youngster, that lady wants you!" He turned
instantly and came running back to the door quite like any boy.
This is the first time that any stranger has succeeded in gaining
his attention in the street.
To-day Willie had his first exercise in deep breathing with a
view to developing his chest.
Sixty-second day, Dec. 19^.?To-day Willie read intelli-
gently. The word friend occurred in a sentence. He paused and
then exclaimed, "Miss Cora is my friend. Miss S. is my friend.
Papa is my friend. Mama is my friend. I am a friend (to?)
myself." He seemed to mean that he is his own friend. He read,
"I know why the bee works," paused and asked, "Why he work ?"
then added quickly, "I know, to make honey."
After reading, singing and dancing, he began to work with
the "Tillich blocks." He first made a set of additions with the
blocks, and later expressed the same in figures on the blackboard.
He has done something similar before and has already learned the
plus sign +, and the sign of equality =. When he began writing
the figures, Miss S. guided his movements by putting her hand
over his. Suddenly he shook her hand off, and said a little
impatiently, "I do it myself." After that, Miss S. gave him a
suggestion here and there.
His table when finislfed stood thus,
1= 1
1+1= 2
. 1+1+1= 3
1+1+1+1= 4
1+1+1+1+1= 5
1+1+1+1+1+1= 6
1+1+1+1+1+1+1= 7
1+1+1+1+1+1+1+1= 8
1+1+1+1+1+1+1+1+1= 9
L=10
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 45
He was greatly pleased with tlie appearance of his work, and
read the table through from beginning to end in a loud voice.
When putting away his blocks, he sang, "This is the way we
play with our blocks," then changed abruptly to, "This is the way
we place our blocks." The box being filled with blocks, and the
cover put on, he carried it to its corner, skipping all the way and
singing, "This is the way we carry our blocks," etc.
Fitting to a tune the words appropriate to his actions, is
spontaneous and gives him great pleasure. When he began to
get ready to go home, he was in a great hurry, and exclaimed,?
"My father is home; my mother is home; my sister is home, and
I must go home and see the folks." Miss S. asked whether he
talked when he was at home. lie said, "Yes, I talk at home in a
big voice, like a big man. My father is a big man and I talk
like him."
This was the last lesson before the Christmas vacation. When
told that he could not come back until the next year, Willie was
troubled, and repeatedly asked Miss S. what she was going to do
that she could not let him come.
C onclusion.
The sixty-two days of special training extended over a period
of three months, from September 18th to December 19th. The
special training occupied only forty minutes of each day. The
results of this brief period of training are sufficient to establish
a striking contrast in mental and physical condition between the
boy at the end and the same boy at the beginning of the period.
In physical appearance the improvement is marked. His
face has lost its vacant, strained appearance and now suggests a
degree of purpose and repose. The eyes are no longer constantly
turned upward; they are under the control of the child's will and
may be directed by himself, or at the command of another, to
this or that object. The mouth is usually closed when in repose and
its movements are under fairly good control. The head and limbs
are also coming under control, so that regulated movements are
becoming possible. The low-class movements still to be observed
are a horizontal ridging or wrinkling of the forehead, and a ten-
dency to turn the head away when spoken to. Looking one full
in the face is never self-determined, but always squires the sug-
gestion of his teacher, and involves also a definite effort of the
will on his part. Nevertheless he makes this effort readily enough
46 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
when told to do so. The rotary motion of the head and the
tendency of the eyes to gaze toward the ceiling has disappeared.
In turning the head away from the person he addresses, the move-
ment is now more nearly horizontal. The writhing movement of
the body has disappeared. It was expected that the development
of rhythmic movements would correct this difficulty, and the ex-
periment lias been very successful. The dancing has been of
great service to him. Through the rhythm he has developed a
very effective control both of limbs and trunk. He can now go
up and down stairs without a guiding hand and every day walks
to and fro from his home to the school without an attendant.
At first totally helpless with respect to the care of his own
person, he is now able to attend to many of his needs himself. He
cannot yet put on his overcoat and button it, neither can he put
on his overshoes. He does not comprehend the necessity of doing
these things because they have always been done for him, yet his
fingers are skillful in drawing and writing as well as in the
simple construction of material things.
Three months ago he was to all appearances inarticulate,
practically without a single word at his command; now he knows
between 800 and 1000 words, most of which are of one or two
syllables. He can, however, nse a few words of three syllables,
for the most part compounded of one or two syllable words. He
knows, though he does not use, three or four words of four
syllables. He articulates very well, though with words of more
than two syllables he is liable to slur the last syllable. The
acquisition of language has not only given him a medium for
social intercourse, it has filled him with courage and a sense of
security which goes far to suppress his fears. As a result, he is
beginning to manifest some interest in people.
Reading is a source of great pleasure and lias contributed in
large measure toward developing a capacity for persistent effort.
His reading and number work give evidence of the existence of
an intellectual capacity, which never would have been suspected
three months ago. His pleasure in grasping these subjects is
greater than any pleasure he derives from the mere exercise of the
senses. His understanding of situations presented in his reading
lessons is quite equal to that of a normal child of his age, and his
apprehension of mathematical relations is rather above the
average.
Perception is keen, as shown by his accuracy in imitating
what he sees and hears. His imagination, lively and liable to
TRAINING A BACKWARD BOY. 47
exaggeration, is perhaps morbid, certainly so in connection with
his fears. Next to his defective speech, his greatest weakness
probably lies here. The thing imagined has a tendency to domi-
nate the actual experience. Great effort must be made to develop
a logical imagination by keeping associations time to known laws.
He greatly enjoys play, but is liable to get lost in it. It is diffi-
cult while the play is going 011 to keep it rational, that is, to keep
it free from delusion.
In the beginning, fear had rendered him practically helpless.
At the present time this obstacle to progress has not been entirely
eliminated, although his fears no longer render him utterly help-
less. As the emotion of fear has diminished, his capacity for hap-
piness has greatly increased. Instead of a hopeless, dreary and
somewhat repulsive object, he is becoming an interesting, even an
entertaining little companion, who desires to share his pleasures
with others. Nevertheless, he manifests very little if any sym-
pathy, and he shows as yet no tendency toward helpfulness and
110 sense of responsibility. Neither has he shown any definite
signs of love or fondness. lie likes to be with Miss S. and Miss
Cora, but this is largely because they give him an opportunity
for certain definite activities which afford him pleasure. Upon the
whole, the development of the intellectual emotions has been more
decisive than that of the sensuous emotions; he seems to experi-
ence a positive joy in the understanding of his reading and
number work. lie shows no trace of anger of any kind. He is
punctual and very obedient.
His attention, originally fitful and feeble, is controlled by
his pleasures. All rhythmic movements tend to steady his atten-
tion because the pleasure is recurrent. His general mental im-
provement is shown in his newly acquired consciousness of personal
desires, for the attainment of which he can, to a certain extent,
adapt means to ends. When his training was undertaken, he
was a creature without pleasure, without purpose, and largely at
the mercy of reflex movements.
