A Clinical Examination Blank for Backward Children in the Public Schools.II
===========================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. 1. No. 8. , January 15, 1908.
L> fS.
:Author:  J. D. Hellman,
University of Pennsylvania.

In the last number of The Psychological Clinic I explained the purpose of the blank, the general arrangement of the
items, and the method of grading employed, especially the method
of grading mentality. To assist me in the further presentation
of the items of this blank, I have reproduced an actual blank
partially filled out, which will be found on the next page.
At the top of the blank is the name of the child, in this case
an assumed one. On the same line with this, is a space provided
for the purpose, is the number 12. This number indicates the
order of the blank in a series. The serial classification of the
cards will be determined by convenience. In my investigation,
the cards of the boys and girls were placed in separate series for
each school.

The significance of the items which give the child's residence
and serve to locate him in a particular class and school and under
a particular teacher in the year when the examination was made,
needs no explanation. If these items are not sufficiently intelligible from an examination of the reproduced blank on the next
page, a satisfactory explanation will be found in the preceding
article.

Directly below the recorded data locating the child, are
found the data which indicate why this child has attracted special
attention.

Progress and conduct are followed by E, G, F, D, and vD,
the initial letters for excellent, good, fair, deficient, and very
deficient. Gradation of progress should be made from the
standpoint of the rapidity with which the child passes through
No. T% Name QkCtWyI) /VYuJf^O
Grade Class " 190 Address
Grade
School
School
uiass lav ?aaress rx
\ Class 190 ^ Address b" 0 On \ JlOsh_V
/ 190 Teacher ^
?\}J (Xa.PAXK/J ,190 *\ Teacher THaAA (XdUX/VYlA/
Progress E G F D Ml) Date of birth <b j OO Age 1
Conduct E G F D Age on entering school G No. years In school /
Attendance vR I vl A School history (Rel) (hxa/bsvO oA'^UclXaauV
Most deficient in A
Habits ^.QW.
54321 54 3 21
Father living dead Nornial vG G M/S1 ,D Deficient Bl^IHIM II Id
Mother living dead Health. vG G P P vP Home Care vG G F V
Step-father, Step-mother Nutrition F G M V St " Culture vG G F P ^
Nationality F. Support R W M ft^vP " Discipline vG G F P ^
" M. Occupation- of provider (^KLhJ^hJ
Birthplace Child works at /y)A
Lives with - Anormality Asymmetry
Home Lang. Trunk
Older brothers living dead Arms
" sisters ' " Legs
Younger brothers " 41 Hands
sisters " " Feet
Eye, R. ) Cranium
Eye, L. ) Forehead
Defects Face
Disease Ears
Ear, R. } Eyes
Ear, L. ) Nose
Defects Lips
Disease . Palate
Co-ordination 5 4 3r 2 1 Tonsils
vB B^d Norm Shy vS Naso-ph'nx
Am Resp P&fs Sull Sur Mth Breathg
Sto In A1 NeVv vN Teeth
\L
vR Refl Norm Imp vl Tongue
Stu Wilf Firm Flex Voice
Stammer (inf) 5 4 3 2 1 Speech
Stutter 5 4 3 2 1 Diseases
Filled in by |.l0^iuLYVVCVW Date .. .U-WYUU.1}". y 1 fj P.'[
laboratory of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania.}
The J. Lewis Crozer Fund.
the grades. Many teachers feel inclined to call a child's progress
good because it does well in its grade, regardless of the fact that
the work has been repeated one or more times. The grade and class
of the previous year will enable the investigator to see how often
or how much of the work was repeated. Progress should be
marked with reference to the rapidity with which the child passes
through the grades, without regard to liis attendance.
If a retarded child's progress be good at the time of the examination, then special effort should be made to find the cause
of retardation in his past school life. A space is provided for a
brief synopsis of the "school history."

As a basis for rating conduct, I chose the agreement between
the child's actions and school regulations. In addition to interfering with a child's progress, poor conduct may have a diagnostic
value of its own. For example, deficient conduct may be a consequence of low mental capacity. When a child is unable to take
part in school exercises, his conduct is invariably of such a nature
as to conflict with the order of the school. Deficient conduct may
be indicative of defective home discipline. When conduct is very
deficient at school, delinquency is often associated with it. When
conduct was reported deficient, I always inquired into the child's
moral history, and often obtained a story of thefts, gambling and
sexual indecency. I recall at least two cases of horse stealing,
quite a number of gambling and no less than six who had been
guilty of sexual offences. I do not for an instant believe that the
teachers knew of most of the cases, or that they reported all the
cases which they did know. Care should be taken not to mark as
deficient the conduct of a restless child, who may simply be unable
to control his body on account of ill-health.

The symbols vR, R, I, vl and A are used to record attendance. These symbols are the initial letters of very regular,
regular, irregular, very irregular, and absent. The choice of the
words used in connection with this item, as with all the other
items, resulted from an attempt to employ words which Ave re
already used by the school for the same purpose, or which would
assist the investigator and teacher in making the rating. If the
five point system of grading be strictly followed, a child who is
present from 17 to 20 days in a month will be considered very
regular; from 13 to 16 regular; 9 to 12 irregular; 5 to 8 very
irregular, and 1 to 4 absent. As truancy is closely related to
attendance, this fact should always be investigated in connection
with it, and recorded on the back of the blank. On the face of
the blank no space was allowed for truancy and a number of
other important facts, because they are of relatively infrequent
occurrence, and a note on the back of the blank involves very
little time and effort.

The card of John Smith, reproduced on page 218, records
his progress and conduct as very deficient; attendance, however,
is regular. He entered school at six years of age, and at the time
when this blank was filled out, June 4, 1907, which may be seen
from the bottom of the card, he had been in school one year and
was at that time seven years of age. His school history shows
that the work of the year was done in the school in which he was
found at the end of the year.

We therefore see that we have a record of deficient progress
which is not explained by irregularity of attendance, nor by
entering school late, and which is either associated with or caused
by deficient conduct. When next we look at the grading of
mentality, we find that he has been placed in the group of those
having deficient mentality and that he is classed as a backward
child.

The ratings of progress, conduct, attendance and mentality,
which have been considered, are indicated by a check mark over
the symbol of the reported grade of the respective quality. This
is an easy symbol to make, and the saving of time is an important
desideratum. If I dissented from the teacher's judgment with
respect to any item of the blank after having examined the child,
I noted the fact by drawing a horizontal line through the symbol
of the grade in which I placed him. Thus, if I had considered
this boy a high grade imbecile, the blank, in addition to the
check mark through Bkw, would have had a horizontal line
through IH. The marks employed are immaterial, but it is important that they should be made as quickly as possible and should
be easily distinguished in the subsequent collation of the data of
the blanks.

We now see that we have to do with a backward child of
normal age in the first school year, who has been regular in attendance throughout the year, but whose conduct is reported as
very deficient. Is his backwardness the consequence of deficiency
of conduct ? Is it the result of school conditions ? Has it followed upon the home environment? Or is it based upon structural defects, or inheritance ?
Directly below the entry of the child's mental grade is found
a group of items relating to the child's environment. His health
is reported as fair, nutrition poor, support poor, home care poor,
home culture very poor, and home discipline very poor. There
can be very little doubt that the progress of a child in school,
independent of any physiological backwardness, is the result of
these various factors. Even physiological backwardness may be
augmented, and probably caused, by the associated activity of a
number of unfavorable environmental conditions. The extent to
which these factors are associated with different degrees of mentality as revealed through school work, is one of the subjects of
my investigation.

In employing this blank, the general health of the child is
to be recorded as very good, good, fair, poor, or very poor. Th^
record is based upon such judgment as a teacher or parent would
give. It is not a report such as a medical examiner would make.
The object is to find to what extent the child's health interfered
with his attendance at school or with his performing daily tasks,
even if he were in actual attendance. It does not propose to
record the existence of actual disease. If the child is found to be
suffering from some special disease, this is to be reported in the
space provided at the bottom of the blank after the word diseases.
Here also are to be recorded such children's diseases as the child
may have suffered from in the past. When facts worthy of
special note are discovered in this connection, they are to be
recorded on the back of the blank.

Poor health may not only cause prolonged or repeated
absences, and so indirectly retard the child: it often interferes
with vigorous mental action, and is a predisposing cause of
fatigue. When fatigue, is readily produced, sustained attention,
which is so essential for mental acquisition, becomes practically
impossible. Many physical ailments are a continual source of
irritation to the nervous system, not only because they produce a
condition of malaise, but because they withdraw attention from
the lesson to the source of excitation. The connection between
good health and the attainment of the objects of school instruction is so close that school systems are awakening to the need -of
physical directors and medical inspectors to look after the physical welfare of the children. Mental, and often moral, deterioration may result from prolonged ill-health.
The nutrition of the child is also to be recorded on the basis
of general observation, rather than a physician's examination.
The five classes, in one of which the child's nutrition may be
recorded, are indicated by the letters F, G, M, P, and St, which'
stand for the words fat, good, medium, poor, and starved, respectively. Faulty nutrition retards the child's progress, whether it
is due to disease or to improper and insufficient diet. If no positive knowledge of the diet can be obtained, the rating of nutrition
may be based upon certain signs to be observed in the child.
After the item habits, in the blank, I usually recorded such facts
as I could obtain concerning the child's diet. Thus, John Smith's
nutrition is recorded as poor, and after the word habits occurs
the formula, "1. Coffee -f- bread & cake; 2. Beer, 3. Tea." This
means that the child's usual breakfast is coffee, bread and cake;
that he drinks beer at dinner and tea at supper. In this case
it would appear that the poor nutrition was probably due to
insufficient and improper diet. This condition is one which I
have found in a very large number of the backward children
whom I have examined.

The child's color may be employed to assist in determining
his nutritional status, for paleness is an effect of either an insufficient supply or an impoverished state of the blood, due to a lack
of oxygen or the proper kind and amount of food materials; but
lack of color must not be mistaken for a light complexion as
shown by the color of the eyes and hair, nor must a dark complexion be interpreted as an absence of paleness.
Paleness may be due to a blood disease called anseinia, and
when this is the case, the skin will remain permanently pale without change of color. The color of the lips, and changes of color
in the finger nails when subjected to pressure, may also be
observed. If this change of color upon pressure is not very
decided, it may be taken as a sign of poor nutrition. If the
return of color upon removal of the pressure is slow in appearing,
it indicates vaso-motor disturbance.

Other important signs of poor nutrition are emaciation, and
deficient weight in comparison with height. Disproportion among
the several members of the body may indicate defective nutrition
at some period previous to the time of examination. Signs of
defective nutrition during the early period of rapid development
previous to the second year, may be observed in teeth, ears and in
other developmental defects. These, however, are not to be taken
into account in this connection, excepting in a general way. They
will be entered under anormalities and asymmetries of the bodily
members.

If the financial support of the child in the home is poor, it is
likely that poor nutrition is the result of insufficient diet. Tf
the support is ample, poor nutrition is more likely to be due to
physiological conditions, and to be associated with ill-health. The
support which the child receives at home is entered as rich, wellto-do>, medium, poor, or very poor. The financial condition of
the family not only militates against the child's health and nutrition, and so causes retardation: it becomes a direct cause of
retardation owing to the fact that many children are kept from
school to assist in eking out a livelihood for the family. Many
children in Camden leave school about the middle of May to
engage in some kind of occupation. This is especially true of the
Italian children, who leave school about a month and a half before
the close of the term to obtain employment as berry-pickers.
Moreover, in my investigation there appeared to be some families
so afflicted with ill-health and poverty that they would have to
depend upon charity for their subsistence if they sent their children regularly to school. Poverty becomes a direct cause of
retardation when it is so extreme as to prevent the family from
supplying proper and sufficient food, clothing and housing. The
nurture of thousands of children in our large cities is the direct
cause of adult inefficiency.

Home care, home culture, and home discipline are usually
directly correlated with the financial status of the family, though
there are many exceptions to this rule. Home care is rated as
very good, good, fair, poor, or very poor. The cleanliness of the
child's person and clothing is the best indication of home care.
The vitiated air in which many of our teachers and children are
immersed day after day, has its origin not only in the poisonous
products of the breath, but also in the children's clothing, which
is often soaked with filth. It would surprise any investigator "to
learn how many parents adopt the convenient custom of "sewing
up" their children for the winter. As the cold weather increases,
the number of garments increases, and as the weather moderates
the garments diminish. During this entire period the clothing
worn next the skin is unchanged, and may be neither washed nor
aired for months. This filthy condition not only militates against
the child's well-being, but interferes with his progress in school,
because these children are repulsive to most teachers.

Insufficient clothing makes it difficult for many children to
maintain health and keep in daily attendance. I was informed
by the principal of one of the Camden schools that there had been
a marked improvement in attendance upon supplying the poorest
children with the cast-off clothing of those in more fortunate circumstances.
The overcrowding of a family into one or two rooms,
the result of insufficient financial support, is also a frequent
factor in reducing home care and home discipline to a minimum.

By home culture is meant the degree of mental development
and refinement attained by the family. If the child has an intellectual, moral, and emotional environment of high grade, his
school progress is favored by it. The conception of culture is
not very definite, nor is it easy to estimate the different grades
of home culture. I asked the teachers to base their judgments
on the kind of literature read in the home, on the parents' occupation, and the-content and modes of conversation. In the determination of the culture level, as well as of other facts about the
home, the child himself very often serves as a satisfactory index.
The relation of home culture to school progress is not to be
settled off-hand without a careful inquiry. Children from the
homes of very ignorant parents often stand high in their school
work, but intellectual standing is not the whole of culture. Where
the moral element is prominent, the members of a family live a
life of duty and self-restraint and effort, whether at home or in
school. This, of course, means application and discipline that
develop habits of work and attention so necessary for school progress. Lack of moral training in the sense of absence of proper
home discipline is a frequent cause of lack of industry, application, and concentration of attention. I consider the item of home
discipline one of the most important determining factors of school
progress. A well disciplined child will always be amenable to
the directions of his teacher and the regulations of the school. On
the other hand, a child may manifest good moral conduct, may
give no trouble in school, and yet may lack the essentials of discipline. In explanation of the deficient progress of John Smith,
I consider the rating bf home discipline, very poor, as significant.
In his case, it also resulted in deficient conduct.

We now know something of this boy's environment. lie is
the offspring of parents who are living in poverty (his father is a
pressor, a tailor's assistant), unable to supply his body with
sufficient food, though not requiring him to work as yet, unintelligent enough to furnish him with beer, tea and coffee, unwilling or unable to accord him satisfactory care of body and
clothing, low in the scale of culture, and incapable of supplying
the mental and moral discipline, the lack of which is probably
evidenced in his retarded progress and deficient conduct.
In the lower left-hand corner of the blank are a number of
items of great interest in determining the general physical aptitude of the boy, as well as certain traits of character which stand
in close correlation to the manifestation of intelligence. Does
the boy show good motorial co-ordination? The check mark
stands over the number 3, which gives his co-ordination a rating
of medium. We learn little from this that throws light on the
association of motor with intellectual deficiency, but from a large
number of cases we may see whether boys deficient in intelligence
more often manifest good co-ordination, poor co-ordination, or
medium.

It is impossible to give in this place an extended discussion
of the factor- of co-ordination. A few words in regard to it will
have to suffice. Co-ordination may be defined as the ability to
accomplish by means of muscular contractions and with the least
possible expenditure of energy, a definite purpose or assigned
task. It means more than the simultaneous or successive synergy
of two or more muscles or groups of muscles. It requires a delicate adjustment of the muscular innervation necessary to move
a member of the body at a given rate through a given distance.
There is reason to believe that control of this muscular innervation is dependent upon the will, and that volitional activity is
closely associated with mentality.

Several criteria may be employed to pass judgment upon the
degree of co-ordination. One is the accuracy with which the task
is accomplished. Thus, if a child be asked to move his arm a
given distance in a given direction, his co-ordination may be regarded as good if his movement corresponds very exactly to the
one required. Judgment of the degree of co-ordination may also
be based upon the facility displayed in the accomplishment of
an assigned task. In my investigation I employed the following
method to rate co-ordination: I threw a number of pegs, about
two inches long and one-eighth of an inch in diameter, upon the
table and asked the child to pick them up as rapidly as possible,
using for the purpose but one hand and holding the pegs in the
same hand while he continued to pick them up.

Below the word co-ordination are five groups of symbols and
words descriptive of mental and emotional character. Their appearance on the blank was to some extent in the nature of an
after-thought. It was not my purpose to determine whether the
child was shy or bold, amiable or sullen, stolid or nervous, reflective or impulsive, stubborn or vacillating in will; but it became
apparent that shy children are often misjudged. They are apt
to be under-rated in intelligence and bold children over-rated. Shy
and timid children will not do so well in their recitations as the
bold and forward. Some children approximating the condition of
moral imbecility are extremely forward and bold, and give the
appearance of great intelligence, and are therefore apt to be rated
high. Teachers are apt to underestimate the capacities of a
sullen or surly child, and give too favorable a rating to an amiable
one. The child whose thought is characterized by reflection is
oftentimes under-rated in comparison with the impulsive child.
Moreover, many of these characters have a diagnostic value. Shyness is often associated with deafness, for the semi-deaf child
often knows that something is required of him, the exact nature
of which he is unable to comprehend. Sullenness is associated
with adenoids, as is also stolidity. Nervousness and impulsiveness and vacillating will are symptomatic of impoverished nervous
systems. It is also true that these characters exercise a facilitating or retarding effect upon school progress and general mental
development. The shy child is not likely to get so much out of
the school work as the bold child. The amiable child receives
more attention from its teacher than the sullen or surly child.
The child who is alert in mentality is more apt to profit by the
school environment than one who is stolid or nervous. The child
whose will is firm, will do better work than one whose vacillating
will produces want of application, or one in whom wilfulness or
stubbornness awakens antagonism and negativism.

The choice of words with which to describe mental and
emotional character is not an easy one. The words that have
been selected for this purpose were chosen after careful consideration. It is possible that different words may recommend themselves to others as being more suitable. The words selected were
picked out primarily because they were thought to give an adequate description of a mental character, that is, for the purpose
of providing an exact psychological designation, but also to furnish terms familiar to the everyday judgment of the teacher. The
terms describe the following five traits of character:?

(1) Social reaction:?boldness or shyness.
(2) Feeling and its expression:?amiability, responsiveness,
sullenness or surliness.
(3) General mental and physical activity:?stolidity, inertness, alertness, or nervousness.
(4) Intellectual character:?reflectivity or impulsiveness.
(5) Will or volitional character:?stubbornness, wilfulness,
firmness, flexibility, or vacillation.

I give below various words tliat may be employed to describe
each of the five groups used in connection with each of these five
traits of character. The one which is employed upon the blank
stands at the top in each case, printed in italics.
Social reaction:

very bold bold normal shy very shy
insolent courageous indifferent reserved afraid
impudent forward unconcerned coy cowardly
impertinent pert timid
saucy bashful
diffident
Expression of feeling:

amiable responsive passive sullen surly
sweet impressionable indifferent sulky rude
genial sympathetic apathetic cross gruff
gentle phlegmatic peevish
morose
General activity:

stolid inert alert nervous very nervous
apathetic inactive active eager excitable
impassive sluggish bright restless
wooden
Intellectual character:

very reflective reflective Normal impulsive very impulsive
meditative thoughtful indifferent thoughtless rash
cautious
Will:

stubborn wilful firm flexible vacillating
intractable determined normal submissive wavering
obstinate headstrong yielding unstable
obdurate refractory pliant
unyielding
It will be seen from the above that the child's social reactions
are distinguished as presenting opposite characters of boldness
and shyness. Children who present neither character in marked
degree are called normal. Perhaps it would have been better to
describe them as indifferent. Children with an excess of either
character are described as very bold, or as very shy.
Feeling, or more accurately the expression of feeling in the
child's reaction to the teacher and other persons of his environment, is characterized as amiable, responsive, passive, sullen, or
surly. for which the symbols Am, Pesp, Pass, Sull, and Sur are
employed in the blank. The amiable child is characterized by a
sweetness of disposition which is bound to make friends. Thus,
amiability wins a teacher's regard and leads to efficient effort on
her part, but amiability in some cases leads to an excess of feeling
which is detrimental to the best intellectual work. The child who
is classed as amiable possesses a character which is therefore of.
doubtful value for school progress. On the other hand, the child
who is characterized as responsive is easy to work with, sympathetic, and is the most favorably situated child so far as feeling
is concerned. The sullen child scowls and pouts, showing ill
temper in facial expression but remaining silent. The surly child
is more active in the expression of his ill humor, using voice and
bodily action to demonstrate its presence. These children are
difficult to treat in large classes. Their feelings, unless they are
won over by a skilful and good-tempered teacher, are a serious
bar to mental progress. The child who is indifferent in the expression of a state of feeling, and in his reaction to the (teacher,
is characterized on the blank as passive. Passivity may give free
play to intellectual effort, and the passive child may furnish a
more favorable soil for the teacher's efforts than the excessively
amiable child, but feeling is a great stimulus to effort and it is
probable that in most cases passivity is a relatively unfavorable
soil.

A child's activity, whether of mind or body, may be such that
we may characterize him as alert. When present in excess it
becomes nervousness. At the opposite extreme is stolidity. For
an intermediate grade between the stolid and the alert child, the
blank employs the term inert, or inactive? The five grades are
therefore stolid, inert, alert, nervous, and very nervous, represented respectively by the symbols Sto, In, Al, jSTerv, and vN\
With respect to intellectual activity, all children may be
divided into three classes,?the sensory or reflective, the motor or
impulsive, and those who are neither. The latter group the blank
designates as normal, though probably the term indifferent or
mixed is to be preferred. The impulsive type is distinguished
by the rapidity with which it responds to a question or other
mental stimulus. This type of child does not stop to think. As
soon as an appeal is made to it, there is an immediate response,
which is frequently ridiculous on account of immature thought.
The reflective type is characterized by relatively slow but intelligent responses. The blank subdivides the reflective and impulsive
groups into two sub-groups, in which each quality appears in
either a moderate or excessive degree. The blank, therefore, disA CLINICAL EXAMINATION BLANK. 229
tinguislies children as very reflective, reflective, normal, impulsive,
and very impulsive. The symbols for these words are vR, Refl,
Norm, Imp, and vl.

For the classification of the will the blank distinguishes the
stubborn, wilful, firm, flexible, and vacillating, using for the purpose the symbols Stu, Wilf, Firm, Flex, and Vac. These terms are
self-explanatory. There may be some confusion, however, of
stubbornness with sullenness and surliness. It is true that a
defect of will is often associated with a defect of feeling, but I
have examined many cases that did not show any ill humor, who
yet simply refused to obey all commands.

One other character is of sufficiently general significance to
be treated in connection with the items that form the subject of
this second article. The most superficial examination of a child
will bring from him some utterance. In voice and speech, the
examiner or teacher may quickly infer the presence of physical or mental defects. On the physical side the utterance of a
single word in answer to a question may awaken the suspicion
of naso-pliaryngeal obstruction. The treatment of purely physical defects belongs to my next article. In this place, I wish to
consider defects of articulation, which are also active factors in
causing retardation. Children with defective speech receive low
grades in reading, and their intelligence is usually underestimated by the teacher, who attributes much of the speech defect to
a lack of knowledge. These defects hinder progress in still
another way. Such children are frequently ridiculed by their
schoolmates on account of their impediments of speech. In this
way they learn to dislike school, lose interest in their work, and
become absentees. But more important than this is the effect of
defective modes of articulation and phrasing upon written lano-uage. Some children with an infantile stammer write school
compositions which mirror with great fidelity their habits of oral
speech.

Defects of articulation are frequently associated with defective hearing, for a child who is unable to hear words distinctly
will be unable to reproduce them properly. Observation has also
shown that defects of articulation cause defective hearing of language. Children that appear to be deaf to words, improve when
their defects of articulation are cured.

The words stammer, and stutter, are loosely employed by
English writers to designate nearly every defect of speech. A
definite meaning should be attached to each. In this blank the
word stammer is employed to cover any defect of articulation,
as, for example, the inability to produce certain sounds, Gr the
substitution of one sound for another like th for s in lisping. A
stammer may indicate defective organs of articulation, like a
cleft palate, displaced teeth, or a partial paralysis of the tongue.
A stammer, however, may simply be the persistence of an infantile speech habit, "baby talk." This retardation in speech
may be due to an undeveloped mind, or may be the result
of adenoids or other obstruction in the resonance cavity, which
may or may not have been removed. If the stammer is an
infantile stammer, a check mark is made over the symbol inf.
The degree of the stammer is indicated by a check mark over one
of the five numbers appearing to the right of the word stammer.
A stutter is characterized by a series of spasmodic hesitations and the frequent repetition of some of the spoken elements.
This defect may be acquired by imitation. It may be the result
of nervousness, or it may be due to an inability to co-ordinato
the movements of breathing with those which control the articulation. Stuttering does not seem to have the same causal relationship to intellectual retardation as does stammering. The
blank provides, as with other items, five grades for an estimation
of the degree of stuttering.

From the record card on page 218, a blank partially filled
in, we ascertain the following facts about the boy John Smith,
which cause him to stand out as a distinct personality. Tie is
seven years of age, has been one year at school, where he attended
regularly, but where his conduct and progress were both very
deficient. He is classified as a backward case, subnormal in intelligence. His co-ordination is only medium. He is bold in his
association with his teachers, passive or indifferent in feeling
towards them. He shows signs of nervousness. Ho is neither
reflective nor impulsive, and is vacillating in will. We-have also
learned that while his health is fair, his nutrition is poor, and
that he is trying to do his school work on a breakfast of coffee,
bread and cake; that he also drinks beer and tea. This insufficient
and improper diet, which probably is responsible in largo measure
for his nervousness, his vacillating will, and his deficient conduct
and progress in school, is itself the result of the poverty of his
parents, which enables them to give him but poor support, in a
home that is characterized as of very inferior culture, providing
very deficient mental and moral discipline, and inadequate care
of his person and clothing.
[To be concluded.]
