Mental Healing and the Emmanuel Movement Religion and Medicine
===============================================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Elwood Worcester, D.D., Ph.D., Samuel
McComb, M.A., D.D., and Isador H. Coriat, M.D. Moffatt, Yard &
Co., New York, 1908.
Psychotherapy. A Course of Reading in Sound Psychology, Sound Medi-
cine and Sound Religion. Vol. I, No. 1. Centre Publishing Com-
pany, New York, 1908.
Letters to a Neurologist. By Joseph Collins, M.D. William Wood &
Co., New York, 1908.
We shall discuss the system of mental healing or psychotherapy,
represented in what has come to be called the "Emmanuel Movement,"
under the following heads
1. As a social movement.
2. As a criticism of medicine and an appreciation of psychology.
3. As a curative system and propagandist movement for the Church.
4. As a system of psychology and philosophy.
1. As a Social Movement.
Any fair-minded man who hears for the first time of the practical
work undertaken by Dr. Richard C. Cabot, a physician, and Dr. Elwood
Worcester, an Episcopal clergyman, for alleviating the unhappy mental
condition of a class of patients suffering from what are commonly called
functional nervous diseases, must welcome it with cordiality and wish
it godspeed.
Several very diverse streams of intellectiial and active endeavor are
represented in the thought which underlies Dr. Worcester's work. These
diverse streams of thought and action seem to agree in one particular,
that they place increasing emphasis upon the importance of an applied
or practical psychology.
This recognition of the value of an applied psychology is due in
great measure to the development of psychology itself. Until the last
quarter of the last century, psychology was not a separate science, but a
department of philosophy. As a branch of speculative thinking its prin-
ciples and conclusions had little or no reference to, and certainly no
value for, ordinary life. Then came the laboratory, with its experimental
investigations into problems of which we may take as an example the
time it takes to respond to a stimulus of sight or sound, or to associate
one idea with another,?in other words, the time of the thinking process.
(212)
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 213
These normal times once established, investigators led the way into the
field of comparative psychology. The effects of alcohol, tobacco, and
other drugs upon the character and time of the associations of ideas
represented in thinking, and the differences between the sane and the
insane mind with respect to these mental processes, were soon under
investigation. So to-day we find in Germany, in France, and in this
country a rapidly increasing series of investigations into the mental
processes of various normal and degenerative types of mind, and different
methods have been proposed to enable us to study the slightly disordered
and insane mind as these have never been investigated before.
Another field of applied psychology was opened,?and the credit
belongs first of all to G. Stanley Hall,?by the persistent effort of investi-
gators to obtain exact results as to the effect of the educative process
upon the human mind during the developmental period. To these must
be added a third line of inquiry, represented by the original work of
Francis Galton in England, by the labors of Cattell and Thorndike in
America, to determine the variability in mental processes dependent upon
different levels of social and intellectual development. Thus, at the
present time, certain pioneers in an applied psychology are developing
new departments of knowledge in connection with medicine and educa-
tion and social statistics.
This stream of psychological investigation moving on toward fields
of practical endeavor has been met by streams which had their origin
each in its respective provinces of medicine, education and sociology.
The study of nervous disease as a medical specialty has led physicians
more and more to call attention to the psychological factors involved in
the treatment of disease. Thus we find Dr. S. Weir Mitchell among
the first in this country to awake to a consciousness of the importance
of the physician's appeal to the mind of the patient,?a method which
has never been absent from the repertoire of the genuine physician or
healer, although until the time of Dubois no one had deemed it worth
while to give expression and fixed form to these psychological methods.
Within the field of education also, any number of men have shown that
the educational problem was being studied from the psychological point
of view, and that the educator was not only ready to accept the results
of the laboratory investigator, so far as these might be helpful, but was
even going abroad to search for psychological methods to solve the
problems which confronted him.
Another stream of modern thought and activity, which is to be found
in combination with the currents of practical work proceeding from
psychology, medicine and education, has its source in the study of social
conditions. Statistical and economic investigations have tended to show
that poverty is not so much a cause as an effect of economic and social
conditions, and this discovery has led to a more exact investigation, to
which such organizations as the United Charities in New York under
Dr. Devine are committed, in order to ascertain the extent to which
214 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
social inefficiency is due to economic conditions or to the defective char-
acter of the individual. The sociologist, therefore, who on the practical
side is the social worker, has been ready to extend the hand of co-opera-
tion to the psychologist and the physician.
The physician, for his part, has begun to cry out for help to the
social worker. Already in waging his combat against the plague of
smallpox the physician found it necessary to seek for social and political
assistance in order to place effective vaccination laws upon the statute
books for the prevention of this dread disease, and to-day smallpox is
reduced to a minimum in most civilized communities through the en-
forcement of compulsory vaccination in combination with compulsory
education. In the same class with smallpox in this respect we find one
after another diphtheria, malaria, typhoid fever, yellow fever, but at the
present time most of all tuberculosis, the centre of a rallying cry for the
co-operation of the social and medical influences of the country to carry
out such precautions as the medical profession has demonstrated to be
necessary. This co-operation has taken concrete form in the organization of
many medical and non-medical societies to combat tuberculosis, the most
conspicuous example of which was the International Congress, carried
on with such distinguished success last October in the city of Wash-
ington.
Of less general importance but perhaps even greater significance,
because it is a definite and concrete realization of the association of
social worker and physician, is the social service department, organ-
ized and guided originally by Dr. Richard C. Cabot and Dr. James
H. Putnam, which was first undertaken at the Massachusetts General
Hospital, and since has spread to other hospitals. The physician, so they
contend, wastes his time if he endeavors to cure tuberculosis at the dis-
pensary without sending some one into the home to instruct the patient's
family and to see that the medical advice given is actually carried out.
From tuberculosis Dr. Cabot applies the same principles to nervous and
mental diseases. The medical profession recognizes that in the treatment
of functional and even organic nervous disease the only efficient cure or
ameliorating agency is what may be comprised under a regimen of life.
Dr. Cabot in a remarkable article invites attention to a consideration of
the value of the social worker, whom he considers at the present day the
only expert in the field of human character. There can be little doubt that
the social worker and the grade teacher will become in time the most
important repository of information concerning the development of
mental, moral, and physical traits.
Another significant feature in modern medicine is the breaking down
of the spirit of secrecy which surrounded the methods and prescriptions
of the old-time physician. To-day many physicians even go to the extent
of instructing the apothecary to copy the prescription upon the label,
and there is a growing consensus of opinion that one important function
of the medical profession is to instruct the public in the hygienic meas-
ures which are necessary to prevent and cure disease.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 215
These various streams of intellectual progress we see united through
the agency of Dr. Cabot and Dr. Worcester, with quite a different stream
of activity. To this union we owe the organization of what has come to
be called the Emmanuel movement. It produced the church clinic, and
has given rise to the interesting contention that the clergyman has a
service partly social in character and partly medical, which he can and
ought to perform. As Dr. Cabot puts it, "What we need is team play,
and there are at least three on the team, the medical man, the social
worker, and the minister." Let us examine a little more narrowly the
stream which at this point combines with that which took its origin in
medicine on the one hand and in social and philanthropic work on
the other.
The church has always been a social and political force. Through
its social service to humanity in connection with education, in fostering
the arts and sciences through several centuries, in the establishment of
hospitals and other philanthropic institutions, the church for many years
kept a firm hold upon its people. When there was no expert physician,
no psychologist, 110 sociologist, 110 real educator, the church was able to
offer to mankind in the person of its representative one who combined
the functions of priest, physician, educator, psychologist and sociologist.
But with the development of modern science one branch of learning after
another was swept away from its ancient moorings in the church. The
first to go were medicine and the physical sciences. Then the moral
sciences split off, in the first instance through the development of social
science, economics, and politics, each branch developing institutions of
its own quite apart from its ancient foster mother. Last of all psychology
as the newest of all the sciences to take its place as a separate branch of
investigation and instruction in our universities, achieved its inde-
pendence of philosophy and theology. The first laboratory of psychology
was established by Wundt in the University of Leipzig in 1879, and the
first chair restrictedly designated as a .professorship of psychology was
established at the University of Pennsylvania in the year 1888. The
recency of this development of psychology as a separate science gives rise
to such a phenomenon as that observed in Dr. Worcester's teaching
philosophy and psychology while exercising the functions of chaplain at
Lehigh University. In many other universities outside of the Roman
Catholic communion, there is still this combination of theological and
psychological activity, and even in some of our leading institutions one
and the same man will presume to cover the fields of both philosophy and
psychology, a combination which has no more warrant, except in tradi-
tion, than a similar combination of philosophy with one of the exact
sciences, say physics, chemistry, or mathematics. But the theologian no
longer spreads his surplice over sociology, economics and history, and it
has almost escaped the memory of man that there was a day when he even
ventured to cover the physical sciences.
And so the church has been stripped one by on<. of the ornaments of
civilization which it had helped originally to design. This circumscrip-
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tion of its influence is observable, according to Dr. Worcester, not merely
in its general relations to society, but also in its personal contact with
the individual. It is the object of Dr. Worcester to give to the church
some measure of its original significance for society and for the indi-
vidual.
Of all the arts at one time practiced by the church, the art of
healing was by far the most important. Since mankind has learned to
go to the doctor and not to the saint for the treatment of his physical
ills, the church's function in this field has been to offer solace and such
assistance as may come through prayer. It is not Dr. Worcester's inten-
tion to claim that the church clinic, in resorting to prayer, will rely upon
a divine interruption of the orderly course of nature,?a miracle, in the
ordinary meaning of that word. In his opinion the healing power of
prayer lies in the suggestive influence that the surroundings of a church
and the personality of a righteous and godly man may exert upon
the mental processes of the sick. In Chapter XIX of "Religion and
Medicine," written jointly by Dr. Worcester and Dr. McComb, the
attempt is made to prove that certain of the healing wonders of Christ
may be explained by psychotherapy. They group the miracles of Jesus
under four heads, (1) ordinary acts of healing, (2) the expulsion of
demons, (3) the raising of the dead, and (4) the so-called nature miracles.
An explanation of these miracles is offered which covers only the first
two of these groups. The authors do not wish to be understood as
throwing doubt upon groups three and four; they merely set them aside
"to be reserved to the day of fuller light." In order to make good their
contention with regard to the first two groups, that these cures are the
result of suggestion, they are obliged to distinguish between curable and
incurable leprosy, between genuine epilepsy and hystero-epilepsy, and the
well known phrase "cast out demons" is modernized into hysteria and
double or multiple personality. We are told that if the evidence warrants
us in holding that Jesus shared the contemporary belief in demonology,
this fact does not invalidate his spiritual authority as the founder of
the kingdom of God.
Hence Dr. Worcester's idea is that the church should follow literally
the example of Christ in healing the sick and entering more deeply into
the personal lives of the people. "Beneath the vulgar exterior of Chris-
tian Science," Dr. Worcester finds a truth, "a spiritual power answering
to men's needs, which the churches at present do not possess." He there-
fore sees in this new movement her opportunity to regain some of the
power and prestige which she has lost, in consequence of having been
relegated through the progress of science to a small and secondary role
in human affairs.
The practice of psychotherapy through religious organizations was
first brought to popular attention through the Society of Emmanuel,
founded in London in October, 1895.* It was taken up nearly three
* Psychotherapy, Vol. I, No. 1, p. 15.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 217
years ago by the Emmanuel Church of Boston, when, as stated in the
introduction to "Religion and Medicine," that church began its first work
for the relief of the sick through an organization of tuberculosis
classes under the medical direction of Dr. Joseph H. Pratt. "The treat-
ment consisted of the approved modern method of combating consump-
tion, plus discipline, encouragement and hope, in short a combination of
physical and moral elements." The success of the tuberculosis class led
to the formation of many similar classes, and readily convinced Dr.
Worcester that the church had an important mission to discharge to the
sick, and that the physician and the clergyman could work together to
the benefit of the community. Accordingly, similar work was undertaken
in 1906 among the nervously and morally diseased. The work opened in
November of that year with an address by Dr. James J. Putnam, who
presided at the preliminary meeting, and brought with him the co-
operation of approved neurological science with the work of the church.
Health conferences for both tuberculosis and nervous cases, employing
religious exercises and including prayer as a psychotherapeutic measure,
were held weekly. This work was later supplemented with what would
be described as a free clinic, a church clinic, at which the patient was
treated by hypnotic and non-hypnotic suggestion in the study of Dr.
Worcester and his assistant, Dr. McComb. It is reported that the work
has been taken up along similar lines by other churches, representing not
only the Episcopal denomination, but including Baptist, Congregational,
Universalist, Unitarian and Presbyterian congregations, in Chicago, New
York, Brooklyn, Jersey City, Buffalo, Detroit, and Northampton, Mass.*
This work is therefore an attempt to help the sick by mental, moral
and spiritual methods. "To be successful," Dr. Cabot says, "we must
appeal to the whole personality." In addition, the patient is encouraged
to work. "We have also realized that the mental, moral and spiritual health
of the individual, through which we hope to influence his bodily condition,
depends upon his work, upon the way he does his work, upon the spirit he
puts into his work, and upon the satisfaction he gets out of it. We have
realized, furthermore, that the health of the mind is largely influenced
by home conditions, by personal friendships, by family affections, by all
that goes on between man and man, as well as by work, and by more dis-
tinctively intellectual or religious influence. Hence, the American type
of psychotherapy busies itself not only with the ideas that are floating
through the patient's head, not only with his thoughts, his worries, his
griefs, but also with his personal relations, with his friendships, his love
affairs, his domestic and family affections."
It is made quite plain that the methods to be employed are not based
upon an appeal to any supernatural agency, nor do Dr. Cabot and Dr.
Worcester require, as one would at first sight imagine, that the priest
shall have a knowledge of medicine. A physician is to diagnose the cases
before the clergyman undertakes their treatment. If the physician has
?Psychotherapy, Vol. I, No. 1, p. 15.
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ascertained that tlie patient is suffering from any functional nervous
disease, he is invited to turn the patient over to the clergyman for
treatment.
Why are we to believe that these cases will be better treated by a
clergyman, unlearned in medicine, than by a neurologist or the general
practitioner of medicine?
2. 4s a Criticism of Medicine and an Appreciation of Psychology.
"So long," says Dr. Worcester,* "as the training of our physicians is
strictly material, such patients will continue to be their despair." In this
statement, manifestly unfair, an appeal to prejudice strikes the first note
which puts the Emmanuel movement out of harmony with a sound and
conservative development. What does Dr. Worcester consider a spiritual
training which should supplement that which our physicians at present
receive? Do not our physicians and our clergymen partake of much the
same training? Physicians, let us hope, have been subjected to the
moral and spiritual influences of a good home. Most of them have gone
to Sunday-school and church; they have attended the elementary and
secondary schools, many of them a college where they have enjoyed with
other young men bound for the ministry the same opportunity to profit
by instruction in philosophy, psychology and ethics. It is only when the
one enters the medical school and the other the divinity school that we
find a separation in professional interests. And yet we cannot call the
one strictly material and the other strictly spiritual. The theological
student spends a great deal of his time in textual criticism, and this is
quite as definitely a training in material things as is the examination
of dry bones by the student of anatomy. If Dr. Worcester means the
training which develops character, we doubt very much the justice of
the contention that a course in a divinity school is more likely to
develop an exalted moral character than a course in a medical school.
If it be devotion to social service which Dr. Worcester desires to see
cultivated, we find the medical profession presenting the most con-
spicuous examples of an unselfish service for mankind in their writings,
in their attendance on free dispensaries and hospitals, in public
addresses, in work on sanitary and hygienic commissions, and in the
active support of important public measures before our legislative bodies.
It would be a difficult undertaking to prove that the church within
the last ten or twenty years has performed a more important social
service to American society than the medical profession. If it be the
force of personality which Dr. Worcester has in mind, that rare com-
bination of keen insight into human nature, of enthusiasm and
sympathy, which makes a man mentally and morally the helper, teacher
*"Religion and Medicine," p. 5. Consider also in this connection the
following passage: "One reason why American physicians are so slow to
avail themselves of psychical influence in combating disease is that
they have been educated in a too narrowly materialistic school of science,
which assumes that only material objects possess reality and which thinks
that the mind can safely be ignored." /&., p. 52.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 219
and hope of lais fellow-men, and which Dr. Worcester himself calls, "A
factor of the highest importance, the individuality of the physician,"
then we inquire,?does Dr. Worcester believe that any kind of training,
either theological or medical, can develop this trait in a man? Such a
combination of qualities can scarcely be cultivated. If a physician
happens to have this rare personality he will do great things; if a
clergyman, he also will move mountains as, for example, Father de Nisco
at Roseto, Pa., but it is doubtful whether he can train a school to follow
in his footsteps.
To ask that the clergyman shall perform a useful social service as
an assistant to the physician in the treatment of certain mental and nerv-
ous diseases, is one thing, but to claim that the necessity for the assump-
tion of this service on the part of the clergyman is due to the lamentable
failure of the neurologist and practising physician, is quite another
thing, and when this fact is explained as due to the physician's neglect
and ignorance of psychology, it becomes necessary to inquire whether
there is any justification in fact for this statement, and whether Dr.
Worcester offers a form of psychological treatment which is any better
than that which the medical profession has been employing. Dr. Cabot,
in an address delivered in New York City on December 3d, whether
intentionally or otherwise, even went to the extent of limiting the func-
tion of the neurologist in connection with functional nervous disease
to its mere diagnosis. When such diagnosis has been made, his recom-
mendation is to turn the case over to a clergyman for treatment. A
man desiring to purchase something often gets into the wrong shop, so
he contended, and for these nervous cases the wrong shop is the neurol-
ogist's office, and the right shop is the church and the clergyman's study.
Dr. Cabot, a physician himself, appears to forget that the physician is
not a diagnostician primarily but a healer, when he invites his pro-
fessional colleague to admit himself a failure and turn over a part
of his practice to his clerical brother.
The vital question is not whether the physician fails to treat suc-
cessfully a large number of cases. Human beings will always die, some
will always suffer from incurable diseases, and others will get along as
best they can with diseases more or less curable. The profession there-
fore will always be subjected to outside and ignorant criticism. It is
also subjected to the keenest criticism from inside the profession itself.
In the most whole hearted and disinterested way, every method known
to man is being employed within the medical profession, though not
necessarily by its every member, to improve therapeutic practice.
Has the physician overlooked the importance of psychology in the
practice of his profession? It is significant, indeed almost humorous,
to find in "Religion and Medicine" as well as in the serial called "Psycho-
therapy," not one single authority quoted as having contributed to the
development of psychotherapy who is not a physician. It is true, opinions
are cited of such psychologists as William James and Joseph Jastrow,
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
and such pseudo-psychologists as Myers and Hudson, but these are
known for their contributions to the theory of psychology and not at all
for any practical applications of psychological principles in the treat-
ment of disease. It is a very common mistake to imagine,* because
psychology is defined as the science of mind, that the psychologist as a
psychologist must have something to offer in the mental treatment of
disease. You might just as well imagine that a professor of pedagogy
will necessarily be a good teacher, or a psychologist a good judge of
character. Something more than general principles is needed. If the
psychologist will address himself to the solution of practical problems
and develop an applied psychology, there can be 110 doubt that in time
the profession of psychology will develop methods of psychological treat-
ment which will be far and away better than those which are at our
disposal at the present time. Just as within the medical profession
itself, the subject of pathology is developing as a separate line of inquiry,
and a group of pathologists are arising who do not practise medicine,
but who contribute results which are reconstructing the basis of practice,
so we shall expect to find psychological experts connected with institu-
tions for the insane and with the public school systems, whose work will
doubtless contribute results of great value, and on whose work mental
and educational treatment will be based in the future. But to-day,
while it calls attention to the science, it invites criticism to play up the
psychologist at the expense of the practicing physician and neurologist.
The reason why Dr. Worcester, and probably Dr. Cabot also, fail to
take cognizance of the work that is really establishing psychotherapy on
a sound basis, is because they are not familiar either with "sound medi-
cine" or "sound psychology." In "Religion and Medicine" we find
authorities on hypnotism and suggestion quoted ad libitum and ad
nauseam, but you will find no mention of the psychotherapeutic work of
Kraepelin, the most conspicuous example of an investigator who com-
bines in one person a sound training in psychological method with a
similar training and experience in medicine. Kraepelin, a product of
the psychological laboratory at Leipzig, is the leader in psychiatry to-
day. To hypnotism, suggestion, and double personality he has paid no
more attention than the importance of these subjects warrants, and
hence he is unknown to the leaders of the Emmanuel Movement, except
as an investigator of the psychical effects of alcohol. It would lead us
too far afield to attempt to collate the evidence which might be brought
to show the existence of a practical psychological experience within the
medical profession. Take for an example such a judicial paper as that of
Dr. Charles K. Mills on "Psychotherapy, Its Scope and Limitations,"
read before the Philadelphia County Medical Society, March 25, 1908,
from which I quote the following conservative opinion of Dubois's
*For example:?"To-day, if he so willed, Professor James might easily
rank with the greatest neurologists in the treatment of a large group of
diseases, and this solely by virtue of his consummate ability as a
physiological psychologist." Worcester, "Religion and Medicine," p. 15.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 221
work, called "epoch-making" by Dr. Cabot: "I would not for a moment
question the verity of his reports, but it has seemed to me with regard
to some of them that, like reports of cures from operations or from
new medicinal remedies, sufficient time has not been allowed before
recording, to decide on the real merits of the treatment. It is true that
he tells us of the relapses of his patients, and of his occasional failures,
but discounting these, his results still remain apparently so brilliant
that it is hard to reconcile them with our experience, even making all
allowances for the superior powers of the recorder."
"The American type of psychotherapy," says Dr. Cabot, meaning
thereby the type of psychotherapy practised in the church clinic, "busies
itself not only with the ideas that are floating through the patient's
head, not only with his thoughts, his worries, his griefs, but also with
his personal relations, with his friendships, his love affairs, his domestic
and family affections." That the American neurologist did not need
to receive illumination from the Emmanuel Movement in order to treat
the entire personality of his patient is shown in a conspicuous manner
in a timely work entitled "Letters to a Neurologist," which may help-
fully be employed to offset the criticisms of Dr. Cabot and Dr. Worcester.
Through the medium of this correspondence Dr. Collins presents types
of mental and nervous disease which will be familiar to every neurologist.
They would be reported ordinarily in the medical literature in such a
manner that they would not interest the general reader or make a
permanent impression upon his mind, despite the fact that persons
suffering from such diseases often present interesting personalities, clear-
cut and aggressive. This is because the neurologist draws his clinical
pictures primarily in order to furnish a description, analysis and classifi-
cation of symptoms. These letters to a neurologist present to the reader
the neurasthenic, the psychasthenic, the manic-depressive, the mentally
defective child, and other types of mental and nervous disorder in such
a way that they will live henceforth in the reader's mind not as gradually
fading groups of symptoms but as concrete individuals introduced to him
through the medium of a personal letter.
Nor is there any evidence in the neurologist's replies to these letters
which would indicate that Dr. Collins overlooks the importance of
psychotherapy in the treatment of his cases. The presentation of his
methods of psychotherapy, which include practically every method in Dr.
Worcester's repertoire, excepting hypnotism, prayer and the appeal to
religious emotion through the setting of a church edifice or a clergyman's
study, comes just at the critical moment when its real position is en-
dangered by a crude and exaggerated popularization.
The presence among these twelve letters of one dealing with the
education of mentally defective children invites attention to a field which
would seem to be peculiarly the province of the clerical therapeutist. The
case presented by Dr. Collins is one of mental retardation. In the moral
sphere an analogous retardation is attracting the attention of the modern
psychologist, social worker and physician. How to avoid moral de-
222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
linquency in young adolescents and how best to treat it are questions on
which we naturally look to the clergyman to throw much light. But in
our search for those who are doing the most active work in this field we
come upon a member of an entirely different profession, Judge Lindsey
of Denver, for the first inspiring exhibition of what may be accomplished
through intelligent psychological insight. It seems almost trivial to
talk of the wonders of hypnotism and suggestion when Judge Lindsey,
relying only upon his powers of logic and moral suasion, can induce a
juvenile offender to take a railroad journey, without a guard or attendant,
for the purpose of committing himself to the Reform School. Dr. Collins
does not discuss the case of the morally retarded child, but of the trainers
who are necessary to carry out the treatment of the mentally defective
children, he says, "The successful trainer of mentally defective children
should have unusual force of character, intelligence, insight, originality,
knowledge of articulation work such as is given to deaf mutes, and a
familiarity with the modes of application of massage, baths and calis-
thenics." Many a case of psychasthenia, neurasthenia, melancholia, and
perhaps even dementia prascox, would stand a better chance of recovery
could the neurologist call upon a thoroughly competent psychological
assistant to carry out such mental and moral educational programs as
the one outlined by Dr. Collins.
The value of work as a therapeutic measure is also emphasized by
Dr. Collins, as it has been by Dr. Cabot and Dr. Worcester. It has
already been recognized as an important element in the training of the
insane. Adequately trained attendants or nurses require a thorough
knowledge of the crafts and arts in order to keep their patients con-
stantly occupied and interested. To this end there must be a variety of
occupations at the instant command of the person in charge of the
patient. No amount of special instruction from outside teachers will
avail. Such a disciplinary regime can be carried out by no one but the
single trainer who is constantly with the patient. The Friends' Asylum
for the Insane at Frankford, Phila., where the services of a resident
psychologist are beginning to make themselves felt, has found this form
of treatment so essential that a course in handiwork has this year been
added to the regular training course for nurses, and it is reported that
the results obtained are already most encouraging.
This little book of Dr. Collins's also exemplifies what has already
been referred to as the tendency of the medical profession to tear down
the veil of mystery and to instruct both the public and in some cases the
patient as to the exact nature of the disease. Thus, in a letter to a
patient suffering from migraine, who reports her experience in going about
from one physician to another, from osteopathy to Christian Science,
Dr. Collins frankly admits that she is suffering from an incurable
disease of which the chief manifestation is headache, from which no
drug or remedy known to medicine can permanently relieve her. "When
your headaches are very severe, send for any commonsense doctor and
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 223
ask him to give you one or two doses of some simple pain reliever. Tell
him you don't want to be cured, you want only to be relieved. Smile
blandly at the doctor who says he can cure you." Which shall it be,?
the apparently pessimistic truth or the false optimism which we are
advised operates so powerfully through suggestion? It is certainly a
mistake to imagine that every pessimistic opinion is objectionable. What
the patient usually desires in these cases is to lead an unhygienic but
pleasant life and be freed from the consequences. For such a patient the
only remedy is a full and complete knowledge of the situation, and the
resolution to carry out a stoical regime of life.
There would thus appear to be little warrant for the opinion that
the neurologist or even the general practitioner has failed to pay about
as much heed to psychology as is warranted in view of the present
undeveloped state of that science.. In fact, when we consider the history
of the development of psychotherapy within the medical profession and
in connection with social work, we must admit in all fairness that the
physician and the social worker exhibit a greater readiness of mind to
accept the co-operation of the professional psychologist than do those
whose training and experience lie within the profession of the ministry.
The Emmanuel Movement gives promise of performing an important
and necessary social work. Dr. Worcester is a man of action as well as
of words. He has done something worth while, and we must recog-
nize in his work much that is good. Unfortunately he has addled
a very good egg through a premature exploitation of his work, which has
brought him into an attitude of criticism toward the medical profession,
and through the foundation of his psychotherapy upon a type of
psychology which, as it will appear, is not representative of the best
which that science affords.
(To be continued.)
