Why Worry?
==========

By George Lincoln Walton, M.D., Consulting Neurologist
to the Massachusetts General Hospital. Philadelphia and London:
J. B. Lippincott Company, 1908. Pp. 275.
Dr. Walton does not content himself with analyzing worry, showing
its relationship to fears, doubts, and obsessions, but in the last two chapters he points out the mental treatment or training necessary to conquer
this so-called "disease of the age." In his book Dr. Walton follows the
worrier home, sits with him at table, accompanies him on his travels, and
exhibits him in all his familiar unattractiveness. In his chapter on
obsessions he points out their presence in childhood, and their persistence
under different forms in many adults. An amusing instance quoted is
that of "a boy who had to touch everyone wearing anything red. On one
occasion his whole family lost their train because of the prevalence of
this color among those waiting in the station."
Dr. Walton recommends the fad, be it stamps or golf, as an admirable method of changing the current of one's thoughts; he quotes
Saleeby as saying that "the mock worry of a game is a good antidote for
the real worry of life." As Dr. Walton says, we spend far too much
thought on the weather. Dr. Samuel Johnson remarked this some years
ago with "Sir, this is all imagination, which physicians encourage."
Dr. Walton's premises are sound and his advice excellent, none the
less so for the fact that we have heard all of it before. It is no new
thing to be told that in order to woo sleep successfully, you must be
indifferent to whether you sleep or not; that in order to digest your food
properly, you must stop fussing about it, and that in order to live at
116 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
peace with your family you must have both self-control and philosophy.
Dr. Walton makes no claim to originality; rather does he collate for us
the wisdom of the ages. He devotes a chapter to the philosophy of
Epicurus, and another to that of Marcus Aurelius, two forerunners of
psycho-therapy and mental healing. To him "who finds himself out of
joint with his surroundings," he offers the sage reflection of the Chinese
philosopher,?"The legs of the stork are long, the legs of the duck are
short; you cannot make the legs of the stork short, neither can you make
the legs of the duck long. Why worry V
No honest reader of Dr. Walton's arraignment of "fuss-budgets"
can fail to cry out peccavi at some point in "Why Worry." But what
then? Between Epicurus and Dr. Walton we have had countless philosophers and teachers who have pointed out to us the evils of worry and the
pleasures of the tranquil mind,?and yet here is worry called the disease
of the age. "I told them once, I told them twice, they would not listen
to advice," for, like the little fishes in "Alice in Wonderland," the public
offers an impassive resistance to the reiterated counsel of the mentor.
Herein is sufficient warrant for recommending the perusal of Dr. Walton's clever and entertaining resetting of an old theme.
E. R. W.
