A Clinical Examination Blank for Backward Children in the Public Schools III
===================================================================================


?Aw
By J. D. Heilman,
University of Pennsylvania.
On page 260 is given a sample blank as it was filled, out
in the examination of one of a thousand cases of retarded children.
I gave a reproduction of this blank, partially filled out, in the last
number of Tiie Psychological Clinic. In this third article I
propose to consider the items of the blank which I have not as yet
discussed.
I turn first to school history (Rcl). A largo number of children are retarded because of frequent changes from one school
system to another. This usually involves an initiation into a new
course of study and the use of unfamiliar text books, with a consequent loss of time. Even the transfer from one school to another
-of the same system is frequently productive of the loss of a grade
in the child's progress. The families of some of the children
whom I examined had changed their residence at least half a dozen
times during the school life of the children. In some cases this
change of residence is made by the family, and even by the children alone, to escape the enforcement of compulsory school attendance. A brief summary of the school history of the child is
therefore of importance if we are to estimate tho influenco of this
factor in producing retardation. The symbol (Rel) is introduced
chiefly to remind tho investigator to enter a record of attendance
in the parochial schools in the case of boys who are members of the
Roman Catholic Church. The curriculum of parochial schools,
as well as of other church schools, is very poorly articulated with
that of the public schools. For this reason children who have
attended parochial schools in tho early years arc apt to be retarded
when they subsequently enter the public schools. Moreover, many
children spend a year in the parochial school, at about the age of
twelve, in order to receive religious instruction. These children
lose a whole year of the public school work, and in some cases have
lost step with their fellow pupils of the public schools to such an
A CLINICAL EXAMINATION BLANK 259
extent that they are scarcely able to begin again where they had
left off.
A child may bo deficient in all his school branches, or he may
show himself deficient in but one. If in certain grades this one
subject happens to be arithmetic, it may prevent his making normal
progress; in other grades it is language that is a great obstacle to
progress. For this reason the items most deficient in and best in
are recorded. Statistics obtained from large numbers of children
will also throw some light on the question whether mentally deficient children commonly manifest ability and memory for some
single line of thought or activity like music, drawing or manual
work. It is a common belief, although not supported by sufficient evidence, that the public school system does not appeal to
the capabilities of children who are exceptionally gifted in one
line and possessed of counterbalancing deficiencies in other lines.
The child whose blank we have taken as an illustration had
been only one year in school, and the absence of any record in the
appropriate space leads us to believe that his deficiency in progress
was manifested in all the work of the school.
Certain habits of life are found to exist among school children, which seriously interfere with their progress. Among these
are the use of tobacco and injurious beverages, like tea and coffee
and even beer and whiskey. Under habits I also recorded the
amount and kind of food eaten at one or more meals, but especially
at breakfast. Immoral practices are also to be recorded in this
connection, but these should not be inquired into in every case.
It seemed the better part of discretion to record facts of this kind
only when brought to my attention by teacher or principal in those
cases where such practices were notorious.
The family life may retard the progress of a child in school,
in so far as it affects his health, nutrition, support, his care and
discipline. The relation of these factors to retardation was discussed in my last article. In addition to these, a few other items
concerning the family appear of sufficient importance to warrant
the making of a record. If the child has lost one or both of his
parents, the probability is that there has been a reduction in care,
nutrition and health, for parents must be presumed to take a
deeper interest in the welfare of their children than do relatives
or friends. In the case of the father's death the children are
often neglected because the mother is'unable to bear the burden of
support. Many mothers leave home early in the morning to go
to work and return late in the evening; the children are left all day
260 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
No. \X Name ^3^/yOJ ^/VV\xV^O
Grade Class ^ 190 Address r>
Grade \ Class ij 190 "f Address SO'K V XOtwL
School s 190 Teachef
School \\T/<0(/VUaJl> ^ 190 T Teacher
Progress E G F D Date of birth <bjOO Age 1
Conduct E G F D Age on entering school (o No. years In school |
Attendance vR \l I vl A School history (Rel) (c> mom; ?\)3 fiA-swJc
Most deficient in Q
Habits \. -W-> +" JWlOjcL & fk. O^XbK) ^.T"jooJ
. 1 ' 5 4 3 2 1 5 4 3 2 1
Father li^img dead Normal vG G M SI D Deficient BlwIHIM II Id
Mother liVuig dead Health vG G F P^P Home Care vG G P Ij/vP^
Step-father, Steja-mother Nutrition P G M V St " Culture vG G F P v\P
Nationality F.( ftxAufcAuVvO Support R W M VVp " Discipline vG G P P v|
~ a M.I Occupation of provider h p A A K )
Birthplace 9/^uJLol- ? fchlld works at
Lives with 0/<xhJL/viA^ Anormality Asymmetry
Home Land. V>ldMJtOTr?nK G&UV C/mJtockdb
Older brothers HvingQdeadQArms
tr sisters " 0 " OLegs
Younger brothers " ^ " O Hands
? sisters " 0 " 0 Feet
Eye, R. ) ^ Cranium
Eye, L. } ^ Forehead
Defects Face
Disease Ears
Ear, R. 10 \ Eyes
O )
?rh
Ear, L. tT j ' U Nose
Defects Lips
Disease . Palate
Co-ordiryition 5 4*21 Tonsils
vB Bffld Norm Shy vS Naso-ph'nx
Am Resp Paks Sull Sur Mth Breathg
Sto In A1 No*/ vN Teeth
vR Red NcVm Imp vl Tongue (j
Stu Wilf Firm Flex Voice
Stammer (inf) 5 4 3 2 1 Speech
Stutter 5 4 3 2 1 Diseases .
Pilled in by . Ac.KD H  Date .. .(LaaAJJ.1!.
<vwjJ3j huA.
AAOsAxtxi.
^ Laboratory of Psychology, University of Pcnnsylvanii(\
Tho J7 Lewis Crozcr Fund. *
A CLINICAL EXAMINATION BLANK 261
with no one to provide for their wants or to oversee them excepting when at school. The children of many mothers, who are the
support of the family, find it difficult to obtain even one good meal
a day. When such children are questioned they usually report tea
and bread for breakfast and the same for dinner; some children
go to school without breakfast. The loss of the mother is also very
unfavorable to good home conditions. Tier place may be taken by
a step-mother, but the phrase "a step-mother's care" has lived long
enough in the language of the race to persuade us of its significance.
The loss of either father or mother is also an indication of the
severity of the struggle for existence on the part of the immediate
progenitors of the child, or it may point out a possible lowered
resistance to disease.
The blank, therefore, provides for recording whether the
child's father and mother are living or dead and whether the child
has a step-father or step-mother. There is also a space provided in
which to record with whom the child lives. A child may be living
with relatives, guardians or acquaintances, who provide it with a
home life distinct from that of its own father and mother. Abnormal home conditions are sometimes brought to light which are significant. If the child is asked whether he lives with his parents
he will invariably respond in the affirmative, even though he may
be living with only one of them. If he is asked, "Do you live with
your father and mother?" he will invariably answer, "With my
father," or "With my mother," if he is living with but one of them.
A record which shows a living father must not be taken to demonstrate the fact that the father is the support of the child or even
that the child is living with the father. The blood relations of
the child are often in no wise responsible for the child's support
and home care.
The language of the child's home may be an important factor
in producing retardation in school progress. Some children of foreign parentage are retarded for several years because they are not
equipped with a knowledge of the language of the school and many
school systems fail to provide for proper instruction in the English
vocabulary. Every large city has some sections where the children, even at play, speak a foreign language. The necessary information to estimate the importance of this factor in an individual
case is given in connection with the items nationality F and
nationality M, which provide for the record of the nationality of
the father and mother, and with birthplace and home language.
When a child is foreign born I found it convenient to inquire as to
262 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
its age at the time of immigration and I sometimes recorded this
in connection with the item birthplace. Even English-speaking
children who come to this country at eleven or more years of age
lose at least a year on account of the difference in the curriculum.
The remaining items with which we have to deal are concerned
with the child's physical condition.. We obtain some indication of
the child's physical vigor, vitality and viability when we know the
number of brothers and sisters living and dead. It is very difficult to ask a child or even an adult the necessary questions in such
a manner as to elicit exact information of the character we desire.
The blank records data in a way that appears to present the question in the best possible form for answer. A numeral records the
number of older brothers living and dead, the number of older sisters living and dead, the number of younger brothers living and
dead and the number of younger sisters living and dead. The boy
whose blank we have taken as an illustration has two younger
brothers, both of whom are living. The information obtained from
these items is very meagre. Wo know only that he is the first
child. According to some authorities, the first child is more apt to
suffer from accidents of birth than later children. A physician
interested primarily in the child's physical history would want to
know very much more in this connection than is provided for by
the blank. For example, he would require a history of miscarriages. No matter how valuable such data may be, it would
be undesirable to make an effort to obtain them. It is only when
children are brought for examination to a clinic by father or
mother that such facts can be ascertained. Discretion as well as
the limitation of time render it necessary to omit many other items,
for example, the birthplace and condition of the grandparents.
The blank probably provides for as many items in this connection
as it is wise and convenient to endeavor to obtain.
The purposes of the blank must be borne in mind when we
examine the remaining items which deal with the physical condition of the child. Space is provided for an entry of the results
of a brief examination of eyesight and hearing and for the record
of marked anormalities or asymmetries of the trunk, arms, legs,
hands, feet, cranium, forehead, face, ears, eyes, nose and lips.
Space is also provided for a record of anormalities that arc often
associated with naso-pharyngeal obstruction,?leading in some cases
to a diagnosis of adenoids. Thus, the condition of the palate is to
be observed, the tonsils, the naso-pharynx, tho teeth, the tongue.
If mouth breathing exists, it is to bo recorded; the voice is to be
A CLINICAL EXAMINATION BLANK 263
observed for symptoms of adenoids and the quality of speech is
to be recorded for the same purpose. Finally, a brief record is to
be made of the diseases from which the child has suffered during
infancy and childhood. The examination from which this record
will be filled out is superficial and is directed only to the ascertainment of striking defects. Time is wanting, nor is it practicable to subject a child to an extensive physical examination. A.
child ought not to be touched nor can many instruments be used
to facilitate the work of the examination. A medical inspector
may perhaps use a tongue depresser, but experience in some cities
has shown that even they had better employ some such common
article as a spoon for the purpose. The tests which I employed
excited no criticism, excepting in the case of one child who refused
to take part in the test of hearing, for which I employed an instrument. I feel that I went as far as it is wise for any one, excepting a medical man, to go, and that even the medical inspector could
not take much more advanced measures without awakening a storm
of criticism. From the standpoint of medical inspection, such results as I obtained with this blank must necessarily be unsatisfactory, but this same criticism holds good also of much of the
medical inspection that is made in the schools to-day, excepting in
so far as it relates to the discovery of contagious diseases and parasites.
From the nature of my investigation it was impossible to
make anything like a thorough examination of sight and hearing.
The limitations of time and the lack of proper rooms and instruments practically confined my work to a hasty test of the child's
ability to see and hear. To examine eyesight, I employed Snellen's
test cards, both the alphabet and illiterate types, the latter for
children who did not know the alphabet. "Where the child's familiarity with the alphabet was in doubt, a brief preliminary drill
was employed to determine whether the inability to read the line
was due to ignorance or defective vision. None of the children
examined by me were under ten years of age, and I seldom was
compelled to resort to the illiterate card.
On account of the dimensions of most of the rooms in which
I tested the eyesight of the children, I was obliged to make use of
the ten-foot line. In making my tests, I placed the cards so that
the ten-foot line was about level with the eyes and squarely in
front of the child. I placed it so' as to be in a good light and to
avoid strong reflections. If the child wore glasses, I tested him
with and without them. Both eyes were tested together and each
264 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
separately. During the test I always looked at the child to be
certain that when one eye was tested the other was covered and to
observe excessive hesitation and signs of eye-strain. In cases of
strain and marked hesitation, the child was asked to move toward
the cards until the letters on the line were read easily. Before
beginning the test, I laid off a ten-foot range, which I subdivided
into feet. When, therefore, the child moved from a distance of
ten feet to a shorter distance I was able at once to note the distance in feet at which he read the line. The blank on page 2G0
shows that John Smith read the ten-foot lino at a distance of seven
feet with both eyes, and the ditto marks opposite eye R and eye L
show that with each eye separately he read the line at the same
distance. His sight is therefore sufficiently defective to justify
the recommendation that his eyes be examined by an oculist.
Various tests are employed to measure the acuity of hearing.
All of these fall into one or the other of two classes; the first is a
speech test, and the second is a test with mechanical sounds. The
speech may be either whispered or conversational. Undoubtedly
tho test which employs conversational speech is of the greatest
value, for. it tests tho child's ability to hear conversation, upon
which depends his apprehension of oral instruction in tho school
room. A conversation test, however, is objectionable because it
requires a very large room. To avoid this difficulty tho whisper
test is usually employed as a substitute. Both speech tests are
open to the practical objection that the intensity of tho sound
cannot be kept constant. Moreover, much time is required to
carry out the tests satisfactorily, and tho results vary with tho
acoustic properties of different rooms, depending upon their sizo
and shape and upon convection currents duo to tho unequal heating of the air. Similar objections may bo offered to tho employment of mechanical sounds for testing hearing. Tho watch, tho
Politzer acoumeter, tuning forks, and specially constructed audiometers, aro the instruments usually employed. No instrument
has yet been devised which furnishes a constant and accurately
measured standard of sound intensity. In my tests I employed an
audiometer which is to l>e recommended, not as an instrument
of precision, but as a convenience for rapid testing.
This audiometer consists of a box, six inches by seven inches
by eleven inches, divided by a partition into two parts. In ono
compartment of the box is placed a small clock as the sourco of
sound. Tho other compartment contains a specially contrived
stop-cock connected with a metal tube, which at one end divides
A CLINICAL EXAMINATION BLANK 2G5
into two branches for conducting tlic sound impulses to eacli of
the two ears. These two branches project about an inch beyond the
box. To these, when the instrument is to be used, rubber tubes
are attached, which connect with the ear-piece of a binaural
stethoscope. The stop-cock which regulates the size of the opening through which the sound is allowed to pass, is connected with
an index finger moving over a graduated disk, arbitrarily divided
into one hundred divisions. When the index finger points to the
zero mark, the tube is open to its fullest extent. When it points
to one hundred, it is entirely closed. The least audible sound for
most normal ears is obtained with the index finger at the mark 92.
The instrument is provided with two other stop-cocks, one on each
of the two branches of the tube. These are to shut off the sound
instantaneously from one of the two ears and without the subject's
knowledge. The advantages of this audiometer are found in the
convenient variation of the intensity of the sound and its measurement with some accuracy on an arbitrary scale, and in the ease with
which the sound can be shut off from one or both ears so as to test
the reliability of the subject's responses. With this instrument the
child whose hearing capacity is measured by 70 for the right ear
and by G5 for the left ear (see blank on page 260) has subnormal
hearing in both ears, the left being slightly more defective than
the right. This record, especially when taken in connection with
facts which give rise to the suspicion of adenoids, is sufficient to
warrant his being referred to the medical inspector or to a medical
clinic for the nose, ear and throat, for examination and treatment.
Spaces are provided for the record of disease and defects of
the organs of sight and hearing. It is intended that only those
diseases and defects shall be recorded which attract attention on
superficial examination. These include sore and inflamed eyes,
strabismus, nystagmus, certain readily observed defects of pupil
and iris, a running ear or a perforated ear drum.
Ample space is provided to record marked anonnalities and
asymmetries of bodily members and their functions. It is impossible in this article to attempt a statement of the various
physical anormalities and asymmetries that may be reported under
this heading. Defects may be recorded for their own sake or
because they have diagnostic value as symptoms or stigmata of
degeneration and arrested development. The reader must be referred to the copious literature on this subject for information
as to the particular defects which may be considered worthy of
being recorded. What will be recorded will depend very largely
266 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
upon the extent of the information possessed by the investigator,
on the purposes of the investigation, and on the interest which the
investigator may take in the association of physical defects with
retardation. I made no attempt at a thorough examination or
record of minute deviations of different parts of the body from the
normal type, whether in structure or function. My record of the
boy whose card I have taken for an illustration shows the cranium
and forehead to be smaller on the right side than on the left. It
is also reported that the ears are large and outstanding. All the
other items recorded have a significance in connection with the
diagnosis of naso-pharyngeal obstruction. The chest is reported
to be contracted, the tonsils enlarged, the voice muffled, and the
speech nasal. He is also reported to have badly decayed teeth,
which are frequently found associated with enlarged tonsils and
adenoids.
The last item on the blank to be considered is diseases. These
include measles, chicken pox, mumps, scarlet fever, diphtheria,
whooping cough, meningitis, and convulsions. On the card reported above, no diseases are recorded. This was the case with
very many cards. It does not mean, necessarily, freedom from
disease during infancy, but perhaps only lack of information. It
is difficult, if not impossible, to extract satisfactory information
from the child, and I believe that physicians encounter the same
difficulty in obtaining accurate information even from the parents.
It must be borne in mind that an investigation such as I conducted
can only endeavor to obtain the fullest and most exact information possible under the circumstances.
We are now prepared from examination of the record of
Jonh Smith to make a tentative statement of the causes of his
very deficient progress in school work. lie is seven years of age
and has been in attendance at school one year. There is no evidence to be had from the blank that deficient progress is due to
inefficient instruction, nor can it bo ascribed to delay in entering
school, or to irregularity in attendance. He is the child of Russian
?Tews who speak Yiddish at home. This may bo responsible to
some extent for his inability to progress at school, but it must bo
remembered that the child was born in this country, and other
Kussian Jewish children under similar circumstances are pr?"
grossing normally in school work. Ifc is rather to the naso-pharyngeal obstruction, the result of poor nutrition, due to insufficient
support at home and deficient home care, that I would attribute
his retardation in school work. The nasal speech, the muffled
NEWS AND COMMENT 267
voice, the enlarged tonsils, the contracted chest, the subnormal
acuity of hearing, his nervousness, and even his vacillating will,
are a group of phenomena which suggest adenoids. Adenoids are
merely an enlargement or hypertrophy of lymphatic tissue in the
naso-pharynx. They may be due to the very decayed teeth, which
act as a source of infection to the tonsils and adenoid tissues.
The naso-pharyngeal obstruction and the decayed teeth may both
result from the insufficient nutrition, the presence of which is
attested by the customary breakfast of coffee, bread and cake.
The remedies to be suggested in this case are partly medical
and partly social. He should be referred to the medical inspector
and taken by his parents or a school nurse to a clinic for nose and
throat diseases for examination and treatment. The insufficient
nutrition may be due to the impoverished condition of his parents,
or to ignorance. The solution and treatment of this problem must
be left to the various social and philanthropic agencies, which in
our large cities are beginning to attack the problem with determination and scientific insight.
