A Concrete Example of the Value of Individual Teaching
========================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. II. No. 1. December 15, 1908.
:Author:  Elmer E. Jokes, Ph.D.,
Indiana University.

There is a type of child who sits under the ordinary class-room
instruction and derives therefrom not the slightest benefit. lie
appears listless and stupid, is not able to fasten his attention upon
the. subject of the recitation, which may thrill his mates with interest, is wholly indifferent to the general school environment, and
in no perceptible way is impressed by the teaching process, even
though the character of the teaching may be excellent. Such a
child is completely overshot by the traditional class instruction of
the modern school, and sits there day after day wholly ignorant of
what it all means. One or two children of this type can usually
be found in almost every first year class of thirty or forty pupils.
The modern school offers 110 solution to the problem of teaching
such children, save in some of the more highly favored city systems,
where there are special schools for defectives. Consequently,
such pupils are allowed to remain with the class, objects of pity
and regret. The teacher, not knowing the methods of dealing
with such children, and even if she did know them not having
the time at her disposal, eventually ignores the child, simply leaving him to his own hopeless destiny. Two or three years of such
physical persecution and mental atrophy and the child is thrust
from school a pronounced defective, doomed to a life of intellectual
darkness and physical degeneracy. Society is burdened to-day
with a small percentage of such individuals, who might have been
trained to some form of usefulness and thus have been made contributors to the assets of society, instead of unwholesome consumers, giving nothing in return. Herein, doubtless, we find a
serious defect in the general public school system which will eventu(195)
ally be remedied by giving all such pupils the special training
needed to bring about educative reactions.

It is my opinion that the great majority of such children are
not at all abnormal, but are regarded as defective because the
character of the teaching has not been adapted to their individual
physical and mental needs. The teaching process is ordinarily
adapted to the average child, with enough flexibility and adjustment in it to meet the needs of all children not too far above or
below that standard. While the brilliant child probably suffers
as much retardation under these conditions as the one who is considered defective, he fails to get the same sympathy and few schools
have been especially established for him. The only method of
reaching the child who manifests retardation, is to apply individual
instruction to him. If he sits unmoved under group instruction,
and if the process, which adequately instructs the class as a whole,
fails to reach him, then he must be taken as an individual, and
given the educational treatment which will bring about that mental
and physical development of which he is capable.

The results of the present investigation were obtained while
studying another problem undertaken the past year with children
of the first grade of the Training School, in the State Normal
School of Virginia. The subject was to study the learning process
as shown in the reading exercises of these children. The investigation began after the children had been in school about two weeks
and had become fully adjusted to their new surroundings. With
the co-operation of the supervisor of the primary grades and some
of her practice teachers, a series of tests were made upon the
children, with a view to determining everything possible concerning
the manner in which the children learned the words in the prescribed reading lessons. For each child a learning curve was
worked out, which indicated the number of words learned, and the
rapidity with which they were learned.

The tests were made in the following manner. As fast as
words were added to the reading vocabulary of the child in the
class-room, they were written on cards three by nine inches and
given to me. At intervals of about a week apart the children
were separately brought into my office by a student teacher and
asked to name the words written on these cards in regular order.
About ten words were added to the list each week, and the child
was compelled to go over the whole list from the beginning each
time he was tested. This was continued until in my judgment
the tests became invalid, owing to the fact that the children reached
a point eventually, when they could name almost any word presented, whether they had ever seen it before or not. This was
due to the excellent system of phonetics used in this school, which
very soon enabled the child to interpret the sounds of letters and
combinations of letters in the pronunciation of the words learned.
When this point had been reached it was obvious that the tests
were no longer testing the child upon the words he had learned,
but rather upon his ingenuity in grouping sounds and combinations of sounds into words. Consequently, when the child reached
this stage he was excused from further tests. A complete record
of all errors was kept throughout the long series, and a careful
study of them reveals much of interest to the primary teacher.

Among the children tested was a boy who is the special object
of study in this paper. He had been in the Kindergarten in connection with the Training School for two years before entering
the first grade, and in that work had been pronounced rather stupid.
Indeed it is doubtful if he had derived very much benefit from the
Kindergarten training. Physically he appeared perfectly normal,
save that he showed a great variety of muscular reactions to slight
stimuli, and his eyes seemed rather expressionless. Upon the playground he played vigorously, showing a considerable desire to win,
or to appear a hero. At times when he observed me watching him,
he would go into the game with great vigor. In such a game as
tossing a ball with the object of catching it, he appeared to have
little co-ordination and control, becoming excited and distorting
the face badly as the ball approached. He could run well and
displayed some skill in tackling another runner in a game called
"black man". He talked fairly well, though he expressed himself
too much in babytalk fashion for a child of his age. Some words
he could pronounce only in the crudest sort of way, though I am
inclined to believe that this was largely due to imitation either
of his parents or of his playmates, who are colored children of his
own age. In the schoolroom he was listless, had no ability to
attend to the subject matter of the curriculum, loved to attract
attention by all sorts of devices which were destructive to good
order, molested his companions by pulling their hair, stuffing things
down their neck, punching them with ruler and pencil,?in fact,
he was regarded by them as a real nuisance. The teaching routine
appeared to carry absolutely no meaning to him. When not a
prey to the mischievous fits, he would fall into a sort of stupor,
resting his head upon the desk. He was somewhat under size for
his age, but his growth at present appears to be about normal. He
increased in height one inch and a half during the time in which
the tests were made, and gained in weight over two pounds. He
has fair skin with usually a good color, light hair, and blue-gray
eyes which rarely have the twinkle of childhood in them. At a
casual glance he does not look stupid and there is nothing to indicate that he is of a mental type which cannot be stimulated by the
ordinary teaching process. Nevertheless, for four months he sat
under most excellent teaching, and it is doubtful if he gained a
single idea. All this time the supervisor of the primary grade
was studying the child, and giving him as much extra help in
the class as her time would permit; the student teacher also, considering this boy an interesting problem, gave him a great deal
of extra drill in the regular work of the class. Still he was not
reached by all this effort, and during the whole time he actually
learned only a few words, and the tests showed that even these
were known only spasmodically.

TABLE I.
Results Under Class Instruction.
'D 03 T3
-M *-< CJ ?-i
<S w 5
Eh $ &
^ 6?.2 MH
O CCO o
?'5*0 <3 q
,Q ,o g ? & g
a 6 o
p s -.5 pa
?
1 10 0. .
2 20 2..
3 30 3. .
4 40 3..
5 50 0
G GO 4. .
7 70 4. .
8... ...80 5.,
9 90 10..
Words Known at each Test.
10 100 2
1 1 110 3
1 2 120 1
1 3 130 10
1 4 140 3
1 5 150 12
. .flower, doll.
. .doll, orange, kite.
..doll, kite, father.
..doll, flower, kite, orange.
. .doll, kite, father, Joss.
. .doll, flower, you, Joss, kite.
. .doll, purple, flower, Joss, kite, chickadees, butterfly, Kitty, May, mother.
.. mother, chickadees.
.. chickadees, May, kite.
. .chickadees.
..mother, caterpillar, doll, kite, May, Will, purple,
bred, seed, is.
.. seed, bud, caterpillar.
. .chickadees, flower, bred, caterpillar, goldenrod,
sister, mother, doll, flower, kite, orange, father.
16 160 2 goldenrod, mother.

A very little study of Table I will suffice to show how much the
ordinary class instruction had impressed him. The first column
indicates the number of tests made, usually at an interval of a week
apart; the second column shows the number of words which each
member of the class was supposed to know at the time the test
was made; the third column shows the number of words which this
boy actually knew at the time of each test; the fourth column
of the table gives the words which he knew at the time each test
was made. Column three is the place of chief interest in this
table, for Ave can see here precisely how rapid was his progress
in getting a reading vocabulary. It cannot be said that he knew
accurately a single word in the whole vocabulary. He knew "kite"
nine times out of sixteen, and was equally certain of the word
"doll." But such a percentage of right cases does not warrant
the conclusion that he had more than a fleeting memory of these
words, not to mention such words as "you," "Will," "father,"
"Joss," and others which he knew only two or three times out of
the sixteen trials. The table shows also that the words he appeared
to know pretty accurately at the beginning of the series of tests,
were forgotten toward the close. "Doll," for example, was never
recognized but twice after the ninth test; and the word "father"
was known in the fourth and seventh tests, but not again till the
fifteenth test. At this time the word occurred again in his reading lesson, which probably impressed it sufficiently upon his memory to cause him to recall it at the time of the test.
The spasmodic character of his knowledge of these words is
also brought out in this table. The ninth, thirteenth, and fifteenth
tests were decidedly his best efforts. It should be said here that
his success at these times caused great surprise, both to his teacher
and myself. In all three instances he knew words which had only
been presented to the class once, and not being considered very
important in the context, had not been specially emphasized.
This led us to believe that a way might be found of stimulating
his mental development, for in some peculiar way these words had
made an impression upon his mind that lasted. It is also remarkable that immediately after each of his most successful attempts
there is almost a total failure. I am entirely unable to account
for this, for at the ninth and fifteenth tests particularly, the words
which he did know were known readily and there was no appearance of guessing. It is evident enough from the results here
tabulated that this boy during the sixteen weeks had obtained
scarcely a single lasting impression. The teaching was not at
all adapted to his physical and mental condition, as is shown by
the later results.

After sixteen weeks of this sort of failure the boy was placed
under one of the best student teachers and started all over again.
His teacher showed great tact in dealing with his case, by appealing to his meagre interests, and holding his attention for short
intervals. The subject matter of the work did not differ materially
from that which had been previously done with the class as a whole,
but this boy was appealed to as an individual; and when it was
found that his attention was wavering from the subject matter,
TABLE II. .
Results Under Individual Teaching.
Words Missed at each Test.
2 a
a as
p p -oS p P
? ?.Sfl
1 10 10
2 20 18 green, roll.
3 30 27 green, yellow, has.
4 40 35 yellow, has, have, Joss, ball.
5 50 41 yellow, green, has, have, blue, will, see, seed,
brown.
6 60 40 yellow, green, have, has, blue, brown, is, was,
five, fly, did, saw, do, white.
7..... .70 68 do, did.
8   80   70 do, did, is, was, saw, white, blue, the, this, in.
9   90   76 did, and, is, was, it, in, white, blue, the, this,
birds, come, dog, feed.
1 0 100   84 did, and, was, is, white, what, blue, purple, the,
this, heads, aster, sister, fox, box, for.
1 1 110 100 and, was, is, what, white, find, purple, aster,
sister, chicks.
1 2 120... .101 did, was, in, is, white, what, purple, cocoon, aster,
sister, feed, find, them, stem, heads, clear, frog,
do, has.
1 3 130 118 was, were, white, is, it, cocoon, aster, feed, find,
fly, has, jump.
1 4 140 130 white, cocoon, in, am, feed, find, fly, had, has,
were.

the work was changed in such a way that his interest was made
continuous. To the delight of his teacher, and all who had observed him during the previous months, and even to his own great
joy, it was found that he could learn. Under this method of treatment, he was not stupid at all, on the contrary his learning capacity
was almost up to the average of the class. This is shown by a
comparison of Tables I, II and III.

The third column of Table II, which gives the number of
words known at each test, increases steadily from the first test,
when he knew all of the ten words of the reading vocabulary, to
the fourteenth test when he knew 130 out of 140 words. The
words known at each test were so numerous that these have not been
inserted in the fourth column of the table, but in their place are
given the words missed at each test. A comparison of the results
of Tables I and II demonstrates the efficiency of the individual
teaching, in comparison with the utter ineffectiveness of class instruction.
It should be said with reference to the results exhibited in
Table II, that the tests were made in precisely the same manner
as before. His teacher prepared the cards for the test and gave
them to me as fast as the words became his reading vocabulary, and
once a week he came into my office and tried to name them from
the cards. He was perfectly delighted at his own success, and for
about three months continued to learn at about the normal rate,
when it became necessary to close the series of tests.

TABLE III.
A Normal Child Under Class Instruction.
O O ? O
? ?
. o3
"g S?F3 "g Names of Words Missed at each Test.
S?L<
s a a
3.,
4.,
5.
6..
7.,
8.
9.
10.,
11.
12.,
13.,
14.
15.
16.
.10.
.20 16.
? ?.5 p
1.
2.
.30 27.
.40 35.
.50   42.
.60 54. ,
.70 61.
.80 77.
.90 85.
100 91.
110 100.
120 116.
130 127.
140 132.
150 142.
160....154.
.. hoop, now.
.. how, little, orange, kite.
.. did, and, you.
.. little, orange, kite, you, did.
..little, kite, did, you, bad, have, has, stem.
.. had, come, came, purple, Kitty, five.
.. had, come, came, five, Kitty, chickadees, fly, do, it.
.. had, fly, birds.
. .brown, caterpillars, stem, them, hands.
.. stem, them, it, is, box, fox, feed, sister, my.
.. stem, feed, box, fox, aster, my, to, at, head, have.
.. aster, sister, head, cocoon.
.. aster, horses, feeding.
..horses, spun, his, is, it, girls, goats, Tom.
..horses, spun, goats, here, too, yes, sleep, sheep.
..here, sleep, glad, looking, brook, book.

In order to compare this boy's learning capacity under individual instruction with that of a normal child under class instruction, the record of a little girl considered of average ability in
the class is given in Table III. On the first test she knew eight
words, and on the fourteenth test 132 words. She improved
steadily from the first to the fourteenth test. The record of the
supposedly defective boy, under individual training, is about as
good as that of this normal child under class instruction. Indeed,
he excels her in the number of words known in the first, second,
and seventh tests, equals her in the third and fourth tests, and in
the other tests he falls below her record by from 1 to 9 words.
To represent this in a graphic and striking form, I have
presented these results in three learning curves shown in Figure 1
on this page. The horizontal line indicates the number of tests
from 1 to 16. The vertical distance above the horizontal line
indicates the number of words from zero to 154. The heavy solid
line at the bottom of the figure, which runs irregularly just above
the horizontal line, is the learning curve of this supposedly defecFigure 1. Learning Curves.
In the horizontal line is shown the number of the test in serial order
from 1 to 16; in vertical distance, the number of words known from zero
to 154. Heavy lower line, the learning curve of the retarded boy under
class instruction; upper solid line, the learning curve of the same boy
under individual teaching; broken line, the learning curve of a normal
girl under class instruction.

tive boy under class instruction. It rises very little above the
horizontal line, and there is no noticeable continuous rise in the
curve from the beginning to the end of the tests. The lighter solid
line is the learning curve of this same boy under individual instruction. It rises steadily from the first to the fourteenth test, and
follows about the same course as the learning curve of the normal
child under class instruction, represented by the broken line. A
comparison of these two curves would seem to show that our supposedly defective boy is just about the average boy, so far as learning to read may be taken as an indication of intelligence.
The question therefore seems to resolve itself into one of
individual in contradistinction to class or group teaching. Class
instruction, or even small group instruction, does not reach the
child who manifests retardation. Tie must have a skillful teacher
and must have her to himself. She must arouse his sympathies
and interests and enter into them with enthusiasm. She must
devote herself assiduously to the study of all his impulses and
activities, and must find the method adapted to this individual
child; for no two children will manifest the same form of retardation. This conclusion brings us directly to the economic problem.
Should the public schools provide such expert instruction for the
occasional case of retardation ? The question is being answered
affirmatively in Baltimore, St. Louis, Kansas City, Omaha, Chicago, Buffalo, and elsewhere. But in the smaller cities, towns,
and villages, it will doubtless be difficult to get the people to see
that skilled instruction for the occasional case of retardation is in
the end a great economy to the schools and an educational stimulus
to social progress.
