Summer Camps
=============

By Winthrop Talbot, M.D.,
Ilolderness, N. II.
The scope and extent of the work that is now being done for
boys and girls in summer camps are not generally appreciated.
The oldest of the present camps was founded twenty-five years
ago, and during the succeeding ten years some twenty other camps
were started.
In 1890 the number of boys in summer camps was about two
thousand. Four years later there were about two hundred camps
in existence, and five thousand boys were in the field. The number
has increased steadily and rapidly in the last five years. Five
years ago about ten thousand boys received the benefit of outdoor
life during the summer months. During the past season, 1907,
there were between four and five hundred summer camps and
about twenty-five thousand boys. Of these, fifteen thousand were
in Y. M. C. A. camps, and about five thousand in settlement and
charity camps. The value of outdoor summer training was recognized officially for the first time by the Y. M. C. A. in the year
1893.
.Five years ago, in 1903, the first girls' camp was started. In
1907 there were thirty girls' camps in existence, providing for
fourteen hundred girls. This number will probably be doubled
during the coming season.
For the past eight years it has been the custom of the directors of summer camps to meet biennially for a Camp Conference,
in order that they may become familiar with improved methods
of helping, training, and caring for children, with a view to producing the best possible results. These conferences have been
addressed by many educators of note, including President Eliot,
President Stanley Hall, and Mr. Thomas Wentworth Higginson.
These discussions, which are published in the reports of the conferences, have proved to be of the greatest value.
The summer camps are not merely places to which boys and
girls may be sent in order to keep them off the streets. ]STor are
they refuges from the evils of summer hotels and boarding houses.
They are veritable training grounds in technical muscular control,
where the children leam the best methods in field sports and track
athletics, where they become familiar with nature and woodcraft,
and where they see and take part in the ordinary farm processes.
(48)
SUMMER GAMPS. 49
Many camps employ the services of a physician or experienced physical trainer, and in this w^y strengthen the boys
in all vital processes, such as respiration and digestion. As a rule
careful study is given to food and sunlight, and much stress is laid
upon early and long hours of sleep. The main and most important training, however, which the camp gives is consideration of
others,?unselfishness and a kindly spirit. !No group of men and
boys, or of women and girls can live together for ten weeks successfully and happily without placing this training first and
foremost. The punctual accomplishment of small daily camp
tasks, keeping things clean, neat and orderly is an education in
itself of a very real sort.
This movement is now so well established and of such recognized value that educators are beginning to feel the need of correlating it with the established methods of the public schools. Certain municipal camps have been established and have proved a
success. It is probable that the future of the movement will
include not only many municipal camps, but also the much larger
development of the camp idea as expressed in the outing or farm
school. Probably it is one of the most potent means of combating
these tendencies in the young which make crime easy and vice
prevalent. The camp teaches impressively. that moral degeneration may be a result of oxygen starvation and lack of training the
hands to do useful things. In the camp, in the outing or farm
school, we find the solution of many of our most difficult moral
problems.
