The Treatment and Cure of A Case of Mental and Moral Deficiency
================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. II. No. 6. November 15, 1908

By Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania.
Some children stand at a point where the path of individual
development forks. One road leads on through a life of imbecility
or markedly subnormal efficiency. The- other road will bring the
child at maturity to a life of normal activity. That such widely
divergent possibilities are open to one and the same child, will
appear incredible to those who have not had the opportunity to
watch the course of development of these children.
What is feeblemindedness ? Is it a mental condition, or is it
an incurable brain defect ? The brain itself cannot be directly
examined, and its condition determined. In severe cases of idiocy
the existence of a serious and incurable defect of the brain is
readily enough inferred from the mental condition of the child
and from associated physical signs or stigmata, such as a malfor-
mation of the skull, peculiarities of the physiognomy, the condi-
tion of the bony structure, skin, and blood vessels, and from other
somatic and physiological abnormalities. In many cases the
diagnosis of a brain defect has been substantiated by post-mortem
examination, but in those other cases, which stand on the border-
land between feeblemindedness and normality, post-mortem
examination has often failed to reveal any apparent defect of the
brain. If such defect exists, it must reside in the minute struc-
ture of the brain cells,?a defect, the nature of which, for the
present, science is unable to ascertain. In these cases, therefore,
which are the very ones that have the greatest interest for the
psychologist, the existence of the brain defect is merely an
inference from the mental condition and the associated stigmata of
degeneration. If we make the inference that this brain defect is
incurable, we have done more than diagnose or posit the existence
(153)
154: THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of feeblemindedness. We have in addition expressed a prognosis
or prophecy of the ultimate outcome of the development process.
Is every brain defect necessarily incurable ? This is not the
case with defects of other organs. Certainly deficiencies of eye-
sight may be cured or at least ameliorated. Even if a defect
persists, its consequences may be overcome by the application of
proper remedies. Thus the wearing of glasses is a simple device
for avoiding the consequences of an optical defect, which may in
itself be incurable. But in some cases, if taken in time, the
wearing of glasses will actually assist in the removal of a defect.
Why may not brain defects be ameliorated and cured to the same
extent ?
If at the outset we define feeblemindedness as an incurable
brain defect, then naturally we are compelled to say that if those
cases are cured in which feeblemindedness has been diagnosed as
existing, a mistaken diagnosis has been made. It is my contention
that feeblemindedness is a term that should be restricted solely and
simply to the mental condition. If the mental status presens of
a child is one of imbecility, the child is at that moment to all
intents and purposes an imbecile. If appropriate treatment can
restore him to normal condition, he ceases ipso facto to be an
imbecile, thus proving that the imbecility did not rest upon an
incurable brain defect. If asylum training is competent to develop
a low grade imbecile into a middle grade imbecile, why may not
the appropriate training be found to elevate a feebleminded child,
say an imbecile of high grade, into a child of normal intelligence %
If the application of every method known to modern psychology
fails to elevate a feebleminded child above the grade of the imbe-
cile, then and only then are we justified in diagnosing the exist-
ence of an incurable brain defect.*
From Seguin's time, feeblemindedness has been viewed as a
retardation or arrest of mental and physical development. If the
feeblemindedness is a form of retardation, the question naturally
arises in our mind, as it did in that of Seguin, whether the arrested
processes cannot be stimulated into activity and the retardation
be overcome, or in other words whether feeblemindedness may not
be cured. Seguin himself distinguished between idiotism as the
mental condition, and idiocy as the brain defect upon which the
*For the purposes of this discussion, children are distinguished as
either normal or feebleminded. The feebleminded are either (1) imbeciles
or (2) idiots. Imbeciles are of three grades:?high, middle and low. The
high grade imbecile therefore represents the class of feebleminded children
which stands next below the normal child in intelligence.
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 155
mental condition rests. May not two children present a similar
picture of mental inferiority or feeblemindedness, though the
feeblemindedness may in the one case rest upon an incurable brain
defect, and in the other case be merely the symptom of a tempo-
rarily arrested development? If we affirm that of these two chil-
dren the one is feebleminded but the other only apparently feeble-
minded, this may be a justifiable use of the term feebleminded.
It restricts the term, as many would have it, to an incurable brain
defect. But in what way are we able to determine whether an
apparently feebleminded child is really feebleminded or not, or
in other words whether the brain defect is incurable ? A mental
and physical examination extending over an hour, or a day, or
even a month, may not be sufficient to make a satisfactory diag-
nosis, which in its terms involves a prognosis as well. It is my
belief that the distinction between real and apparent feebleminded-
ness, or as I prefer to put it, between a feeblemindedness which
rests upon an incurable brain defect, and a feeblemindedness which
is the expression of arrested cerebral development, can only be
ascertained after a protracted examination, and more important
still, after a persistent effort has been made to stimulate the
arrested mental processes. There are children whom even the lay-
man is able at a glance to diagnose as feebleminded, but there
are other children with whom even the expert cannot distin-
guish between these two forms of feeblemindedness without some
protracted examination and effort at education. It is my ex-
perience that careful individual training is able to restore to
normality a small percentage of children who are considered
feebleminded by physicians, whose diagnosis is, in my opinion,
correct so long as it is understood to be merely a'statement of the
status presens and not a prophecy of the future condition of the
child. I do not believe that there is any reason for impugning
the diagnoses which have been made in a number of cases that
have come under my personal observation. It is only my desire
in this and other articles to call attention to certain cases which
offer a typical picture of feeblemindedness,?though of high grade,
?and which are nevertheless distinctly curable. It must be
remembered that even the physical signs are not in themselves
sufficient. The study of degeneration reveal^ that practically
every normal person possesses one or more of these so-called de-
generative stigmata. It is simply a question of the number of such
stigmata which the individual can safely carry.
It is now recognized that a man may be insane in one environ-
156 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ment, and sane in another. I believe that a child may be feeble-
minded in one environment, for example in his own home, and may
cease to exhibit feeblemindedness when placed in a different
environment. I also agree with those modern students of insanity
who assert that the development of some forms of insanity may be
averted by a proper course of discipline and training.* Analogously
I contend that because a child of sixteen or twenty presents a hope-
less case of feeblemindedness, this is no evidence that proper treat-
ment, instituted at an earlier age, might not have determined an
entirely different course of development. It is a question of per-
suading physicians and parents to confide these children to educa-
tional and psychological experts, and of supplying the financial
means to provide for what is in the nature of the case an extremely
expensive mental and physical training. The type of child whom
I have under consideration ought in my opinion to be viewed as
being in as critical a condition as the child who is on the verge of
death from typhoid fever. In an acute disease every remedial
agency will be called upon, regardless of the expenditure of money
and scientific effort. The retarded child under ten years of age,
from the medical standpoint, is not suffering from alarming
symptoms. From the standpoint of society, the family, and from
his own point of view, if he could give expression to it, his condi-
tion is more alarming than if he stood momentarily expecting a
summons to another world. If I am right in the position for
which I have been contending, there are children under ten years
of age, who have before them a life which is little better than a
living mental death, who might, if taken in time, be rescued from
this condition and developed through a course of training to the
normal mental stature of man. We have institutions and private
schools for feebleminded children, and we have schools for normal
children, we need something in the nature of a scientific home and
school for those children who are suspected of feeblemindedness,
but who give to the expert in this new field some promise of ulti-
mate restoration to normal condition. The Hospital . School^
which I have established in connection with the laboratory of
psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, is intended for the
observation and treatment of children, for whom in my opinion
there is a fighting chance of restoration to normal life, but who, if
*Meyer, Dr. Adolf. What do Histories of Cases of Insanity teach us
Concerning Preventive Mental Hygiene during the Years of School Life?
The Psychological Clinic, Vol. II, pp. 89-101.
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 157
allowed to remain undeveloped, would inevitably be doomed to a
life of imbecility and inefficiency.*
The cure of a case of mental and moral deficiency is one of the
first-fruits of this school. My report of this case will present
a child of eleven years who had never attended a regular
school, and who was unable to do even the simplest addition
-or subtraction correctly. He could read, but he never read
a single sentence without making several mistakes. He
was subject to outbursts of uncontrollable and unreasoning
anger, which caused the parents much anxiety. He did not asso-
ciate with other boys in a normal fashion. His father complained
that he would let other boys browbeat him, take away what belonged
to him, and in other ways treat him as a distinct inferior. I was
told by the father that when the boy was between four and five
years of age, he had consulted several specialists in ISTew York
City, none of whom gave him any hope of the child's ultimate
recovery from the condition then existing. One diagnosed the
child as mentally defective, adding that there was nothing the
matter with him that he could cure. Another pronounced the boy
generally undeveloped, "foolish and weakminded." Another is
reported to have said, "Don't spend any money on doctors or medi-
cines for this boy. They won't do him any good. Take him out
into the country, or send him to a private kindergarten, where
they will humor him a good deal." Another expressed the opin-
ion that by the time he was eight or nine years of age he would be
uncontrollable. The family physician is reported to have said that
if the boy were an adult, he would say he had locomotor ataxia.
A neurologist, in whose judgment I have the greatest confidence,
and who has been kind enough to furnish me with a transcript of
his notes, made a tentative diagnosis of hereditary or congenital
ataxia.
There is no doubt in my mind that at the age of four or five
years this boy presented symptoms which warranted a diagnosis
of mental and physical degeneracy. There is also no doubt that
most of the physical symptoms had subsided by the time he was
eleven years of age, but the mental and moral symptoms continued,
and the boy was an object of extreme anxiety to his parents, the
mother, a naturally strong woman, being on the verge of nervous
prostration from worry.
*See also an article entitled "The Hospital School" in The Psycho-
logical Clinic, Vol. I, p. 138 ff. Also called "The Orthogenic School" to
emphasize its aim at restoring normal development through individual
training.
158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
On October 12, 1907, he was entered in the Hospital School.
On January 15, 1908, I entered him in the third grade of a
Philadelphia public school. In June he was promoted, by exemp-
tion on his term record, from this grade, to the fourth grade of the
Philadelphia school. During this time he lived at the Hospital
School, and his work was under my supervision. In the early
summer he returned to A , his native town, with the recom-
mendation that he be entered in the fourth or if possible the fifth
grade, as intellectually he was ready for this higher grade. He
was given some private tuition during the summer, and this fall
he was entered in the sixth grade of the public school at A . If
he advances at a normal rate of promotion, he will enter the high
school in three years time, at the age of fifteen. At the present
time, therefore, he manifests no intellectual retardation, nor has
lie moral symptoms which in my opinion deserve to be considered
pathological.
The history of this case presents many points of psychological
and medical interest. I shall give in order, (1) the results of my
first examination; (2) his previous history; (3) his condition on
entering the Hospital School; (4) his record of progress in the
Hospital School; (5) his present condition.
(1) First examination. On August 9, 1907, Mr. C
wrote to me from A , a city in the state of iTew Jersey, saying
that he had been recommended by Dr. John K. Mitchell to consult
me in regard to his son, who was a case of arrested development. I
told the father I was about to leave the city on my vacation, and
recommended that he wait until my return in the latter part of
September. He wrote me again, however, requesting me to stop
off in A , to see the boy on my way north. I mention this fact
to show the urgency of the case from the father's point of view.
I saw Edgar on August 18, 1907. I dined with the parents
and their two children, and spent a couple of hours in the physical
and mental examination of the boy. He was a stocky, well-built,
healthy looking child. He had red hair, and the expression of his
face suggested an unsteady temper. The brow was low, but not of
a character to awaken a suspicion of mental deficiency. The
shape of the aperture of the eyes indicated a possible arrest of
foetal development, but this was the only suspicious symptom.
The teeth were in good condition, the mouth closed, the nose
undeveloped, the nostrils small. A hasty examination showed the
necessity of consulting an oculist, and the appearance of the nose
and nostrils called for an examination of the naso-pharynx. The
chest was fairly well developed, the voice was good, but he had a
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 159
lisp, and his speech was a trifle thick. Hearing was normal. His
manners at table were good. His gait was normal, the knee jerks
were present on both sides, the co-ordination of the hands was good.
In his conversation with me and with his family, he seemed to
me to be a normal child of eleven, rather alert mentally, a self-
contained, independent sort of boy. If I had visited the family
casually, I would not have observed anything wrong with him.
My first brief examination was therefore negative, and excepting
for the history which the father and mother gave, I should have
pronounced the boy normal, but probably suffering from some
optical defect and from naso-pliaryngeal obstruction.
(2) History. The father and mother were apparently
healthy, and of normal mentality. I considered them capable of
exercising more than average judgment in the management of their
children, and in the enforcement of home discipline. I could
obtain no history of degeneracy in either the father's or the
mother's family. There was one other child younger than this
boy, a girl who had never caused the parents any anxiety and whose
history was that of an unusually alert and vigorous child.
The birth of the child had been in every respect normal. He
had been healthy as an infant, and for three or four years they had
observed nothing unusual in his development. As time went on,
however, they observed that his gait in walking and running was
defective, that his speech was thick and slow of development, and
that he refused to associate freely with other children. These
facts led them to look back with suspicion on an occurrence which
took place when the child was two months old. The mother had
left the child in charge of a woman acquaintance, during an
absence of from fifteen to twenty minutes. When she left the
child he had just awakened from a nap. When she returned, the
child was apparently sleeping soundly again. He slept until
midnight, a very unusual occurrence for him, and he awakened
screaming. During the evening, the woman in whose charge he
had been left, kept coming up and asking after the child, as though
she were worried concerning his condition. Shortly afterwards
she moved away and ceased to visit the family. They recalled
that she was jealous, and they suspected that she might have
struck the child on the head or injured him in some way, either
purposely or accidentally. They reported that the child was
unusually fretful the next day, and vomited once violently. They
also noticed that when bathing him the arms and legs hung
pendant, although previously the fingers had been tightly grasped
into a fist, and the legs drawn up on the body.
160 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The parents reported that he began to walk at one year, and
to talk at about three years of age. When he began to talk, he
lisped. He was a healthy child, the only children's disease from
which he suffered being measles. When between four and five
years of age, he got up a great deal at night, crying and seeming
to suffer pain. He lost the power of walking and for a while could
not stand. His legs went from under him. He had nervous
movements which looked like chorea. He stumbled a good deal,
and often fell sprawling upon the floor. One leg was not notice-
ably worse than the other. He was said to be awkward in the use
of his hands, and could not dress himself. He was careless at
table, eating noisily and "slobbering." He was very hot-tempered,
could not be corrected for anything without flying into a passion,
but when angry he never broke or smashed anything around the
house. When he was a small child he would strike back at his'
parents or other children, but later on he became somewhat easier
to manage.
From the beginning he did not play like other children, and
differed from them in many ways. When a little over four years
of age, he was entered in a kindergarten. Here the teacher com-
plained that he could not be managed with the other children. He
would not join in the games, and would lie upon the floor, refusing
to stand or march in line with the others. The kindergarten
teacher thought he had spinal trouble, and said he lacked concen-
tration. It was after this experience in the kindergarten that the
father, on the advice of the family physician, consulted a number
of specialists, from whose opinion the parents arrived at the
conclusion that the boy was mentally deficient and likely to develop
moral symptoms which would make him dangerous to himself and
other children. A neurologist whose notes, made at the time, I
have been given the opportunity to consult, reports him "fairly well
developed physically, but with a kyphosis of moderate degree due
apparently to muscular habit rather than any bony condition. His
gait was simply rather ataxic and awkward, but he could walk and
run fairly well. He stumbled in walking, would hold the head
forward, but had no distinct Brach-Romberg. . . . The
speech was thick, although he talked fluently. The main defects
in the boy were his mental backwardness and his stumbling gait,
and I take it to be a case of hereditary or congenital ataxia,
cerebellar or spinal. I only saw the boy twice and could not follow
him up."
As a result of the boy's condition and of the medical opinions
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 161
which they had received, the parents sent him to a small private
school in the neighborhood, where it was thought the teacher would
be able to give him individual instruction. When he came to us
he had evidently been taken through fractions in arithmetic, and
had been taught to read. But the mother reported that he did not
know his multiplication tables. When she tried to teach him, he
would forget one day what he had learned the day before. lie had
never been able to tell time very well. If the parents or the teacher,
in their efforts to teach him reading, had asked him to close first
one eye and then the other, they would doubtless have discovered
that he was nearly blind in one eye. The early correction of this
optical defect would probably have led to the amelioration of much
in his condition.
The parents complained that the boy was unable to stand
up for himself, that he would allow strange boys to take things
away from him, damage his bicycle, or pummel him without
making any resistance. The mother talked with him about this,
and both father and mother impressed upon him that when a boy
hit him he must hit back.
They also complained that the child giggled and laughed
inordinately. When a joke was made, he would laugh to an
immoderate extent. They also observed that he was unable to
play ordinaiy children's games with cards, and that he complained
very much of fatigue. He vomited frequently.
In view of this history, I felt I could only suspend judgment,
and I therefore advised the father that I must have the boy in
the Hospital School for at least a month before I would be willing
to express an opinion as to his condition and the treatment required
in his case.
(3) His condition on entering the Ilos-pital School.
Accepting my advice, the father placed the boy under my care in
the Hospital School on October 12, 1907. He appeared to be
a bright, observant boy, manifesting considerable intelligence in
conversation. Our tests showed him to be possessed of a fairly good
memory. His mental retardation was not of a character that
could be revealed in a brief examination. I therefore left the
discovery of his mental defects to be made in the course of his
training, which was in the hands of Miss Tierney, the trainer
and nurse in charge of the school. From her report and my obser-
vation of his work Ave found that his retardation in school work
appeared to be the result of two factors, (1) his own deficiency and
(2) the improper teaching that had been accorded him up to this
162 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
time. For example, in arithmetic lie would attempt fractions,
but in the first days that he was with us he did not perform a
single sum even in simple addition correctly. The following is a
sample of his work in substraction:
6273
?1425
4847
A single instance of this kind means nothing. When an error
like the one made in subtracting 5 from 13 creeps into every opera-
tion there must be some cause for this deficiency. Is it a defect
in the boy or in the educational methods ? There seemed to be no
reason why a boy of his general intelligence could not have been
taught to add and subtract with accuracy. There were also
apparent gaps in his educational equipment. Thus, in division
he worked as follows:
3)17415
585
We could find no evidence of his ever having known that a cipher
should be placed in the quotient to represent the division of 1 by
3. lie was tanglit this in two days and never seemed to lose n
afterwards. Tie also failed to understand how to multiply by a
cipher, lie did not know his multiplication tables.
In reading he left out words and put in others which were not
to be found in the text. lie also misread many words. Thus,
he would read was for were. The comprehension of what he read
was excellent, and despite his many errors with simple words, he
was able to read very difficult words. In reading he was hasty,
rushing quickly at the succession of words. He seemed to be fond
of reading, but he mumbled a great deal to himself when reading
a book.
His spelling was exceedingly deficient. He could not spell
words that were taught in the first grade. Thus, he failed to spell
correctly all of the following words: fruit, picture, taking, liking,
making, ever, kneel, fright, knitting, and never. His writing
was extremely poor and unformed. Apparently he had never
written with pen and ink until he came to us.
The physical examination made by Dr. Ludlum* and myself
was negative, so far as revealing severe somatic or physiological
stigmata of degeneration. His circulation was poor, but was
*Neurologist to the Hospital School, who had charge of the medical
treatment of the case.
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 163
rapidly improved by hygienic baths, massage and exercise. His
appetite was poor and his nutrition below par. lie fatigued
rapidly both at work and play. He was ready to go to bed right
after his supper, which he had at six o'clock in the evening. To
improve his health, he was given a tonic.
He had spells of vomiting,?two or three a week. When his
field of vision was tested he became dizzy and vomited. The
examination of the eyes revealed a marked defect in one eye.
With the right eye alone he was able to read better than with the
two eyes open. With the left eye he could not make out a single
word, and a line of print looked like a black blur upon the page.
Iiis mouth was closed; he was not a mouth-breather, even
during sleep, but the nose was undeveloped, the nostrils small, and
blood often appeared in the nasal passages.
He settled down to work in the school, quite happy and con-
tented. The parents were greatly worried about the result of my
examination, and kept imploring me for an expression of my
opinion. It was a long time, as our work progressed, before I
was able to convince them that there was nothing seriously and
permanently wrong with the boy. Some of my letters to the father
help to develop the case, and I therefore print some extracts from
them here. On October 16, 1907, I wrote:
My Dear Mr. C.:
I liave been observing your boy's work, continuing my examination.
I wish that I could write with such positiveness as to disabuse Mrs. C.'s
mind of all cause for worry. I am not able to do this, but I can assure
you that there is no reason to worry greatly. I have not as yet been able
to observe from my examination of Edgar, that there is any reason why
he should not be able to take a full public school education and develop
into a perfectly normal young man.
Edgar is an extremely nervous boy. His mind seems to me to be
very quick and alert,?so quick that he does not give sufficient attention
to detail. He ought to have been trained very early to do some of his
work with great exactitude. In all ordinary matters he seems to be
quite bright. He can repeat a story that he has read quite well, perhaps
a little bit better than the average boy of eleven years. I may come
to the conclusion that Edgar is a boy of a peculiar mind, a mind that
may perhaps be cultivated to some work above the average. I must
observe him somewhat longer. We must undertake to teach him some
simple things, and see how well he grasps and how well he retains. We
have already found that he grasps quite readily. It will take me a week
to see whether he loses what he has once been taught.
I find that he fatigues very easily, growing tired and nervous. His
164 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
circulation is not as good as it should be. We shall strive to improve
this with baths, exercise and massage.
I want you to assure Mrs. C. that on the whole the result of my
examination is favorable. Dr. Ludlum and I are not able to con-
vince ourselves that there is any mental defect. We are convinced,
however, that he is seriously in need of a training which will, in some
directions, go all the way back to the beginnings of school work. I will
write you again in the course of a week, or if anything is discovered
by me which forms my judgment positively one way or the other. I
shall be very greatly surprised if I should discover Edgar to be perma-
nently a mental defective.
Very truly yours,
Oil October 18th I wrote:
My Dear Mr. C.:
Edgar's right eye is practically normal. His left eye is quite defect-
ive. It is very astigmatic and his vision is very much reduced. He has
about one-tenth normal vision for distance. If this condition is sub-
stantiated by the examination of an oculist, the condition of Edgar's
eyes would account for a great deal of his difficulty in progressing in
school work. It is necessary for us to have Edgar's vision corrected
immediately, as it is very disadvantageous for him to iise his eyes in
their present condition.
Very truly yours,
Following this letter he was sent to Dr. Burton Chance, who
refracted his eyes.* On October 23d I wrote to the father as
follows:
My Dear Mr. C.:
I have found one cause of Edgar's inability to progress in school
work. His left eye is quite defective, while his right eye is very nearly
normal. My diagnosis of deficient vision has been substantiated by
the examination of an oculist, to whom I sent him. Edgar's eyes will
now be refracted and glasses will be prescribed for him. I will then
see how he progresses.
An inequality in the capacity of the two eyes, such as Edgar has, is
usually attended with somewhat serious consequences. Edgar complains
of headaches, which are undoubtedly from the eyes. Moreover, I believe
that we must attribute to the eyes alone his inability to learn to read
*The findings were a slight inward deviation of the axes, associated
with a hypermetropia of the right eye and a myopia of much greater
degree of the left eye. The vision of the right could be made to equal the
normal in spite of the hypermetropia, while that of the left equalled one-
twelfth the normal and was practically amblyopic.
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 165
with exactness and his difficulty in some of his work in arithmetic.
Outside of this defect of vision I have not been able to discover anything
seriously wrong with the boy. I believe now that at the end of this
month I shall be able to report to you with confidence that the boy has
normal mentality, but that he has been backward in school work owing
to his defect of vision and owing to poor training at school. I also
incline to the belief that much of his irritability may have arisen from
the eyes producing nervousness.
Very truly yours,
On October 29th I wrote the following letter:
My Dear Mr. C.:
It is very necessary for Edgar to remain with us until a full month
has been completed. I have sent Edgar to an oculist, who has made a
very careful examination of his eyes and will, I expect, finish to-morrow
by giving him a prescription for glasses. It will be necessary for Edgar
to wear these glasses always. When there is one very bad eye and one
nearly normal eye, it is very hard to get the two eyes working together
properly. I shall want to see that his glasses are satisfactory and shall
want to discover what improvement he makes in school work from the
wearing of the glasses.
The question of where Edgar shall go to school is an important one.
I am beginning to encourage myself with the thought that if Edgar is
given special instruction he ought to be able by Eebruary 1st, the begin-
ning of the second term, to enter his proper grade in a public school and
progress normally with the other children. The schools in A  are
good schools, at least that is their reputation. If he were entered at the
present time, he would undoubtedly have trouble, owing to the fact that
there are many curious gaps in his knowledge, especially concerning
arithmetic; certain simple things which he ought to comprehend and
would have comprehended if he had been taught, he appears not to know.
I think that Miss Tierney could do a great deal for him between now
and Eebruary 1st. I am very much interested in the boy, and as I have a
small fund at my disposal for looking after a few of these children, I
should, I think, be glad to make a special arrangement with you, keeping
Edgar at my school on such terms as you feel you could afford. I do
this because I want to continue my experiment with him until -I can
return him to you with his backwardness entirely made up.
Unless you are confident that the military academy to which you
thought of sending the boy is a better school than a public school, I
would not send him to it. If he returns to school immediately after his
first month with me is over, I want to be put in communication with
his teacher, as I can tell her some things that will help her to under-
stand him.
Very sincerely yours,
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The first month's work clearly demonstrated that Edgar was
not intellectually defective. His extreme retardation in school
subjects, an intellectual deficiency for a boy of his age, appeared to
be difficult to explain. Undoubtedly the defect of vision had made
his school work difficult, and may perhaps have been solely respon-
sible for the backwardness. Children with eye strain of the sort
from which Edgar suffered, cannot concentrate their attention on
their work. They also fail to form clear visual images which are
essential for the acquisition of satisfactory memories, and thus they
experience a very serious handicap in the learning of reading, spell-
ing, and arithmetic. Moreover, eye strain of this character produces
in some cases a state of mental confusion. There can be little doubt
that much of the boy's nervousness was due to eye strain, for this
ceased shortly after his eye defect had been corrected. Tie had
been troubled with vomiting, and the prolonged testing of his
vision always brought on a fit of nausea. After he had been
given glasses, he had but two attacks of vomiting, one following
immediately upon first wearing them. The wearing of the glasses
also resulted in greater mental alertness, and a greater accuracy in
reading and writing. They probably also assisted in the improve-
ment which took place in his health, though this was brought about
in large part by more hygienic food, baths and a tonic.
The moral symptoms displayed by this boy are of great
interest. By the end of the first month I could not make up my
mind whether these symptoms were pathological, the result of an
earlier diseased condition of the brain, or whether I should view
them as normal traits of character. Fortunately the father deter-
mined to leave the boy with us until June, in order that we might
overcome the backwardness in school subjects. This gave me an
opportunity to study the moral features of the case.
The first symptom worthy of note was obstinacy. Edgar
could not be forced in any of his school work, nor could external
discipline be exercised without producing a resistance which was
certainly excessive, and might be viewed as pathological. It was
necessary to treat him in a very different manner from the ordinary
boy. The trainer could not say,?"do this," with any hope that
the command would be obeyed, but if the boy were invited or
requested in a mild manner, especially if he were allowed to reason
the matter out, he became entirely amenable to the discipline of
the school and home. Tie at first refused to take the tonic pre-
scribed for him before each meal. When brought to the breakfast
table, and told that he could not have his breakfast until he had
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 167
taken the tonic, he refused to eat a mouthful. The same pro-
cedure brought about the same result at dinner, but when Miss
Tierney put before him the solicitude which his father and mother
felt for his welfare, and their desire that he should get an educa-
tion, and how necessary it was for him to take the medicine, he"
finally yielded and never afterwards made any objection. This
kind of treatment made him more and more compliant to tho
demands put upon him by the Hospital School. I have no doubt
that if at the outset we had employed the ordinary school methods,
the obstinacy would have developed instead of diminishing. By
the time we considered him ready for an ordinary public school,
the middle of January, he had become thoroughly interested in
his work, and this element of his character was no deterrent to
his school progress.
A second trait of character amounting to a pathological
symptom was the uncontrolled and apparently unreasonable out-
break of temper, at times resembling an insane rage. Without
a sufficient cause, he would rush down from the second floor and
violently assault another boy in the school. These outbursts of
violence and temper appeared to be periodic. They were ushered
in by two or three days of irritability. Their frequency diminished
very rapidly during his stay with us, and on Jannary 10th he had
his last attack. Undoubtedly his general improvement in health
assisted in causing their disappearance, but they were made to
disappear largely because we finally reached an understanding
as to their origin and nature. In what manner I shall proceed
to relate.
Edgar had one trait of character which cannot be called
abnormal per se, but which in his case was undoubtedly excessive.
Tlis parents never mentioned it to us, and doubtless they had
never observed its presence. He was intensely jealous. Even
after he had been with us for several months, he would be unpleas-
antly affected for two or three days if another boy was shown some
favor by even a relative or outsider. He was extremely ready to
claim that one or another of his associates was the "teacher's pet."
He was always on the lookout for favors shown to others, in which
he did not participate. Naturally, this was accompanied by intense
selfishness. He never offered to share a penny, or a bit of candy,
or a cake with another child in the school. If he could not
immediately use what he had, he stored it away for some future
occasion. Rather than use a postage stamp that belonged to him-
self, he would borrow a postage stamp from some one else and
168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
forget to return it. Ill my judgment the selfishness was not exces-
sive for a boy, but -the jealousy was certainly present to an inor-
dinate degree, and yet I am not willing to consider what at times
I called an "insane jealousy" a pathological symptom. I view
it now as a trait of character which he will have to struggle against
all his life. Miss Tierney's influence upon him was for the good,
and this influence increased after we discovered the relation between
his jealousy and his outbursts of passion,?for example, he prob-
ably ran downstairs and assaulted the other boy for what appeared
to us to be no cause, for the reason that he had been brooding for
a day or two, or three perhaps, over some chance favor that had
been displayed to this boy, which he considered unfair. His
jealousy made it impossible for him to win a game of checkers
or cards from a child who had much less intellectual capacity than
he. lie was always fearful that the other boy would cheat and
get the better of him in some way. lie therefore did not watch
his own hand. The first game he ever won in his life he wron some
time during the spring, after he had been taught how to control this
passion of jealousy.
He was a child fond of nagging and teasing. He would
knock another boy's hat off, or give him a gentle pinch. If the
other boy retaliated, he went him one better, then when the inevit-
able outcome of this occurred, he was the one who blamed the other
boy for teasing him. After the Christmas holidays, the father
brought him back with the report that Edgar had been struck by
another boy in the school, and that Miss Tierney had not allowed
Edgar to hit the other boy back, as, according to the father's advice,
he ought to have done. It required a great deal of diplomacy to con-
vince the father that this kind of admonition was not appropriate
for his boy. While he loved to tease, and had the elements of a
bully, he was, like most bullies, a coward. When it finally came
to blows, I never knew him to make a stand-up fight with some one
whom he had been nagging. While these traits are unpleasant,
they are not sufficiently unusual to be called pathological.
The boy also had certain habits which might awaken a
suspicion of a pathological origin. He would pick his nose and
sores on the body, and then put his fingers in his mouth. He
also chewed his food at table with his mouth open, and made a
great deal of noise while eating. But I scarcely consider these
habits pathological, for they are of frequent occurrence in boys
who awaken no suspicion of mental defect. Of course it must be
borne in mind that this child came of parents to whom these habits
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 169
were disgusting, and that they had tried to break him of them, and
failed, but we must not suppose that they failed because they
necessarily had a pathological character to deal with. It may have
been that they were not gifted with sufficient psychological insight
to train a boy who presented just this combination of character
traits, each in itself normal.
If, for example, we had failed to discover early in our treat-
ment of him that there was one trait of character to which we
could always appeal,?a reasonableness, combined with an ambi-
tion and pride in accomplishment,?it would have been impossible
for us to have solved in the easy way we did, the difficulties pre-
sented by the emotional and moral characteristics of this boy. It
was always possible, except during the actual occurrence of some
outburst of temper, to appeal to Edgar's reasonableness, his desire
to get on in the world, his wish to please his parents, his pride in
outdoing his fellows. Indeed, I am not at all convinced that the
exaggeration of his jealousy, of the nagging and teasing, may not
have come in very large measure from the observation of his own
inefficiency, when he compared what he himself was able to do,
with what other boys were doing. Consequently, in a double
sense his eye defect may have been responsible for the exacerbation
of his moral symptoms, in the first place because the eye strain
induced a hyperexcitability of his nervous system, and in the
second place because the defect of vision made him ineffective,
despite the fact that he must have been aware of his mental superi-
ority to boys who far outdid him in the elements of school work.
He certainly showed signs of shunning competition with other boys.
In our Hospital School, they vied with one another as to who
should ran the talking machine. He sat by, apparently uninter-
ested.
The complex of emotional and moral symptoms which I have
just passed in review, presents the picture of a pathological con-
dition often found in children recovering from an injury to the
brain, at birth or in the early years of life. Associated with these
symptoms was the intellectual deficiency. The motor symptoms
which are apt to be associated with the pathological emotional and
intellectual conditions, were not present in this case, unless we
view the marked inefficiency in writing and drawing, which showed
itself during the entire course of his training, as a survival of an
earlier motor disorder. It appears to me to be quite within the
realm of probability that this boy at the age of five years was in an
acute condition as the result of some, perhaps slight, injury to the
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
brain; that in tlie course of liis development from five to eleven
years of age, tlie injury to the brain was recovered from, and the
motor symptoms gradually subsided and to all intents and pur-
poses disappeared by the time he had reached his twelfth year;
that the brain, however, remained in an unstable and irritable
condition, and hence the retardation in intellectual development
and the emotional symptoms. There is certainly no evidence, in
view of his rapid intellectual and moral development, that his
condition in October, 1907, or at any time, rested upon an incur-
able defect of the brain.
On the other hand, why need we believe that there remained
any trace of this supposed injury when the boy had reached his
twelfth year ? Why, indeed, may we not assume that the brain had
become entirely normal at an even earlier period than this, by the
time he had reached, let us say, his sixth year ? Then we should
view the mental deficiency and the defects of character, which he
presented in his twelfth year, as the very natural result of the
failure by the parents to provide for the proper training of a
normal boy, because they had come to look upon him as abnormal,
presenting as he did traits of character which rendered him difficult
to manage. A simple arrest of mental and moral development,
the result in the first instance of some cerebral injury but later
on due solely to lack of training and a defect of vision, is my inter-
pretation of the emotional and moral symptoms which in my opin-
ion do not suffice to remove him from the class of' normal children.
If, then, the picture I have painted is that of a normal boy, it may
appear to many that I have drawn a very unlovely character, pre-
senting as it does extreme irascibility, jealousy and selfishness. But
it must be taken into consideration that this boy was induced
during the eight or nine months that he was subjected to our
training, to make a manly and successful effort to overcome his
defects of character. This must be placed on the credit side,
when we form an estimate of the worth of this child's character.
Indeed, it is my opinion that children of strong passions and
impulses are better material to work with than those who are
merely indifferent, and that an excess of temper and obstinacy
is more easily dealt with than excessive amiability. Under proper
guidance, children of strong impulses, even though these may in
themselves be objectionable and likely if let alone to lead on to a
perverted and practically hopeless moral condition, possess the
materials upon which may be built an adult character of fine
quality as well as strength.
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 171
Edgar was under training in the Hospital School from
October 12, 1907, to June 25, 1908. In the record of progress
which follows, I have eliminated all but the essential features.
With reference to the development of emotional stability and
moral character, my notes are given in greater fulness of detail
than with reference to the methods and other particulars of the
intellectual training and improvement.
(4) Record of Progress. On October 30th, he began to
wear glasses. On November 3d, he had an outbreak of temper,
in which he lost control of himself. On November 4tli, he com-
plained of headache and vomited. On November 11th, he again
complained of severe headache and vomited and had an outburst of
temper.
His school work, in which he had begun to make some pro-
gress, before he put on glasses, now showed marked improvement
although he still continued to make his characteristic mistakes. He
complained constantly of being tired, lounged in his seat, rested his
head on the desk and usually had to be urged to take any kind of
exercise. On November 21st, he began taking a tonic. By De-
cember 1st his physical improvement was beginning to be noticeable.
He no longer lounged in his seat and he sat erect when studying.
He did not seem to fatigue so easily, and his attention was more
steady.
On December 12th he again had an outburst of temper in
which he attacked another boy without any apparent cause, running
downstairs and assaulting him. He also tried to bite the assistant
trainer. He was irritable for several days at this time. While
in this state he pulled the bedclothes from another boy in the
school and annoyed him so much that he was obliged to leave the
room.
He returned home for the Christmas holidays. In his report
the father commented on the fact that he seemed to play more
naturally than usual with the other boys, that both he and his wife
had remarked that the boy played a game of cards with a cousin
thirteen years old in quite a normal fashion. He complained that
the child continued to giggle inordinately. Edgar had no
outbursts of temper while at home. The father observed that
the boy told time better than he used to. His disposition was
much improved. Pie read a great deal at night, having been
given five or six books for Christmas which interested him greatly.
The father reports that he noticed before he came to the school
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that he would often have severe headaches and would go to bed
early. During the Christmas holidays he had no headaches and
had to be driven to bed.
On January 7th he was operated on for adenoids. Following
this operation he was irritable for three days and on January 15th,
he had another outburst of temper, but much less violent than
heretofore. Miss Tierney reports that he tells her now when
he feels the attacks coming on and by talking to him she is able to
check the active outbreaks. This was the last violent outbreak of
temper that he had during his stay at the Hospital School.
On January 15th he was entered in the third grade of a
Philadelphia public school. The normal age for children in this
grade is nine years. Measured by his classmates, Edgar was two
years behind in his school studies. ITe presented his first school
report on Monday, March 21st. He had received excellent in
conduct, excellent in spelling, excellent in geography, good in read-
ing, good in language and poor in writing and drawing. I had
rather feared that he might not be able to stand the strain of the
school work and of association with other boys, but his teacher
expressed very great satisfaction with the excellent work he was
doing, and spoke of him to Miss Tierney as one of the best pupils in
her room. He prepares all of his lessons for the next day before
going to bed. He has to be sent to bed. I have myself observed him
come in from the street, where he had been roller skating, in order
to get his lessons of an afternoon. He seems to be able to work at
odd moments, showing very excellent concentration of attention. He
had some difficulty with a boy at school on one occasion, claiming
that the boy ordered him out of the hall, and that he kicked the
boy and then ran home to report. The boy followed him, but he
escaped by getting into the house first. He had to be coaxed to
go back to school the next morning, but he finally consented.
Since the operation for adenoids a marked improvement has
been noticed in his physical health. He is now unusually obedient
and does with the best will in the world whatever he is asked to
do. He has no more nausea or vomiting. His improvement in
spelling and arithmetic is most remarkable.
The boy is ambitious in his school work. On March 11th
his name was placed on the roll of honor for the week, for the
first time. He exhibited his record on this occasion, and also on
subsequent occasions when he had achieved this honor, with the
greatest pride. He realizes that he has a bad temper, which is
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 173
apt to get him into trouble with the other boys, and he remains
at home until nearly school time, so as to avoid getting into trouble
with them.
His inability to control himself is shown in his temper in
games. He is not good at any game. In fact, he always loses.
This is to some extent due to selfishness and excitability. He
seems to be in such fear that someone will take an advantage of
him, that he watches his antagonist rather than his own hand.
When he loses his- game, he becomes very angry. Thus on
March 15th he ran down stairs to Miss Tierney and said that he
could not win a game, and would not play any more. He was
greatly excited, but calmed down after being talked to, and
admitted that his temper was due to jealousy. The next evening-
he was told to play a game and see if he could not carry it through
without losing his temper. He played with another boy in the
Hospital School, and lost as usual, but he did not lose his temper
this time; he came to Miss Tierney and reported with some pride
that he had controlled his temper, although he had again played
and lost the game. When jealousy leads him to resentment, he
will torment another child in every way possible. Thus on the
evening of March 27th, he kept striking another child with a
strap in a teasing manner, pulling his hair, and otherwise worrying
him. When he was talked to by an assistant trainer in a kindly
way about this, with a view to persuading him to stop, he refused
to obey, and simply said "I don't care." Miss Tierney was then
called, and when she went into the room he said he would stop
teasing D?, but as soon as she had left the room he began again,
claiming that D? was her pet, and had everything. He said he
hated D? because he had everything, and made the remark, "If
I had two aunts living in Philadelphia I could go anywhere too."
(This was apropos of the fact that D? had two aunts who.occa-
sionally took him to the theatre.) He said he hated everybody
in the house. He continued to bother D ?so that they could not
be kept in the same room for that night. When in these spells
of anger or jealousy his eyes become very small and bright, and
the cornea seems to redden. His face gets very red, and his whole
expression changes.
On the following day he kept up this tormenting of D?,
because D? had been taken to a lecture the previous evening, and
he (Edgar) had been kept at home in punishment for his bad
temper of the night before. With the assistance of another boy
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
in the school, D?'s hands and feet were tied, and the two cul-
prits walked off without permission. "When they came back,
Edgar kept on teasing D?, calling him the "pet of the school,"
was irritable all day and very unkind to D?.
On March 29th he was still in what Miss Tierney had taught
him to call his "mean mood," and sulked all Sunday morning,
refusing to go to church. In the evening he was a little more
agreeable, and sat on the porch. By April 4th he had overcome his
mean mood, was in a pleasant humor, and ashamed of his behavior
of the past few days. On this day he came voluntarily to Miss
Tierney and asked her if he had not been behaving himself better
in the last day or two, admitting that he was jealous of D?.
When Miss Tierney talked to him about his faults, he promised to
do his best to keep his temper down, although he said it made him
mad, because D? had everything.
By April 6th his outbreaks of jealousy, like his violent outbursts
of temper, were beginning to be under control. By this time also
his articulation was noticeably improved. I had him read from a
history which was far beyond his ordinary reading lesson, and he
read extremely well. He lisped on a few words, but when I asked
him to pronounce them carefully, he pronounced them without any
lisp. He lisps more when talking than in reading. The lisp is
undoubtedly a persistent habit. The grade teacher reports on
April 6th that he is one of the brightest pupils she has in her class.
His average for a test in arithmetic made about this time was 67.
This branch is now his most difficult study. Excepting in arith-
metic and writing, he is doing excellent work. He has caught
up to and is perhaps beyond the average of children in his grade.
On April 8th, Edgar reported that his teacher said that his
language work was the best in the class. The story was about
George Washington, on the rendering of which she complimented
him, saying that he knew more facts than any other boy.
On April 9th, he came home with a language lesson marked
good. He claimed that another boy was jealous of his mark, and
had torn up his own work, because it was only fair. He fre-
quently makes remarks of this kind about the other boys, seeming
to think that they are jealous of his good work. He also volun-
teered the information that one boy in the class was marked
excellent, but this did not bother him as this boy was the "teacher's
pet" and she would have marked him high anyway.
Perhaps because of this boy's mark, Edgar sat down to dinner
sullen and irritable. Miss Tierney was absent, and an assistant
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 175
trainer was in charge. When asked if he would have some
butter, he said, yes, but when another boy refused, he said he did
not care for any either. When his attention was called to the
fact that it might be well for him to develop a little originality,
and not copy others, lie said, "Well, I will have a little butter after
a while." The assistant trainer said, "No, if you don't take it
now, you can do without." lie retorted that he did not want any
dinner anyway. lie was advised that he would be the chief loser
by going without his dinner, and that he was spiting only himself.
When dinner was brought in, he helped himself liberally. But
he was still irritable towards D?, and when he was told to let
D? alone, he grew cross and wanted to leave the room, but he was
compelled to sit still. When the trainer told him that D? was
really too good-humored to associate with a boy like himself, that
when he went out into the world, he would be shunned by everyone
and have no friends, as other people would not take his nasty
remarks so nicely, he made a face at the trainer, stuck out his
tongue, and said he did not care what other people thought of him.
But during the rest of the meal he was in a reflective mood, and
after finishing his dinner, when D? asked if he might skate,
Edgar asked if he could go on the porch and watch D?. The
rest of the evening he appeared to be in a good humor.
On April 10th, he brought home an arithmetic paper marked
100, and his average in review was 91. This kept him in the best
kind of humor all day. He asked the trainer what she thought of
his general behavior during the week, and when she told him it was
not very good, he said it would be better next week, as he was
trying hard. On April 11th, he was in good humor, played a
game of marbles and won the game. He came in very delighted
to report the fact, saying that this was the first time in his life
he had won any game. He also asked "Don't you think I am
getting along well ? It has been a long time since I quarrelled
with anybody." He was out of doors playing the greater part of
the day, and had no outbursts or quarrels.
On April 12th he attended church in the morning, and spent
the afternoon with D? and his aunt in the park. In the evening
Miss E. invited him to attend a special service. He made ready
to go, but when he got as far as the door he said he had changed
his mind and would not go. When coaxed, he continued to refuse,
and ran upstairs. Miss Tierney called him down, and said,
"Edgar, that does not look as if you were improving or getting
along well." It was pointed out to him how very unkind it was to
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
act in that way when people were good to him, and that it showed
an ungenerous disposition. After being reasoned with in this
fashion for a few minutes, he said, "If I run, I will catch up with
them and go." lie ran out, caught them, and went to church with
them.
On April 14tli he again had 100 in arithmetic. Three dollars
was sent to him in a letter from his father. The receipt of this
money delighted him. ITe is always pleased when he gets money.
He wanted to keep it, and was not willing that the trainer should
take charge of it. He said he knew a place where he could hide it.
On April 27th he obtained an average of 75 for a review.. He
apologized for this low grade on the ground that he should have
had a higher mark, but that a boy sitting near him defaced his
paper. When the paper was brought home, however, this was
found to be an untruth. The work was all his own, and the correc-
tions on his paper were made by the teacher. The mistakes made
in the review lesson were in new work in arithmetic.
On April 28th he went to school as usual and was in good humor
until evening, when he and D? went out skating. Edgar came
home angry, claiming that D ?had made fun of him, and that
D? felt too proud because he could skate better than he. He
would not go out again, saying that he would rather study anyway,
as he had more to study than D?. He is by far D?'s intellectual
superior. When D? was questioned, he said he had not made fun
of Edgar, but that Edgar had become angry because he could take
longer strokes and skate faster. Edgar remained in the house and
studied his lessons, and went to bed about nine o'clock.
On April 29th he came home from school, claiming that he had
been compelled to write certain words ten times, whereas another
boy who was the "teacher's pet" had written them only five times.
When asked how he knew this, he said he had picked the boy's
paper out of the waste paper basket, and found that his words
were written only five times each. He said he was never going
to write his work more than five times in the future. He seemed
very jealous of this boy. This is an illustration of what jealousy
will lead him to do. On May 1st, D? was taken to the circus.
Edgar did not go, but this did not seem to affect him to jealousy,
as it always had heretofore, and he even asked D? to tell him
about what he had seen at the circus. But in the evening, when
he played a game with F? and D? he lost the game and said it
was because E? cheated. He teased F? calling her a cheat. He
was suffering at this time from a cold, which probably tended
? MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 177
somewhat to make him more readily exasperated. On the following
day, May 2d, he said, "Miss Tierney, it is a long time now since
I had any fits (meaning his outbursts of temper). Do you think
I wTill ever have any more?" Miss Tierney told him, "No, not
if you keep on trying to overcome your jealousy." He claimed
he was not jealous of anybody now, except of the boy in school
who thought himself so smart. He talked a good deal about this
boy claiming that the teacher petted him to such an extent that it
made everybody mad.
On May 6th his cold continued pretty bad, but his humor was
excellent. He brought home a report of 100 in arithmetic, which
pleased him greatly. He is always delighted Avhen he gets a high
grade. On May 7th he came home very much excited and indignant
because he and some others had been searched for money that was
lost. It took quite a long time to quiet him down, and until he
was quiet he was unable to eat his luncheon. He finally calmed
down, but during the afternoon he referred to it frequently.
Despite his excitement, he prepared his lessons for the next day,
read a story, and played a game in a good-natured manner. On
May 8th his name was again on the roll of honor, but he had mislaid
his glasses and brought home work from school which he had copied
wrong. He had written m's for n's and left out letters in a number
of words. The following day he wrote a letter to his mother which
was very badly spelled, showing the kind of spelling errors that are
easily referred to difficulties of vision. His work showed that he
could not possibly get along well without his glasses. On May
10th he and D? went with D?'s aunt to gather some flowers.
When he came home he requested that his bunch of flowers be kept
separate from D?'s, because he had the larger bunch,?another
manifestation of his selfishness. On May 11th, he came home from
school very much excited. He said he was afraid his teacher
would take his name off the roll of honor, but it would be all on
account of another boy. This other boy was jealous because
Edgar's name was on the roll of honor, and kept slapping him;
and because he told the boy to stop slapping him, he supposed
the teacher would take his name off the roll of honor. Tie said
another boy also slapped him, and claimed that he did this so
that he would have to talk and have his name taken off the roll.
His name so far had not been taken off the roll, but he said if he
should come home and say it was taken off, Miss Tierney would
know the reason why. On May 12th he reported that his name was
still on the roll of honor. This put him in a very good humor.
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
On May 13th, he was sent from the dinner table to wash his
hands. On leaving the room he said, "I won't come back."
However, he did come back after washing his hands. When tJtie
meal was over, he went to Miss Tierney and said, "I nearly got
mad but I just said to myself 'I will control my temper.' " May
15th, he came home from school with his glasses broken. He
said a boy at school had broken them, but he did not report it to the
teacher because this boy was the teacher's pet and she might only
punish him (Edgar) for it. Miss Tierney asked him why he
disliked this particular boy so much. He said, "Oh, he thinks he
is so smart," and then he told about the good clothes this boy
wore and that he always carried a flower in his button hole and
looked at him with a grin on his face as much as to say "I am
smarter than you."
On May 20th, he reported that all the boys with the exception
of three of the teacher's pets had been kept after school for
leaving the room in a disorderly fashion. ITe claimed he had been
unjustly punished, but he studied away at his lessons during the
afternoon and evening. On May 21st, in the evening, while play-
ing with some other boys, he stopped playing and left the room.
After he had gone to his room, he called Miss Tierney and asked
her if she thought he had left the boys because he was angry. He
said he wanted her to be sure that he had not lost his temper and
claimed that he had only left the room because he Avas feeling very
warm and Miss Tierney had told him not to get overheated in
playing. He asked if she did not think that he had been control-
ling himself pretty well. On June 5th, Edgar came home from
school with a distinguished note signed by the principal, testify-
ing to his good conduct and he asked if he might keep this report
and was allowed to keep it. On June 23d, he came to me with
his term report from the school. He had been exempted from
examinations and promoted to the fourth grade. He was very
proud of the record that he had made and said he was glad to go
home as "he felt like himself again." He said to me, "Dr.
Witmer, do you think I am cured now ? I liavn't got mad since
the operation. Of course F? came into the room once or twice
and bothered around and I chased her out, but that wasn't like
what I used to do."
On June 25th, he returned home and during the summer was
given private tuition to prepare him for skipping one or more
grades.
MENTAL AND MORAL DEFICIENCY. 179
His present condition. No comment of mine can add to tlie
force of the following extract from a recent letter of the boy's
father:
October 10, 1908.
Dear Dr. Wither:
Your letter received and would have answered sooner but was
waiting for Edgar to receive his monthly report. They have placed him
in 6 B, which means he has three years before he enters high school, if
he does not miss. He received 8 in history and geography and 1 in all
other studies, which we considered fairly good, as we only expected he
would be placed in the 5th. We have urged him to do better next month
and try to bring home some 10's on his report. We consider Edgar very
much improved.
Yours sincerely,
C.
