News and Comment
================

Five years ago the Visiting Nurse Society of Philadelphia placed
a nurse in a large public school in one of the poorest quarters of the
city, to work in conjunction with the medical inspector. They chose
Miss Anna L. Stanley for this post, and for several years she carried
on the work alone. Last fall the society placed four other nurses in
the schools, under the direction of Miss Stanley. As a result of the
successful pioneer work done by the Visiting Nurse Society, Councils
have recently authorized the Board of Education to appoint a super244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
vising nurse at a salary of $1,200 a year, and five assistant nurses at
$900 each. It will be a source of gratification to those who have followed the history of the school nurses, to learn that Miss Stanley has
been appointed supervising nurse by the Board of Education, for it is
largely owing to her tact and devotion that the experiment has been
brought to a successful conclusion.
The British Child Study Association has united with the Childhood Society to form the Child-Study Society. In consequence of the
reorganization, The Paidologist, hitherto the journal of the ChildStudy Association, has been discontinued, and its place will be taken
by a new magazine called Child Study, which will be published as the
official organ of the new society.
The officers of the Child-Study Society are: President, Sir Edward
W. Brabrook, C.B.; Vice-President, The Hon. Sir John Cockburn,
M.D.; Honorary Secretaries, Miss Mary Louch and W. J. Durrie Mulford, Esq.
The Philadelphia Teachers' Association, organized three years ago
as an experiment, has proved a flourishing success. Its membership of
nearly four thousand includes representatives in every public school
in the city. For the winter of 1907-08 committees have been appointed to
plan and discuss every phase of educational work. These committees
are as follows: On professional work; on higher schools; on grammar
schools; on primary and kindergarten schools; on professional reading;
on public meetings; on the immigrant child; on special schools; on
legislation; on entertainment; on membership; a conference committee
of teachers of eighth year grammar and first year high school; on Lewis
Elkin Boom (in the Jefferson Hospital); and an auditing committee.
Of these, the committee on special schools is naturally the one
whose proceedings are of the greatest interest to readers of The Psychological Clinic. In the Normal School, on the 11th of November, the
committee held a symposium on "The Problem of Special Education."
The program included addresses by Miss Lydia A. Ivirby, superintendent
of special schools; Mr. George Wheeler and Dr Oliver P. Cornman,
district superintendents; Mr. E. A. Huntington, principal of Special
School No. 3; Miss Mary Days, a teacher in Special School No. 5;
Miss Corinne B. Arnold and Miss Margaret Maguire, supervising principals; and Dr Walter S. Cornell, medical inspector. On December
9th another conference was held in the Normal School to discuss the
question, "Who Shall Determine whether a Child Is a Fit Candidate
for a Special School?" Four observation trips for the teachers of
special schools have also been arranged, the first of which was made on
Saturday, November lGtli, to the New Jersey Training School for
Feebleminded Children at Vineland, N. J.
