Provision for Exceptional Children in the Public Schools
=========================================================

By James H. Van Sickle.
Superintendent Baltimore Public Schools.
The problem of educating extremely backward and defective
children in the public schools is a comparatively new one. Before
compulsory attendance laws began to be strictly enforced, public
school authorities had no adequate idea of the magnitude of the
problem. Children who failed to get along fairly well in the
ordinary classes either by reason of their low mentality, or their
refractory bearing, or both, often ceased to attend, and were
absent or truant without the knowledge of the authorities. In an
article in The Teacher, December, 1907, Dr. Witmer comments
upon this fact in discussing the evolution of special classes in the
Philadelphia schools. Before attendance at school was enforced
by law the Superintendent had reported that there were not
enough backward children in any neighborhood in Philadelphia
to form a special class. By 1900 there were reported 1,122
children in the schools too backward for the usual grade instruction.
The experience of Philadelphia is the experience of Baltimore
and doubtless of all large communities. Before the attendance
laws were effectively enforced there were as many of these special
cases in the community as there are now; few of them, however,
remained long enough in school to attract serious attention or to
hinder the instruction of the more tractable and capable.
If it were not for the fact that the presence of mentally defective children in a school room interfered with the proper
training of the capable children, their education would appeal
less powerfully to boards of education and the tax-paying public.
It is manifestly more expensive to maintain small classes for backward and refractory children, who will profit relatively little by
the instruction they receive, than to maintain large classes for
children of normal powers. But the presence in a class of one
or two mentally or morally defective children so absorbs the
energies of the teacher and makes so imperative a claim upon her
attention that she cannot under these circumstances properly
(102)
EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN IN SCHOOLS. 103
instruct the number commonly enrolled in a class. School authorities must therefore greatly reduce this number, employ many
more teachers, and build many more school rooms to accommodate
a given number of pupils, or else they must withdraw into small
classes these unfortunates who impede the regular progress of
normal children. The plan of segregation is now fairly well
established in large cities, and superintendents and teachers are
working on the problem of classification, so that they may make
the best of this imperfect material. Whether or not school boards
really approve spending money upon the education of mentally defective children, the enforcement of the compulsory attendance
laws leaves no other course open. We are committed to their education so far as their capacity permits. The movement for their
education is supported on other grounds by those who are not
very much, if at all, concerned with the financial side and the
need of protecting the rights of the more capable children.
The investigations of modern science, as well as the philanthropic sentiments that actuate people in every community, have
reinforced the practical and economic arguments which were the
primary considerations whenever public school authorities had
formed special classes.
The action this very year of the Baltimore School Board in
establishing special classes for epileptics illustrates this fact.
Formerly a child, who was subject to severe attacks, was not
allowed to attend school after it was known that an attack was
liable to occur in the school room in the presence of other children,
some of whom were sure to suffer nervously in consequence. Even
after the compulsory attendance law went into operation we excluded the worst cases; but we were surprised to find in the spring
of 1907, on taking a census of these children, that we had 83 of
them in school. Almost wholly as a protective measure, and in
the interests of the normal children, it was decided to try experimentally their separation from other children. Three special
classes were authorized by the Board and two were organized
early last fall. We wish to study these two before proceeding
further.
At once it may be said, "Why make the education of
epileptics a public school matter at all? Institutional care is
needed by these children." This is true of a large number of
them, certainly, but perhaps not of all. Home and day-school
care are sufficient for the less serious cases. Institutional care
104 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
is, however, at present out of the question. Maryland has an
excellent school for the feeble-minded at Owing Mills, just outside of Baltimore, but it is more than full, and it has a long
waiting list of applicants. !Not until the state realizes the magnitude of this very problem and increases the capacity of the school
can the city send all or any appreciable number of its epileptics
of school age to this state residential institution. Meanwhile they
must receive such instruction as will best fit them for self-support
or partial self-support, and they must not be allowed to remain in
the regular school rooms. Besides accomplishing a useful educational purpose the segregation of the mentally defective children
will call attention to the need of enlarged facilities at the State
institution where undoubtedly many of these children ought to be.
Not all parents are as yet willing to send their afflicted
children to the special class. The very existence of the class,
however, enables us to relieve the regular class of the presence
of the epileptic child, for now, when we exclude him from the
regular class, we are not depriving him of opportunity for such
education as he is fitted to receive. On the contrary we are offering him an opportunity superior in several particulars to that
which he had previously enjoyed. We give him a teacher especially fitted in disposition and attainments to look after his
welfare. We furnish him with car tickets if he lives at a distance
from the school. He works in a room especially equipped for his
comfort, should h^ be ill in school hours. In it are work benches
and tools and materials of various sorts, besides the ordinary
equipment of books. There is a garden in which he may work. He
is released from the exactions of the ordinary school curriculum.
His teacher studies his capabilities and gives him what he needs.
We have not yet forced attendance in these classes. The
teachers visit the homes of those children reported to them for
transfer to the special class, and in most cases succeed in securing
parental consent and co-operation through tactful explanation of
the advantages offered.
One of the supervising principals, Dr. C. A. A. J*. Miller,
physician as well as teacher, is giving special attention to the
work in two classes. After three months' experience he submitted
the following notes:
"The epileptics in our care up to date can be divided into
three classes from the standpoint of ability:
1. The bright;
EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN IN SCHOOLS. 105
2. The mediocre;
3. The weak-minded.
"The first class, the bright, of whom there are but few, take
up all the school work as readily as the ordinary healthy child.
The second, or mediocre class, upon whose minds the disease has
made considerable inroads, are like children of arrested development; they gradually though very slowly take to the various
studies and manual work and profit thereby. .The third class
are those whose minds have possibly been permanently weakened
by the disease. Even these are educable.
"We of course take the word educable in the widest sense
and claim that we are succeeding if through our efforts in school
we are effectually teaching our pupils:
1. The common school branches:
2. Manual work of some kind;
3. Obedience, attention, manliness and fortitude, the acquisition of which is doing away with the needless petting and
humoring ;
4. More correct habits pertaining to personal cleanliness,
exercise, eating, drinking, sleeping, etc., the practice of which is
producing better physical condition and greater cheerfulness and
hopefulness
Dr. Miller quotes from each of the two teachers and then
sums up as follows:
"The conclusion that we are compelled to draw from class
room experience in our work with epileptic children is, that they
are educable; some are making marked progress in the common
branches, all are accomplishing something; all are doing well in
their manual work which is tending toward a vocation that may
be pursued at home, sewing, basket-making; (later on we shall
try cooking, housekeeping, willow-basketry, chair-caning, broommaking, modern cobbling). All are hopeful, cheerful, and growing in power of attention and concentration; some are establishing
better personal habits and following to a limited extent rules of
hygiene. In fine, the general progress is good."
It is open to question whether it is at all necessary to separate
the epileptic feeble-minded from other feeble-minded or backward
children or even from the disciplinary cases. It is asserted that
the refractory boy is made more gentle and sympathetic by being
allowed to help the teacher care for an afflicted classmate. If this
view is correct it simplifies the problem of special classes; for it
106 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
is easy to find fifteen or twenty children needing special treatment
within an area so small that the question of transportation need
not arise.
These were by no means our first speical classes. Ungraded
classes, not differentiated very much as to grades of defect in
children, whether mental or moral, were authorized under a rule
adopted by the Board of School Commissioners in the year 1902.
This rule appears under the chapter headed Discipline. It provides that pupils who cannot work to advantage in any regular
class may be transferred to an ungraded class. As the rules
prohibit corporal punishment, the disciplinary function of these
classes in connection with refractory pupils, forced into school
under the operation of the compulsory attendance law, was at
first more appreciated by teachers than the help they would afford
to mentally defective children. The boy, who by reason of persistent bad behavior at his home school, is obliged to walk a greater
distance to attend an ungraded class, begins to see that since a
record of good conduct is a prerequisite to his re-entering his
former school bad conduct does not pay, and in many instances
he chooses the path of less resistance?that of good conduct. In
new surroundings he is likely to be less of a leader than perhaps he
was in his former school. He finds his supremacy disputed by
other boys, earlier on the ground, who resent his air of domination,
and who, though without definite intention to aid the teacher,
nevertheless help to coerce the newcomer into a more modest
bearing. A transfer to a still more distant ungraded class is a
resource in difficult cases, but it is seldom necessary to use it.
We now have twenty ungraded classes, but they are not all
of the disciplinary type. A more or less successful attempt Has
been going on for some years to separate the disciplinary cases
from those that are plainly defective or positively backward without marked disciplinary complications. Often one type so shades
into another that there is no very clearly defined or conspicuous
boundary line for our guidance. In such instances, if we have
more than one class in a given locality, we secure the assistance of
medical examiners employed by the Commissioner of Health, who
are most willing to co-operate with the teaching force in making a
proper grouping.
ITew York, Philadelphia, Milwaukee, Chicago, and some
other cities have quite recently set examples worthy of study and
emulation in their recognition of differences . among backward,
EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN IN SCHOOLS. 107
defective and refractory children and tlieir selection of means by
which each variety of defect may receive as nearly as possible
the proper treatment. Plans recently put into operation in St.
Louis are perhaps less well known than others on account of their
very recent promulgation. In November, 1907, Superintendent
Soldan reported to the Board of Education that there were at that
time in the various public schools of the city 181 children so
mentally defective as to be incapable of doing the regular school
work provided for normal children. These were not merely slow
or backward children. They were unable to do either the amount
or kind of work which even a slow child can do; yet these children
were considered capable of education with educational facilities
adjusted to their needs, and with constant supervision of their
physical condition. Nine children cited by Superintendent Soldan
as typical of the entire list ranged from nine to fourteen and a
half years of age. They had attended school from three to six
years. Four had not advanced beyond the first grade; and only
two had advanced beyond the second. "Nature," says the report,
"puts the defective child in a class by himself and Education
should take Nature's hint." It was recommended that twelve
school rooms be selected and equipped, not as makeshifts, but in
the best possible manner, with a view to meeting a permanent
demand. As to location, the report discusses the advantages and
disadvantages of a central school; of vacant rooms in existing
schools; and of small houses to be rented for the purpose; and
recommends that ordinary two-story, six-room houses, conveniently
located with reference to the homes of the children, be rented.
Each house is to accommodate two classes of fifteen children each,
and leave room enough for work and free movement and some yard
room for recreation. Transportation is to be furnished to those
children whose homes are not within walking distance. There are
to be two teachers in each center, and a woman attendant who
will live in the building and take care of the heating and cleaning
and at times assist in taking some of the children to school. The
instruction given will not follow any fixed course, but will be
adapted to individual needs. The teachers must be exceptionally
capable and sympathetic, and will be among the best paid teachers
in the service. Some strong teacher is to give her whole time to
the supervision of these classes, and medical attendance is to be
furnished. Imbecile or demented children are not to be admitted,
nor are merely slow or backward children to be taken from
108 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
schools near their homes and put into these classes. Attendance
is not to be made compulsory. If the new institutions are made
so excellent that it is a clear advantage to each defective child to
attend, it is argued that no compulsion will be necessary. Should
a parent prefer to send his child to one of the regular schools,
no objection is to be made, provided the child does not disturb the
rest of the school by his presence.
To meet the present needs of the city of St. Louis for the
education of defective children, the Board ordered that three
houses be provided and they appropriated $12,000 to cover the
expense of the special schools for the remainder of the present
school year. A later report shows that three special centers of two
classes each, organized on the above-described plan, are now in
operation and that each center has a waiting list of applicants for
admission.
Great changes have taken place everywhere in courses of
study and plans of classification and promotion since the days
when exceptional children began to be studied with some approach
to the scientific spirit. Careful classification requires that children
of about equal working power be grouped together, so that none
shall be held back on account of slow-moving classmates, nor shall
any be unduly hurried through the course. Sometimes these very
great ameliorations of former rigid and unwise school arrangements are overlooked by those who discuss present-day conditions.
They also overlook some home conditions which are very important factors in over-pressure. For instance, a recent study
made by the teachers of one school of 500 pupils in a foreign
section of Baltimore shows that 76 children, ranging in age from
six to thirteen years, are obliged by their parents to attend a
denominational school from one to two and a half hours daily, in
addition to the five hours which they spend in the public schools.
Many of these boys sell papers in the morning before school.
Thus they have no leisure; they scarcely know the meaning of
play; their parents have no conception of the physiological limit
to mental activity. !No wonder these children appear anemic and
show signs of fatigue. Before this study was undertaken, it was
the opinion of the teachers that the children were suffering from
lack of sufficient food, and they were agitating the question of
giving them daily a nourishing meal at the city's expense. They
found by investigation, however, that there were very few parents
who could not afford to supply their children with proper food.
EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN IN SCHOOLS. 109
Unwise selection of food rather than insufficient food was characteristic. Carelessness and ignorance on the part of the parents
as to what children should eat and drink, rather than poverty,
were found to be the causes of the trouble. It is the home that
must be reached, and the child through the home. This school is
only one of many in which such conditions obtain.
For such conditions the school curriculum cannot be held
responsible. The school is meeting these conditions in part by
introducing as much activity and variety as possible into the daily
program. It is also trying by means of parents' meetings to reach
the home and influence it against such oppression of children.
A good city school of to-day is so flexible in its grading, its
curriculum, and its methods, that in its regular classes it can do
well by all except about one or two per cent of its pupils. These
few must have special care. Among these even the deaf and the
blind, once thought to be institutional cases, are in a few cities
received into the public schools with good results. This is true
of those who come from good or fairly good homes. In the public
day school they are managed in separate classes for a portion only
of their work. They mingle with other children in some of their
work and recreation and thus are better prepared for their later
life among normal people than they would be if limited to association with other children equally afflicted. The day schools for
the blind and deaf in Chicago and Milwaukee are of this mixed
type.
I have watched with much interest the progress of a blind
girl through the grades of one of the public schools of Baltimore.
She is now in the seventh grade and is doing work that measures
fully up to the average for the class. At my request the mother
of this child, formerly a teacher, has given me an account of her
experience as follows:
"This blind child learned her first play from children of
normal vision in a public school kindergarten, and on being sent
at six years of age to a residential school for the blind she was
then able to distinguish the difference in actions and to miss the
kind of play to which she was accustomed. After about twelve
months of attendance at the residential school, we found she was
developing into a very different child from the one we sent away.
Then we were thankful she was so young, but it took several years
of home influence, which means so much to a blind child, to
eradicate the evils of association with children from the worst
parts of the city.
110 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"Upon the advice of the Superintendent of the Institution
for the Blind, she was sent to a school among children who
could see. He had noticed the change in her, and said that a child
who has a good home ought to have the benefit of home training.
In most of the schools for the blind the number of attendants is
insufficient to give the care to young children necessary to train
them to be clean both in body and in mind.
"The first year in the public school was an experiment, the
lack of books and appliances of all kinds being the greatest difficulty. By using the Braille writer we copied the lessons from day
to day and found on every hand some one to suggest ways and
means of doing everything. The inability of the teachers to
understand that a blind child could comprehend as easily as a
seeing child was another difficulty. But after a few weeks that
was overcome in every case where a change was necessary. Each
year the work of the parents grew easier; they were able to procure
more books as the child advanced in her studies.
"She has become so much like the children with whom she
associates that they often forget her affliction and treat her as any
other playmate. She is independent of them in every way possible to a blind child. From the children she had learned to sew,
darn, knit, crochet, cook, and do many other things. She is happy
excepting when she comes in contact with another blind person
who speaks of his affliction. We have found that among themselves blind children dwell too often on this topic.
"As the writer spent nine years in the school room as a teacher
she feels justified in believing that the child is getting all and
more than all it would be possible for her to get in a school
where she would be among the blind and away from the outside
world for the greater part of the year. She has now been
in the public schools for four years with no special help
excepting from home; but she has not had one- complete year of
school work on account of her health. She is thirteen years old,
is well informed on the general news of the day, is a good musician, and is interested in everything about her. She reads all
systems for the blind. On consulting her present teacher in the
seventh grade we find her 'getting as much or more than any child
in the class' without any partiality being shown her or any extra
work being given her by the teacher. It seems to me possible that
any parent with a fair education should be able to take a child to
the high school.
EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN IN SCHOOLS. Ill
"We have let eacli year take care of itself, and feel that we
are doing the best possible thing for her. We do not find her an
exceptionally bright child, but normal in all things."
In a special class for the deaf or blind the special teacher
would serve the purpose of this mother to a group of five or six
afflicted children, and she would secure the co-operation of other
teachers in the building in the ordinary class work.
School attendance laws which are the expression, after all, of
humanitarian sentiments, have forced upon our attention more
than ever three classes of children?the backward, the defective,
and the refractory. Many of these, with proper training, will
become self-supporting, useful citizens and are where they belong
when in attendance at a public school. Others should spend their
lives in a state institution which would protect them from the
crushing competition of the capable, meanwhile using the products of their directed labor for their entire or partial support.
Thus the state would at the same time protect itself by keeping
the manifestly sub-normal from propagating their kind. Until
the state makes adequate provision for a task, the magnitude of
which has not been realized by legislators, the town and the city
must provide for defectives in special classes; for the rights of
normal children cannot be safeguarded when 50 per cent of the
energy of the teacher is expended on 5 per cent of the pupils in
the class.
In dealing with exceptional children the co-operaition of
teachers and physicians is absolutely essential. The teacher of
the special class needs to develop to some extent the insight
characteristic of the skilful diagnostician, and the school physician
needs to be a good deal of a psychologist.
