The Training of a Backward Boy
=================================

By Margaret Keiver Smith, Ph.D.
State Normal School, New Paltz, N. Y.
Iii the March and April numbers of The Psychological,
Clinic for this year will be found a report on the training of a
backward boy, eight and one-half years of age, for a period of
sixty-two days, that is, the school term from September 18 to
December 19, 1907. After the Christmas vacation the work with
the child was continued from the first week in January until June
18, 1908, at which time the schools in New Paltz closed for the
summer vacation.
The purpose of the present paper is to report the progress
made during the period of nine months, from September 18, 1907,
to June 18, 1908.
When the child came under her care, the first effort of the
teacher was directed towards securing suitable food. At present,
though rather delicate, he has a fair appetite for such simple foods
as children need. His appearance now indicates a fairly satisfac-
tory condition of nutrition, while his strength may be indicated
by the fact that during the time he has been under training, he has
not lost a day because of illness. During the school year he has
gained only three pounds in weight, but he has grown two and
one-half inches in height.
The treatment of the nose and throat for adenoid growths
resulted in the development of voluntary control over the move-
ments of the head, and in the ability to close the mouth. A
marked improvement in power of attention was also observed.
The involuntary rotary movement of the head has entirely ceased.
Even yet, however, when under the influence of fear, the mouth
has a tendency to fall open, while the head tilts slightly backward,
thus bringing the chin above the normal level.
As stated in the March issue, the mother asserted that Willie
never ran, never played, never smiled or laughed, and never talked.
The whole attitude of the child was quite in accordance with these
statements. He was quite incapable of lifting his feet to run, and
it was only after sixty-one days of instruction that he ran volun-
tarily. At present he runs in much the same way as- any boy of
his age.
(134)
TRAINING OF A BACKWARD BOY. 135
The impulse to play, as well as the power to perceive a humor-
ous situation was quite undeveloped. His first appreciation of
a "make-believe" was shown in connection with the period at the
end of the sentence. The teacher told him that this dot always
says to the reader, "Please stop a bit." He argued seriously that
the dot could not talk, yet agreed that the request to pause should
receive attention. At present the child has a keen delight in play,
and takes great pleasure in dramatizing his reading lesson. In
playing, signs of self-consciousness are entirely absent, so that he
is ready to undertake any character, old or young, beast or human.
During the last seven weeks of training, his play was largely con-
fined to the dramatization of the Mother Goose melodies, many
of which he learned during the winter. He directs the arrange-
ment and attitudes of the characters, and before he tires of the
play has himself acted all the different parts.
At the beginning of his training, the child had not the faintest
idea of competition. At present he understands clearly what it
means to "beat" in a game, and will even call out, "Here, let me
do that!" or "Let me get ahead!"
His attitudes are quickly assumed, and are remarkably easy.
His voice changes at will from low to high, from soft to harsh
tones. At times when he gives himself up to the spirit of play, he
displays such an apprehension of the situation, and such abandon
that a more than ordinary development in this direction seems
not improbable. As soon as the play is over, however, the sugges-
tion of unusual possibilities largely disappears, and he becomes
again the inarticulate, backward little boy who can hardly be
forced to expression except by means of many imitations and
innumerable repetitions.
It must be stated that Willie gives himself up to the full
enjoyment of play only in one room, that in which his training
first began. In this room, "our room" as he calls it, he will
receive all the children of his grade, will call them by name, and
will direct them in their several parts in a play. In the grade
room, or in the street, he will not play with these same children,
nor will he answer if they speak to him.
Learning to laugh was for Willie a work o\ +ime and effort.
Tor several days, teacher and assistant strove to do and say things
which a child might consider funny. They tried to bring out the
amusing points in a story. On the ninth day of instruction, they
observed a contraction of the pale little face which they joyfully
interpreted to be a grin. After that, no day was allowed to pass
136 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
without securing at least one smile from the child. In this con-
nection, singing was of the greatest service. Before he ever at-
tempted to imitate the notes of the scale as sung by the teacher,
he was amused by the sounds. The jingle of the Mother Goose
rhymes often caused a smile, while the recitation of Trowbridge's
"Charcoal Man" occasioned a hearty laugh. Sound and rhythm
rather than sense occasioned the amusement, however. He was
delighted with the echo to the cry of "Char-coal!" and with the
changes of tone necessary in imitating the voices of a man, a
woman, and a child. Willie often begged the teacher to use the
same changes of tone in saying other words. His own efforts to
imitate the same tones were often the cause of laughter on his part.
On the fifty-first day of instruction, he begged the teacher to say
funny things that he might laugh.
At present Willie laughs as much as does any child. He will
play a trick on his teacher, and if he surprises her, will shout
with joy. Tf he writes her a letter containing unexpected infor-
mation, he chuckles at her astonishment. When at the blackboard,
doing his regular work (drawing or writing), he amuses himself
by calling to the teacher in different tones. lie is greatly amused
and laughs heartily while trying to make the words, "Dinner
time!" sound like dinner bell.
Although in connection with singing and reading Willie's voice
has developed volume and flexibility, in the matter of talking he
has made less improvement. It must be remembered, however,
that at first he was practically a mute child, and that now he can
ask for any information he desires, and can make suggestions
regarding anything that he wishes done. He begins to volunteer re-
marks upon certain points, yet it must be admitted that he knows
much more than he can tell. In reading and singing his pro-
nunciation of words is much more distinct than in talking. Often,
instead of answering a question, he is disposed to substitute a nod
or a smile, or to hold up to view the object in question. During
the first days of training, a very strong external stimulus was
necessary to induce him to speak at all. The first time he spoke
voluntarily (beyond asking a single question), he had been startled
by the sight of a burning building. He informed the teacher that
"The mountain was all burned up," and asked many questions
concerning the people in the burning house. When in the one
room where he feels really at ease, the little fellow now chatters to
his teacher constantly. Advantage is taken of his willingness to
talk, to find what meaning he attaches to the words he reads, or
to the directions which his teacher skives him from time to time.
TRAINING OF A BACKWARD BOY. 137
The teacher asks, "Willie, what is careful?" He answers
while he goes on with his hand work, "Not to let my blocks fall."
"What is neatly?" "To measure nice." "What is read care-
fully?" "Not to spoil the words." What is happy?" "To
dance," and Willie's eyes twinkle. "What is good?" "Oh," says
Willie, "a good boy." "What is a good boy?" "I am a good
boy" (very confidently). A pause, while the work of measuring-
blocks goes on; presently he says, "Ask me some more words. Ask
me about bad." Silence for a moment, then he asks, "What is
bad anyway ?" He himself has no idea of "bad," except that he
is positive he is not a bad boy.
Later in the year (June 8) he began voluntarily to ask for
reasons. A thunderstorm had occurred the night before. The
child asked, "Why it thunder ?" The teacher told him that clouds
come together, and a sound like a blow is produced. "WThy it
lighten ?" He was told that the lightning comes a little before
the thunder, and shows that the clouds have actually come together.
Two days later he read the word God in his lesson. The teacher
asked, "What is God?1' He answered readily, "A big man up in
the sky." After a short silence, he said very slowly, "I know God
make it thunder, but (very much puzzled) how He do it?" The
teacher answered as she had (lone before, whereupon his questions
followed rapidly,?"How He lighten ? How He rain ?" She told
him that the cold high up in the air squeezes the clouds so that the
rain drops fall. He at once began to squeeze an imaginary sponge,
and then to imitate the patter of the rain on the roof by drumming
on the table. Then came the question, "How He hail ?" He was
told that high up in the air where it is cold, drops of water are
pressed together and frozen into little balls of ice which fall to the
ground. "Now," said the teacher, "you are ready to take your
singing lesson." "No," said he very positively, "No, I want to talk
more about God. How He blow ? How fast He blow ? How big
He blow? How flat He blow?" (probably referring to objects
being thrown down by the wind). After the teacher had explained
for some time, he exclaimed very impatiently, "Oh, I want to
seen it blowed!" He seemed, to be puzzled and vexed that he
could not see the wind.
Two days later, he and his teacher coming down stairs met a
lady going up. He asked, "Who is that lady?" The teacher
answered, "I do not know. She is a stranger." Here he remarked
with some contempt, "A stranger lady not nice, is she ?" "Why,
Willie," said the teacher in surprise, "I think that she is very
138 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
nice!" After a moment's silence lie asked, "Who preach in the
Methodist Church now?" (A new clergyman has come to the
church recently.) The teacher said, "I think that you mean
Mr. R." "Yes," said Willie, "Well, that is the woman." "You
mean," asked the teacher, "that the stranger lady is Mrs. R. ?"
"Yes," said he, "she is the one. She not nice." He had seen this
lady in church, and had recognized her on the stairs. His reason
for thinking her "not nice" seemed to be that she was a stranger
and he had not spoken to her.
Willie's parents report that when at home he talks to himself.
When they try to find out what he says, he stops instantly. So far
as can be ascertained this talking to himself consists in his repeat-
ing words and phrases which he has used with his teacher. Prom
the first, the child has given evidence of a very unusual interest
in words. The image of a written or printed word seems to persist
long after the word has been removed. It may be stated, however,
that as he gains possession of more and more new words, his power
to hold the image before the attention after the printed or written
form has been removed, becomes markedly less. With the loss of
memory for form, a loss of memory for sound is also to be observed,
but with this loss there is an undoubted increase of power to
apprehend not only the meanings of words, but the meanings of
sentences as well. His power of general comprehension and appre-
ciation has increased greatly. Recently, when reading a simple
description of a house made of mud, he paused in his reading
and exclaimed, "A house made of mud! Oh, (with a very wry
face) it would smell awful."*
The child's real interest in words impels him to try to read
every word he sees, so that he can read both script and print more
fluently than the average child of his age. A few days ago, upon
entering the room, he stopped as usual before the blackboard to see
what new words had been written for him to read. A student had
inadvertently left a German sentence on the board. Willie begged
the teacher to pronounce the strange words for him. Gravely and
slowly the teacher read, "Im schwabischen Heere war ein Rekrut."
"Oh!" cried Willie, waving his hands excitedly, "What is it? Im
schwabischen Heere war ein Rekrut! What is it ?" His imita-
*It is a question whether the increased mobility and adaptability of all
parts of the body may not have had some influence in breaking up the
rather inert combinations (associations) which gave an undue persistence
to his images, and which stood for what is sometimes called "a good
memory".
TRAINING OF A BACKWARD BOY. 139
tion of the teacher's pronunciation was very accurate, and he re-
peated the six foreign words without a break.
Still more recently, he asked to have the word jaguar written
on the board (he pronounced it jagger). When the teacher failed
to understand, he informed her that it was the name of an animal.
The next day he began to write for himself the word hippopotamus,
stating that it was the name of another animal. He wrote it
hippotamus. His next demand was to see the word library. It
was found that the teacher of the second grade had been reading
the "Just So Stories" to the children, and had probably used the
names of the strange animals. The word library had been men-
tioned by her when she was talking to another teacher about the
care of books.
Willie has developed a desire to write sentences that tell
something. He told his teacher to shut her eyes while he wrote
something just for her. The something proved to be a sentence
about his sister. He also wrote, "Miss S. and I dance around the
room." He was uncertain about the word I, so he called his teacher
to write it for him with the strict injunction that she was not to
look at the other words. He was delighted with the teacher's
approval of his "letter," and next suggested, "Now I hide and you
write something just for me. You write something that we do
right here in this room." Willie's "letters" have assumed consid-
erable importance. When a visitor enters the room, he asks for a
"letter" from the visitor, and is willing to write one in return. As
yet he cannot address a person directly, as he has difficulty in
using the second person. He writes about instead of to the person
he addresses. As an example,?a lady came into the room. She
asked for a letter. He looked at her a moment, then wrote, "Miss
P. is a fat woman." Later the director of the art department came
in, and he wrote, "Miss S. is a nice lady." Still another read,
"Miss F. is a good woman, she is a good tech" (teacher).
Care is taken that the letters which the visitors write shall be
correct in form, and that they shall contain something which will
give him pleasure. These letters all begin with, "Dear Willie."
He reads the letters, but does not understand that he is directly
addressed. He seems to think that dear is a part of his name. In
a recent letter he wrote, "Dear Willie is so hungry, he got to go
home and eat with his mamma."
Many of Willie's "letters" are more or less connected with his
reading. Recently in reading he came upon the word hard-
working, and asked what it meant. The teacher said, "I think
140 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
that Willie is a hard-working boy." After a moment's silence he
said, "First I read my book; then I do my blocks (number work) ;
then I work on the board; then I sing and dance. Yes, that is
hard-working." Later in his "letter" he wrote, "Papa is a good
man. He go to work all day." Evidently the word "hard-work-
ing" indicates a virtue to him.
For some time Willie has displayed a very active curiosity
regarding the names of people. He insists on having the names of
students written on the board so that he may pronounce and copy
them. He no sooner pronounces and writes the name of a student
than he exclaims, "What color is her dress ? Write the color of
her dress. And does she wear glasses ?" When a stranger enters
he at once asks the teacher to speak her name, then he goes to the
person, offers his hand, and pronounces the name and asks her to
wait and dance with him when his work is done. This places him
on a friendly footing with every person who comes in.
Next to his inability to talk, Willie's excessive timidity has
been his greatest defect. During the first two or three weeks he
seemed to be in a state of terror bordering on shock. He shrank
from every one, refusing even to look at a stranger. He has lost
much of this fear, but he still falls far short of the normal in this
respect. Recently on two occasions he was too frightened to speak
even to his teacher. Once when twenty high school girls came into
the room unexpectedly, he clutched the teacher's gown, and stared
open-mouthed. The second time was on June 13, when he was
present at a gathering of three or four thousand people, mostly
children. He clutched his mother's hand, and seemed unable to
speak or move.
As an evidence of his gain in courage, however, may be men-
tioned his daring on June 10, when he actually crossed the street
alone and went around to the back door of a large building in
search of Miss N., the director of the kindergarten, whose presence
he desired at his dancing lesson. There was no possible way by
which he could get her unless he sought her out and fetched her
himself. The first day when he undertook this expedition, lie
failed utterly. The second venture was successful, and his pride
in his achievement was great.
The child's fears decrease as his social development increases.
After six months' training he had acquired sufficient courage to
read aloud upstairs in the presence of the children of the second
grade. He was able to do this because the children agreed to shut
their eyes while he read. Two days later he read with the children
TRAINING OF A BACKWARD BOY. 141
looking at him, the teacher having promised that if he would do
this, the children should come down to his room and dance with
him.
Another evidence of growth in social sympathy is his desire
to walk home with any of the teachers who go his way. He will
shout for the kindergarten teacher to wait, and will run to over-
take her. As yet, however, he does not talk with the teacher with
whom he walks. The chief reason for the child's unsocial ten-
dency seems to lie in his inability to use words freely. When at
play, his great need for intercourse with others overcomes for the
time his unwillingness to talk.
Another significant hindrance to Willie's social development
lies in his lack of capacity to do anything for other people. He
has been cared for so constantly that he accepts service as a matter
of course. He has no idea of making any return for favors re-
ceived, and has no sense of obligation whatever. He is utterly de-
pendent without in the least realizing this dependence. Without
a sense of dependence and a certain sense of obligation or at least
of recognition of service received, the development of any great
degree of social sympathy is impossible. Though the child has
made some progress, he is still lamentably deficient in this direc-
tion. He has great dread of a stranger, as he has of any unknown
thing. Insurmountable difficulties stand in the way of any new
undertaking. If required to come alone from the room upstairs
to the room downstairs, he sees himself in imagination helpless
before the shut door of the latter room. This dread is still suffi-
cient to deter him from starting unless a teacher is with him.
Every new undertaking requires management 011 the part of
the teacher. First a suggestion is made, and repeated day after
day until the idea is quite familiar. Then a desire for some
pleasant thing already known is developed. The attainment of
the desire involves the new activity required, and before he thinks,
the movements which the teacher desires are made. Being once
made, these movements are repeated generally without difficulty.
After many repetitions something of a habit is formed. As an
example,?when writing or ciphering on the blackboard, in order
to reach the upper part of the board, the child climbs upon a chair.
Only after about six months' training could he be induced to stand
upright on this chair. Day after day the upright attitude was sug-
gested to him, but he was too fearful to attempt it. The best he
could do was to kneel on the chair, and reach upward. Finally on
condition that the teacher would stand behind the curtain and sing
142 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
while he worked, he consented to stand erect. As soon as he found
himself standing upright, he was delighted and called loudly to
the teacher to come and admire his achievement.
In many cases, suggestion has been used to considerable ad-
vantage. By referring constantly to desirable foods, and assuring
Willie that he liked them, his rather morbid tendencies in the
matter of eating have been significantly checked. By making him
familiar with an idea through repeated suggestion, much of his
dread for untried things has been removed. Suggestion is also
effective in trifles. One day while reading, he coughed inad-
vertently. In a moment, he coughed again, evidently to gain
sympathy from the teacher The latter remarked casually, "Willie,
you will not cough again." Again he coughed, again the remark
was made in exactly the same tone. He coughed six different
times, and six times the suggestion was made. The last time he
coughed, before the teacher could speak, he said, "I not cough
again." The coughing ceased and was never resumed.
Willie's obedience is very marked. So far as his feeble atten-
tion and his fears allow, his tendency is to do the thing required.
Yet his obedience may be regarded as passive, rather than active.
It is more a response to a suggestion, than a deliberate volition.
At least two exceptions to this have been observed, however. In
two cases he refused direction and assistance at the blackboard.
Very recently he has shown signs of independent activity, which
will probably develop later into disobedience.
Every effort is made to develop power of self-direction. To
this end every possible opportunity for managing and planning is
afforded him. In carrying out his plans, it is not unusual for
him to direct every movement of the teacher. "Now you place
the chairs while I get the box ready. You go behind the curtain
and sing while I put the blocks away. Bring me a good crayon.
Here, you hold this box till I want it." One day when he was
ready to go home, he discovered that he had left his lunch box
upstairs. He said to the teacher, "You go and get the box, and I
will wait here." "'No," said the teacher, "You go and get the
box, and I will wait here. I think that will be the better plan."
He ran off quite cheerfully and fetched the box.
Willie's quick and exact imitation of tones and movements,
as well as of attitudes, implies considerable power of perception.
Yet his attention being very fleeting, his observations are often
very faulty. Frequently, however, he seems to see and hear with
less effort than ordinary children. Without appearing to look or
TRAINING OF A BACKWARD BOY. 143
to listen carefully, unexpected reproductions often occur, which
indicate that he must have been very alert. In securing correct
pronunciation of syllables, his power of imitation is very service-
able. It aids him in enunciating final letters, d, t, etc., yet he
has objections against pronouncing certain words other than they
are spelled. He persists in calling the word stopped, "stop-ped"
rather than "stopt." He treats similarly many words ending
in ed.
Such originality as Willie possesses is shown more in his play
than in his work. In the latter, he is addicted to routine. In
singing he will often improvise words appropriate to his actions.
In his skipping games, he frequently introduces new figures. His
interpretations of the characters of his reading lesson are his own.
In his written work he dislikes greatly to write after a copy. The
teacher one day gave him as a copy, "My dear mother remembers
her boy." He wrote the page, then read the copy and said, "Yes,
I am her boy, but why I write the same words many times ?"
"Very well," said the teacher, "next time you make your own
copy." "No," said he, "I write this," and he wrote, "I am glad
Miss F. comes every day to sing and dance with me." He refused
to write the same words a second time, but instead wrote a new
sentence.
Throughout the work, Willie has never shown any signs of
anger. The reports of his family are directly contrary to this
statement. An aunt and a grandmother both state that at home he
has always been addicted to fits of violent anger. Before he talked,
this anger was expressed in cries, and in throwing his limbs about.
Since he has acquired some facility of speech, he threatens to
strike or even to kill. He does not swear, but makes use of abus-
ive words. The writer has never been able to see the child in
one of these states, and is still disposed to believe that they are
states of fear rather than of anger. From her own experience,
she cannot say that his vocabulary contains a single abusive term.
Throughout the training, every effort has been made to adjust the
work to his tendencies, and to secure a pleasant tranquility that
should make for repose and serenity, to the end that both anger
and fear might be allayed.
Hp to the present time, fear has seemed to act directly upon
the motor centres, so that action, especially articulation, was
almost if not quite impossible. When not under the influence of
fear, the child's motor activities are satisfactory. He is deft in
the hand work required of children of his age. In drawing and
144 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
coloring he uses pencil and brush fairly well. He sketches fairly
well from memory such objects as steam engines, dwelling houses,
churches, mills, factories, trees, etc. In the shop for manual
training he can saw, hammer, and cut fairly well. He writes
legibly and freely. He can run, jump, hop, skip, and dance,
though as yet in a jig dance the co-ordination of his feet is
awkward. He can beat simple time accurately with fingers -or
feet, or even by shrugging the shoulders. At present, his head,
shoulders, arms, legs, hands, and feet are under fairly good con-
trol. This control has required much practice. The teacher
walked with him daily, again and again showing him how to lift
his feet, how to hold his head, to depress the chin, square the
shoulders, keeping the arms at the sides, and throwing the weight
011 the ball of the foot. At times he was required to walk alone
and to observe all these directions. In a similar way he learned
to run and jump. Skipping and dancing were his own discovery,
resulting from his efforts to act words in his reading lesson.
While the acquisition of language has been the child's greatest
need, it is doubtful whether without the bodily activities the lan-
guage would have had the desired mental effect. The rhythm of
singing gave purpose and grace to his movements, while the
rhythmic exercises were effective in controlling the writhing of
the body, and in correcting the facial grimaces. Indeed the
rhythms of singing and dancing secured a concentration of atten-
tion and energy which has benefited both body and mind. Skip-
ping and dancing in time to his own singing afford him a pleasure
of which he never tires. Under the influence of this pleasant
feeling he expands socially and seeks the people whom under other
circumstances he carefully avoids. At any work which allows him
to keep time with his hands, he is disposed to sing.
It may be stated here that Willie is required to keep his body
still only when he is reading. Of late even this exercise is carried
on with both teacher and boy on foot. When conversation is in
order, very likely they are walking up and down the room, perhaps
together, perhaps on different sides of the room. If he sat still
while the teacher talked, there is no doubt that he would become
incapable of understanding half of what she says.
In giving the meanings of words, the evidence of the promi-
nence of motor activity is very marked. In every case at first he
seemed to see himself in action. For example, he defined neatly,
"to measure nice"; happy, "to dance"; anger, "you get mad";
trouble, "you get hit"; surprise, "you laugh" ; moon, "to shine";
TRAINING OF A BACKWARD BOY. 145
uneasy, "to move". At the present time, liis thought appears to
consist of concrete images more or less logically related. When
asked the meaning of the word pilloiu, he laid his head on the
table, shut his eyes and said "Good night," sleepily.
Willie's habits seem to be formed by the unconscious repeti-
tion of certain acts, rather than by any deliberation or resolution
on his part. An instance of this is his habit of greeting people.
At first the teacher directed him to remove his cap from his head
and to present his right hand. This was done day after day and
week after week. At present when he meets his teacher, or indeed
any person he knows, he takes off his cap and extends his right hand
automatically. When told to go and speak to visitors, he offers
his hand instinctively and immediately says, "Good morning."
An exception to this, however, is the deliberate effort he is
now making to keep his mouth shut when not speaking. One day
in April he was amusing himself by pronouncing words very
vigorously, when he observed the syllables which made him open
his mouth, as well as those which made it necessary for him to
bring the teeth or lips together. Then he began to name the letters
of the alphabet, and found amusement in opening his mouth much
too widely when pronouncing the vowels, and in shutting lips or
teeth much too tightly when speaking the consonants. "Oh," he
exclaimed, "I must keep my mouth shut!" The matter of keeping
the mouth shut had been suggested very many times with no
apparent result, but from this time whenever the thought occurs
to him, he shuts his mouth and runs his finger along the lips to
convince himself that they are close together. His later attempts
in this matter seem to arise entirely from his own volition.
In undertaking the training of this child, the writer had at
first in mind the repetition of a few fundamental physical move-
ments by means of which she hoped to secure a certain co-ordina-
tion of nerves and muscles sufficient to enable the boy to remain
in the grades of the public school without distracting the attention
of the other children. Because of his serious difficulty in speak-
ing, she began with the simplest movements of the vocal organs,
speaking to him a single word many times, until lie was con-
strained to imitate the sound, arid the movements of the lips and
tongue. As the work progressed, it became evident that, in order
to save the child from permanent arrest and perhaps from idiocy,
the acquisition of language was absolutely necessary. With his
senses fairly acute, and with power of locomotion, he was con-
146 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
stantly gaining images from the outside world, but without power
to speak the names which he must have frequently heard. Beyond
the most primitive gestures and tones (limited to nodding and
stamping, and to a moan, whine, or shriek), he had no means of
communication with people. Deaf-mute children, who have no
words to express their mental states, often develop a condition of
restlessness, and uncontrolled anger. In Willie's case, instead of
anger, overwhelming fear seemed to paralyze his efforts.*
As a means of developing an apprehension of his own and of
other people's possibilities and limitations, the acquisition of a
knowledge of number relations seemed to be only second in impor-
tance to the acquisition of words and their relations. In laying
the foundation for a later apprehension of number in accordance
with the Herbartian idea, viz., that number as a multiple (mani-
fold) of unity has its origin in space relations, the "Tillich blocks"
were used as illustrative material. The presentation was careful
and slow, and the results have been unexpectedly satisfactory. The
addition tables were worked out from the blocks and expressed
in figures. The multiplication table was developed from addition,
and later was constructed systematically. Fractions to tenths were
developed and expressed, thus laying a foundation for division.
Nothing was done with subtraction concretely, but a good deal of
abstract work involving this process was performed. With the
use of the "Tillich blocks," Willie manifested quite as great an
aptitude for the apprehension of number as the average boy of
his age.
In number, as in language, the teacher repeated the presenta-
tion until a reaction involving some effort on the part of the child
was secured. ISTo mention of his ability or inability to do a thing
was ever made. Working was regarded as a matter of course. If
the child made his best effort, and a result was produced, even
though the result was poor, beyond an expression of pleasure in
the accomplishment, nothing was said. If his best efforts were
not put forth, or if no result was gained, by one means or another
*For the sake of opening communication with the people around him,
by far the larger part of his instruction consisted of the acquisition of
words and the use of words in sentences. Though the results are fairly
satisfactory, yet the child's greatest difficulty is still in connection with
speech. Any sudden excitement may make it difficult for him to say a
word. If he is to be permanently helped, his speech must receive atten-
tion for years to come. Before fluent speech can be depended upon, a
much greater control of his emotions must be secured.
TRAINING OF A BACKWARD BOY. 147
he was induced to do the same thing again and again until the
accomplishment was in some degree adequate.
The habit of looking for a result after every series of efforts-
has given a constructive character to Willie's work, and does much
towards enabling him to understand the relation between the
beginning and the end of his work. His expressions indicate this,
?"Now you hide till I have done something for you. Don't peep
until it is finished. Come and see what I have done." Upon
such occasions the teacher strives to do exactly as directed. If he
needs her help at any point, he calls her, tells her what to do, and
then tells her to leave him. "Come and write the word about and
the word finger on the board. Don't rub them out. Leave them
there. ISTow go." "When allowed to see his finished work, the
teacher read, "I cut my finger about off one day." Once when in
response to his summons she did not appear immediately, he
shouted impatiently, "Come! I have done it. It is good!"
An apprehension of accomplishment being the intellectual
result of all sustained effort, it is always assumed that work is
begun with the intention of keeping at it until it is finished.
Nothing partly done is ever given up. The relation between
accomplishment and effort is always maintained. The result is
not always reached in a single period. Occasionally the same point
comes up in three or four lessons. Throughout the training the
teacher has managed so that every moment has been occupied. A
habit of industrious (purposeful) activity is the result. Willie
begins his work briskly, never stopping until the last exercise is
finished, and the last objects used have been returned to their
places. The habit of working toward a known (desired) result
has developed some power of looking ahead. Before the close of
school (June 18, 1908) Willie began to plan the reading of certain
books during the summer, that he might be ready to enter the third
grade in the autumn. He has much respect for school require-
ments, and a lively sense of responsibility in meeting engagements.
Throughout the training no questions as to Willie's liking or
disliking to do a thing have been asked. It has always been taken
for granted that, since a thing was to be done, it was necessarily
pleasing and interesting. As a result, Willie's work and play are
performed with equal cheerfulness. Until work is finished, he
does not think of play. He delights in dancing, but never mentions
it until the last exercise is finished, and all apparatus has been
put carefully away.
One unexpected feature of this work has been that the in-
148 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
struction has demanded on the part of the child much more
synthesis than analysis. In his immature condition synthesis has
been less difficult than analysis. The peculiarities of his fleeting,
feeble attention, and his great need of language have determined
this procedure. The observation of an object involving anything
like careful analysis has always been physically exhausting, and
often quite beyond the power of the child. His tendency is always
constructive. For example, "Miss B. wears a brown dress. She
does not wear glasses, and she wears red (tan) shoes. Miss F.
wears glasses, she wears a black dress, and her shoes are black." In
this way his images of Miss B. and Miss F. are quite complete,
and the one is quite distinct from the other. Such analysis as
was performed was merely incidental to the construction of the
image.
So far as possible in his work as well as in his play, Willie
has been encouraged to make use of any original devices that best
served his purpose. Especially every effort has been made to have
him put his plans into words. "What are you going to do ? IIow
will you do it?"?the answers to these questions give purpose to
his actions, and enable him to look over the field of his activity.
His pleasure in talking by no means equals his pleasure in doing
things with his hands, but the teacher tries to keep the two in
connection. In the number work his devices for getting results
with his blocks are never quite the same as those of his teacher,
but so long as he secures a correct result, and makes a good use
of his time, he is allowed to pursue his own plan. He chooses
largely his own games, and determines how they shall be played,
introducing such changes as seem to him good.
From being an inarticulate little boy, Willie can now use in
reading and speaking more than two thousand words. At present
he reads readily the stories of any third grade school reader. He
had read many of Grimm's fairy tales. At home he reads the Bible
aloud every day. His talking is less fluent than his reading, but
he speaks to his teacher without restraint. When at play, he will
talk with children, not otherwise.
Upon the whole Willie has ceased to be the helpless victim of
his fears, but this difficulty still persists in the form of imagined
obstacles which are a great hindrance to undertakings requiring
deliberation. The reflex movements which kept the child in con-
stant motion have largely disappeared. It is quite possible for
him to sit still in his seat, so that he no longer disturbs other
children. Unless unduly excited, his hands are motionless. Even
TRAINING OF A BACKWARD BOY. 149
when disturbed, if reminded, lie can put liis hands at his sides and
keep them still. With the head and facial muscles under control,
he posesses a sufficiently attractive appearance.
The child no doubt possesses the fundamental conditions for
reasoning power. His memory is good. In a limited way, he
can plan and execute. He realizes the future as well as a child
may. A few days ago the word money occurred in his reading
lesson. He ceased reading, put his hands into his pockets and said,
reflectively, "I have no money, but when I be a man I will have
money in my pockets." "Willie," questioned the teacher, "how
will you get it? How do men get money?" He remained silent
and shook his pockets. For the most part his associations are
logical, as shown by his definitions of words, as well as by the
greater part of his actions.
Though still weak as regards his social development, lie has
made much progress. He likes the teachers of the school. Pie is
curious regarding strangers, and he has much more interest in the
members of his family than he had at first. As regards his capacity
for happiness as well as his effective activity, the child is quite a
new creature. It must always be borne in mind, however, that he
is still, and for some years to come must be, dependent upon the
care and oversight of an experienced instructor. The cause for
anxiety regarding his future lies in the uncertain influence of the
public school, which in working for masses loses sight of the indi-
vidual who is not adapted to its fixed lines. The teachers of the
grades are so burdened with numbers of children, and with a
multitude of subjects which must be presented in rapid succession
that they have neither time, strength, nor interest for any special
children. If adequate instruction and training could be given this
child for the next five years (he is now ten years old) there is
little doubt that at least ordinary intellectual capacity might be
developed.
The expression "adequate training" is a very comprehensive
term, however. It probably implies exclusion from home for a
large part of the time indicated. At present the difference be-
tween Willie's home life and school life is so great that there may
be danger of developing a double personality. If the family
reports are to be trusted, the Willie at home bears little resem-
blance to the Willie at school. The child at home seems to be a
much less desirable person than the child at school. In the home
life, filling as it does by far the greater part of the day, the oppor-
tunitv for a desirable development must be greatly hindered. The
150 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
conditions ought to be reversed. Better still, if a new life quite
independent of the old could be built up, it would be well. To
this end, new surroundings are necessary. The mother in her
misapprehended love for the child, being bent upon giving him (or
herself) the gratification of the moment, loses sight of the future,
which is being defeated by present indulgence.
There is also danger that both parents may underestimate or
totally misunderstand the effort which the child makes, and may
become unduly exacting at times when he most needs their patience.
In their false shame of the child's defects, they may be inclined
to give untrue reports of his condition. Sometimes also false
statements may arise from uncertainty and forgetfulness on the
part of the mother. Whatever their cause, they are a formidable
hindrance to the work of the trainer, who ought to have accurate
information regarding everything concerning the child. The
mother is in danger of misapprehending the real significance of the
child's condition, as well as of the trainer's procedure, and may
unwittingly undo a large part of the work done. Very few mothers
realize the importance of obedience to directions, and of consecu-
tive action. In this special case, the mother's tendency to epileptic
convulsions is a source of danger to the child. Also the home
atmosphere lacks the requisite intelligence to stimulate him prop-
erly. The reported bursts of anger on the part of the child may
very probably be traced to lack of power on the part of the mother
to direct him, or even to leave him alone at the right time.
