Sixty-Two Days' Training of a Backward Boy
===========================================

:Author:  Margaret Keiver Smith, Ph.D.
Early in October, 1906, a boy, eight and a half years of age,
entered the Kindergarten connected with the State Normal and
Training School at New Paltz, New York. The Kindergartner
thus describes his appearance at that time:? *

"Willie was rather tall for his age, slender and thin. His hair was
light brown; eyes bluish gray; skin delicate but of an unhealthy pallor;
lips bloodless; mouth constantly open; the eyes fixed and staring. His
gaze was directed toward the ceiling, the head turning incessantly from
side to side.

"His mother led him by the hand. She carried his lunch box for
him and took off his cap, coat and mittens. He did not offer to help
her in the least. After the mother had gone, lie held the Kindergartner
by the hand the whole morning. When she tried to release her fingers,
he clutched them more tightly. He seemed to be in terror of both
people and things. He bit his nails and picked his fingers. He did
not speak a word, unless it was repeated to him many times. His
efforts at articulation revealed a voice entirely unused, thin, squeaky
and dull."

During the year in the Kindergarten, his mother brought
him every morning to school and took him home at noon. In that
year, he never ran, never smiled, never sang. When he walked or
stood, his weight was thrown upon his heels. Some days he made
foolish grimaces with his mouth open, and his head on one side.
At times his body writhed and twisted. The first time the teacher
told him to put his lunch box on the shelf, he made several abortive
beginnings before he really started, but he finally succeeded in putting the box on the shelf. After some weeks he was able to take off
his own coat, but he could not put it on without help. He did
the work of the Kindergarten children fairly well, viz: weaving,
sewing, stringing beads, cutting paper, etc.

By the end of the year, he could answer a question with a
monosyllable, but he volunteered no statements of any kind. He
took part in the games, imitating the movements of the other
children. He seemed, also, to be a little less afraid of people and
things.

In September, 1907, Willie returned to the Kindergarten.
During the summer vacation, he had failed to improve either
mentally or physically. The facial grimaces, and the writhing
of the body were so marked that for the sake of the other children,
it was thought advisable to remove him from the Kindergarten.
The writer of the present article then took charge of him for
forty minutes each day for five days of the week. Later'the
periods of instruction were reduced to four a week, on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. The lesson began at 12.25
and ended at five minutes past one o'clock. The work was
observed and recorded at the time by an assistant, Miss Cora, who
often took part in the plays and later undertook to teach Willie
to sing. It is from these daily records that the following report
has been prepared.

First Day, Wednesday, Sept. 18th, 1907.?The Kindergartner brought Willie by the hand to Miss Smith's room. He
was then nine years and five months old. He was four feet in
height and weighed about fifty pounds. His shoulders were
rounded and his chest contracted. The Avliole body showed signs
of defective nutrition. The face and lips were bloodless; ears
white; eyes dull and staring; features very good. The skin was
of a delicate texture, and of a bluish tint beneath the eyes. The
hands were well formed but flabby and cold. The nails of the
fingers were very imperfectly developed. The walk was irregular,
the body writhing at each step. The weight of the body came on
the heels. The head turned constantly from right to left and
back, and the eyes were directed toward the ceiling.
Owing to his condition of terror, it was not possible to test
the child with any instruments of precision. He shrank from
the slightest touch on any part of the body. If one put out a
hand, he shrank suddenly as if to avoid a blow. Both breathing
and pulse beat were affected by his state of fear. Eor some time
it was difficult to tell whether sight and hearing were approximately normal. These senses have not yet been tested, but it
has been found that he can read words at a normal distance, and
that he can hear when spoken to in an ordinary tone of voice.
Miss S. greeted Willie with "Good morning," to which he
returned no answer. She then asked, "What is your name?" and
to this no attention was paid. The eyes were directed toward
the ceiling, the head was turning, and the hands were working on
each other.

When Miss S. asked, "Who is Willie Jones?" there was no
answer, but a jerk of the head, with the eyes still directed upward. The next questions were, "How old are you ?" "Where
do you live ?" "Which way do you go when you go home ?" None
of these elicited a.ny response nor even a sign of attention.
Miss S. then said, "When I go home, I go down Main Street,
and then in that direction" (pointing). "Now, Willie, show me
the direction in which you go." He raised his right hand and
pointed correctly, but neither spoke nor looked at any one. This
was the first sign of volition.

Miss S. drew on the blackboard two lines crossing at angles.
She said, "This line A A stands for my street.

At this comer, B, I turn and go towards C. Just here at C is my
house. j^oWj Willie, you make some lines on the board that will
show your streets." He drew two lines in exact imitation of those
that Miss S. had drawn. While drawing the lines, he looked at
them, and this was the first sign of concentrated attention. When
the Kindergarten teacher left, Willie did not appear to notice
her departure.

Throughout the period Miss S. talked to him in a natural,
cheerful voice which was maintained throughout the work. The
little fellow was treated exactly like a normal child. At the ena
of the period, when asked whether he would come to-morrow, he
nodded, but continued gazing at the ceiling, though repeatedly
asked to look at something else. Miss S. repeated the words
"Good bye" many times, and finally he said them. These were
the only words he spoke during the period. His voice was thin,
wiry and weak, wholly without cadence, and without direction.
His mouth was open, and the head was constantly moving during
the period. He seemed to be on the verge of shock. His mother
came to take him home.

Second Day, Sept. 19th.?When Willie came to-day, Miss S.
took his hand and said, "How do you do, Willie ? Are you very
well ?" The child made no answer. The head moved to right and
left, and the eyes were turned upward. Miss S. said, speaking
slowly and steadily, "Willie, say these words, 'I am very well.' "
She repeated the sentence "I am very well" many times, when
finally Willie piped in a thin, small voice, "I am very well."
Miss S. then asked him to help her lift a small table. She
said, Try hard, Willie. Keep yonr lips shut tightly and you
will be strong." Willie shut his mouth and for the first time
looked intelligent. Miss S. took from the table drawer a ring
about an inch in diameter. She repeated the name again and
again until finally he pronounced the word "ring." She wrote
the word on the board in large letters, RING. She then repeated
the written word till he looked at it and pronounced it. The same
thing was done with the words "box" and "chain." Then the
object was put into his hand, and he was helped to say, "I have
a ring; I have a box; I have a chain." These sentences were then
written on the board. The objects were put into the drawer.
Willie was required to find one and make the statement as he had
made it before. Then he was helped to read the same statement
on the board.

To strengthen his voice, he was sent to the farther end of
the room and required to name each object in a tone loud enough
for Miss S. to hear. His voice was so weak that for some days
no progress was made in loud speaking.

At the close of his lesson, Miss S. told him the story of "The
Bonnie Bush of Blackberries." He sat still, but seemed to pay
no attention to the story. His eyes were turned toward the ceilmg, and his head was constantly moving from side to side. His
hands also were in motion. Every effort to speak was accompanied by a singular writhing motion of the upper part of the
body (chest and shoulders).

At the close of the period, the mother came to take him home.
In talking with her, Miss S. learned that Willie never runs, never
plays, never talks, never laughs, never notices other children,
sleeps well, eats no meat, will not eat bread and butter, will not
diink milk, eats Graps Nuts. It is doubtful whether her testimony regarding his sleep is of any value, as she seems but an
m ifferent observer, and below normal in intelligence. She is
roported to be subject to epileptic fits, but the severity and frequency of the attacks are not known. She seems not to comprehend the seriousness of Willie's condition. The father appears
to be normal, and of average intelligence. There is a sister about
twelve years old who is somewhat deaf.

Miss S. urged the mother to cease giving Willie Grape Nuts,
and to see that lie ate bread and butter, milk, soup, and a little
meat cut fine. It is quite possible that the child's digestive power
is limited. Miss S. also told the mother that the open mouth
might indicate the presence of adenoids, and urged her to have a
physician examine him.

Third Day, Sept. 20th.?The work to-day was like that of
yesterday. During the lesson Willie looked a little brighter than
before, though his mouth was still open. This day he was sent
home alone. When he Avent into the street, he seemed greatly
terrified, but made 110 sound. He appears to be a very timid,
shrinking little soul. His gait in walking is very bad, the weight
of the body resting on his heels. Again to-day Miss S. told him
the story of "The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries," but he gave no
sign of having heard it before.

Fourth Day, Monday, Sept. 22>d.?To-day when Willie came,
Miss S. had him take off his cap, shake hands with her, and say,
"Good morning, Miss S." It took some time, but after she had
repeated the words many times, he finally said them. Then he
was required to greet Miss Cora in the same way.

Miss S. asked him whether he went to Sunday-school yesterday. After she had repeated the question five times, he said
something which might stand for "Yes." She asked, "To what
church did you go ?" repeating the question again and again.
Finally lie said something like, "Methodist Church." When
asked whether he remembered the story told him on Friday, he
gave no answer, though the question was repeated many times.
To-day, the sentences constructed on Friday were repeated.
Then they were written 011 the board. The new words introduced
to-day were, "Boy," "stone," "foot," "good," "Willie." The
sentences 011 the board were: I have a ring; I have a chain; I have
a box; I have a good box; I have a stone; I have a good footj
Willie is a good boy.

Willie was required to look for the objects named on the
board. lie found the ring in the drawer, held it up and said, I
have a ring." Then he found the same statement 011 the board
and read it. The same method was used with each of the other
sentences. He was led to talk about his own name, which at first
had no personal application. It was some time before he understood that he and Willie were the same boy. When he did, he
was taught to name the various parts of his body, thus, "Willie
has hands, Willie has a good foot, Willie has a head, eyes, etc."
When he read on the board "I have a good foot," this statement puzzled him more than all the others. He did not connect
it with himself, any more than he did the other statement, "Willie
is a good boy." By constant repetition, however, and by force of
the associations used, he came to realize the meaning of all these
words. He seemed at first to recognize words by their location on
the board rather than by their form. When this fact was discovered the words ring, stone, box, foot, boy, good, Willie were written
on the board in unexpected places and he was required to seek and
identify them. After much work, he became fairly apt at this.
He was required to count from one to ten, the figures 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, G, 7, 8, 9, 10 being written on the board. With some help
he read them, and then tried to copy them. He drew them as
pictures. Many of them he drew upside down.

At the close of the lesson "The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries"
was repeated. The most striking thing about this story is the
rhythmic repetition of certain words. Willie now appeared at
times to listen, but gave no sign of having comprehended. His
head was constantly turning and his eyes were directed toward
the ceiling. To-day his attention was especially feeble. He
seemed to have lost much in the interval between Friday and
Monday. At times he is like a timid, startled little animal.
Fifth Day, Sept. 24th.?To-day Willie came from home alone.
After being told once what to say, he spoke the words, "Good
morning, Miss S.," fairly well. His voice seemed a little stronger
than usual. After the greetings, Miss S. went to the farthest
corner of the room and called to him quickly, "Willie, run to me
just as fast as you can!" He started before he thought, but in a
moment halted and came down heavily on his heels. He could
not run. We tried to make him smile by saying funny, bright
things to him. It was useless. Up to the present time, he has
not been known to smile.

The sentences on the board were:?
I have a box; I have a good box; I have a chain; I have a
stone, etc. Miss S. pointed silently to a sentence, Willie looked
at it, then went to the drawer and found the object. He held it
up and read the right sentence aloud. He did the same thing with
the other sentences. As the objects were kept out of sight, he had to
know the word before he began to look for the thing. When he
had finished, Miss S. said that she would like to read the sentences if he would help her. He led her to the board, put the
stone into her hand and pointed to the correct sentence, I have a
stone. Miss S. read it correctly. He then put the other objects
successively into her hand and each time pointed to the right
sentence. Then the known words were all combined into one
sentence?I have a good stone, a good booh, a good ring, and a
good chain?which he read correctly.

To-day Willie asked his first question, "What is that?"
pointing to a large, bright Japanese umbrella suspended from the
ceiling. He had looked at it every day. It swayed in the wind
which came in at the open window. Miss S. said "That is an
umbrella, Willie. Do you think it pretty ?" He nodded. Miss
S. asked, "What makes it move ?" He answered "The wind." His
attention was directed to an object on a small table. He said it
was a cup. The word was written in a sentence on the board, I
have a good cup. He took the cup in his hand, and read the
sentence correctly. He was told to shut his eyes tightly while
some words were being written on the board. He did so and
Miss S. wrote cwp, box, chain, booh, ring, boy. At a signal he
opened his eyes and at once read the words correctly. It was
found that by making him close his eyes with the expectation of
seeing something when he opened them, a momentary concentration of attention was secured.
Miss S. pointed to the word boy and asked "Who is that,
Willie?" He laid his hand on his own chest but did not speak.
His copying of the words later was rather a matter of drawing
than of writing.

A small sum was written on the board thus,
2 2 2
2 2 2
2 2 2
Pegs were given him to count;?after much work he added
2 and 2 and 2 and gave the sum 6. When asked whether he would
rather hear "The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries," or go home, he
said that he wished to go home, so there was no story to-day.
Before going, he took his cap in his left hand, went to Miss Cora,
offered his right hand and in a thin little voice said "Good bye."
He did the same to Miss S. He walked out quickly without looking round. He came and went alone to-day.
His voice is still low, uncertain and weak. He cannot construct. a sentence himself. When told to repeat one, he does it
mechanically. His gaze wanders round the room, but he will look
at some one for a moment, if told to do so. He notices the ringing of a telephone bell which announces the close of the hour, but
his attention is very fleeting.

Sixth Day, Sept. 25th.?After this morning's greeting, in
which he did and said exactly what he was told, Willie turned
quickly to< the board. The words were box, cup, stone, good,
umbrella, ring. He recognized all the words excepting umbrella,
but when questioned concerning the object hanging from the ceiling, he immediately associated with it the word on the board, and
pronounced it. He never afterward forgot this word.

He found the objects indicated by the words, and constructed
the usual sentences. While copying the words, his attention was
steadied, but while reading, his attention wandered repeatedly.
Toward the close of the period his attitude indicated greater
repose. His mouth is still open. He seems to hear Miss S., but
it is only after many repetitions that her words assume meaning.
Again and again she says the same thing, quite loudly and cheerfully, with no sign of impatience or surprise. Finally he says
the word in a dull tone. Miss S. never gives up until he speaks.
The two factors in his improvement seem to be repetition on the
part of Miss S. and imitation on his own part. As yet, he has
originated nothing whatever.

Seventh Day, Sept. 2Qth.?This morning Willie brought to
Miss S. a picture of a spray of blackberries. His mother had
taken him to the Kindergarten for an hour. While there, the
Kindergarten teacher gave him this picture. He brought it away,
and when he shook hands with Miss Sv he presented it to her.
This seems to be the first act which he has originated. He probably associated the picture with the story of "The Bonnie Bush
of Blackberries." Miss S. asked, "What are these in the picture,
Willie?" He answered, "Berries." When asked what kind of
berries, he said "Blackberries." Miss S. asked, "Did you ever
hear a story about blackberries?" He nodded. Being asked
whether he remembered the story, he nodded again. Miss S. then
repeated the story. In this story a kid plays an obstinate, part.
Miss S. asked, "Was the kid a good kid ?" Willie looked at the
ceiling and piped, "A bad kid."

The sentences on the board were: I have a good hid, I have
a good ox, I have a good stone, I have a good chain, etc. Miss S..
said, "Now Willie, go to the drawer and find the things so that
you can read the sentences." He found the stone and the chain,
but made no comment upon his inability to find an ox or a kid
in the drawer. He read all the sentences correctly. Miss S.
asked, "What kind of a chain have you ?" He answered, "I have
a nice chain." The word "nice" is a new word. So far as we
know, we have not used it in his presence. Miss S. inserted it in
the known sentences, "I have a nice chain," "I have a nice cup,"
etc. These sentences were written irregularly on the board.
Willie found and read each one correctly. Miss S. asked, "What
kind of a boy are you, Willie ?" He answered promptly "A good
boy,?a nice boy." Miss S. asked, "Who is a good boy?" He
answered, "Willie,?a nice boy." Miss S. wrote, I am a nice
good boy. Willie read it mechanically without any sign of selfconsciousness.
After the lesson Miss S. suggested that Willie and Miss Cora
should run round the table and see who could get back to her first.
He ran three steps, then came down heavily on his heels. He
seemed to fear that he might fall and tried to clutch Miss Cora's
hand. He had no idea of trying to compete with her.

Eighth Day, Sept. 27th.?To-day Willie made his greetings
in a voice that could be easily heard. He arranged some chairs
according to direction, and located the buzz of the telephone. He
was afraid to go to the spot, but liked the sound from a distance.
He observed a drawing on the blackboard, and asked what
it meant. Miss S. told him that it was a picture of a star-fish,
and repeated the word until he pronounced it. The board was
then turned so that he could not see the picture, and Miss S.
continued talking to him, stopping occasionally to pronounce a
word over and over again until he would say it.

She told him that she desired him to eat bread, and drink
milk. She mentions this frequently, but he hardly seems to hear
her. Later she proposed to tell him a story, to which suggestion
he nodded, whereupon Miss S. began: "This is the house that
Jack built." He sjx>ke at once, "That isn't the story." Miss S.
then began the story of "The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries," hesitating here and there as if she had forgotten parts. He supplied
the missing words, articulating very well and showing that he had
learned much of the story. During the narration some change of
facial expression could be observed. Before the story was ended, he
said that he wished to read sentences on the board. Miss S. was
surprised and assured him that a person always finished one
thing before beginning another. He seemed to be satisfied with
this and listened quietly till the end.

A mouse ran across the floor. He was startled and asked
what that was. Miss S. went on with the story. When she had
finished, she told him it was only a mouse and that it could not
hurt him. He seemed to be afraid. The word mouse was written
on the board, and he copied it. The sentence I have a good ring
was written. He went at once to the drawer and found the ring.
Other sentences followed and were read correctly.
Miss S. referred to the kid in the story. He said, "A bad
kid." She then wrote, I have a bad hid, I have a nice cwp. As
he likes to have the object in his hand when he reads, he started
to get the cup, but was afraid to go to the table lest the mouse
should be there. While reading the sentence I am a nice boy,
he caught sight of a mirror hanging on the wall. He instantly
asked "What is that?" Miss S. repeated the word "mirror"
until he said it, then she made him stand, before it so that he
could see himself, and asked the color of his coat, his tie, his
collar, hands, face, etc. He named the colors correctly each time.
A perforated board with pegs, such as is used in the Kindergarten, was given him. Under direction he put the pegs into the
holes, counting them as he did so. He failed at first in counting
three, but upon a second trial got them right. He found a broken
one, and in answer to a question, said, "It is broke." When
asked the color of some pegs, he said "fellow" (for yellow). Miss
S. directed an arrangement of pegs which formed a Greek cross.
When asked what the figure looked like, he said, "The star-fish."
More pegs were put in. He said the new forms were "boxes."
He counted two groups of red pegs, twelve in each. He could
not tell how many he had altogether, but when the two groups
were combined, he counted twenty-four. He then laid sixteen
green pegs in a row, counting them correctly.

Miss S. then named the days of the week. He counted them
on his fingers, and tried to pronounce the names. Miss S. asked,
"What is your name ?" Though the question was repeated many
times, no answer was given. Miss S. then asked, "Is your name
Tommy Brown ?" to which he said emphatically "No." The next
question was "When you go home, in which direction do you
go?" He pointed correctly. "Have you a mother?" He shook
his head, but said "Yes." "Have you a sister?" He said, "Yes,"
but again shook his head. "What is her name ?" He could not
tell.

Although this child has never talked, he has been hearing
people speak all his life. Consequently he now and then uses a
word which has not been taught him, but which he must have
heard at home. When he said, "The peg is broke," he used the
word "broke" as his mother would use it.

Ninth Day, Monday, Sept. 30th.?To-day Willie seemed
brighter than usual. He said "Good morning" very well. For
the first few minutes he and Miss Cora ran around the table.
She tried to let him get ahead, but he clung to her hand. He has
not the least idea of competition. He was glad to stop running.
When asked whether he desired a new story or the same old one,
he said, "I want the same old one." "The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries" was told again. He reproduced a large part of it. When
a single word was given, he would reproduce a series of words.
When asked what he thought of the woman in the story, he said
"A good woman." Asked about the kid, he said, "A bad kid."
Miss S. asked, "Why do you think it was a bad kid ?" He answered, "He wouldn't go home and keep house." Miss S. asked,
"What kind of a boy are you ?" He answered promptly, "A
good boy." "Why do you think you are a good boy ?" No
answer.

Question,?"Do you eat meat when mamma tells you ?" He
answered, "Yes." "Do you drink milk?" "Yes." "Why do you
do this, Willie ?" "To make me grow." (His mother had probably told him this.) Miss S. then asked, "Do you wish to be big
like papa?" He said "Yes." "How big is he?" !N"o answer.
Miss S. continued, "Willie say these words, 'Papa is very large.' "
He hesitated a moment and then said, "Papa is very awful big"?
probably the first sentence that Willie has constructed to suit
himself. While saying it, he showed neither emotion nor interest.
The story, "The House that Jack built," was told him.
When asked whether he liked it, he did not answer, but said "I
want to read." Being told to bring the objects whose names he
wished to see written on the board, he brought a stone, chain,
hammer, pencil, book, vase and cap. As he brought each article,
he was directed to say, "Please write the word stone, chain, hammer," thus insuring the oral pronunciation of each word. The
words were written separately on the board in no particular order.
As soon as Willie read one, it was erased. He made but one
mistake. He then read correctly the following sentences: I have
a good hammer; 7 have a nice, good cap; I have a good ruler;

I have a box and a book; I have a box, a booh, a cap, and a chain.
The telephone bell rang. Willie turned toward ft quickly. Miss
S. asked "What is that?" He said, "The telephone." The
word telephone was written on the board, and the sentences, I
have a good telephone, and I have a telephone and a box. He read
the sentences correctly, but was afraid to go to the telephone and
touch the box. Miss S. and Miss Cora went and passed their
hands over it, remarking upon its smoothness, and finally he went
and did exactly as they had done.

To-day Willie's improvement is marked. He seems to have
gained rather than lost during the interval between Friday and
Monday. His lips show some color, his eyes are bright, and once
he smiled a little. He now leans against Miss S. without any
sign of fear. At first if she moved her hand toward him, he
shrank away. It is possible that he has been slapped at home.
His attention is still imperfect. His mouth is open and his head
moves restlessly. He does not look at the person who speaks to
him.

Tenth Day, Oct. 1st.?This day was very like yesterday.
Willie asked to hear "The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries." When
Miss S. seemed to forget the beginning, he began "Once there was
a woman sweeping the house (floor) and she found a penny."
Miss S. continued from there, he helping when she needed it.
When asked about the kid, he said, "A mean kid." When asked
how big his papa was, he said, "Quite big." "Mean" and "quite"
are both new words. He read his sentences correctly.

Eleventh Day, Oct. 2d.?The work to-day showed nothing
new. Miss S. again talked to Willie about eating bread and
meat, and drinking milk. She made him say, UI like bread and
butter. I like milk. I shall eat some meat to-day." He read
fourteen sentences, recognizing the old words and inferring the
new ones by reason of the objects presented. He preferred reading to listening to a story.
Twelfth Day, Oct. 3d.?This morning, Miss S. tried to show
Willie how to walk, throwing his weight on the balls of his feet.
She took his hand and walked with him. Sometimes they walked
on their toes, making themselves as tall as possible.
Willie said that he wished to see the word "brush" on the
board. Miss S. introduced all the personal pronouns. The sentences were: I have a brush; she has a brush; he has a brush; we
have a brush; you have a brush; they have a brush. The new
words he, she, we, you, were written separately in unexpected
places among known words. Willie hunted them out, and then
read the sentences in which they were used: He has a good telephone; I have a vase and a good brush; she has a ring and a bad
chain; you have a cup and four good books. These sentences were
all constructed orally before they were written and the objects
were placed in the hands of Miss S., Miss Cora or Willie, according to the person of the pronoun used.
Willie copied several words. As he worked, Miss S. talked
to him about improving the forms of the different letters. She
pronounced the letters and seemed to take it for granted that he
knew them as well as she did. He really is getting to know them.
In talking to Willie, Miss S. uses the same words and sentences she would employ in talking to a normal child, or indeed
to a grown person. He seems to get her meaning by the associated actions.
Thirteenth Day, Oct. 4:th.?To-day Willie told the story of
"The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries," Miss S. helping him by a
word here and there. Several times he said "give" for did, then
suddenly stopped and said "did" very carefully. The word boy
was on the board. He called it "dog." The word dog was
written. He looked at it, then read the word boy correctly. He
was not able to pronounce the word the. After watching Miss
S.'s lips while she pronounced it again and again, he suddenly
said it. Many sentences containing the words have, has, had, is
and are were written. Willie read them until he knew them
thoroughly. He had forgotten the word pencil. Being told to
go to the drawer and look at the things, he went, and in a moment
returned and read the word pencil correctly.

To-day Willie said suddenly, "I am tired." This is the first
time he has asserted his right to stop work. He did not desire to
do anything more, so he was allowed to go home earlier than
usual.

He comes and goes alone now. He speaks to no one and
appears to recognize no one, but seems to be less frightened.
Fourteenth Day, Monday, Oct. 7th.?To-day Willie brought a
book?a "Ward Primer." He seemed to have been studying it
by himself. He knew several words in the first two or three
lessons. Miss S. took some very simple words from the book and
used them in questions on the board:?Do you see me? Do I see
you? Does she go? Does he go? He disliked reading the ques18 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
tions and could not construct any answers to them. Miss S. went
through the questions and answers many times. Then followed
written statements:?I see a book; I see a boy; I see a chain;
I see a telephone-box; I see a hammer. He read these, then
opened the book and read, "The boy sees a girl." He pointed to '
a boy and a girl in the picture, then pointed to himself, and again
to the girl in the picture. After a time he announced with a
little note of warning in his voice, "I am tired now." Miss S.
shut the book and began "The Bonnie Bush of Blackberries."
He interrupted her and asked for "The House that Jack Built."
As it is desirable that Willie should come into social relations with other children, he has been entered in the first grade
of the public school for an hour or two every morning before
coming to Miss S. He will begin to-morrow in the room upstairs.
Fifteenth Day, Oct. 8th.?To-day Willie entered the first
grade, where he was seated with children aged six and seven.
Later he came downstairs. He could give no account of anything
that went on in the grade. He read about twelve sentences, first
on the board and then in his primer. Before he began to read,
he pointed to the word bread and asked "What is that word?"
This is the first time he has asked about a word. After reading
for some time, he said warningly, "I am getting tired now."
Miss S. shut the book and told "The House that Jack Built."
He said "Good bye" and walked away quite briskly.

Sixteenth Day, Oct. 9th.?The period to-day was spent in constructing oral sentences and in reading those on the board, and
certain ones in the primer. An effort was made to make Willie
understand the relation between a question and an answer. Miss
Cora and Miss S. constructed conversations, using simple words,
varying inflections, and different pitches of tone. The sentences
were:?

Willie likes bread. (He read this incorrectly, discovered
his mistake, and seemed to be sorry.) Willie wants it; I want it.
Will you give it to me? Give it to me. Do give it to me. (Repeated
many times.) It is good. The bread looks good. Jack wants it.
The boy eats bread. Do give it to him. (Repeated many times.')
I do want to give it to him. He gives it to the girl. Is it her
bread? (Repeated many times.) It is her bread. Give it to her.
Seventeenth Day, Oct. 10th.?To-day special attention was
given to the use of personal pronouns in oral and written sentences: he, his, him, she, hers, her, it, its, we, our, us, etc. He
is a good boy; Give the booh to him; This is his dog; The hat is
hers; Come to us, etc.

In reading the primer, Willie came to a sentence which
began on one line and finished on the next. It was impossible
for him to carry the thought beyond the first line. He treated
the two parts as two separate sentences. He worked steadily and
made several corrections which were not suggested. After reading, he selected the story "The House that Jack Built." This
story has always been repeated with attention to the rhythm. Today the rhythm was emphasized markedly, and for the first time
Willie began to move his finger in time to the beat. He observed
that Miss S. called Miss Cora's attention to this, and he immediately stopped beating time. This is the first sign of self-consciousness he has shown. Miss S. then took hold of his hand and
showed him how to beat time. Willie seems to realize that there
are some things which he cannot do. To-day he pointed to a page
at the back of his book and remarked, "I can't read that."
His attention is still fleeting, but it shows improvement.
Every day a curious little contest goes on between him and Miss
S. For instance, Miss S. points to a word. Willie glances at it,
then instantly looks away. She keeps the pencil pointing to the
Same word. He looks back at the word. The pencil is still there.
He looks away. Miss S. does not move a muscle. He looks back
again. Finally he reads the word. Then the pencil moves on to
the next word. This goes on to the end of the sentence. After
pronouncing each word separately, he reads the whole sentence
quite fluently. As he does this, a writhing movement passes over
his whole body. When the sentence is finished, the writhing
ceases. When he reads each word separately, there is no sign of
this writhing movement.

Willie's color has improved, and his eyes are brighter, but
he still keeps his mouth open and his head moves restlessly. The
mother has promised to take him to the hospital, in order that he
may be treated for adenoids.

Eighteenth Day, Oct. 11th.?To-day Willie was measured;
he is just four feet high. He was not interested in being measured, but asked permission to read. He had the usual difficulty
in connecting the words of one line with the words on a preceding
line. He failed to recognize the word "that," "When it was pronounced for him, he began to count the "that's" on the page. He
was drilled on the question, "What is tliat?" until he could both
ask and answer it. He counted the "what's" on the page.

To-day for the first time the notes of the scale were sung to
him. He smiled and appeared to he amused, but would not try
to imitate the sounds. He repeated "The House that Jack Built"
and beat time, with Miss S. guiding his _ hand. His body at
present seems to be quite without rhythm. When he walks in the
street, the writhing of his body is similar to his contortions when
reading a sentence. This writhing appeal's to accompany all
consecutive movements of his body.

Twenty-first Day, Oct. 15th.?Willie has been absent for
two days. On Monday, Oct. 13th, his father had taken him to
the hospital to be operated on for adenoids. The surgeon did
not give him an anesthetic, but the child bore the discomfort of
the operation without a sound. It is doubtful whether his sensitivity is great. His fear of unusual things, however, is very
pronounced. The doctor sent him home at once, saying that he
must be kept in the house for a week. He was very anxious to
come to school, however, and to-day he appeared. He seemed
very glad to get back.

He had forgotten to bring his book. Miss Cora went to the
office to get a book for him while Miss S. tried to question him
about his experience at the hospital. He would not answer a
question, but seemed very anxious about Miss Cora's absence.
He asked, "Where is Miss Cora gone?" Miss S. said, "She has
gone to the office to get a book for you, but tell me"?he interrupted, "What office ?" Miss S. answered, "The school office, "but
now tell me"? Again he interrupted with a shade of impatience,
"She won't find a book there!" Just then Miss Cora appeared with
a book of jingling verses. Miss S. read,?"One two, buckle my
shoe. Three four, shut the door." He interrupted, "What is
that?" Miss S. opened the door and shut it again, repeating,
"Three four, shut the door." She continued, "Five six, pick up
sticks." Willie asked quickly, "The sticks in the box ?" Miss S.
nodded and continued "Seven eight, lay them straight." Willie
took seven red pegs and eight green pegs from the box, and laid
them in a row. Miss S. asked, "What are you doing, Willie?"
He answered (still working) "I'm laying them straight." Miss S.
continued, "How many have you ?" He said "Five." How many
do you need?" "Seven." "How many more must you have?"
"Two." After this he laid eight pegs in a straight line.
Miss S. read, "Eleven, twelve, a man must delve." She told
him that "to delve" meant to work. He committed the jingle to
memory, but always persisted in saying "Eleven, twelve, a man
must work.

With only two repetitions he learned the story of "Jack and
Jill" by heart. In repeating the Mother Goose melody "The Cat
and the Fiddle," he refused to say, "The little dog laughed to see
such fun" (the version taught him), but said, "The little dog
laughed to see such sport" (another version). It is probable that
he has heard the Mother Goose melodies repeated by his little
sister at home, but he certainly has never said them before.
He could not repeat the Miss Muffet jingle, but when Miss
S. paused he would insert the right word. He repeated after
Miss S., "I like little pussy," and when asked "What kind of a
coat has pussy?" he answered, "A soft coat, a warm coat."
To-day there is a change in Willie. The experience at the
hospital seems to have stirred him mentally. His eyes are bright;
his lips are quite red; his mouth has been shut part of the time.
All his movements are more purposeful than before.
Twenty-second Day, Oct. 17th.?To-day Miss S. asked,
"Willie, did you talk to your teacher upstairs?" He said, "No."
Miss S. then had him repeat the words, "I shall talk to my teacher
to-morrow." He said the words very slowly.

In his primer he read the sentence, "What does a girl like
to eat?" Then he turned to Miss Cora and asked very naturally,
"What does a girl like to eat?" Miss Cora promptly answered,
"She likes bread to eat."

In reviewing the rhymes of yesterday, Miss S. read, "A man
must delve. What does delve mean, Willie ?" He answered a
"bell" (some similarity of sound). He seemed to have forgotten
the talk about the word yesterday. Much of Willie's reading
appears to be guess work. He remembers the words largely from
their position on the page. Often when he fails to recognize a
word, he turns back to a preceding page, finds the word and recognizes it in the position in which he first learned it. Then he pronounces it in its new position and continues the reading.
He does not answer all questions which are addressed to him.
Some of them he seems not to understand; others do not assume
significance for some time; a few he answers at once. When
asked to do so, he can now speak in a full tone. When leaving the
room, he never forgets to say "Good bye," but he departs in a
very brisk, decided way, as if no power could induce him to stay
a minute longer.

The most important factors in his instruction have been the
repetition, the regularity, the routine, and the absence of hurry.
If the child were hurried he would probably do nothing. He is
always made to finish one thing before he begins another. No
matter how often he turns away from his work the pencil remains
pointing to the word that is to be spoken. Sometimes he tries to
move the pencil with his fingers. The pencil is immovable. He
tries to turn the leaf?the pencil presses it down firmly. Finally
he gives up, and reads with the intention of finishing the page.
Not a word is spoken. Sometimes Miss S. remarks, "If we begin
a page, of course we must finish it before we turn the leaf. One
cannot stop until he finishes the thing he has begun."

Willie has evidently learned many things which he has not
been able to express. At times a mass of images seems to be suddenly uncovered, and he recognizes them all at once. When this
occurs he talks quite freely. A single word may be the means of
reproducing a whole series.
[to be concluded.]
