The Plea of Insanity in the Case of Lefroy
============================================

122 Art. VII?
Having expressed ail opinion a few days after Lefroy was
condemned to death that there were sufficient grounds to j ustify
the Home Secretary in granting a medical inquiry, and no
response having been made to an appeal so numerously signed,
we have thought it desirable to discuss iC The Plea of Insanity "
in this unfortunate case. Having been concerned in the matter
we feel it an imperative duty we owe to ourselves, the public,
and to the friends of the young man now gone over to join the
great majority, to give the following particulars.
Within a few days of the termination of the trial we were
consulted by some relatives of Lefroy with reference to our
forming a conclusion on his state of mind. Certain documentary
evidence was placed in our hands, and family histories were
disclosed, all bearing directly on the case. Having carefully
perused these we expressed an opinion that there were sufficient
grounds for petitioning the Home Secretary to grant a medical
examination of the condemned man. A few days subsequently
we had occasion to go into the country, and on our way down in
the train we read in the morning's paper that we had been
appointed to visit Lefroy at Lewes Gaol. Upon arrival at our
destination we immediately telegraphed to the Home Secretary, expressing our desire that if such were the case we would
rather make the examination in conjunction with a medical
Government official appointed by himself. This wish was also
subsequently expressed by us at the Home Office. We felt that
public opinion was so great against the condemned man that we
did not care to take upon ourselves the responsibility of acting
as mental adjudicator in a case of so much public importance
TIIE FLEA OF INSANITY IN TIIE CASE OF LEFROY. 123
and interest. We only saw the friends on one occasion. We
have never seen or had any communication with Mr. Dutton,
the solicitor for the defence, beyond telegraphing to him on the
day before the execution, and also signing the petition presented
to us by his clerk, not asking for a reprieve, but simply praying
that the Home authorities would sanction an inquiry into
Lefroy's mental state. This petition was subsequently signed
by upwards of one hundred medical men.
Three years ago a young man presented himself at the house
of a consulting physician in Brook Street, giving the name of
Percy Lefroy Mapleton. This circumstance had escaped the
memory of the medical man whom Lefroy then saw, until hearing of
the murder, when, upon reference to his note book, the following
entry was seen attached to the name, " This person is evidently
insane." Lefroy, inheriting insanity on the side of both father
and mother, commenced his career with anything but a hopeful
future. His mother dies before he reaches the age of five ;
his father suffers from softening of the brain for some years
previous to his death, which only occurred recently. His
natural disposition is described as being gentle in the extreme,
and he is reported as abhorring all crime and vice. Of the early
life of Lefroy we know but little. He was sent to Australia,
and returned a short time back, but whilst on his passage home
he conducted himself in such a strange manner as to necessitate being placed under absolute restraint?the captain and
officers of the ship can testify to this. If, therefore, his real
state of mind had been properly recognised by his family at this
period of his history, a terrible calamity would have been averted.
We hear of his going into theatrical speculations with an imaginary opera bouffe, supposed to have been written by Offenbach,
which he called " Lucette," but which had no reality beyond his
own morbid imagination. The extraordinary statements,
founded on fabrication, which from time to time have been
called "lies," were, in our opinion, delusions, existing only
in his diseased mind. We have had in our possession, and we
deposited at the Home Office, a letter written to a friend of his,
124 THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN THE CASE OF LEFROV.
in which he stated that he had come into a property of ^10,000
per annum for life, and that he was going in for " parliamentary
honours." Does this look like the saying of a man in his
right mind? The letter to which we refer is dated May of
last year. Within a few weeks of his penning this epistle
he commits the murder for which he has met the death of a
wilful criminal. Cunning is conspicuous in lunatics, and this
quality had been shown throughout the whole of the transaction.
Commencing the crime with Hanoverian medals in his possession ; the endeavour to conceal the watch in his boots; sending
one of these counterfeit pieces to the post office, and expecting
to receive a sovereign in exchange for it. His conduct was very
peculiar after the murder. It may be alleged on the other hand
that there was distinct premeditation, but this is no argument
against his insanity. Surely, many of the murders committed
by lunatics are premeditated, and suicidal insanity is nearly
always so. His method was not that of a sane man. With
regard to his confessions, they appear to be nothing but a tissue
of crazy incoherencies. He admits one crime after another. It
is said that he did this to obtain a reprieve, so as to give time
to investigate the truth of his statement. This opinion was
eagerly grasped by those desirous of hurrying the victim into
eternity. What possible evidence have we that these statements were not positive delusions, emanating from one, who at
the time he is reported to have uttered this, was described as
" raving like'a lunatic and foaming at the mouth ?" We could
adduce from the other documents we have had in our possession
in further proof of what we urged to the Home Secretary, that
there were sufficient data for an inquiry to be held. It would
be as absurd to consult a medical man upon some knotty legal
question as it would be to ask a lawyer to solve some psychological problem. Why then, in the name of justice and common
sense, were not those experienced in insanity called in to report
on his mental state ? The only official opinion as yet published
was Marwood's, who considered him sane, and the press grasped
this opinion as carrying weight, and sent it forth to the world.
THE I'LEA OF INSANITY IN THE CASE OF LEFROY. 125
In our opinion Lefroy was subject to paroxysms of homicidal
impulse, in addition to other marked symptoms of insanity.
In homicidal insanity it requires one especially conversant
with the subject to detect mental aberration. A visit to Broadmoor will convince anyone of this fact. Here we see persons
convicted of murder, but subsequently acquitted on the ground
of insanity, who since their confinement have been of sound
mind; but they are, and rightly so, detained during Her
Majesty's pleasure. " Homicidal impulse " is often recurrent,
and it is never known when a fresh paroxysm may occur, and
what the result of such outbreak may involve. It is not connected
with any special type of mental aberration, and is generally
associated with monomania. The insanity here is often of
so superficial a kind that it is most difficult of detection,
the intellectual powers remaining seemingly intact throughout
the disease. Persons so afflicted are liable to sudden paroxysms
of mental excitement and murderous desire. No reason can,
as a rule, be detected for the perpetration of the deed, and
the crime is apparently quite motiveless. Many homicidal
lunatics destroy the lives of those they love most dear. Some
victims to this homicidal tendency are quiet, morose, and gloomy
in their nature ; they are naturally a most dangerous class
of humanity, and too often it happens that their real condition is not detected until some crime has been committed
which brings their actions under the immediate attention of
the authorities. Unnatural cruelties, impulsive desires are also
present; the reasoning power, judgment, and ordinary mental
symptoms remain intact, the chief characteristic being a
morbid and irresistible wish to commit extravagant and
murderous acts, no positive delusion being present. It belongs
to a class of in sanity called " moral insanity," and one under
which Lefroy laboured, the symptoms we have just enumerated
being all present. His love affair, which was so conspicuously,
we regret to say, brought prominently forward, had not the
slightest foundation, but was purely an hallucination of his
disordered fancy. According to the law of England, if it can
126 THE PLEA OP INSANITY IN THE CASE OF LEFROY.
be conclusively established that a prisoner knows the difference
between right and wrong, he is therefore held legally responsible.
This is a monstrous doctrine. If we examine one hundred
ordinary lunatics in any asylum, not, of course, including the
demented and absolutely idiotic inmates, we find that quite
ninety of this number are able to discriminate between right
and wrong; and yet, according to the rule of law now laid
down, these persons must be regarded as responsible beings,
who, if they aggress, must pay the penalty for so doing. The
opinion we originally entertained that a medical examination
should have been granted by the Home Secretary is universally held by all those medical men with whom we have
discussed the case. As far as the unhappy man himself is
concerned, it may perhaps be a mercy that he is spared incarceration as a criminal lunatic for life ; but in discussing a
case of this nature we should not heed the popular cry for
vengeance towards a condemned man. It is to the immediate
relatives and those with whom he has been all through life
associated that we must extend our pity, and by whom sympathy
was doubtless deeply felt for the family of Mr. Grold. It is the
opinion of many individuals that insanity, if clearly established,
should not exempt a criminal from the extreme penalty of the
law. We do not, however, for one moment, endorse this, or credit
that such a monstrous and unchristian doctrine should be
tolerated by the more enlightened members of our community.
There are undoubtedly some individuals among both the legal
and scientific sections of society who entertain extreme views
respecting crime and punishment?men not deficient in natural
sagacity, and not uninfluenced by feelings of humanity, who,
being educated in the spirit and prejudices of the old school,
consider the throne, the seat of justice, and the State in danger
if any undue mercy is extended towards those who violate the
sacred majesty of the law.
" Not hang a lunatic! " they exclaim, " who has committed
the crime of murder! Not hand over to the tender mercies of
Marwood an insane person who has imbrued his hands in the
THE PLEA OF INSANITY IN THE CASE OF LEFROY. 127
blood of a fellow creature ? If doctrines like these are promulgated, if such principles are allowed to interfere with the
legitimate administration of justice, who will answer for the
safety of society, or the security of the State ? " We have the
happiness, however, of living in an age when such obsolete
doctrines can exercise no influence upon the understanding, the
humanity, character, and conduct of those placed in positions
of great legal trust and responsibility. It may be asked, Why
was the plea of insanity not raised at the trial of Lefroy ? But
with this we have nothing to do. It was our opinion from the
first that it ought to have been. Again, Why were the officials,
on pain of dismissal, not allowed to divulge anything that
occurred within the precincts of the gaol for twenty-four hours
previous to the execution, in reference either to the prisoner's
conversation or demeanour ? The case, from first to last, was a
sensational one; and under no pretence whatever could the
public executioner be deprived of his victim. Reviewing the
case calmly and deliberately, and taking into consideration all
the concomitant facts, it would have furthered the interests of
intelligence, humanity, science, civilisation, Christianity, and
justice if a deaf ear had not been turned to the prayer of these
petitioners, simply begging that the Home Secretary would
grant a medical inquiry into the mental state of the youth then
standing on the precipice of his fate.?Ed.
