The Idiot; his Place in Creation, and his Claims on Society
=============================================================

136 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.

By Frederic Bateman, M.D., F.R.C.P., &c. London:
Jarrold & Sons, 3 Paternoster Buildings.
Dr. Bateman has, in this admirable address, eloquently and
earnestly pleaded the cause of that most unfortunate of our
fellow-creatures?the helpless and pitiable idiot. The address
was delivered in St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, at a public
meeting held in support of the Eastern Counties' Asylum for
Idiots (of which Dr. Bateman is the consulting physician),
under the presidency of the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of
England; and was published at the special request of the Board
of Directors of the Asylum
The author's prefatory remarks on the definition of idiocy
are clear and convincing. He says :
" I would define idiocy as an infirmity consisting, anatomically, of a defective organisation and want of development of
the brain, resulting in an inability, more or less complete, for
the exercise and manifestation of the intellectual, moral, and
sensitive faculties. There are various shades and degrees of
this want of development, from those whose mental and bodily
deficiencies differ but slightly from the lowest of the so-called
sound-minded, to those individuals who simply vegetate, and
whose deficiencies are so decided as to isolate them, as it were,
from the rest of nature.
"The first idiot that attracted the attention of scientific
men was looked upon as a savage man, and every treatise on
the subject contains some allusion to the so-called savage of
the Aveyron, who excited so much curiosity, speculation, and
interest among the psychologists of Paris in the early part of
the present century.
" In old books on medical nomenclature, idiocy was classed
amongst the varieties of insanity, and the visitor to a lunatic
asylum, half a century ago, would find the idiot skulking in the
corner of a courtyard, chained to a staple, and lying on a litter
of straw; in fact, he was considered and treated more like a
wild beast than a human being. He had but little talent given,
and by neglect or abuse that little was lost, until, growing
more and more brutal, he sank unregretting and unregretted into
an early grave, without ever being counted as a man. Now,
idiocy is not a form of insanity, and it is most important that
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 137
no confusion should exist in the public mind upon this point,
as the association of idiots and insane patients in the same
asylum is a disadvantage to both classes. I desire especially to
press this point upon the legislators of the country, and, as, in
this county, our union-houses are far too large for the requirements of the age, I would suggest that one or more of them
might, with advantage, be devoted to the care and treatment of
pauper idiots.
" Insanity is a loss, more or less complete, of faculties formerly possessed ; it consists of a perturbation of the mental
faculties after their complete development, or, as a noted
French psychologist has beautifully put it, 4 L'homme en demence est prive des biens dont il jouissait autrefois, c'est un
riche devenu jpauvre. Vidiot a toujours ete dans V in for tune
et la misere.'' (The man that is mad is deprived of possessions
which he formerly enjoyed, it is a rich man become poor;
whereas the idiot has always been in misfortune and misery.)
The distinction between the idiot and the insane is clear and
marked. The madman suffers from abnormal development of
brain, the idiot from an ill-developed brain?the mind of the
madman is not in proper balance, in the idiot it is not in proper
power. The poor idiot (the word being derived from the Greek
l8i(orr]s) is alone in the world; isolated as it were from the
rest of nature, he sees, but does not perceive, he hears but does
understand or appreciate, he cares for nothing, and is alike
indifferent to the grandeur as to the beauties of nature; he
stands unmoved at the thunder-clap, the foam of the rushing
cataract, or the roar of the mighty ocean; he heeds not the
hum of the insect world or the song of the early lark, that
winged chorister of the air; the star-bejewelled canopy of
heaven, the mountain landscape lighted up with all the purple
splendour of the setting sun, all these are nothing to him?he
is a soul shut up in imperfect organs."
Dr. Bateman agrees with those who consider the abuse of
alcohol to be the most fruitful source of idiocy. He states that
Dr. Howe, of Massachusetts, observed that out of 359 idiots in
that State, 99 were the children of inveterate drunkards. Dr.
Kerlin, of America, gives a proportion of 38 out of 100 ; and
Dr. Fletcher Beach stated at the British Medical Association,
held last year at Cambridge, that in 430 patients he traced a
history of parental intemperance in 138 cases, or 31*6 per cent.
With regard to the Histology and Pathological Anatomy of
the brain of an idiot, Dr. Bateman makes the following pertinent
remarks. He asks:?
" What is there in the brain that makes one man a senior
wrangler and another an idiot ? What is it that unfits one
138 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
person for the discharge of the ordinary duties of domestic and
social life, and endows another with capacities adapted for a
statesman, a mathematician, or a philosopher ? Is it a defect
in the quantity or the quality of the nervous matter of the
brain ? Does it depend on a malformation of the cranium, on
the size or shape of the head, or on the amount of development
of the convolutions of the brain ? Upon this point, I am bound
to tell you that science speaks with a somewhat uncertain
sound, volumes having been written upon it without any definite
solution or tangible result.
" It was formerly supposed that idiots always presented some
obvious malformation of the cranium or skull. This is by no
means necessarily the case ; one of the most remarkable cases
of idiocy that has come under my notice was that of a child
with a well-formed head, remarkably handsome face, and wellproportioned body. It has been said by some that the power of
mental expression depends on the fineness and degree of complexity of the cerebral convolutions, or on their symmetry in
each hemisphere. One of the most noted writers on the subject,
after stating that a number of scientific men had spent thirty
years measuring and weighing the heads of idiots, sums up their
conclusions as follows :
44 1st. There is no constant relation between the development of the cranium and the degree of intelligence.
" 2nd. The dimensions of the anterior part of the cranium,
and especially of the forehead, are, at least, as great among
idiots as others.
" 3rd. Three-fifths of idiots have larger heads than men of
ordinary intelligence.
" 4th. There is no constant relation between the degree of
intelligence and the weight of the brain.
" 5th. Sometimes the brain of idiots presents no deviation
in form, colour, and density from the normal standard; it is, in
fact, perfectly normal."
The Author's observations on " Matter and Mind " are so
much in accordance with the antimaterialistic views which have
been so strenuously advocated in the pages of the Journal
of Psychological Medicine for many years, that we have much
pleasure in giving them in extenso :
" I can imagine no more powerful weapon for combating the
materialistic tendencies of the day than is furnished by a consideration of the natural history of the idiot. This is neither
the time nor the place for me to enter into the question of the
mysterious connection between matter and mind, a subject
which I have developed at some length in my published works.
In mj various public appeals on behalf of the Asylum of Idiots
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 139
I have also usually taken the opportunity of pointing out how
the experience afforded by the study of idiocy is utterly
opposed to the extravagant dogmas of the materialistic school,
and to the crude notions which pseudo-science has engendered,
and I have also shown how the results of idiot training furnish
a forcible demonstration of the dualistic theory of mind and
matter, upon which science reposed till the times of Spinosa,
Laplace, Haeckel, Huxley, and others.
" The pseudo philosophers of our time have bewildered the
public mind by the wild flights of their imagination; thought,
the so-called spiritual attributes of man, are merely a function
of brain protoplasm ; the brain, say they, secretes thought, just
as the liver secretes bile, or as oxygen and sulphur produce
sulplmric acid, and all the varied phenomena of nature are
nothing more than the molecular changes of matter; the operations of the mind are but the products of the caudate cells of
the brain, and volition and consciousness are mere physical
manifestations. They see only the physio-chemical side of
nature, they utterly ignore any spiritual attribute in man, they
regard metaphysics as a relic of mediaeval superstition, and they
assert that all mental operations are bodily functions, and
simply the result of some molecular or atomic change in the
brain ; indeed, the German philosophers go so far as to say that
life itself is only a 6 special and complicated act of mechanics;'
that there is no real distinction between living and dead matter,
and that vitality is a metaphysical ghost (ein metaphysisches
Gespenst).
" When I had the privilege, some few months since, of
pleading the cause of this Asylum at Lynn, I stated that at an
international congress of psychologists held at Paris in 1878, at
which I was present, a celebrated Russian professor laid before
the congress the result of his elaborate experiments on the
brains of idiots, and I pointed out how the professor's conclusions
strongly militated against the notions of the school of philosophers of whom I have been speaking.1'
The professor referred to is Dr. Mierzejewski. An interesting account of his experiments appeared in an article on
" Idiocy," by Dr. Bateman, published in Part I., Vol. V., of the
Journal of Psychological Medicine. Dr. Bateman alludes to
them again in his address. They are so extremely valuable
that no apology is needed for requoting them, with the comments upon them by the Author in his address:
" In order to understand the great value of Dr. Mierzejewski's
investigations, I must remind you that the human brain is
composed of two kinds of nerve structure of an essentially
different nature, grey matter and white matter. Examined
140 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
microscopically, the grey matter is found to be composed of
cells, while the white matter consists of fibres; their function
also is different, the former being regarded as the generator of
nerve force, while the latter simply serves as the medium by
which this force is transmitted. As the manifestation of the
intellectual powers is supposed to be in some way connected
with the development of the grey matter of the cerebral convolutions, one would expect to find in idiots a deficiency of this
element of brain tissue. Dr. Mierzejewski, who illustrated his
communication by casts of the brains of idiots, showed that this
is by no means the case, and he mentioned an instance of an
idiot in whose brain the surface of grey matter was enormous.
So it would seem that there is no fixed relation between the
amount of grey matter of the brain and intellectual power, for
richness of grey substance and abundance of nerve cells may be
accompanied by idiocy.
"Now, as these startling statements of the Eussian professor were not made in a hole and corner, but were enunciated
in the presence of leading psychologists from all parts of the
world, I felt myself justified in telling the materialists that they
must be faced, and either answered or admitted as correct, and
as my address at Lynn was subsequently published in a leading
London periodical and widely circulated, I am now justified in
assuming that the inferences I then drew from these remarkable
experiments cannot be controverted, and that the time has not
yet arrived when the broad distinctions between mind and
matter are to be obliterated, and man reduced to a mere
automaton, a creature of a blind necessity.
"Without unduly exaggerating the importance of Dr.
Mierzejewski's experiments, it must be admitted that very great
interest attaches to them at this juncture, when attention is so
widely directed to the mysterious connection between matter
and mind. Unhappily, instead of solving the question, the
Eussian professor's researches tend to shroud it in a still deeper
mystery, and show that what has been termed the ' slippery
force of thought?the vis vivida animce'?cannot be weighed
in the balance; and they fully justify the eloquent language of
a recent writer when he says, ' Far more transcendent than all
the glories of the universe is the mind of man. Mind is indeed
an enigma, the solution of which is apparently beyond the
reach of this very mind, itself the problem, the demonstrator,
the demonstration, and the demonstrand.' ... To those who
may wish to pursue this subject further, I recommend a perusal
of an essay on 4 Materialistic Physiology,' in the Journal of
Psychological Medicine for April 1877. In this article, the
writer, Dr. Winn, seems to share my views as to the paramount
importance of boldly facing this matter, thus he says:?
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 141
"' The unphilosophical and extravagant dogma, that matter
can think, is now so loudly and confidently asserted, and so
widely spread by a numerous class of medical men and physiologists, both in this country and abroad, that the time has
arrived when a doctrine so fallacious, and so fraught with
danger to the best interests of society, should be fairly and
carefully scrutinised. It is not by mere assertion, or the use of
obscure and pedantic language, that such a theory can be
established; and if it can be shown that the arguments on
which it is based are shallow and speculative, words can
scarcely be found too strong to censure the recklessness and folly
of those who promulgate views so subversive of all morality and
religion.
"' The physicists have utterly failed to establish their position. They were asked to prove by inductive reasoning the
truth of their theory, that the universe is the mere outcome of
molecular force, and their defence has been clearly proved to be
of the most evasive and inconclusive character.
"4 The doctrines of the modern school of materialistic
physiology are permeating all classes of society, and it is these
doctrines, based on the assumption that mind is a mere function
of the brain?an assumption that, if true, would reduce man to
the level of the beasts that perish?that we are offered as a
substitute for the belief in the immateriality of the mind.'
" The essay from which the above quotations are taken is
full of sound and logical reasoning, and the writer's position is
not supported by mere theoretical statements, but by arguments
drawn from well-accredited facts in anatomy and physiology."
Dr. Bateman considers that idiot asylums are destined to be
the " battle-fields " upon which the difficult problems of mental
philosophy?the connection between Mind and Matter?is to
be definitely solved.
In alluding to the brutal treatment to which idiots were
formerly subjected, on the supposition they did not belong to
the human family, he observes:
"All admitted that they had the cr<y/za, or material part of
our nature; they also conceded to them the or principle
of animal life, but they considered that the "rrvev/xa, or spirit of
immortal life?that which essentially differentiates man from
the brute?was absent in the idiot. This idea seemed to have
been entertained by a great theologian of the 16th century, who,
on being asked by a father what he was to do with his idiot
boy, replied that the child might be drowned, as he possessed
no soul! Times are happily changed. We don't admit the
lawfulness of drowning idiots now. It is proved beyond a doubt
that the unhappy idiot of the lowest kind possesses what has
142 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
been called the Tripartite Nature of Man. ' Non enim este sctxo
sculptus e robore dolatus, liabet corpus, habct animum,
movetur mente, movetur sensibus.''
" The above statement could be amply borne out by a reference to cases which have been observed in idiot asylums. I
will, however, mention but two :?An idiot boy has been known
to retire alone, when there was a thunderstorm, to ask God to
take care of his father, who was a sailor. A little boy in the
Massachusetts Asylum for Idiots was in declining health, and
became during his dying illness an object of great interest to
the matron and attendants. Unbidden he said his prayers
frequently, and putting up his little hand, he muttered, ' Me
want to go up ! me want to go up !' Surely he was thinking
of some sort of hereafter, because he added distinctly, ' They'll
say, here comes one of the boys from the Boston School for
Idiots.' The approach of death seemed to awaken his spiritual
life ; out of the decaying body appeared to rise the growing
soul, for after repeating the verse of a hymn, the spirit of this
simple child became liberated from its earthly tenement?its
material habitat?the connection between matter and mind was
severed, and to use the touching language of his biographer,
' this poor little idiot boy bade a long adieu to his sorrowing
friends, and doubtless there was then joy in heaven, as the
recording angel wrote in the Book of Life the name of George
Tobey.'"
Dr. Bateman is diametrically opposed to the opinion of
Esquirol, who stated that the mental condition of an idiot was
irremediable. In answer to this he says :
"Now, I am happy to tell you, that in the broad daylight
of the nineteenth century, science gives an emphatic denial to
this statement. Yes, the results obtained at our own Asylum
and elsewhere, show that much, very much, may be done for the
unhappy idiot, who in a private house is an intolerable incubus,
but who, under proper training in a suitable asylum, becomes
sociable, affectionate, and happy. It has been shown that in
the majority of cases, the idiot may not only cease to be a
source of annoyance and danger to those around him, but by
care and training he may be made able to contribute to his own
sustenance ; the knowledge of simple trades of a mechanical
kind, such as that of a carpenter or tailor, has been reached by
some, and household industrial pursuits have fitted others for
domestic usefulness.
" A celebrated German authority, Herr Saeger, of Berlin, has
stated that in his establishment he had indubitable cases of
idiocy, in which the head was small and malformed, yet in which
the results of education were so triumphant, that they were ultiREVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 143
mately able to mix with the world without being recognised as
idiots. Further, he tells us that in one instance a young man
underwent confirmation without the priest suspecting that he
had been delivered from idiocy.
" It will thus be seen that science has done much for the idiot.
Science will do more, for her motto is 6 Excelsior,' and her
votaries are not content to linger with complacency on the
heights already attained, but they look for the period when, by
the powerful lever of an enlightened philanthropy, this benighted
race shall be raised from the grovelling level of the brute, to
the highest attainable point of bodily perfection."
We strongly recommend the whole of this address for
careful perusal, and feel assured that it will be found as deeply
interesting to the philanthropic as to the psychologist.
Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane.?Report for 1881.
The excellent condition of the Pennsylvania Asylum under
Dr. Kirkbride's control, has more than once been referred to in
these pages, and we are glad again to welcome a favourable
report of the institution. At the end of 1880, this held
356 patients, and during the succeeding 12 months there were
200 new admissions, with 158 discharges or deaths, leaving 398
under treatment at the close of the year. The total number in
the hospital during 1881 was 556 ; the highest number at any one
time was 405, the lowest, 339 ; and the average for the whole
period, 370, viz., 168 males, and 202 females. The discharges are
thus classified:?
Males. Females. Total.
Cured ...... 26 31 57
Much improved
Improved
Stationary
Died
7 4 11
27 17 44
16 4 30
16 10 26
Of the patients discharged "cured," 27 were residents of
the hospital not exceeding three months; 15, between three
and six months; eight, between six and one year; and seven,
for more than one year.
Of those discharged "much improved," five were under
treatment less than three months ; two between three and six
months ; two between six months and one year ; and two for
more than one year.
Of the "improved," 18 were under care less than three
144 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
months ; 11 between three and six months; 11 between six
months and one year; and four for more than one year.
Of those discharged and reported " stationary," six were
under care less than three months; two between three and six
months; four between six months and one year; and eight for
more than one year.
Sixteen males and ten females have died during the year.
Of these deaths, three resulted from acute mania; three, from
general paralysis ; seven, from acute melancholia ; three, from
the exhaustion of chronic mania; three, from old age ; three,
from pulmonary consumption: one, from pneumonia; one,
from suicide; one, from peritonitis; and one, from erysipelas.
The work of improving the institution, in the way of increased
accommodation and the addition of hygienic and other apparatus,
has been consistently carried out; and every effort has been
made to aid in the recovery of patients who exhibited any
tendency towards an amelioration of their symptoms. Added to
this Report is a valuable series of tables dealing with the
8,480 cases treated in the Asylum since it was opened in 1841,
to the end of 1881. From one of them we gather that of the total
number, 8,082 have either been discharged, or have died. They
are classified as :?
Total. Ha2es. Females.
Cured  3 825 1,939 1,88G
Much improved
Improved
Stationary
Died
640 383 257
1 404 789 615
1,098 749 349
1,115 645 470
On the subject of entertainments for patients, Dr. Kirkbride
remarks that he has long been satisfied that " with the proper
kind of entertainments and means for passing the evening
?which it must be remembered during much of the winter
embraces a period of at least four hours?such as can readily
be provided for in any institution, where there is even a
moderate degree of enthusiasm and the proper interest in the
subject the patients feel, not a little, the omission of an entertainment a single night, and anyone who will take the trouble
to walk through the hospital during such an omitted evening,
will readily detect the changed appearance of the wards and
their occupants."
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 145
Nova Scotia Hospital for the Insane. 24th Annual Report.
The twenty-fourth Annual Report of the Medical Superintendent of Nova Scotia Hospital for the Insane gives the number
of patients under treatment during 1881 as 441. Of these 29
were discharged as recovered, two as improved, and 28 died.
Eighty-one patients were admitted, 21 having been previously
inmates of the asylum, and of these readmissions one had been
in six times before, one five times, three twice, and 16 once.
Moreover, of the 21 readmissions, 15 had been discharged as
" recovered " and five as improved ; the remaining one had left
" unimproved." The somewhat considerable rate of mortality is
explained as being caused by the death of five patients who, at
the time of their admission, were hopelessly ill, and who died
soon after being received.
The causes of death in the 28 cases are thus arranged :
Men. Women. Total.
Phthisis 4 3 7
Paresis 2 02
Apoplexy and Paralysis 4 15
Epilepsy 2 13
General Debility and Marasmus .... 2 2 4
Locomotor Ataxy . . . . ... .1 0
Pneumonia.  10
Diarrhoea ........ 1 0
Peritonitis ........ 1 0
Mania ......... 0 1
Gastric Ulcer ....... 1 0
Suicide. ........ 0 1
11 9 28
No reference is made in the Report to post-mortem examinations of the dead bodies?a fact which is much to be
regretted.
Several attempts at suicide were made during the year by
inmates of the hospital, and in one case, that of a woman, unhappily ended fatally. The circumstances attending the act
are somewhat curious, and may prove interesting. They are
recorded as follows in the Report :
" No. 1544, a female, was admitted in March and died July
15th, after about four months' residence. She had several
times attempted to hang herself before admission, and persisted
in similar efforts during the time she was here. She received
most careful watching all the time up to her death. She was
PART I. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES. L
146 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES,
quiet in bed an hour before the night watcli (at 1.20 A.M.)
reported her as lying strangled on the floor. She had risen out
of bed and managed to loosen her hands from the apparatus
which confined them (a precaution used in addition to regular
watching). She fastened one end of a strap about thirty inches
long around her neck, and the other end to the bed ; then, by
lying on the floor and pressing her feet against the wall, induced
suffocation. She was found lying perfectly prone with body
and head resting on the floor alongside the bed, and the arms
straight at each side of the body. Although for some nights
preceding this attempt she had been more tranquil than usual,
yet there had been no relaxation in the attention paid. A
coroner's inquest was held, and a verdict was given in accordance
with the facts."
The recovery rate is given at 36*2 per cent, on admissions,
and an apology for the comparatively low figure thus obtained
is offered in the explanation that a considerable number of
admissions took place at the end of the year ; and then also 14
patients were away at home on trial. Half of these latter are
described as well, and others as in various stages of improvement ; but it was deemed advisable not to actually discharge
any of them until a longer term had elapsed in which to determine the reality of the amendment already exhibited. In former
years the average rate of recoveries, as compared with admissions,
has been 44.
Mention is made of several improvements in the arrangements for securing the comfort of the inmates ; and the report
is, generally speaking, a favourable one.
