Early Education and Spiritualism
=================================

75 Art. IV.?
By Mrs. BURNET, Crimplesliam, Dowriliam Market.
The spread of Spiritualism, and the grave importance given to
the subject by the discussion of it at the recent Church Con-
gress, are startling facts in this ninth decade of our boasted
nineteenth century civilisation. A craving after some visible
apparition, or palpable evidence of a spirit world, may be justly
deemed one of the most irresistible and deeply-seated yearnings
in the hearts of all. So passionate does the longing become in
some whose loved relatives have passed the bourne whence no
traveller returns, that life seems to them unendurable, almost
impossible, without the touch of a vanished hand, and the
sound of a voice that is still. Spiritualism has for all such a
wondrous fascination. They approach the subject with a desire
to know that it is true, rather than to know the truth about it,
their minds already biased, and full of pre-conceived ideas of
such a nature as to allow them to fall facile victims of the false
sensorial impressions, from which men of the highest intellectual
attainments are by no means exempted, and which will, perhaps,
never be safely guarded against until a wise system of careful
education of the several senses has been devised for the
young.
One by one, many of the children of the present generation
are drifting from the old moorings. The faith of their
fathers is no longer their faith, even if they do not make their
boast of being altogether emancipated from the thraldom of
anything so effete as Christianity. The parents of many of
these were taught to lisp catechisms of dogma so soon as they
were able to speak, instead of having had their faculties
developed in a natural order. It is possible that the ranks of
Spiritualism would not have been so rapidly recruited, especially
in America, but for the reaction inevitably resulting from this
very defective system of early education, which was formerly
carried out there even more extensively than in England.
It may be well in elucidation of our subject to take a
rapid glance at some of the leading features of Spiritualism.
The first thing which strikes us is the intense selfishness
on the part of the living which underlies the whole creed.
How strange the life beyond the grave, revealed to us
76 EARLY EDUCATION AND SPIRITUALISM.
through the medium, for the soul freed from the trammels
of sense and flesh appears to have no glorious faculties, no
celestial pursuits. Can we conceive a much more gross and
materialistic doom for a disembodied spirit than that of being
forced to appear, perhaps night after night, and year after year,
at the bidding of Brown, Jones, and Kobinson, to twist tables
about, and sprinkle water on bouquets of flowers ? We can only
stand aghast at the inglorious conception of Anglican divines
who uphold the worth of such testimony against atheism, and
can from the heart re-echo Professor Huxley's remark, that if
such be our future life, it adds a new terror to death. Human
souis vary infinitely; the logic of one man's mind is not the
logic of another's, so with the heart's profoundest yearnings;
there must be some so constituted as to be comforted at the
thought of a table-leg incited to give a sympathetic stroke by
the vital magnetic power of the medium, at the instance of a
departed relative; to others, who have never learnt to look on
these wooden emblems as possible sacred channels of some
mystical psychic force, but have only regarded them as con-
venient for holding viands, such comfort savours of direst
mockery and the rankest materialism. Again we are asked to
carefully bear in mind that no medium guarantees any mani-
festations, that everything depends upon the " conditions"
which are dictated by nature. The manifestations are always
mysterious in their coming and going, acutely sensitive to the
presence of any hostile influence, and it is not unusual for an
earnest inquirer to find that his presence is alivays calculated
to interfere with the free development of the powers of the
spirits. Does an associated body like the Dialectical Society
attempt an investigation, then their sense of responsibility pro-
duces positive magnetism, and thus tends to neutralise spiritual
influence. Has some " embodied spirit" received in the person
of the medium a cochineal brand from a daring unbeliever, no
one's faith is staggered, an impress made on an embodied
spirit is only transferred, according to a well-known law of
Spiritualism, to the medium. If it had fallen to the lot of
equally scientific persona to make the first experiments in pho-
tography, that art might have been still in its infancy, and a
glorious pecuniary harvest in the hands of the monopolists of
spirit-pictures. What a furore there would have been for a
glimpse of them! What terrible denunciations would have
been hurled by unbelievers against those who had anything to
do with what some feeble folk, when first the marvels of sun-
pictures came before the public, were wont to ascribe to
diabolical agency; whilst others would have recognised a blas-
phemous infraction of the divine command to abstain from
EARLY EDUCATION AND SPIRITUALISM. 77
making the likeness of anything that is in heaven or earth.
Yet how different from the " conditions" of the modern spirit-
ualist were those of the early experimentalists in the photogra-
phic art. They, too, were only able at first to preserve the
picture in darkness, and their efforts to find chemicals which
should fix the image were for a while futile. But no dark
seances were convened to gaze upon the marvels said to have
been produced by spirits. Persons might easily then have been
foun,d, who after a long wearisome waiting time of anxious
expectancy, would have recognised in their own likeness that of
some dead relative. Darkness, excepting to those intending to
sleep, is certainly favourable to mental confusion and dazed
sight; even a rather tottering judgment may readily follow
prolonged idleness in a dark room.
There seems no reason to doubt that all persons commonly
described as of a nervous temperament are, even when highly
intelligent and cultivated, peculiarly liable to have the evidence
of their senses falsified, these false impressions being especially-
likely to follow a prolonged concentration of expectant atten-
tion. Only by that " systematic culture of the powers of
observation," from the earliest dawn of intelligence, which Mr.
Herbert Spencer long ago recognised as " the process of acquiring
a knowledge on which all after knowledge is based," can such be
guarded against the dangers of rash exposure to spiritualistic
influence. The immense importance of rightly fashioning and
directing the infant's mind from the cradle, of surrounding it
by wise, qualifying, and controlling influences, whilst letting it
as far as possible acquire facts for itself, that they may take a
deeper hold upon its mind, is well exemplified, if we notice
how early it will register an experience and originate from it a
very false inference; as, for instance, that all flat things are
heavy, because money is flat, and though so small very heavy for
its size ; and books are flat, and some that it has tried to lift are
very heavy. Great attention should be given to the physical
education of the child, with a view to counteracting any morbid
irritability of the nervous system by sufficient muscular force,
thus promoting the growth of a large district of the brain, on
the imperfect development of which much one-sidedness of
belief, and incapacity for forming a sound judgment in after life
may probably depend. Very important, too, that the little flut-
tering, bewildered soul, longing and struggling for light, eager
to drink in knowledge on all sides, and to bring out its own
quaint deductions and comparisons, shall never be allowed to feel
the want of a responsive, intelligent and appreciative mind. For a
peculiar difficulty in dealing with children when very young often
arises from the parents' inability to know or sympathise with their
78 EARLY EDUCATION AND SPIRITUALISM.
deepest thoughts and feelings. Instead of resembling the parents,
the child may revert for moral sentiments and affections to some
near or distant ancestral type which is comparatively unknown
to them. And even when a likeness to them exists, how hard
all must feel it to be to recognise as failings those weak points
of character whose reproduction is both amusing and fascinating.
Thus sympathetic interest too often leads to the intensifying of
palpable defects, instead of to the seeking for a truer equilibrium
of character by systematic strivings after the development of
counteracting qualities and emotions. It is far easier, for
instance, for the parent who finds his counterpart in the highly
impressionable, too emotional child, to encourage with sugges-
tive questions the wistful infant who is just opening its tiny
soul to wonder, than to give it scant sympathy by putting into
a swing, or inciting it to a merry dance, with a consolatory
promise of much future knowledge in store for it by-and-by.
Let anyone deeply interested in the question of intuitive
beliefs only make the experiment, and he may find that any
child endowed with a fair power of inferring an ordinary
cause from an ordinary event, will, whilst yet an infant untaught,
seek to trace back all to a First Cause if it has been trained to
regular intercourse with the realities of nature. Such a child
will be no more capable of looking upon death as annihilation
than upon sleep as death. The thought of not waking next
morning is to it impossible, and as it can remember having once
seen the spring time of the flowers after their long winter sleep,
its conviction of its own individuality is too strong to allow it
to do other than believe that "nothing can keep on being
dead, it must come alive again next summer or some other
summer." Evidently there can be no idea of a soul distinct
from the body; body, mind, and soul are to the infant one
being, the being that breathes and wills, that may lie dormant for
awhile, but cannot perish utterly. Also the idea of retribution
comes very early to a child. In vain may we give it its " Eed
Hiding Hood," with the wolf changed into an affectionate dog,
fond of practical jokes, for it will still invent an embodiment of
punishment awaiting the evil-doer; a boy may choose a lion or
a tiger, a girl a great monkey, and if as yet in ignorance of any
definite wickedness, such as lying or stealing, she will, when
about two years old perhaps, put on a pedestal her earliest
innate conception of virtue, self-respect, and narrate to her doll
such a warning history as the following: "There was a naughty
doll who did not care at all about herself, and threw herself quite
away into a deep ditch, where there was no water, and a great
many stinging nettles, and a big monkey came by that way, and
when he saw the naughty doll who did not care at all about her-
EARLY EDUCATION AND SPIRITUALISM. 79
self, he bited and bited her away until there was not any of her
left, and that was the end of the naughty doll." Here perhaps
is the germ innate in the mind of every infant and untaught
savage which first leads the latter to acts of cannibalism as the
most complete, sure, and perfect vengeance on his enemy; dead
he may come to life again like the flowers, but eaten up he is
truly annihilated. This thought, too, it is which for the infant
gives such terrific and undesirable reality to the nursery tales of
ogres. Again, another epoch in the mental history of an
infant, and one fraught with mighty importance for its future,
may be the time when it first shows vague fear at an unknown
sound, terror at the sight of a dark cloud over the moon, or any
sombre shadow. If no attempt be made to explain the source
of the sound, to at once initiate the young mind into the
difference between substance and shadow, and the very varying
aspects under which the same objects may be seen, a golden
opportunity has been ruthlessly lost for forming and strengthen-
ing the infant's mind. Since, then, children come into the world
with such marvellous aptitudes for reasoning belief, what
grievous wrong may be done to their faculties, and more serious
harm still to those of their descendants, by the too early sound-
ing in their ears that things are thus and thus, instead of care-
fully training their powers of observation and perception, and
so leading up to true conceptions. However stunting and
dwarfing to the harmonious development of the brain may be
the practice of too early instilling artificial knowledge into the
mind, it can hardly be as dangerous as the pernicious one of
questioning in and questioning out profound problems of
dogma.
The question of how the infant is to be brought up in close
communion with nature is a broad one, and admits of an almost
infinite variety of interpretation. Very forcibly has Mr. Herbert
Spencer shown the importance attaching to such training, and
plainly indicated various plans to be pursued with the older
child. He says :* " Here again we have but to follow Nature's
leadings. Where can be seen an intenser delight than that of
children picking up new flowers and watching new insects; or
hoarding pebbles and shells ? And who is there but perceives,
that by sympathising with them they may be led on to any
extent of inquiry into the qualities and structures of these
things ? Every botanist who has had children with him in the
woods and lanes, must have noticed how eagerly they joined in
his pursuits, how keenly they searched out plants for him, how
intently they watched whilst he examined them, how they over-
* Education, p. 86, by Herbert Spencer. London, 18G1.
80 EARLY EDUCATION AND SPIRITUALISM.
whelmed him with questions. The consistent follower of Bacon
?the 'servant and interpreter of nature'?will see that we
ought modestly to adopt the course of culture thus indicated.
Having become familiar with the simple properties of inorganic
objects, the child should by the same process be led on to an
exhaustive examination of the things it picks up in its daily
walks?the less complex facts they present being alone noticed at
first; in plants, the colours, numbers, and forms of the petals, and
shapes of the stalks and leaves; in insects the numbers of the
wings, legs, antennas, and their colours. As these become fully
appreciated and invariably observed, further facts may be suc-
cessively introduced: in the one case, the numbers of stamens
and pistils, the forms of the flowers, whether radial or bilateral
in symmetry, the arrangement and character of the leaves,
whether opposite or alternate, stalked or sessile, smooth or
hairy, serrated, toothed, or crenate; in the other, the divisions
of the body, the segments of the abdomen, the markings of the
wings, the number of joints in the legs, and the forms of the
smaller organs?the system pursued throughout being that of
making it the child's ambition to say, respecting everything
it finds, all that can be said."
With what interest will a mere infant watch the bulb and
the seed put into the ground. If it be shown the tiny blade
first bursting from its prison-house, it will get some faint con-
ception of the lapse of time during its slow evolution under
the ground, thus satisfying itself for a while with a vague
idea of derived life drawn from this image of the seeds
and flowers; by-and-by the question of the origin of evil
things will come before it, and it will ask where did the
first wasp and the first gnat come from ? Who made them ?
Then it will be taught there is a great and loving God who
made all bright things in the world around it; if it just knows
this, utters the precious Name, and learns that it was made his
little lamb by Baptism, and marked with his sign in earliest
infancy, seed enough has been sown, it must germinate. Parents
little realise how utterly faithless and selfish they are, when for
their own comfort they love to hear from the lips of their
cherished weaklings unearthly, unchildlike longings for death.
Surely the thought of death should be put far away from the
infant as long as possible. It must inevitably know of it sooner
or later; probably a dead bird, found and tenderly taken into
the hand, will send a strange look of sudden revelation and sad
wisdom into the child-face, although it may not say anything.
But the worst terror of death will be gone if it has previously
communed with nature. There will flash into its mind the grand
truth of resurrection ; that as with the flowers, so with the bird,
EARLY EDUCATION AND SPIRITUALISM. 81
it must come alive some day when the weather is warm; till
then the infant fancies its companion birds may lodge it safely
in a tree, and shelter it with their wings.
It may be objected that close communing with nature is
not possible to dwellers in towns, hardly, perhaps, in its fullest
sense ; as some of the lessons will vary and be trammelled by
the surroundings and altered by art. Yet the town can yield
many more opportunities of the kind than might be, at first
sight, supposed; for, after all, original endowment, so far as
capacity for education and happiness goes, determines so much
more than aught else what our life shall be. In this the children
of the very poor in the heart of London need so often our ten-
derest pity in that they are born weary, with an inherent
inability to draw any real education and enjoyment from much
that would yield it had they the power or heart to appreciate
it. What a lifetime of future happiness might not a child of
this type owe to the fostering care of a beneficent Creche
to take the place, to some extent, of the sunshine of its poor
mother's smiles, which her heart so often aches with a great
longing only to have time to give, and without which she
vaguely half divines how joyless and aimless a being her child
may become. For the infinite sadness of the fate of this true
city child, as well as that of the most to-be-pitied type of
gutter-child, lies not in the fact that it has only the gutter to
play in, for a good gutter must doubtless furnish much interest-
ing matter for exploration ; but that, by reason of being born
so near the gutter amidst so many foetid emanations, it has
been from birth bereft of that organic life and aptitude for
accommodating itself to its surroundings, without which no true
education, no gladness, nor any light-hearted joyousness can be
possible, and endowed with which, despite the most adverse
circumstances, any life can seem well worth living.
PART I. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES.
