Lunacy in England and Wales
===========================

128 Art. VIII.?
The Thirty fifth Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy deals
with the statistics of madmen in England and Wales for the
year ending December 31st, 1880. From it we learn that on
January 1st last year the total number of persons of unsound
mind under care and treatment in asylums, registered hospitals,
licensed houses, and as private patients in unlicensed houses,
Avas 50,175. Of admissions there were 15,240, viz.: 1,338 males
and 1,276 female, as private patients; and 6,017 males, and
6,609 females, as paupers. Of the total admissions, 1,789 were
transfers. After deducting these transfers, 1879 exhibits an
increase of 160; but compared with 1878, the number is 119
less. The total number of patients were thus classified :?
Private patient, . {?^Ie8 J ; 3^} 7,741
Paupers . . {??e5 ' ' 42,434
Total ..... 50.175
The readmissions in 1880 were 1,855, and compared with
1879, the ratios per cent, were, respectively, 12*11 and 12*18.
The information as to discharges is interesting in connection
with the readmission : the total number was 9,317, of whom
4,276 were males, and 5,041 females; 5,338 of them are
entered as recoveries, and of the number 482 were private
patients.
Deaths reached 4,498 ; 2,487 men, 2,011 women. In 1,656
cases only, however, were post-mortem examinations conducted,
r:nd it is satisfactory to find that the Commissioners are alert
to the prime importance of extending this very necessary means
of enlarging our knowledge of cerebral pathology. As compared
with previous years, moreover, there is a marked falling off in
the number of autopsies performed, a fact difficult of explanation
save on the ground of declining interest in the scientific study
of disease. Whether or not this is justly to be attributed to
those who are responsible for the omission, it is, nevertheless,
much to be lamented that greater anxiety is not exhibited in this
important respect; every medical superintendent should direct
his earnest attention to the matter, and strive to supplement
existing knowledge by every possible means in his power to
LUNACY IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 129
employ. From a study of appendix (B) of the Commissioners'
Report, it is at once evident what large opportunities of pathological investigations are permitted to pass unutilised, and this
too, even in the Metropolitan district, where the least possible
excuse can be found for such neglect, since ample assistance is,
at all times, readily obtainable. Thus we find that, at Camberwell House, with an average resident population of 477, and in
which 46 deaths occurred during 1880, there were no more than
four autopsies performed. At Grove Hall, on the other hand,
with 27 deaths, no less than 23 post mortems were conducted,
the average resident lunatic population being 439. At Peckliam
House there were 44 deaths, and four autopsies; at Bethnal
House, 47 deaths, and only one post-mortem examination.
Indeed, of the Metropolitan establishments, Grove Hall appears
to be the only institution where any importance is attached to
the method of investigation; a fact that cannot be too deeply
deplored. Neither is much improvement exhibited when we
have regard to extra-Metropolitan Asylums, the great majority
of deaths being registered without any indication of their confirmation by post mortem-examination. At Haydock Lodge,
however, where 44 deaths occurred, 26 autopsies were performed;
and at Fisherton House, 12, with 31 deaths. The following
figures are indeed eminently suggestive in their bearing on this
very important question :?
Total Deaths, 1880   4,498
,, Autopsies, 1880   1,656
Of the autopsies performed, there were :
In County and Borough Asylums
? Registered Hospitals .....
,, Metropolitan Licensed Houses
? Provincial ? ...
? Naval and Military Hospital and India Asylum
? Criminal Asylum ......
Among Private Single Patients ....
1,470
69
35
50
12
20
0
1,656
Further comparison of these numbers with the total deaths
in each class of institution is still more suggestive. Thus the
Metropolitan licensed houses contribute 212 deaths, and 35 autopsies; while Provincial licensed houses, with only 173 deaths, give
50 post mortems. At the Criminal Asylum, the cause of death
would seem to have been investigated in every case, the number
recorded under each head for this investigation being the same,
20. In no instance was a post mortem made on a " private
single patient," of whom 29 died during the year.
These figures deserve to be very attentively considered, and
the inference they justify to be well kept in view. It is not,
PART I. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES. K
130 LUNACY IN ENGLAND AND WALES.
perhaps, too much to assert that the field of observation, neglected in this omission to confirm the causes of death among
the insane, is one which, assiduously cultivated, could not fail
to yield results of the greatest magnitude and importance; for
it is a matter of constant reiteration, that our knowledge of
primary lesions can be expected to increase in extent only by aid
of psychological studies on all classes of patients. The Commissioners have done well in laying special stress on the paucity of
post-mortem records, and, by urging with them the necessity for
rigorous prosecution of this branch of objective research, we are
maintaining a point we have unceasingly insisted on in the
past.
A curious and instructive case of homicide is reported to
have occurred at the Prestwich (near Manchester) Asylum.
One patient killed another with a crowbar while at work, in the
presence of an attendant; and respecting him the superintendent says : " He was considered one of the best and steadiest
farm-labourers. He had been an inmate of the asylum for
about nine years ; was childish, but industrious ; and prior to
the act itself, had never evinced any symptoms of violence. He
was the last person in the world from whom a criminal outbreak
would have been anticipated; it was instantaneous, perfectly
unprovoked, and attended with absolutely no signs of anger in
the face of the assailant, who, when he had struck two blows,
and was prevented from dealing the third, showed no appearance
of concern, and wished to resume his previous work." This case
shows, as the Commissioners remark, that a chronic and usually
tractable lunatic, who is not physically disabled^ may, at any
time, become suddenly dangerous.
The infrequency with which suicides are recorded speaks
well for the careful supervision maintained over the unfortunate
inmates of asylums. That this is necessarily of a strict character, is shown by the considerable proportion of the lunatics
under treatment who are scheduled as suicidally inclined ; the
actual number of successful attempts at self-destruction, however, during the year was twenty-one. Five of these patients
committed the act while away on leave from the asylum ; and
in one case it was committed before admission. They were
distributed thus :?
M. F. Total
In County and Borough Asylums 7 5 12
,, Metropolitan Licensed Houses 1 3 4
? Provincial ? ... 1 1 2
Among Private Single Patients ... 1 1 2
10 10 20
In every case of suicide an inquest was of course held. Certain of
the deaths possess elements of interest in connection with them.
LUNACY IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 131
Thus, at the Cumberland and Westmoreland Counties Asylum, a
man precipitated himself through a dormitory window, from
which the sash had been removed by another patient with a view
to escaping. A recommendation consequent on this catastrophe,
to so fix the window beads as to render their removal by
patients impossible, has, to the Commissioners' regret, not been
carried out. In another case, a male patient in the Somerset
and Bath Asylum escaped from his attendant while proceeding
to chapel, and, jumping into the reservoir, was drowned ; and a
taste for needles which, after being swallowed, set up enteritis,
terminating fatally, was the exciting cause of a third fatality.
In almost every separate report on the condition and
arrangements of public asylums visited by them, the Com
missioners dwell on the insufficient night supervision of
epileptics. A large number of inquests were held during the
year on such patients as had died, from suffocation by pillows
chiefly, during epileptiform attacks; and the conclusion is
irresistible that, under an adequate system of watching, the
frequency of such occurrences would be materially diminished.
In some asylums a form of " tell-tale" clock, with electric
communications, is used to test the wakefulness of night nurses,
who are required to prove themselves alert by periodically
touching the instrument at regular intervals. Certain of the
cases of death referred to were so unmistakably the consequence
of help being withheld from the patients, that it is to be hoped
a plan like that recommended will be universally adopted for
the better protection of epileptics in the future.
The question of restraint is one on which the Commissioners
specially report in the case of institutions visited by them.
Speaking generally, the employment of actual means of confinement is resorted to with extreme rarity in English asylums,
the most common form of punishment of this description being
temporary seclusion in a separate room. One instance is
recorded of a boy at Earlswood, whose hands it had been found
necessary to confine iu locked gloves for three months, on
account of destructiveness ; but any such form of confinement
is now all but obsolete. Even with women it has been found
possible gradually to discard these former aids to the maintenance of discipline ; and we cannot but regard the change thus
introduced as one of the most beneficial modern improvements.
Doubtless a case will now and then be met with for which
nothing short of actual restraint in some form or other will
suffice. The resources of the asylum physician, however, are
now, even in these extreme cases, but rarely at fault for long;
and by-and-by we shall certainly find that no record of confinement will be found in our reports
k a
132 LUNACY IN ENGLAND AND WALES.
There is a curious feature about the successive reports of
the Commissioners in Lunacy, and one that is worthy of consideration. We refer to the recommendations invariably embodied in them in favour of improvements and extensions of
the asylums visited. The question of providing a sufficient
accommodation for even pauper lunatics is deserving of attention, so long as this class of the national poor is regarded as a
special care of the State ; and yet it is impossible to feel that
the necessary importance is attached to suggestions the carrying
out of which must entail the outlay of ratepayers' contributions;
indeed, it is rather an exception for a county asylum to be
described in this report as including all the Commissioners
could desire to observe. In place of this, we find regrets that
a greater number of attendants are not engaged at certain
asylums; that the medical staff is inadequate in others ; that
recommendations as to drainage, or ventilation, or additional
buildings, have been persistently neglected; and in some cases
it is even asserted that buildings in use are quite unfitted for
the purpose they are put to serve. During the year dealt with
in the report, however, a good deal had been accomplished in
the way of providing additional accommodation, as may be
judged from the fact that extensions at the Cumberland and
Westmoreland, and Lancaster County Asylums to the amount
respectively of ?15,490 and ?78,329, were sanctioned by the
Home Office. A large number of other asylums are also named
as under process of enlargement, or about to be increased in
size.
It is worthy of notice that as many as four suicides of
patients away on trial took place in 1880. In all these cases
the patients were discharged from the asylum within six months
of their admission, and it may well be asked whether this
fact ought not to have an influence in determining in the
future how far it may be advisable to permit any patient to
leave the institution after so short a residence within it.
Reference is made by the Commissioners to the birth of a
child in Colney Hatch Asylum in June, 1880, the mother being
a female patient who had lived in the asylum continuously
since 1876. A strict inquiry was instituted by two members
of the Board of Commissioners, who were convinced, after
hearing all the evidence obtainable, that the offence had been
committed by a plumber's labourer on an occasion when the
ward nurse was asleep. On this subject the Commissioners
remark, that " the impossibility of adequately punishing those
persons employed in asylum?, who have carnal knowledge of
female patients, was pointed out by us in our 33rd Report,
when we recommended that the provisions against illusing and
LUNACY IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 133
abusing patients should be extended, so as to make this a
criminal offence."
In the 23rd Report (1869), the following passage occurs,
at page 53 :?
" Since the first formation of the older lunatic hospitals,
such as Bethlehem, St. Luke's, the Bethel of Norwich, the Iletreat
at York, and the York Hospital, a very material change has
taken place in the provision made for the insane in this country, and the general erection of asylums in each county for
paupers has, to a great extent, changed the character of the
hospitals. While at one period the inmates were, with few
exceptions, of the pauper class, and, in the absence of other
provision for them, proper objects for gratuitous treatment, they
are now chiefly of a higher social position, many of whom,
though unable to meet the lowest charge at which patients are
received into licensed houses, are still in a position to contribute something towards their maintenance. The great want
at the present time we believe to be hospitals in which the
insane of the middle class, who, though poor, are not reduced to
pauperism, may be received at small sums, varying from 5s. to
10s., or 15s. a week, according to circumstances. So inadequate
is the charitable aid afforded to this class by all the hospitals
at present erected, that the pauper asylum is the only resort
for them; and daily increasing numbers are sent there as ordinary paupers, the parishes being partly, or in some instances
wholly, reimbursed for their maintenance.
" To such an extent is this practised in county asylums, as
to be frequently matter of formal complaint by the Visitors,
imposing, as it is argued, a burden upon the ratepayers which
they are not legally called upon to bear. To the patients
themselves, also, it is no less a hardship and injustice; and
painful cases are constantly coming under our observation in
which persons of education and social position, clergymen,
barristers, medical men, and others, who, from reduced circumstances, are unable to meet the lowest charge at which admission
can be obtained into licensed houses, are, as a last resource,
driven to associate with paupers."
In the present, 35th (1880) Report, the Commissioners
say:?
" These remarks are now quite as true as they were eleven
vears a go, and it is with great regret that we must report that
on the whole, the Lunatic Hospitals are not fulfilling the
expectations we at one time entertained, that their expansion
and increased popularity among well-paying patients would
materially add to the amount of charitable assistance available for the more necessitous class to which the above paragraph
refers."
134 LUNACY IN ENGLAND AND WALES.
An important section of the Report is that devoted to a
criticism of Mr. Dillwyn's Bill " to amend the laws relating to
lunatics." The Commissioners express their emphatic opinion
that the provisions of the Bill are calculated to do more injury
than good, and particularly in respect to the certification to be
required, and to the clause dealing "with the reception of
lunatics into asylums. Of the latter clause they write:?
" This clause appeared to us to be calculated materially to
increase the difficulty of placing a lunatic, not being a pauper,
under care and treatment for his disorder, and so to add indefinitely to the aggregate number of chronic lunatics.
" Now for forty years and more this Board, and their predecessors, the 4 Metropolitan Commissioners in Lunacy,' have
persistently, and we hope, not unsuccessfully, directed their
endeavours towards securing the early treatment of mental
disease, upon which, according to all experience, recovery so
materially depends. It can, therefore, be no matter of surprise
to your lordship that we should view with extreme jealousy any
proposed alteration of the law which might seem calculated
to check such early treatment.
" At the same time, we must not affect ignorance of the fact
that this and other provisions of the Bill are the outcome of an
uneasy feeling, somewhat widely spread, though chiefly among
persons who have little special knowledge on the subject, but
depend on constantly reiterated assertions that further safeguards are needed for the protection of the liberty of persons
alleged to be insane. The existence of such a feeling is, doubtless, to be regretted, but it would be, we venture to think,
entirely contrary to sound principle to alter the law in an important particular without evidence of recent abuse."
We venture to think that every competent critic of the
measure referred to will entirely agree with the view of it held
by the Commissioners in Lunacy. Nor are they less earnest in
condemnation of the requirements that the certificate on
which a lunatic shall be committed must be signed by a
medical man holding some sort of public qualification, and
strengthened with an order signed by some public functionary.
On this the Commissioners observe with justice :?
" The proposal, we apprehend, must practically come to
this; that in every case of private lunacy, one of the two
certificates now required must be given by a medical officer of
the Poor Law Union.
" With every respect to these gentlemen, it cannot be said
either that they are, merely as Poor Law officers, better
judges of insanity than their fellow-practitioners, or that the
fact of appointment to a poorly paid office by a board of guarLUNACY IN ENGLAND AND WALES. 135
dians affords any guarantee for responsibility or respectability
exceeding that of other medical men with similar educational
qualifications.
" Here, then, we fail to see any further security for the
liberty of the subject, while, on the other hand, it certainly
appears a most ill-advised arrangement to refer the question of
the insanity of the patient, and the necessity of placing him
under care and treatment, to the opinion of a medical man
whose official position, such as it is, would not necessarily imply
any particular acquaintance with mental disease ; and who, by
the very nature of the caee, would often be the youngest
practitioner, and the least experienced in the whole neighbourhood.
" There are, no doubt, many local practitioners of the
highest repute who happen to hold a poor-law appointment.
They would continue, as at present, to be called in to most
cases of insanity arising in their district, but, supposing them
to be persons of skill, experience, and high moral character,
they would owe none of these qualifications to the accident
that they were also medical officers of the Poor Law Union.
" In large towns, the patient would usually lose the advantage, which he now often enjoys, of being seen and examined
by some one of the chief consulting physicians of the place;
for the family attendant who has seen most of the case would,
in general, give one certificate, and then the papers would be
completed by the 'official' certificate, for the independence or
for the scientific value of which the ' public appointment'
would not afford the slightest guarantee."
The final conclusions of the Commissioners are as follows:?
" The certain result of this measure would be, we strongly
feel, to increase in many cases the reluctance, already very great,
to place a relation under early treatment, a matter of the
utmost importance.
" The probable result also would be, that to avoid publicity,
patients of the upper classes would be clandestinely confined in
England, or would be removed illegally to the Continent for
treatment, and deprived of all the protection of visitation."
There is very much of a, deeply interesting nature in this
exhaustive report to which we have not yet referred. Space,
however, compels us to close this notice here, and in doing so
we beg to tender our hearty thanks to the Commissioners in
Lunacy for the able and valuable report dealing with lunacy
in England and Wales in 1880.
