Tetany
=======

147 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.

That form of neurosis designated by the term tetany, presents many features to lend it interest in the eyes of physicians;
not the least perhaps being the comparative rarity of. its occurrence. Its exact nature is still matter of discussion, and any
well-recorded instances possess a value to make them deserving
of careful consideration. Probably the most likely explanation
of the affection is that which refers it to the class of spinal
irritations, but the distinctive phenomena that characterise the
attacks sufficiently serve to give it an individuality of its own.
Dr Hirschfelder communicates some particulars of the disease
in the February number of the " Pacific Medical and Surgical
Journal," founded on observations of a case which had come
under his care in private practice. The patient was a man of
nervous temperament, who had nevertheless enjoyed good
health until February 1880, when he fell with an elevator,
sliding down a trap a distance of three stories, and lacerating
the palms and fingers of both hands, but especially of the left
side. No unusual symptoms occurred during the next five
days, except slight convulsive movement at night, to which
no attention was paid ; a severe convulsion, however, set in on
the evening of the fifth day, and being regarded as tetanus was
treated with bromide. Morphia subcutaneously only made
matters worse; chloral finally checked the condition. Two
weeks later a second attack was again met with chloral, and a
depressed nervous state persisted after it. Another severe
convulsion occurred shortly before Christmas, chloral again conquering it; but a decayed tooth having been blamed for the
mischief, it was extracted. Fresh attacks, apparently causeless,
came on in June 1881, since when patient has continued
nervous and excitable. Dr Hirschfelder describes the obvious
appearances as follows:?
" You see, gentlemen, the patient before you looks to be in
the best of health, and no one would suspect him to be a victim
of the disease present. I press upon the radial nerve and you
see contraction occurring in the palmar muscles supplied. I
squeeze the ulnar nerve?the muscles on the ulnar side draw up.
I press upon the axillary nerves rather forcibly and you see the
patient stiffens, the arms draw up, the head turns back, opisthotonos and a well-marked tetaniform convulsion ensue. At the
L 2
148 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
same time the face reddens, and you hear a short, hacking
cough; I cease to press and instantly you see the attack passes
over and the patient seems as well as before. I stick him with
a pin here upon the arm, and you see the same convulsive
movement. I press upon the facial nerve, and the muscles
supplied by it twitch. Pressure on the scalp produces no contractions. Our patient is quite a sceptic, and thinks that
perhaps by a powerful exertion of his will he might possibly
prevent the attack coming on; but you see now, when firmly
determined not to permit the convulsion, he is unable to do so
when the axillary nerves are pressed, and the contractions occur
as heretofore. He has, however, made a discovery never before
noted in a case of tetany, that if he causes his muscles to become
powerfully contracted, as when firmly holding a stick in both
hands, the convulsive movements do not occur upon irritation."
This observation of the patient may not be without some
practical result, and may be borne in mind by any who may in
the future meet with similar cases. That tetany is distinct
from tetanus is shown by the frequency of its attendant phenomena. Painful contractions are present in both forms, but the
order in which the parts of the body are attacked is remarkably
different. In tetany, the contractions are centripetal, not, as
in tetanus, centrifugal, the extremities being first attacked, then
the trunk or head; and in less severe forms the seizure is confined to the limbs. The peculiar form assumed by the contracted
hand also is apparently a constant sign of tetany, this being like
the folding up in a conical form followed by the obstetrician
when about to explore the vagina. Dr Kadcliff'e, in Eeynolds's
" system," questions " whether a sufficient case is made out in
describing tetany as a definite disorder, and whether it is not
rather a form of spinal irritation, complicated with some graver
spinal disease?spinal meningitis, myelitis, spinal congestion?
in varying proportions," and he arrives at an affirmative conclusion also from the presence in such cases of tingling and
numbness, with prolonged contraction, this being at any rate a
not unfrequent symptom in single spinal irritation. Hyperoemia,
moreover, has been mostly noticed in the upper portion of the
cord in those rare cases when post-morten examination of persons
dying from tetany have been made. Dr Hirschfelder has the
following in relation to causation of the disease :?
" Tetany may be produced by a large number of causes. It
frequently occurs in epidemiform groups, and seems to be most
frequent during the winter months. It occurs most frequently
in children and during lactation. In many cases a connection
exists between the tetany and intestinal irritation. Psychic
alterations seem to stand in causal relation to it. A number of
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 149
cases have been observed immediately following extirpation
of goitres. In one sucli case the formation of a small abscess
occurred, and the tetany persisted until the abscess was opened,
when it permanently disappeared. In our case the tetany
occurred after a trauma, but whether it was produced by the
injury or the fright is very difficult to determine."
Hypnotism.
Of late the subject of hypnotism has attracted a good deal of
attention both at home and abroad, several interesting communications respecting it being found in the various home
and foreign journals. Dr Beard, of New York, whose demonstrations of the hypnotic state last summer in London were
so unfavourably criticised, has been diligently pursuing further
studies, and has published several papers in reply to criticism,
and in explanation of his position.
The "Alienist and Neurologist "for January contains an article
from his pen on " Current Delusions in relation to Hypnotism,"
to which attention may properly be drawn. Dr Beard admits
that the silly delusions formerly popularly held on hypnotism
are becoming rarer and rarer, but he contends that even yet there
remain among the best special workers a number of other delusions that are attended with results almost as serious, and that
until these are finally and utterly dissipated, the phenomena of
trance, its real nature, and the practical scientific details of the
condition, will never be accurately appreciated. Trance is defined as " the concentration of nervous force in some one direction,
with corresponding suspension of nervous force in other directions." It may further be natural or artificial; the former
arising from natural causes, and separable, like insanity, into
cataleptic, somnambulistic, emotional, intellectual, &c.. the latter
form of trance, artificial, is hypnotism. All alike, however, are
to be explained by> the concentration theory; and Dr Beard
deplores the error committed by specialists in assuming that any
radical distinctions divide the natural varieties of trance from
the artificial or hypnotic description. He says: "Writers
speak of the artificial variety as something different from the
natural state, just as they would speak of different varieties
of insanity as something distinct from general insanity. Insanity
may be artificially produced in various ways, just as trance can
be produced artificially. If we make a man drunk with,
alcohol, we produce a case of artificial, the symptoms of which
resemble many cases of natural, insanity ; if we put a man out
of his head by fright, we may also in some cases produce a case
of artificial insanity, and it is the same in principle as the
150 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
natural varieties of insanity. An attack of drunkenness, then,
is to insanity what an attack of hypnotism is to trance" On the
surface this argument is specious and imposing; but it is in
veality a veritable surface induction. It cannot be maintained
jn careful examination, for the premises on which the conclusion
depends are not stable quantities. Reasonable objection may be
taken to the likeness drawn between the cerebral excitement
of a drunken man and the structural changes productive of
insanity in even its simplest forms. It is perhaps a point in
favour of Dr Beard's view, that we are, too often alas ! unable
to recognise the lesions or the molecular disturbances which
generate a condition of mental unsoundness; but it is a fatal
objection, nevertheless, that there is a specific quality in the
latter which widely removes it from the merely drunken state.
Nor does it help to reconcile the disparities to admit that continuous indulgence in alcoholic poisons will induce actual madness, for this is then consequent, not on momentary changes, but
on a general condition of disturbance which results from constant
operation of disturbing forces of an exactly similar kind. Intoxication of the most decided character may, and often does
result, at the first employment of alcohol in immoderate amounts;
but no stretch of imagination could conceive any similarity
between a drunken schoolboy and the maudlin toper whose whole
mental faculties are weakened and ruined by long-continued
abuse of excitants. To justify Dr Beard's conclusion, however,
this should be more than possible; it is an essential element of
proof of the identity of conditions he insists on.
The second delusion complained of is, " that it is necessary
for the operator to do anything, or cause the subjects to do anything, in order to produce this artificial trance, this so-called
hypnotism." Dr Beard comments on the incredulity expressed by European experts when his experiments were performed in this country, and on the fact, especially, that the
subject of them entered and emerged from the trance state
" without anything being done either by himself or anybody
else." Tbe force of this illustration, however, is lost, when it is
remembered that the subject had already been trained into a
condition of excitability by long excitation of the emotions by
the " method of expectation"; and when once the task of
educating such a person to the reception of and obedience to
impressions has been accomplished, it is not difficult to comprehend how response may be made to them, even when operator
and operated-on are far removed from each other. Dr Beard
would seem to have been guilty in this respect of forgetting the
necessary connection between cause and effect; and because the
action performed does not immediately precede the phenomena
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 151
exhibited, that therefore no relation exists between the two factors.
We may even admit the bona fides of the experiments on this
understanding; but none the less they display direct causal relations that at once dispose of the theory that " nothing is done "
either by operator or subject. Here, too, maybe considered the
third complaint uttered?that, namely, it is improperly assumed
that " persons who are entranced artificially are necessarily
liable to the natural varieties of trance, and also that they are
liable to be injured thereby in mind or body." On this point
Dr Beard very decidedly expresses an opinion contrary to that
generally accepted here, and, it must be added, by those also on
the continent of Europe, who have specially investigated the
phenomena of trance, notably, Heidenhain. Dr Beard thus
expresses himself:?
" There is common belief that good subjects for these experiments are those who are, or have been, epileptic, anaemic,
hysterical, or insane. This belief, which is mostly an erroneous
one, prevails all over Europe and in this country also, except
among those who have given much time and thought to investigation of this subject. Prof. Preyer, of Jena, who is working
faithfully and successfully in this department, on witnessing
the experiments, repeatedly urged me to desist, or to be more
moderate lest the subject should be injured. Trance produced
by acting on the emotion of expectation is a purely psychological, not a physical state, and lias not necessarily any relation
to physical health, whether good or bad. The Jumpers of Maine
are strong and long-lived. I have experimented with persons
of different ages, of both sexes, white and black, old and young,
and the majority, though not all of the very best subjects for
the average of experiments, and for the most interesting experiments, are of firm or medium health, and it is on this class
that for scientific purposes, I prefer to experiment. Nervous,
feeble, hysterical women, who are made subjects of these
experiments, and become frightened or alarmed in regard to
them, may become temporarily and, possibly, in rare cases, permanently injured thereby. The possibility of this, on theoretical
grounds, I will allow, but I must say, that in my own personal
experience extending over many years, in which I have made
many thousands of experiments on hundreds of different individuals, I have never known of one being permanently injured
thereby; a few temporary disturbances, lasting over a few hours
or days, have been the only unpleasant results I have witnessed,
and these due almost always to the inexperience of the experimenter. This is the position which the psychological science
of the future is to take on this subject."
At the present time confident assertions to this effect are
152 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
scarcely justifiable; it must be for further inquirers to decide
the question at issue.
Of the genuineness of the phenomena of artificial trance,
Dr Beard says we have as much proof as of any of those of
insanity, and even better proofs than can be obtained of insanity
where simulation is suspected. He admits, however, that long
series of experiments may be needed to ensure certain proof,
and that " no person, however skilful in this department, or however large his experience may be, can tell from witnessing a
number of experiments whether they are genuine or not." This
of course disposes of the objections raised against his own
experiments here last summer, and it likewise effectually precludes any but specialists, who particularly confine themselves
to the study of hypnotism from judging of the value of exhibited results. Consequently, therefore, the vast majority of
medical men are declared incompetent to test the reality of
trance phenomena, and are at the mercy of every pretender who
chooses to pose before them as a hypnotic individual. This
necessary deduction from Dr Beard's statements may be agreeable to him, and the few who think with him, to accept. We
must dissent from them in toto, and while admitting that the
phenomena referred to present many features of interest, when
they are not the outcome of intentional fraud, but that they
are one and all open to discussion and explanation both clinically
and psychologically.
Dr Beard's paper, as we have said, is worthy of attention
because its author is so completely identified with the subject of
it: but that it does anything more than put into words objections against dogmatic and unsatisfactory explanations of an
ill-understood mental condition, without any attempt to clear
up the mysterious relations between the mental and bodily
state of persons in trance, cannot be said with any truth; as
further discussing the problems the essay is useful, as helping
to enlighten our ignorance of them it does not possess a very
high value.
The Opium Habit.
The opium question has been subject to discussion in nearly
all the medical journals within the past few months; and a
considerable number of books and pamphlets have likewise
been issued in connection with it. Opinion, however, is by no
means unanimous in respect to the injury that is done by
excessive indulgence in opium-smoking; even so competent a
judge as Sir Risdon Bennet is content to say :* " That the
* Preface to Medical Testimonies to the Effect of Opium-Smoking?Society for
Suppression of the Opium Trade.
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 153
moderate use of opium, whether smoked or eaten, as of alcohol
or tobacco, may be compatible with health and comfort is perfectly true ; but it is not the less true that opium is a dangerous
poison, and not the less pernicious because, when taken habitually, its action is very insidious." This opinion is undoubtedly
at variance with that of the majority who have essayed to
ventilate the question; and in the pamphlet whence the quotation is extracted, few venture to make the concession yielded
by the ex-president of the Royal College of Physicians.
Dr Edward C. Mann, in a paper on the Nature and Treatment of the Opium Habit, contributed to the " New York
Medical Journal," believes " the habitual use of opium seems
to produce a peculiar type of moral insanity, leaving the intellectual centres of the brain untouched. The patient's views of
right and wrong are perverted, and, while he may go on with
his routine duties, either in public or in private life, he often
manifests an utter disregard of truthfulness, honesty and sincerity, and after a time shows a seeming inability to exert his
will in any other direction or for any other purpose than the
gratification of his morbid appetite. The use of opium tends
to sterility and impotence, and to the extinction of the reproductive propensities. Hearing and vision are not unfrequently
affected, and insomnia is very common. Tremors and an unsteady, ill-balanced gait are generally observed in all welldeveloped cases. Opium rather suspends the operations of the
mind than causes disease, for it does not seem to act directly
on cerebral structure. If it did insanity would be the result,
and I have never met with a case of mental disease that I could
trace to indulgence in opium or morphine, and I had many
cases of this nature under my care." These views, especially
those relating to the effects on the mind of the opium habits,
will cause surprise to a good many who are accustomed to look
upon the abuse of the drug as a fruitful cause of insanity.
Certain it is, that when Dr Mann succeeds in establishing his
theory on a perfectly sound basis, we shall be compelled to
expunge from future asylum reports one of the most prolific socalled origins of mental disease. In the last published report
of the Pennsylvania Asylum, opium accounts for 33 cases of
insanity, and it is very frequently cited in this connection in
American official tables. That the masses in China and elsewhere, to whom indulgence in the use of the drug is habitual, are
degraded in mind as well as physically demoralised, that their
mental faculties are diseased rather than suspended, has been
again and again insisted upon; but, notwithstanding, the number
of those who hold less pessimist views on the ill effects of opiumsmoking are both numerous and competent to express them.
154 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
In marked contrast to Dr Mann's gloomy forecast, " The other
side of the Opium Question," by W. J. Moore, L.K.C.P.,
&c., Deputy Surgeon-General H.M. Forces, and Hon. Surgeon
to the Viceroy, distinctly denies the evil effects attributed to
opium. Mr. Moore emphatically protests against " preventing
a comparatively few Chinamen, suffering from the abuse of an
agent which many more Chinamen find to be a source of enjoyment, of comfort, a necessity and even a blessing." He further
continues: " I do not advocate the use of opium. Were it
possible I should rejoice to see a law against the immoderate
use of opium in force throughout the world. But of the two I
would prefer to see the immoderate use of spirits abolished, as
the greater of two evils. The moderate use of opium, and the
moderate use of spirits (as sanctioned by all law?human and
Divine?except Mohammedan law), I hold to be legitimate;
also under innumerable circumstances, beneficial to mankind,
both in health and in sickness." The aim of this remarkable
pamphlet is to refute what its author regards as the artificial
nature of the anti-opium agitation. He certainly succeeds in
putting the matter in a light very different from that in which
it is usually regarded. One more quotation may be made from
it (p. 91): "Very recently a publication has been issued from
the ' Chinese Imperial Maritime Customs.' It is calculated
by the compiler that there are in round numbers 1,000,000
smokers of opium. The population of China is spoken of as
amounting to more than 400,000,000, and may be fairly estimated as something above 300,000,000. Estimating the population at these figures, and the opium-smokers at 1,000,000,
the result is that three in every 1,000 smoke, that is, opium is
used by probably less than one-tldrd of one per cent, of the
population; a sufficiently lame and impotent conclusion to
the statements which have been unblushingly made that opium
is rapidly destroying the Chinese nation."
Old Standing Lesion of tiie Insulae Lobule.
The current number of the " Archives de Neurologie " contains an important article contributed by Drs. Bourneville and
Bonnaire, on a case of extremely rare character, in which an oldstanding lesion of the convolution known as the Island of Reil
had resulted in entire destruction of all the cligitations of the
lobule, neighbouring convolutions remaining almost unaffected
by the changes set up. The patient, a man 54 years old, a
carpenter, came under the care of Dr Bourneville at Bicetre in
18(58. The nature of the disease from which his parents had
died could not be ascertained. He had two sisters without
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 155
family; no history of epilepsy or lunacy was recorded of any
member of patient's own family. Patient was married when
34 years of age, was addicted to excessive smoking, but
not to drinking. Eighteen months after his wedding he was
suddenly seized with left hemiplegia, and six years subsequently he became subject to epileptic attacks. In the
interval he gained a livelihood by opening carriage-doors in the
streets, and at this time, too, became addicted to drink. The
frequency with which the epileptiform seizures recurred compelled
renunciation of all attempts at work, and that the patient should
seek permanent hospital shelter. .Two daughters, one aged 22,
the other 17, and both enjoying good health, are the fruits of
the marriage. The condition of the patient, and the treatment
adopted from September 1880 to the end of July 1881, when
death occurred, are detailed in the paper, and careful post-mortem
notes are appended. While in hospital, for a period of four
years memory and conversational power were both retained, but
afterwards recollection was entirely lost, and the patient paid no
attention to his surroundings. At the same time as the mental
faculties were lost physical weakness increased, but, apart from
the paresis consequent on the first injury, the patient exhibited
no other symptoms of cerebral lesion than were comprised in
intermittent attacks of headache. The number of epileptic
fits recorded, however, is very considerable: thus in 1871,
35; 1872, 43; 1873, 17 ; 1874, 48; 1875, 51; 1876, 46 ;
1877, 85; 1878, 112 ; 1879, 111; 1880, 454; 1881 (seven
months), 49. At the autopsy the following notes as to the condition of the brain were made. Its weight was 1,160 grammes,
surface slightly pale, arteries and nerves at the base healthy.
The right mammillary tubercle a third smaller than the left,
and of normal colour. The right cerebral peduncle was
markedly atrophised, flattened and smaller then the left, and
the right anterior pyramid was represented by a mere flattened
band of greyish tint,, on the same level as the corresponding
olivary body. The right half of the pons, or isthmus of the
encephalon, was considerably less in size than the left, and on
section, the cerebral peduncle was very much smaller on the same
side of the brain. Corpora quadrigemina, normal. On being
weighed the right hemisphere was found lighter than the left
by 140 grammes, and was shorter. The cerebrum weighed
970 grammes altogether. Cerebellum healthy, the two hemispheres being of equal volume. The left cerebral hemisphere presented little to notice; but when the right was examined, a
considerable depression was at once seen on a level with the
insular lobule and the sphenoidal lobe. The pia mater was
everywhere easily detached, except on certain points where it was
156 COMMETNS OX CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
thickened and brown, reddish or slightly ochreous in hue. The
superficial depression was filled by a collection of cerebro-spinal
fluid, and on raising the pia mater, the hemisphere presented
as a flat surface. There was discovered a region of atrophy
which involved the whole posterior part of the third frontal
convolution, the rest of this convolution not having suffered ;
the inferior portion of the frontal and parietal ascending convolutions ; and the entirety of the island (Reil), of which no
trace of the digitations were observable.
The first temporo-sphenoidal and posterior part of the second
convolution exhibited similar changes. The parenchyma in
the region of the insular lobule was replaced by a reddish-coloured
gelatinous substance, but the neighbouring convolutions were
atrophied without alteration of colour. The corpus striatum
was represented by two small nodules about the size of a bean ;
the thalamus, diminished two-thirds of its volume, was distorted
also in form. The wall of the ventricle was thinned, its capacity
sensibly increased. Taken altogether, the right hemisphere was
shorter, thicker, and shallower than the right.
The authors consider that during the efforts made at some
time by their patient while defecating, a clot may have lodged
in the middle cerebral artery near its origin. This conclusion
was strengthened by the fact that the tract supplied by the
artery to ihe third frontal convolution was found to be anaemic
The most remarkable features of the whole case was perhaps
the absence of aphasia in presence of lesion of the posterior parts
of the right third frontal convolution, when considered in relation
to the theory which localises the faculty of speech in the corresponding left convolution. Also it is deeply interesting to note
the effects produced on the brain as consequent to an injury
persisting for 36 years.
One other important fact in connection with the case should
be added; that, namely, a perforating ulcer of the left foot existed
for some time before the death of the patient. The appearance
of this on a member condemned to relative functional inaction,
and consequently independently of conditions generally assumed
as determining such ulcers, is regarded by the authors as indicating its trophic nature, and that it had therefore a central
origin.
An Interesting Case.
Dr Geo. L. Peabody communicated an interesting case of
caries of the alvearium and abscess of the brain, resulting from a
non-penetrating gunshot wound, to the New York Pathological
Society in January last" The patient, a German labourer,
COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS. 157
was shot on May 28, 1881. The bullet, which was lying in
contact with the hone, was removed at the Chambers Street
Hospital soon after the shooting. The wound was found to be
non-penetrating, and the patient was treated as a dispensary
case, every other day. He suffered a little from headache, and
about the middle of June he vomited several times, and his
headache increased. On June 18th he was sent to the New
York Hospital. On admission, he complained of severe headache ; he was drowsy, and unwilling to talk, but was easily
aroused, and answered questions slowly and intelligently. His
pulse was full and strong, his temperature was 97.4? F. There
was no paralysis at any time. He gradually grew more and
more stupid, became comatose, and died two days after admission.
" The aivearium exhibited the effect of the bullet-wound
above the right superciliary ridge. In that situation a button
of bone, about half an inch in diameter, had been almost completely detached from the outer table of the skull, being united
to it by a narrow isthmus of bone, about one-eighth of an inch
wide. On the inner table the separation was less complete,
extending only over about half its circumference. The bone in
the neighbourhood of this button was porous, the process of
caries having distinctly invaded both tables of the skull. The
inner surface of the frontal bone exhibited several small
osteophytes, not in any way connected with the injury.
" The brain showed more extensive injury. The dura mater,
pia mater, and brain surface beneath the site of the injury were
firmly adherent; so that on gently separating the former from
the brain, a small fragment of grey matter came with it from
the second frontal convolution. This was followed by the
oozing of pus from the opening. The brain was then hardened,
and being subsequently opened, disclosed an abscess-cavity,
which was ovoidal in shape. It had an antero-posterior long
diameter of one and one-half inch, and a vertical short diameter
of one and one-eighth inch. It was lined by a thick pyogenic
membrane, so called. It comes within three-fourths of an inch
of the upper surface of the frontal lobe, and within about the
same distance of the base, invading the grev matter only to a
slight extent in the second frontal convolution. It was separated from the corpus striatum by about one-fourth of an inch."
Unfortunately, Dr Peabody could not speak definitely as to
the flattening of the convolutions ; he believed it was only local.
Dr E. 0. Seguin, President of the Society, commenting on the
case, described a recent post-mortem examination of a brain,
in which he discovered that a tumour situate under the
ascending convolution, near the medjan line, had produced
local flattening on immediately adjacent convolutions, while the
158 COMMENTS ON CONTEMPORARY JOURNALS.
first frontal and posterior part of the second and third convolutions were perfectly natural, and there was only a slight
flattening across the median line. On clinical grounds, lie did
not believe in transmission of pressure in all directions, but
he knew of no post-mortem demonstrations in point. Dr.
Seguin quotes also another example in illustration of the subject
under discussion. In this, an orbital abscess led to necrosis
of the orbital plate of the frontal bone, the dura mater
covering which within was diseased, as well as the arachnoid
and grey matter of the brain, an abscess forming in the frontal
lobe of the latter. The patient had no paralysis, no lesion of
theoptic nerves, no convulsions, and not any very severe pain
until a short time before death. There was slow pulse,
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, and gradually increasing coma.
The whole of the white centre of the frontal globe, except a
portion near the convexity of the hemisphere, was destroyed
close to the island of Reil and the head of the nucleus candatus. The mass of white substance connecting the posterior
part of the third frontal convolution and the anterior gyri of
the island of Reil, with the internal capsule, were uninjured.On the question of trephining in such cases, Dr Seguin
expressed an opinion that the operation would have been justifiable, seeing the diagnosis of abscess was unequivocal. The
cases are both of very decided interest from many points of
view, and deserve to be attentively considered in all their
details. The extracts given above are taken from the New
York Medical Record
