The Psychological Aspect of the Guiteau Case
=============================================

28 Art. II.?
:Author:  EDWARD 0. MANN, M.D., New York, Supt. Sunnyside Retreat for Nervous and
Mental Diseases, Inebriety, and the Opium Ilabit.

On the 2nd of July, 1881, as President Garfield was entering
the depot at Washington, leaning on the arm of Mr. Blaine,
Secretary of State, Guiteau, who had been lounging about the
depot waiting for his victim, got behind him, and fired two
bullets into the President's back ; the wound proved mortal,
the President dying on September 19th, 1881.

From the day on which Gruiteau shot the President of the
United States he has daily declared that the power of God
was around him and would protect him from harm, and claims
that he has not been insane since the 2nd of July, and that
the deed was done during transitory mania, and admits no
other insanity. He has also claimed that his intellect is
intact, saying, January 7th, to Mr. Davidge, who then opened
the argument on the part of the prosecution, " My head is as
good as yours or Porter's. I am no fool. .The Lord does not
employ fools to do His work." He adds also on the same day :
" I say that it was God's act, and that He has taken care of it,
and will take care of it." On January 10th, in reply to Mr.
Porter, who closed the argument on the part of the prosecution, or rather I should say as an interruption during Mr.
Porter's argument, Guiteau said: "You would not make this
big talk unless you knew the Lord was on my side." Curiously
enough, Guiteau's statement that he had not been insane since
July 2nd, 1881, seems to have been considered by the prosecution as strong evidence in behalf of his sanity. The feeling
of the American people, as a whole, I think I may define by
saying that public opinion has been demanding that Guiteau
should be hung like a wild beast, as he has acted like one.
This feeling has been unanimous from the highest to the lowest
classes.

Upon the trial several gentlemen of ability, superintendents
of American asylums, testified that they considered Guiteau
a sane man. It is to be regretted that the eminent alienist,
Dr Pliny Earle, of Northampton, Mass., was recalled to his
home by the sickness of his family, and did not testify. Dr.
Henry P. Stearns, the Supt. of the Hartford, Conn. Retreat
for the Insane, and an able man, made four examinations ot
the prisoner in jail in regard to his physical and mental condition. He said on the witness stand: " We examined the
prisoner first in regard to the shape of his head, and we noticed
the asymmetry of his head. We examined his eyes, and it was
noticed that there was a difference in the size of the pupils,
and that the iris responded more quickly to the effect of light
in one eye than in the other. We also noticed that there was
a slight deviation in the axis of one of the eyes. The face was
examined. The mouth was examined. The tongue was examined in regard to its condition, its cleanliness, and whether
there was any tremulousness on the surface. There was none
discovered. It was noticed that there was a slight deflection
of the tongue on the left side, but that is not an uncommon
thing. We examined as to his heart. There was found a
slight soufflet; a slight abnormal sound of the lung. There
was no skin disease noticed. The pulse was, on the first
occasion, above the normal condition, 88 beats to the minute.
On the second occasion it was 78 or 80. We found that
there was no difference in the sensitiveness of the skin. That
embraced all the examination in regard to his physical condition. He said that his appetite was unusually good, and had
always been good ; that he was in the habit of sleeping well,
and regularly every night: that he had been always in the habit
of sleeping well, and that his general condition was good. We
then proceeded to examine him as to his mental condition. His
memory seemed to be remarkably good in relation to all his
history and to the transactions of his life, and in every way
that we could test it. He seemed to comprehend fully all
questions put to him, and their bearing in relation to his own
case. He seemed to comprehend with the utmost quickness and
readiness the meaning of all questions addressed to him. They
seemed to reach his mind at once. He showed great quickness
of perception. His responses to questions were remarkably quick,
accurate, and ready. His language was remarkably good. In
certain cases, and on the use of certain words, there was a slight
defect in articulation,but, perhaps, not more so than is frequently
the case with perfectly sound persons. He said that, having done
the act under the belief that he was inspired by God to do it,
he was entitled to an acquittal, if the jury were convinced that he
believed he was inspired. I could not take the statement of an
individual under indictment for crime, in itself, and by itself, as
an evidence of insanity. From my observations and examinations I think the prisoner is sane. In the propositions laid
down in the hypothetical case, put by the District Attorney, I
see no evidence of insanity."

Mr. Scoville recited the facts as to the members of Guiteau's
family that had shown unsoundness of mind, and asked whether
all these facts, put together, were any evidence of hereditary
disposition to insanity in the family. Dr Stearns said he would
have to eliminate from the question the religious peculiarities
of Guiteau's father, and the mental weakness of his cousin
Maynard (produced as it was by mesmerism), also the dissipation
of the uncle; but he admitted that there were, in the Guiteau
family, more than the ordinary proportion of cases of insanity.
Dr Gray, superintendent of the New York State Insane
Asylum, at Utica, was the only other witness for the prosecution
whose testimony we propose to introduce, although several other
witnesses were examined. We give the most important parts of his
evidence entire, as in advancing original ideas respecting the
psychological state of Guiteau, it may be interesting to lay
the most important testimony for the prosecution before the
reader for ready reference.

"Dr Gray.was recalled, and his examination-in-chief proceeded with. Being asked by the District Attorney to give the
reasons on which he had yesterday stated his opinion of the
prisoner's sanity at the time of his examination in the jail,
he said : 'In looking over the history of the prisoner, as given
to me by himself, and considering his physical state through
life, I could see no evidences anywhere through his life when
he had been insane or had any symptoms of insanity. Coming down to the period of his arrival in Washington, on the
5th of March, I found that the prisoner was then in good
health. He came here for the purpose of applying for an
office. From that time down to the killing of the President
he continued in good health. He said that he had not even
had a headache or any evidence whatever of any physical disturbance. He followed up his effort to obtain an office persistently, and in a manner which he himself thought best to
secure it?by personal application, tie claimed no inspiration and no insanity of any kind.'
"Mr. Scoville said that the testimony was remarkably like
a speech to the jury in tone, in manner, and expression. He
objected, and the objection was overruled
" The Wit ness : I inquired of the prisoner whether he claimed
inspiration at that time, and he said no.
" The Prisoner: That does not correspond with your testimony yesterday. I claimed inspiration at the beginning, at the
middle, and at the end of the entire transaction. The whole
thing was derived from inspiration, and all these experts understand it.
" The Witness : I took into consideration in forming my
opinion his statement that the inspiration which he claimed, or
the press of Deity, did not come to him at the time of the
inception of the act, nor until after he had fully made up his
mind to do the act.

" The Prisoner: All this thing was the result of grinding
pressure, and there is where the inspiration came in?grinding
pressure made the inspiration. Gruess that thing straight
now.

The Witness : I also took into consideration the fact that
while he was considering the question he held in abeyance his
own act, his own intention. He controlled his own will, his
own thought, reflection, and intention to do the act pending the
obtaining of the Consulship.

" The Prisoner: The doctor has forgotten what he swore to
yesterday. That is the trouble with him. He is now under
Corkhill's influence.

" The Witness: The presence in him of judgment, reflection,
self-control in regard to his acts, was a controlling matter, in
the forming of my opinion ; also the fact that he controlled
himself as to the time in which he should do this act.
" The Prisoner: The Lord does not employ a fool to do His
work. Please remember that.

"The Witness: All which, in the light of my experience
with insane persons who have the delusion that they are controlled, or directed, or commanded, or inspired, by the Almighty,
would be entirely inconsistent with insanity. Such self-control,
self-direction, and self-guidance are antagonistic to anything that
I have ever seen in my personal experience with the insane
having such delusions. I took into consideration, also, in
forming my opinion, the fact of his preparing carefully for his
own safety and protection.

" The Prisoner : I was not going to allow the populace to
destroy me, when it knew nothing about my motives.
" The Witness : In cases of insanity there would be no preparation for personal safety.
"The Prisoner: You'are talking about cranks.
" The Witness : He further stated to me that he had looked
up the subject of insanity, and had considered it in connection
with his defence.
" The Prisoner: That is false.
" The Witness : That would not be consistent with anything
in the nature of insanity I have observed.
"The Prisoner: I never thought anything about the
defence.

" The Witness: Persons who have the insane delusion that
they are inspired by Grod, have been in every case the most
profoundly insane persons independent of the delusion. The
delusion itself is a symptom of the profound insanity pervading
the whole nature of the man.
" The Prisoner : How about Abraham ? There are 38 cases
in the Bible where God Almighty commanded persons to kill.
" The Witness : I took into consideration, also, the deliberation with which he proceeded, as well as the change of
purpose which from time to time he manifested.
" The Prisoner : Dr Gray is arguing the case for the prosecution, which no expert has the right to do. Let him confine
himself to facts and not to argument. Porter will do that business?Judge Porter, I mean.
"The witness stated that during the past 10 years 300 cases
of homicidal insanity had come under his care at the Utica
Asylum.

" The Prisoner: Ever have any Abrahamic cases ? Have
you been dealing with cranks all your life ?
" The witness stated that of those 300 persons only three
claimed inspiration. In those cases insanity was of a most
marked and violent character. They had all been insane
before the offence, at the time, and for a long time afterwards.
" Being asked as to whether he regarded intense religious
convictions as an evidence of insanity, witness replied that, in
his judgment, religion was the highest possible evidence of
sanity.

" Q. Suppose a man should state that he had murdered
another man ; that he conceived the idea of doing it himself; that
he executed it himself; that no person in the universe knew of its
conception ; that his inspiration was only to do the act and that
the details were left to his own judgment, would you consider that
any evidence of insanity ? A. No ; it would indicate wickedness.
" Mr. Scoville excepted to the reception of this question and
answer.

" Witness stated his disbelief in hereditary insanity, but
admitted that a susceptibility to the disease might be transmitted.
" The District Attorney inquired whether a man who believed himself under a divine inspiration would leave his
vindication to the Deity, or would appeal to the civil authorities.
" The Prisoner: I didn't appeal to the civil authorities.
I am here under indictment.

" The Witness: The man would be indifferent as to that.
I recall no case where such a man appealed to the civil
authorities.
"The Prisoner : I have not appealed to any civil authority.
I am willing to go out now if the jury will let me. If they
don't I expect the Lord has fixed the law, and I will go any
way. Mr. Merrick and the other lawyers who ought to know
their business?and they say they do?say that the question of
jurisdiction is going to settle this question, any way.
" The District Attorney asked the witness to state the instructions which he (the District Attorney) had given him
before going to the jail.

" Mr. Scoville objected.
" The District Attorney stated that his object was to show
that the witness had gone to the jail perfectly untrammelled by
any instructions.

" The court sustained the objection.

" The District Attorney then read to the witness the hypothetical question of the defence, and asked his opinion as to the
insanity or sanity of the person therein described.

"The Witness: In my judgment that question cannot be
answered yes or no. It refers to the prisoner at the bar as
representing the imaginary person, and I would not be willing
to answer that question with the knowledge which I have from
personal examination of him. I should feel that it would be
misleading. Assuming that it is an entirely imaginary case and
has no reference to the prisoner, I should not be willing even
then to give the opinion that it really represented an insane
man.

" In reply to the hypothetical questions of 'the prosecution
the witness stated that in his opinion the prisoner was sane at
the time of the shooting.

" While the questions were being read the prisoner con tinually interrupted with such expressions as ' false,' ' that's
false,' ' absolutely false,' ' the whole substratum of that question
is false,' 4 one word in ten is true, the rest are false.'
" The witness then proceeded to state further reasons for
considering the prisoner sane at the present time. Among
others was the fact that the prisoner was continually interrupting, urging that-he was insane, and that the Deity was
responsible for the act.

" The Prisoner: And he will take care of it, too; stake
jour life on that, Dr Gray.

" The Witness: In other instances the prisoner claimed
that the death of the President was due to the doctors.
"The Prisoner: The Lord only confirmed my act by allowing
the doctors to finish my work. As a matter of fact, the doctors
killed him.

" The witness having again stated that the prisoner was
sane, the latter exclaimed: 'You are paid for your opinion, the
jury is not.'

" The Witness, (in reply to a question): I believe that he
is acting a part?that he is representing what he thinks and
believes will impress others with the idea that he has an inspiration or is acting under the influence of the Deity ; in that
respect he is feigning.
" The Prisoner: I am acting the truth in order to vindicate
myself, and I will be vindicated. I never feign ; I go straight
and square.

" The Witness: Such conduct, from my experience, is
utterly inconsistent with the idea of insanity, and especially of
insanity in which there exists a delusion of n. command from Grod.
"The Prisoner : You deal entirely with cranks, but I don't,
and the Lord don't.

"The cross-examination was then begun by Mr. Scoville,
who, after inquiring about witness's experience with insane persons,
asked him whether he had ever been mistaken in a diagnosis.
Witness replied that he recalled no case in which he had been
mistaken, but declined to answer for other scientific gentlemen.
" Mr. Scoville called his attention to the case of Cecilia Kerr,
who in 18G8 was admitted as insane to the Utica Asylum, on a
certificate signed by Dr Fordyce Barker. Witness replied that
the woman was sane when she arrived at the asylum, but he
could not state what her state was when Dr Fordyce Barker
examined her.

" Being questioned as to his belief in ' moral insanity,'
witness stated that, though in his early days he did believe in
it, he changed his views soon after going to the Utica Asylum.
" The Prisoner: The idea that a man cannot be insane
without having a diseased brain is all nonsense. Eead what
Jesus Christ says about it in the New Testament. Spiritology, not
craniology. The spirit comes into the man and that is insanity.
" The witness stated that he had come as a witness in
obedience to a telegram.

" The Prisoner : And Corkhill's money. He has a bunghole up at the Treasury that will run out $100,000 on this case
if he don't shut it quick. He will get shut off himself before
he is many days older. It's time Gen. Arthur was attending to
his case. If I were President he wouldn't be here. I will
attend to him in 1884.

" A half-hour's recess was then taken. While waiting for
the counsel for the prosecution to enter after the recess, the
prisoner exclaimed : ' I have nothing else to do, so I might as
well write my autographs for anybody that wants them?without money, without price. If I could get $500 for them I
wouldn't take it. There's no money in that business for me?
never has been, and I don't want that there should.'

" The cross-examination of Dr Gray was resumed. It was
rather tedious. Mr. Scoville seeming desirous of killing time
this afternoon and the witness being somewhat prolix in his
answers. Witness stated that insanity meant that there was
a conjunction or combination of disease of the brain with mental
disturbance. Disease of the brain was essential to insanity.
He had conducted post-mortem examinations of the brains of
insane persons, but never [sarcastically] before they were
dead.

" The Prisoner: What the doctors want to do is to kill a
man first and examine his brain afterward.

" Mr. Scoville inquired whether witness had ever before
known a case where the prisoner, in feigning insanity, had acted
as Guiteau did.

" The Witness : I have not considered that the prisoner had
made any manifestations of insanity. I said I thought that
he was feigning in this : that he endeavoured to impress on
me in the jail and here the idea that he believed in inspiration,
in respect to which I believe he was feigning and misrepresenting?playing a part.
" Dr Gray was further cross-examined by Mr. Scoville.
" Q. Is your opinion that the prisoner was sane on the 2nd
of July based on your inability to discover any indication that
his brain was diseased? A. Based on the whole examination of
the case and as represented here to me; also in the hypothetical
questions. There was no inability present. There was no brain
disease present.

" Q. Did you not answer on your direct examination that
the prisoner was sane on the 2nd of July? A. I did, and I do
answer now?

" Q. What was the basis of that opinion ? A. That question
was connected with the asking of the hypothetical question,
involving what was supposed to be the ground for the opinion
as to whether the prisoner was sane or insane.
" Q. Was your opinion based wholly on the hypothetical
question ? A. My opinion, in answer to the hypothetical
question, was based wholly on that.

" For some time Mr. Scoville continued to question the
witness as to the ground on which he based his opinion,
endeavouring to get him to admit that it was formed in part
on the testimony of the prisoner when on the stand, but the
witness was wary, and Mr. Scoville failed to accomplish his
purpose. The witness declined to answer categorically any of
the questions propounded to him, and on Mr. Scoville's remonstrating with him, stated that he did not propose to be lectured.
He should answer the questions in his own words. He proposed to
give his own testimony, and not let counsel give it for him. He
was on oath, and proposed to follow that rule.

" Suppose a man in a public place shoots, without adequate
motive, another man in the presence of a large number of
people, would that fact be any evidence of insanity ? A. Not
the slightest. The words 'apparent motive' have no particular meaning.
" The witness stated, in answer to further questions, that
the regulation of the diet, regular hours and rest were important
elements in the treatment of the insane. Under such treatment
an insane patient might recover within three or four months.
" Q? Would there be anything to show that he was insane
four months before ? A. Not without the history.

" Q. What is 'kleptomania' ? A. A word used to express
thieving ; I don't believe in it; I don't believe in any of the
so-called ' moral insanities ;' I believe they are crimes.
" Q. What do you mean by 'dipsomania'? A. Some
people call such a tendency a habit of drinking; I call it
drunkenness ; I don't call it insanity.
" Q. What do you mean by 'pyromama '? A. The burning
of houses. I call it incendiarism ; I call it a crime.
" The witness having characterised one of Mr. Scoville's
questions as frivolous, the prisoner exclaimed : ' Your idea
that a man cannot be insane without the brain being diseased
is rather frivolous. You and the Saviour don't agree on that
subject. You had better study spiritology; you will get some
new light then.'

" Q. Suppose that a person believed that he was called of
the Lord to do a certain act of violence, that his education
was such that he was led to obey, and that under that conviction
he should do the act, would you consider such a person to be of
sound mind ? A. I should not consider such a person necessarily
insane.

" Suppose he believed that he had no alternative but to
do the will of the Lord and that he was not able, mentally, to
resist it, so that with him it was a grinding pressure, would his
doing that act be an evidence of insanity? A. No; there is
no evidence of disease in it. It would be simply an extreme
fanaticism.

" Is it not a fact that insane people have sometimes such
periods of sanity that it is difficult to detect any evidence of
insanity ? A. There are such cases?called in one class
periodical cases, in another paroxysmal cases.
" Here the tedious cross-examination closed.
" The prisoner kept remarkably quiet, not interrupting
more than three or four times, once with the information that
' Humpty Dumpty' wanted his autograph.

" At the request of the District Attorney the witness gave
brief descriptions of the various cases which had come under
his observation where insane persons had committed homicide.
One of these cases was that of a man who had killed li:s wife
with an axe, under the delusion that he saw the face of Grod in
the axe and heard a voice commanding him to do the act. In
all these cases the insanity was very marked, independent of the
delusion.

" The District Attorney stated he thought he had concluded
the examination of the witness, but desired to look over his
notes during the recess, which was then at 12.30, taken for
half an hour.

" After the recess Dr Grray was again called to the stand and
further interrogated by Mr. Scoville, but there was nothing of
interest developed.

" As he left the stand the District Attorney announced that
that concluded the testimony for the Government."
Dr A. E. Macdonald, Superintendent of the New York City
Asylum for the insane, appeared as a witness for the prosecution
December 27th, 1881. He defined insanity as a disease of the
brain, manifesting itself in a departure from the ordinary views
and conduct of life. When asked as to moral insanity lie said
that he did not believe in it, and had never seen a case of it.
He had seen more than 6,000 cases of insanity. He said that
moral insanity was another name, and had been since its invention, for wickedness or craft. He then said that he did not
mean to say that there was no such thing as insanity showing
itself in the disturbance of the moral nature, and said that an
insane person might give evidence of insanity through his moral
actions as well as through his mental actions, but he would say
that there was no such disease as moral insanity. Dr Macdonald
visited the prisoner in jail on the 13th of November remaining
there from 11 to 1 o'clock. From his personal examination
of Gruiteau, and his careful observation of him during the trial,
he believed him to be a sane man. He believed that he had
been feigning insanity in court, and based that opinion on his
observation of him in jail, and of his conduct during his visits
to the jail as contrasted with Gruiteau's conduct in court.
The only effect for the defence, whose testimony we shall introduce, is Dr E. C. Spitzka of New York, the important part of
whose evidence follows in full; succeeding this the principal
points in the judge's charge to the jury, and finally our own
psychological estimate of Gruiteau's mental condition. Had the
experts for the prosecution been cross-examined differently,
much of their testimony would have been found very weak, and
many points could have been elicited which would have told
strongly in favour of Guiteau's insanity. Guiteau's vagaries
seemed to assume the form that " the President under the
manipulation of the Secretary of State has been guilty of the
basest ingratitude to the Stalwarts. His express purpose has
been to crush General Grant and Senator Conklin, and thereby
open the way for his renomination in 1884. In the President's
madness he has wrecked the once grand Republican Party, and
for that he dies. This is not murder, it is a political necessity.
It will make my friend, Arthur, President, and save the Republic"
These are Guiteau's own words, and he claims that God inspired
him to do the homicidal act. Do these utterances of Guiteau's
resemble those of a sane man, or do they resemble those of a
man displaying that he is influenced by the most exalted
notions respecting himself, and displaying liis diseased self-love ?
Does he not show himself a Theomaniac which is a classical
form of emotional insanity ; reasoning mania with exaltation?
We refrain from saying more until the close of this paper when
we propose to draw our conclusions respecting Guiteau's mental
state.

" Mr. Scoville called to the stand, with the Consent of the
prosecution, Dr E. C. Spitzka, of New York. He stated that
he had followed the medical profession for eight years, and for
six years had made a speciality of nervous and mental diseases.
He had studied in Vienna and this country. He had been
called as an expert in insanity cases 25 or 26 times. He had
written articles upon the subject, and had received the international competitive prize-in 1878 for an essay upon insanity.
" Q. Do you know the prisoner? A. I examined him
yesterday in the jail.

" Q. Did you ever see him before that? A. Never
" Q. For what purpose did you examine him ? A. In order
that, if I were compelled to give testimony by the court, I
might do so intelligently.
" Q. Will you tell the result of the examination ? A. If
the court compels me to do so.
" The Court: If the counsel requires it you will have to
answer it.
" The Witness: The result of my examination was that I
found this man insane.
" Q. Have you any question or doubt about it ? A. Not
the slightest.
" Q. Did you examine his eyes with an ophthalmoscope ?
A. Simply with the desire of making the examination thorough,
not with any special object.
" Q. Did you examine his eyes so that you satisfied yourself
as to their condition ? A. I did.
" Q. Also his pulse ? A. Yes.
" Q. How did you investigate this subject ? A. I examined
the background of his eyes by an instrument known as an ophthalmoscope. I examined the pulse with an instrument which
magnifies the pulsations called the sphygmograph.
" What was the result of that examination as to his eyes and
pulse ? A. I found both normal and healthy.

'* Q. State whether there was anything in those particulars
to change or affect your opinion as to his insanity. A. Nothing.
From the nature of the case as in my mind, both examinations
were not necessary, and strictly speaking, irrelevant. It was
simply as a matter of record that I made them.

" Q. State somewhat further the particular phase or character
of the insanity in this case as observed by you. A. That
would be very difficult to render clear to any jury not composed
of experts. I simply say that the marked feature of this man's
insanity is a tendency to delusive or insane opinion, and to the
creation of morbid and fantastical projects. There is a marked
element of imbecility of judgment, and while I had no other
evidence than the expression of his face for this, I have no
doubt that he is a moral imbecile, or rather a moral monstrosity.
" Q. Will you state whether you observed any indication
of insanity from the general appearance of his eyes? A. That
was to my mind the most conclusive evidence of his insanity.
I concluded that I had an insane man to deal with before I
asked any question or said anything to him. He had an insane
manner as well marked as I ever saw it in an asylum.
" Q. From your knowledge of the insane, is it or not an
indication of insanity that a man has an acute, retentive
memory? A. It is consistent with some forms of insanity, and
inconsistent with others.

" Q. In it consistent with a condition of insanity that a man
has a quick perception ? A. The same answer would apply to
that question.

" Mr. Scoville then propounded a long hypothetical question,
similar to that which he had already asked the other expert
witnesses, ending with the interrogatory as to whether Gruiteau
was insane on the 2nd July.
" The Witness: I decline to answer any hypothetical
question in a case where I have examined the prisoner himself
that would not incorporate the result of that examination.
" Q. Then include in that hypothetical question your own
conclusion of his mental examination ? A. I should say that
the prisoner, whom I examined, had been in more or less of a
morbid mental state throughout his life, and that he was probably
insane at the time that you mention.

" Cross-examination by Mr. Davidge. Q. What do you
mean by insanity ? A. That is a question which I never
attempt to answer. I can give you an approximate definition.
" Mr. Davidge : I would be glad to have it.

"The Witness : Any profound deterioration from a normal
standard of human thought and action, excluding the ordinary
phenomena of the common nervous diseases, and excluding
acute intoxication and febrile delirium.

" Q. There are very many degrees of insanity, are there not ? .
A. Certainly. There is every degree.

" Q. There may be degrees involving want of discrimination between right and wrong, and there may be other degrees
which do not involve want of discrimination? A. That is so,
and it varies in the history of the same person.

" Q. There may, therefore, be degrees which render insane
persons responsible, and other degrees which do not render them
responsible ?

" Objected to by Mr. Seoville and objection sustained by
the court on the ground that it is not for a medical expert to
say whether or not a man is responsible in law.

" Q. You have had submitted to you quite a long hypothetical case. Suppose every element of that case to be removed
except the single one that the prisoner was dominated by the
delusion that in putting the President to death he was carrying
out the Divine will, and that he had not capacity to resist the
force of that delusion, would not that postulate alone have led
you to the conclusion that he was insane?

" The Witness : Is it an insane delusion that you refer to ?
"Mr. Davidge: It is an insane delusion.

" The Witness : A person who has an insane delusion is
insane, even if it is a single delusion.

" Q. Then if you can assume that postulate to be true the
rest of the question amounts to nothing. A. I do not see how
that follows.

" Q. If the fact that this prisoner was dominated by an
insane delusion alone led you to the conclusion that he was
insane, do you attach any importance to the other postulates
in the hypothetical case. A. The greatest, as strong confirmatory evidence.
" Q. If the first postulate was sufficient to lead you to the
conclusion of his insanity, did you want any confirmatory evidence? A. I should feel very much more positive if I had it,
than if I had not it. As medicine is not an exact science, we
generally strengthen our diagnoses by taking every available
point.

" Q. You are not making a diagnosis here but answering
a hypothetical case; and one tixed fact in that hypothetical
case is tantamount to a proof that this man is insane. Now, I
want to know why you needed any corroboration ot his insanity ?
A. I think you misunderstood me. As a witness on this stand I
needed nothing further than that single postulate.

" Q. And all beyond that postulate might be left out of the
case ? A. That is not a supposable case.

" Where did you graduate ? A. At the Medical Department of the University of the City of New York.
" In reply to further questions, the witness said that he had
never had charge of an insane asylum, but that he had applied
or made inquiries looking to application for such employment
to the asylums at Blackwell's Island, New York; Oshkosh,
Wis.; and Danville, Penn. The application for the asylum on
Ward's Island was made at the instance of Dr McDonald, its
Superintendent. These applications were not gratified for
reasons which he would like to state. He had never made such
application to the Bloomingdale Asylum. He had never been
Professor in any medical school, but was Professor of Comparative Anatomy at the Columbia Veterinary College?
" Q. What sort of a college is that? A. A college where
physicians are instructed in the art of treating the lower
animals.

? " Q. Horses, mainly, I suppose? A. Yes. The branch
which I treat of is the branch pursued by such men as Thomas
Huxley, Baron Huguet, Ha3ckel, and others of our most eminent
scientists. I have no reason to be ashamed of it.
" Mr. Davidge : I do not mean that you should be.
" The Witness: The same question has been asked me before on suggestions from a special quarter, and I know that it
comes from the same quarter. I expected it. It is done with
the intention of casting a reflection on the witness.
" Mr. Davidge: All these doctors and the doctors belonging to this college are,called ' horse doctors,' are thej' not?
"The Witness: I never have treated any lower animal,
except the ass, and that animal had two legs. (Laughter.)
I, therefore, cannot consider myself a veterinary surgeon.
" Q. But you are a veterinary surgeon, are you not ?
A. In the sense that I treat asses who ask me stupid questions,
I am. (Laughter.)
" Q. I understand that you have been examined as witness in
a number of cases involving the questions of insanity? A. I
have been.
"? Q. Are you what is called a professional expert? A. Inasmuch as I never solicit a case I do not know that 1 can
properly call myself such, but I am so often in court as an
expert that I might consider myself one in the sense of being
very frequently consulted.

" Q. Is not that your main business? A. No. In that
sense I am not a professional expert. The term is often used
in an unfavourable sense, as representing a professional man
who is willing to put his services at the disposal of any party
for hire, and to regulate his testimony according to the interest
he represents.

" Q. Putting aside that unfavourable definition, do you
hold yourself out to the world as a man ready to go into court
and testify in cases involving the question of insanity ? A. I
am willing to testify to the truth in any case and for any side,
and I charge a respectable fee for it, the full value of my services.
In this case, however, I do not receive enough to take me to
Jersey City. If I had desired to sell my services or sell my
convictions, I would be sitting behind you as one of the experts
for the prosecution. (Sensation.)

" Q? What reason have you for saying that ? A. Because
I had an opportunity of coming here as an expert for the prosecution.

" On being further pressed on this point the witness stated
that Mr. Porter, a counsel for the prosecution, had called at
his office on October 31, and asked him whether he (the witness)
could be of any service to the prosecution. The witness told
him that he should be very glad to act for the prosecution if it
were not against his convictions, but that he had already formed
a fixed opinion. He also told Mr. Porter that he had been indirectly approached on the part of the defence and that he had
declined. On being pressed to give the ground for the opinion then
formed (before he had ever seen the prisoner), the witness said he
had formed it from the picture of the prisoner which he had seen
in one of the illustrated papers, from the prisoner's documents
(particularly his letter to Gen. Sherman, and the letter in which
he said he was going to marry a wealthy lady in New York),
from his family history as stated in the newspapers, and from
the almost unanimous interpretation given to his acts by the
laity, who had seen him a short time before and a short time
after the assassination. He referred particularly to the statements
of Senator Logan and Mr. Charles Reed. While giving this
testimony the witness was leaning carelessly on the rail of the
witness box, when he was somewhat imperatively directed by
the District Attorney to stand up straight, so that he could be
better seen by the counsel. The witness resented this direction
by saying that he would take his seat, and he accordingly took
it. The District Attorney then asked the Judge to instruct
the witness to stand up. The Judge did so, and the witness
obeyed.

" The witness was then examined as to the circumstances of
his visit to the prisoner yesterday in the jail. He had gone
into the cell behind other visitors so as to take the prisoner
unawares. He had gone to the jail with Mr. Scoville, and spent
about an hour and a half with the prisoner. He did not
examine the prisoner physically at first. That was done at the
same time that he examined him mentally. Witness represented himself as a professor of phrenology. Prof. Brown, of
Fowler & Wells. In that way he was enabled to induce the
prisoner to allow him to put atropine in his eyes so as to dilate
them in order that he might examine them. As a phrenological
dodge, he first examined the shape of his head, and asked him
to give him his psychological condition at the time he shot the
President. The prisoner repeated the word ' psychological' and
said 'psychos?mind, soul.' Witness then asked him what objection he had to the President. The prisoner said he had not
any. Witness asked him why he had not removed Mr. Blaine
instead of the President. He said : * Because that would not
have done any good. There would have been just such another
man as Blaine to step into his shoes and Arthur would not have
been President.' Then the prisoner became wildly excited
about the trial, and yelled forth about the way that the prosecution was attacking him, bringing up (as he said) lying
witnesses. He yelled out loudly, declaiming and shouting in
the insane manner very perfectly. The witness told him to
keep cool, but it was difficult to restrain him. Witness asked
him why he interrupted the court if (as he said) God had got
the thing in His hand, and would bring it to a successful conclusion, so far as he was concerned. He made a quotation from
Scripture about Jesus Christ sending the lying to utter damnation, and said : ' May I not do the same thing ? Am I not in
the position of Jesus Christ ? Am I not a martyr ? Have I
not sacrificed myself foy the American people ?' The witness
went on to state that he found the prisoner's physical condition
(as far as he noticed it) good, his memory good, and his legal
attainments (in conversing with Mr. Scoville about his trial)
those of a third-class shyster. He displayed a certain amount
?t judgment, parried questions which he did not want to answer,
and went to subjects which developed something flattering to
his self-love.

" RIGHT AND WRONG IN INSANITY.

" Q. Did you form the opinion that this man did not know
the difference between right and wrong? A. That would
depend on the interpretation given to the question. If you
ask me whether he knew the full consequences of his act, I
should say without any hesitation, that (at least since he has
been a lawyer) he has always known the ordinary legal consequences of criminal acts.
" Q. You have no doubt of that ? A. Not the slightest. But
that is not my interpretation of insanity. It is outside the idea
of right and wrong.

" Q. You reached the conclusion first that he did not know
the difference between right and wrong. A. I did not say
that.

" Q. I understood you to say that. A . I am positive I
stated that this man, ever since he was a lawyer, always knew
the legal consequences of criminal acts.
" The Prisoner: I have not been a lawyer for five or six
years.

" Q. I understood you to say distinctly that you had 110
doubt he did know the difference between right and wrong?
A. 1 would not like to answer anything under the construction
of a foreign mind. I want this answer to stand as I gave it?
that this man, since he was a lawyer, always knew the ordinary
consequences attaching to criminal acts. But I again wish to
add that that is not my test of right.

" Q. But it will be that of the courts. On these postulates
you base the opinion that his mind tended to insane delusions ?
You did not find any insane delusion, but a tendency to insane
delusion ? A. I found a tendency towards insane delusion, and
I found delusive opinions.

" Q' What do you mean by a tendency to insane delusions ?
A. A phenomenon frequently exhibited by those having an
insane constitution; a tendency to misinterpret the real affairs
of life, especially those of a complex nature.
" Q. You found in him a tendency to morbid opinions ??
A. To the formation of morbid projects.

" Q. What made you think that he had a tendency to the
formation of morbid projects ? A. Because he told me as positively and sincerely as a man could, that when he got out of
jail (feeling firmly convinced that the American people would
not allow him to die a disgraceful death after what he had
done for them) he would go'to Europe for three or four months
to keep out of the way, and then come back and lecture, and
that he expected to make a great success. That was a morbid
project in the future. I became convinced that the crime for
which he is indicted was the result of a morbid project rather
than of a delusion, strictly speaking.

Q. You found that he shot President Grarfield, not so much
in consequence of an insane delusion as on account of the
formation of a morbid project? A. Based on a delusive
opinion,
" Q. You concluded that the shooting of the President was
not the result of an insane delusion, but rather of a tendency
of the mind to the formation of morbid projects? A. That is
the main motor.

" Q. Do you not think that every murder originates in
seme such tendency ? A. On the contrary, I think it is the
great exception.
" Q. Could any man who does not indulge in morbid
projects commit a murder ? A. Most murders are not committed from morbid projects, but from sane motives, criminal
motives.

" Q. The murderer, as a general thing, is in a healthy state
of mind, 'and his projects are not morbid? A. I did not say
that. I only say negatively that the ordinary murderer is not
insane. I do not say that he is in a typical good condition of
bodily health.

" Q. Is not a man who murders another a creature of a
morbid project ? A. Positively, no.
" Q. You noted no insane delusion about this man? A.
He did not have anything I would call a fixed delusion.
" Q. You found no illusion ? A. No.
" Q. Hallucination ? A. No.
" Q. You attributed this crime to the formation of a morbid
project ? A. A morbid project, growing out of a diseased condition of the mind.
" Q' Was there any instance (except the remark about
lecturing) that showed the formation of a morbid project?
A. He gave me an account of the shooting of the President,
which I considered another morbid project.

" Q. That is reasoning in a circle. The thing to be ascertained was the condition of his mind at the time of the shooting ? A. I did not so understand it when I went to the jail.
The only thing I expected to get was his present condition, in
so far as it tended to elucidate the condition of his mind at the
time of the shooting.

" Q. You do not undertake to give an opinion as to his
condition at the time of the shooting? A. Only so far as I
would say that this man has always been of a morbid mind.
" Q. By which you mean a diseased mind? A. If I were to
be very accurate I should draw a line between the disease
which attacks the brain after it has been developed and the
improper development of the brain. I should rather say he
was a brain monstrosity?a congenital malformation of the
brain.

" Q. As to his project' to go to Europe for a time and then
return and lecture, was that a morbid project or a depraved
one? A. Depravity enters as an element, but it is a morbid
project.
" Q. You thought that the scheme was so revolting that it
could not originate in depravity, but was the result of a morbid
disease? A. Yes.
" Q. Would not that depend upon the degree of depravity ?
A. I suppose if there was an extreme degree of depravity it
might coexist in the scheme. The idea that the American
people would be so grateful that they would flock to his lectures
could only be based on an insane conception.
" Q. Might not that be the outcome of a depraved heart ?
A. No, it could not.

"The court then, at 12.30, took a recess for one hour.
" As the manacles were being placed upon the prisoner lie
broke forth with a denunciation of the prosecution for the use
of the word ' depravity.' With the exception of committing
adultery to get rid of his wife, and of owing some debts, he
had always been a Christian man ; ' and,' he concluded violently,
11 am not afraid to go to the gallows if the Lord Almighty
wishes me to go there. I expect an act of (rod that will blow
this court and the jury out of that window to protect me if
necessary. I want to thunder that in the ears of the American
people.'

" AFTEJt THE RECESS.

" The afternoon session was opened, as usual, by the prisoner, who, thumping the table with his fist, cried: ' There are
a good many poodle dogs in the newspaper business, and I
want to express my utter contempt for some of those poodle
dogs. I am glad to notice that the high-toned, conscientious
papers are saying, almost with one voice, that it would be a
stain on the American name for the jury to hang a man in my
condition on the 2nd of July, when I was precipitated upon
the President.'

" Hardly had he ceased speaking when a voice from the
most crowded corner of the covirt-room exclaimed : ' Shoot him
now!' The prisoner glared around in a frightened manner,
while there was a good deal of suppressed commotion among
the spectators. The Deputy Marshal endeavoured to discover
the offender, but was unsuccessrul in his search.
" The cross-examination was then resumed.

" Q. The appearance of his face indicated moral insanity ?
A. I made the general proposition that this man's facial
expression, with that which we know as the usual manner, and
that having some other evidence, I would have concluded that
he suffered from moral imbecility or moral monstrosity.
" Q. That was the conclusion you derived from the appearance of his face ? A. Yes.
" Q. What do you mean by a moral monstrosity ? A. By
moral monster I mean a person who is born with a nervous and
defective organisation, one altogether deprived of that moral
sense which is an integral and essential constituent of the normal
human mind, being analogous in this sense to a congenital
cripple who is born speechless or with one leg shorter than the
other.
" Q. From that brief interview with this man you concluded
that he was born a cripple in respect of his moral sense ??A.
Yes.
" Q. What means had you to attribute his crippled mental
condition to a congenital cause and not to natural causes ??
A. The shape of his head and his face and certain physical
evidences of imperfect brain development which I found, there
being a defective innervation of the facial muscles, asymmetry
of the face, and' a pronounced deviation of the tongue to the
left. I found that he was born with a brain whose two sides
are not equal, or eo much unequal as to constitute a diseased
brain. The end of his tongue deviated one-half or three-fourths
of an inch from the median line. I do not wish it to be understood that on any of these evidences singly I would call a man
insane.

" The Prisoner: The doctors all agree that one side of my
head is larger than the other. That may be insanity or not,
but it is a fact.

" The Witness stated that the fact that the prisoner had had
two blood relatives in insane asylums, was what first led him to
conclude that the insanity of the prisoner was congenital.
" Q. You did not base your opinion on the data you have
mentioned? A. This data only allowed me to form a very
strong suspicion.

" Q. Do you think the fact that there are two cousins in the
insane asylum, from causes not congenital, indicates a congenital
defect in the prisoner? A. I made no such proposition. If
these two cousins became insane from causes foreign to their
ancestry, it would not prove anything as to this man's insanity.
" Mr. Davidge inquired whether, in the case of Mr. Parker
(one of the cousins) if the insanity had been brought on by
excessive drinking, there would be anything to prove the insanity of the prisoner, and received a negative reply. He then
stated the case of the other insane cousin, Abby Maynard, who,
up to her tenth year, had been a bright child, but who had
48 THE PSYCIIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE GUITEAU CASE.
become insane under the influence of a mesmeric teacher, and
? inquired whether that fact could throw any light on the congenital insanity of the prisoner. The witness replied that it
threw the strongest light. No one could become insane or of
feeble mind from mesmeric experiments who was not already
tainted with insanity.

" Q. You think not? A. I may say I know not.
" Q. You draw no difference between susceptibility and
insanity ? A. She was susceptible because she was predisposed.
I could probably mesmerise one out of thirty of the persons in
this court-room 100 times without affecting the health, unless
they were of an imperfect mental organisation. But no person
can be mesmerised frequently without being injured.
" Q. The degree of damage would depend upon the organisation of the subject ? A. Certainly. I consider those experiments inexcusable. I doubt that ordinary persons in ordinary
conditions of health become insane or feeble-minded from such
experiments. ?

" Q. How many have become insane that you ever heard
of? A. I am so familiar with the literature of insanity and
the statistics of asylums that if that fact had anything to do
with the production of insanity, I would have heard of it.
" Q. Suppose that the idea of hereditary insanity had been
removed, would you still have reached the conclusion you did
from the formation of the prisoner's head, his facial muscles,
and the deviation of his tongue? A. It would amount to no
more than a strong suspicion. The fact that the head is larger
on one side than the other is not the most pronounced anomaly.
There is a peculiar ascent of the back part of the head, as if it
were cut off suddenly, and a sort of keel-like prolongation in the
middle line extending along down the back of the head. That
is what we call rhombo-cephalic.

" Q' What is the keel? A. A ridge in the middle line.
" Q. Have you examined any more monsters ? A. They are
not so frequent that any one can examine any large number. I
do not think I have ever seen a case exactly like this, and I
have not seen more than half a dozen that would belong to the
same group.

"Mr. I)avidge then went into an exhaustive examination as
to the exact difference between the prisoner's head and the
heads of ordinary persons, the extent of the deviation of the
tongue, and the effect of the facial muscles, to which the witness
had referred. The witness detailed the peculiarities, not always,
however, to Mr. Davidge's satisfaction, stating that none of them
taken singly could be looked upon as evidence of congenital
insanity, but that being grouped and taken in connection with
the fact of hereditary insanity was strong evidence.
" Q. You base your opinion as to bis moral monstrosity on
tlie shape of bis head ? A. Only incidentally. I base it upon
his expression, taken in connection with the abnormal shape of
his bead. It proves the congenital character of the trouble.
If the man only bad the mean face he has, I should say he
might be a depraved man, but when I add to that the defective
shape of his skull, I am strongly of the belief, as strongly as
science permits us to come to a conclusion, that he is a congenital monstrosity.
" Q. You refer to the shape of the head and the inequality
of the facial muscles, and the deviation of the tongue to the
left, as indicating that the lack of moral sense is congenital and
not acquired? A. Yes, among the other physical evidences I
noticed was a defect in his speech.

" Q. What do you mean by an unequal facial development?
A. On one side the facial folds, when he was laughing, rose
higher than on the otber.
" Q. His smile was a one-sided smile? A. A lop-sided
smile.
" Q. In your practice, have you met with many lop-sided
smiles? A. It is the characteristic of those insane whom we
term 4 primary monomaniacs.'
" Q. Taken alone, what would it amount to? A. Absolutely
nothing.
" Q. When he put out his tongue it went to the left side ?
A. Yes, over half an inch.
" Q. And tbatwas another proof of congenital monstrosity?
A. I never said anything remotely leading to that conclusion.

" TIIE WITNESS WEARIED.

" At this point the witness asked permission to sit down,
stating that he was suffering from a slight affection in the heel.
' Oh, certainly,' assented Mr. Davidge, and then took occasion
to retaliate for some of the bitter remarks made against him by
the witness by adding significantly : ' I thought it was higher
up.' The witness was not long allowed to be seated, for in a
few moments the District Attorney, in a petulant tone, complained of being unable to see his face and ordered him to stand
up. The witness made no strong objection, though he intimated
that if the prosecution bad seen fit they might have asked some
of their experts to move their seats a little, and thus be able to
see his face without putting him to personal inconvenience.
" The prisoner's comment upon this was addressed to Mr.
Corkhill: ' He's a bad man for you, Corkhill, and we have
more of them.'

" The examination was then continued.
" Q. How common is it for tongues of people to deviate ?
A. In a perfectly healthy person the tongue will not deviate.
" Q. Is it uncommon for the tongues of sane people to
deviate ? A. In the experience of physicians it i3 one of the
common evidences of other diseases than insanity.
" Q. It can throw little light upon insanity ? A. Only as
an accessory fact.
" Q. Suppose the tongue had deviated to the right, what
effect would it have ? A. None whatever.
" Q. Only when it deviated to the left? A. I cannot
answer a question that is put in a trivial way.
" Q. You are a member of the moral insanity school? A.
I have said nothing to that effect. I believe that there are well
established cases of moral insanity. Occasionally it does exist
by itself.

" Q. Throw away altogether the hereditary element, would
you call this a case of moral monstrosity ? A. I would only
have the strong opinion that it was so.
" Q- Would you be able to discriminate between moral monstrosity and depravity ? A. Standing by themselves, I doubt it.
" Q. Did you discover any defect in his reasoning faculties ?
A. I did. The man based his conclusions on insane and
erroneous assumptions throughout.

" Q. I want to know whether, between the assumption and
the conclusion, you discovered a lack of reasoning power ? A.
Taking his assumption to be correct, his conclusion was logical.
" Q. For instance, you asked why he did not remove Mr.
Blaine, and he said: * Because another just as bad would get
in his place?' A. That was logical from his point of view.
" Q. He said his act would cement the Republican party ?
A. From his point of view, and perhaps from the point of view
of many politicians that are not insane, that is correct.
" Q> What experience have you had with men under trial for
heinous crimes ? A. Within the last two months I have
examined three criminals whose attorneys claimed insanity for
them, and I found them all to be sane. One of them was
shamming and two were not shamming.
" Q. As a sensible man do you mean to say that you can
base any opinion on such an experience as that? A. Certainly.
I am one of those who believe that the careful analysis of one
case is worth more than the slip-shod examination of a thousand
cases.
" Q. You say that you found the prisoner's memory good?
A. Yes.
" Q. You found his perceptive faculties good? A. Fair;
that is, as good as the average, perhaps better than some.
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE QUITEAU CASE. 51
" Q. And you found tliat he had the abilities of a thirdclass shyster ? A. Yes.
" Q. That is,you attributed to him low cunning?* A. I did.
" Q. And unscrupulous actions ? A. Undoubtedly.
" Q. And what men would call a depraved moral character ?
A. Yes, only that I attributed that to disease.
" Q. Have you had any experience of men who professed to
believe that they were instruments in the hands of Divine
Providence? A. With insane men, yes, quite a number. It
is a common symptom of the insane that they consider themselves the instruments of a higher power, and according to their
'legree of education they woidd make it more or less plausible.

" THE ASSASSIN IN HIGH GLEE.

" As Mr. Davidge concluded his cross-examination it was
taken up by the District Attorney, who endeavoured to show an
inconsistency in the witness expressing to-day a disinclination
to reveal a professional communication and his having written
?t letter, published in the New York Times on the 2nd of
November, stating that he had declined to appear as an expert
for the Government. The witness explained that what he meant
was that he would not make the statement on the stand lest it
might prejudice the case. He drew a broad distinction between
that and his letter in The Times. He also admitted having
written a paper which was published in the New York Medical
Record of October 20th (ten days before Mr. Porter called on
him,) in which he said that there was not a scintilla of doubt in
his mind that Gruiteau was insane, and that he would be admitted
into any insane asylum as a proper subject for sequestration.
He added: ? That was my opinion then and is my opinion
now.' The District Attorney recited the points in this article
on which the witness had based his opinion, and the witness
stated that they were all correct.

" An allusion being made in this article to a certain writer
on insanity who would turn over in his grave if Gruiteau were
hanged, the District Attorney asked him if that were true.
" The witness replied, with a considerable asperity of manner:
4 That is an absurd question. You know that was intended
figuratively. I am not here to give you instruction on the use
of metaphor.'

" Q. Is that one of the metaphors on which you based your
opinion ? A. That is nonsense.
" The Prisoner (to the District Attorney) : The Doctor gives
you trouble, Corkhill. I am sorry to see you heated up so.
You had better cool off and let us go home.
" Q. You state in this article that Mr. Blaine, Senator
Logan, and the President recognised the insanity of the
prisoner, is that true ? A. It was so stated in the papers of
the day. An interviewer in the New York Herald made a
very exhaustive statement of an alleged interview with Mr.
Blaine, and he gave the unqualified opinion of Mr. Blaine that
the man was insane ; and I knew, furthermore, that there was
a telegram from the Cabinet to the American Ministers in
Europe, stating that there was no conspiracy, but that the
assassination was the act of an insane man. (Applause in the
court-room.)

"The Prisoner (tauntingly to the District Attorney) : That
settles you, Colonel. (Laughter.)
" The District Attorney, referring to the Gosling case, in
which the witness had been examined as an expert, put this
question to the witness: 'You did not appear on both sides in
that case ?'
" The witness answered, with an expression of anger, 4 No ;
and there was no basis for your question.'
" The District Attorney : I am to determine that.
"The Witness (resolutely): I will determine that.
" The Prisoner (to the District Attorney) : Let us go home,
Colonel, and then you can cool off. (Laughter.)
" Q. Did you take a fee in that case from others than
the family? A. I never did, and there is no basis for the
question.
" Q. Did you return that fee and take a larger fee r
A. Never; and there's no basis for that question.
" The Prisoner (to the District Attorney) : And it is a dirty
question for you to ask, Corkhill. You have got no brains and
no conscience, and I am going to ask President Arthur to kick
you out of your place. (Laughter.)
"The Witness (to the Judge) : I am a witness here under
attachment. I appear here very unwillingly. I object to
questions which have no basis, and the only object of which is
to run me down. There was no basis for the questions. I dare
any person to make an assertion on which such a question could
be based.
" The District Attorney: The witness's answers are conclusive. I cannot contradict them.
" The Prisoner: Dr Spitzka is one of the most scientific
men in America. He studied in all the high-toned colleges in
Europe, and he is not to come here and be insulted by this
little bit of a scamp. (To the District Attorney, contemptuously) : Why, Corkhill, he would not even condescend to spit
on you. (Laughter.)
" The District Attorney : I understand that this witness
over a month ago wrote ail opinion upon the subject of this
prisoner's insanity and criticised the whole case. I want to
show that he did not come here with unformed opinions.
"The Witness : Nor did I claim to do so.
" The Court: There is nothing wrong in that.
" Q. Did you say in this article that it would be a matter
of regret if the Gruiteau case ever came before a jury ? A. 1
said it then and I say it now.
" Q. Did you say that a narrow-minded official, conducting
this trial, would find experts who would be only too willing
to chime in with the public prejudice? A. I said that,
decidedly.
" Q. "To what official did you refer? A. I referred to
you. (Laughter, in which the prisoner joined, clapping his
hands and saying to Mr. Scoville, who was endeavouring to
keep him quiet, ' Do not undertake to put your brain over
mine.')
" Q. Did you say that it was to be feared that the conviction
of Gruiteau would be nothing more than a form of lynch process
which would reflect great discredit on American medical jurisprudence ? A. Yes, I said that.
" The Prisoner: And that is the opinion of the best medical
papers in the country, and you know it too, Corkhill.
" Did you say that the insanity of the assassin was recognised by many of the journals, but that the organ of the
officers of asylums expressed itself adversely, and that several
Superintendents of asylums pretended that Gruiteau was insane?
A. I said that.

" Q. So that when you came into this case you had not
only expressed your opinion as to the sanity or insanity of the
prisoner, but you had criticised the law officer in charge of the
case, and said that it would be disgraceful to hang the prisoner,
and that the case ought never to go to a jury? Now, do you
pretend to say that you came here an unbiased witness ?
A, (Indignantly) : I mean to say that I am an honest, scientific,
unprejudiced witness, and if you will say?(restraining himself)
?I will not go any further.

" JUDGE cox's DECISION.

" Judge Cox then proceeded to state his views on the
prayers submitted on both sides, first giving his attention to
the question of jurisdiction. He said that at an early stage
in the case he had expressed a preference to hear that question
discussed in a preliminary form, by way of demurrer, or motion,
or plea, because a determination of it adversely to the jurisdiction would have spared all the labour and trouble of the trial.
54 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE GUITEAU CASE.
Counsel, however, had the privilege of making the question at
at any stage of the case. The jurisdiction of the court had
been publicly discussed and seriously challenged, and he had
felt it incumbent on him not to ignore a question so vital to
the rights of the accused. He had deemed it his duty, therefore, to investigate the question thoroughly. After a very
exhaustive review of the English and American authorities,
he expressed his conviction that the English authority was
decidedly in favour of jurisdiction where the blow had taken
place, and that in this country there was a strong array of
authority in the same direction. He felt at liberty to adopt
and announce the doctrine (which conformed to common sense),
that the jurisdiction was complete where the fatal wound had
been inflicted, and that, therefore, the place of death was immaterial. Consequently, it would be improper to grant the
thirteenth instruction prayed for by the defence, because the
offence charged might be tried and conviction might follow
under those counts of the indictment which averred the death
to have occurred in the District of Columbia. For the same
reason the fourteenth instruction, relating to jurisdiction, had
to be denied. When it became his duty to charge the jury in
the case, it would be his effort to expand and illustrate so much
of those instructions as he considered correct; but, for the present, he merely desired to express his opinion sufficiently to
guide the counsel in their arguments to the jury.

" The Prisoner: I am glad your Honour has excluded the
thirteenth prayer. It was put in without my consent.
" Judge Cox then proceeded to consider the first and second
prayers of the prosecution in connection with the third, fifth,
sixth, and eighth prayers of the defence. The first instruction
asked for by the prosecution namely that 4 the legal test of
responsibility, where insanity is set up as defence for alleged
crime, is whether the accused, at the time of committing the
act charged, knew the difference between right and wrong in
respect of such act,' he regarded as correct. He reviewed at
great length the questions involved in the McNaughten case,
and quoted from testimony given by Lord Justice Fitz James
Stephen before a Parliamentary Committee, which had before
it in 1874 a bill to define the law of insanity. He referred
to this, h? said, simply to show that the answers of the Judges
in the McNaughten case had not since been regarded as
clearly establishing the proposition that a mere capacity to
know the laws of *he land subjected persons to criminal responsibility. Since the McNaughten case a number of homicide
cases had been tried at nisi prius in England, and he had not
been able to find one in which a knowledge of the law of the
land had been laid down as a test. In the United States there
were numerous cases that applied to a knowledge of right and
wrong in regard to the particular case ; but the instructions
had been in the most vague and general terms. He would,
therefore, state his own views, which he did as follows: ' To a
sane man an act, whether morally wrong or not, is wrong if it
is in violation of the law of the land. It cannot be right for
him, although he may think that, independently of the law,
it would be. It cannot be right for him, although he may
think it is right notwithstanding the law, and that he may
rightfully commit it in violation of the law. But, while a sane
man is responsible for opinions contrary to the law, if carried
out in practice, an insane man is not held to the same responsibility. He may know the law of the land, but in his delusions
he may insanely believe that it is not the law for him, but that
he is acting under a higher authority which supersedes it. If,
therefore, I am to rule upon this proposition as" presented, I
grant it only with a qualification, and I give, as a substitute
therefor, my own (marked No. 1) as follows :

"No. 1. The legal test of responsibility, where insanity is set
up as a defence for alleged crime, is whether the accused, at the
time of commitingthe act charged, knew the difference between
right and wrong in respect of such act. Hence, in the present
case, if the jury find that the accused committed the act charged
in the indictment, and at the time of the commission of his
crime knew what he was doing and that what he was doing
was contrary to the law of the land, he is responsible, unless, in
consequence of insane mental delusions, or other form of mental
disorder, he was labouring under such defect of reason as to be
incapable of understanding the obligation of the law of the land,
and the duty aud necessity of obedience to it and of understanding
that his act was wrong, because it was in violation of the law.
" The Prisoner: That first instruction is just what I desire.
It leaves the matter entirely with the jury to say whether the
act was right or wrong. I say that it was right.

"Judge Cox: I have prepared instruction No. 2. which
embodies all that I think is correct on the remaining instructions asked for by the Government, and in the first four
instructions asked for by the defence. It is as follows.
"No. 2. If the jury find that the defendant committed the act
charged, and at the time thereof knew what he was doing and that
what he was doing was contrary to the law of the land, it constitutes no excuse even if it is true that when he committed the act he
really believed that he was producing a great public benefit, and
that the death of the President was required for the good of the
American people. Nor would such excuse be afforded by the
fact that in the commission of the act he was controlled by a
depraved moral sense, whether innate or acquired, or by evil
passions or indifference to moral obligations. And, even if the
jury find that the defendant, as a result of his own reasoning
and reflection, arrived at the determination to kill the President,
and, as a further result of his own reasoning and reflection,
believed that his said purpose was approved or sugge-ted or
inspired by the Deity, such belief would afford no excuse. But
it would be different, and he would not be responsible criminally,
if the act was done under the influence, and as the product, of
an insane mental delusion that the Deity had commanded him
to do the act which had taken possession of his mind, not as a
result of his own reflections, but independently of his own will
and reason, and with such force as to deprive him of the degree
of reason necessary to distinguish between right and wrong as
to the particular act. In such case, even if he knew that the
act was a violation of the law of the land he would not be
responsible if his reason was so perverted by the insanity that
he was incapable of understanding the obligation of the law of
the land, and that the act was wrong under the obligation of
that law, and wrong in itself.

" Judge Cox continued as follows: In this connection I
used the words 'wrong in itself' because I can conceive a
case in which one might believe, insanely, that the law of the
land provided no punishment for murder, and yet the person
might be perfectly aware of the moral enormity of the crime.
I would be unwilling to pronounce such a person irresponsible.
I have omitted from this instruction one important feature of that
asked for on the part of the defence. It is expressed in the first
sentence of the first prayer, in these words: ' Or was it committed
under an influence or power which the accused could not resist by
reason of his unsoundness of mind.' It cannot he denied that
some of the most respectable courts in this country have recognised it as possible that a man may be driven against his own
will to the commission of an act, which he knows to be wrong,
by an insane, irrepressible impulse within him, overriding his
own will and conscience ; and those courts maintain that, as
under such circumstances the will to do wrong (which is the
very essence of criminality) is wanting, he ought not to be
held criminally responsible. They therefore hold that the test
of the knowledge of right or wrong ought to be qualified by
the further condition whether the person had the power to
choose between doing or not doing the act. The question is a
dangerous one alike for courts and juries to handle, and I do
not intend to express an opinion upon it further than the facts
of the case require. Those facts seem to relieve me from the
necessity and responsibility of discussing it generally. If we
strike out of this case all the declarations and testimony of
the defendant himself, we have no light whatever on this
subject. There are circumstances, such as his actions and. conduct, which his counsel may argue of themselves indicated
some aberration, and are corroborative of and explained by his
testimony. But of themselves they would have afforded no
indication of the particular motive or special form of delusion
that actuated him. Of this we have no indications except in
the declarations, oral and written, of the defendant himself.

But he has never claimed that he was irresistibly impelled to
do an act which he knew to be wrong. On the contrary, he
always claimed that it was right. He justified it at the time,
and afterwards in his papers, as a political necessity and an act
of patriotism ; and whether he claimed inspiration early or
late, he has claimed that the act was inspired, and therefore
right. He has used the words 'pressure' and 'inspiration'
interchangeably, as it were, to express the idea. This has no
meaning, unless it be that he was under an insane delusion
that the Deity had inspired and commanded the act. He has
certainly not separated the idea of pressure and impulse from
the conviction of inspiration and right of duty.
"The Prisoner:. My speech will throw a light upon that
very point.

" NO EVIDENCE OF INSANITY.

" Judge Cox : The defendant has asserted no form of insanity which does not involve the conviction that the act was
right, and I feel sure that I am not transcending the privilege
of the court when I say that there is no evidence in the case
outside of his own declaration tending to prove irresistible
impulse as a thing by itself and separate from this alleged
delusion. Therefore, the case does not seem to me to present
or call for any ruling on the hypothesis of an irresistible
impulse to do what the accused knew to be wrong and what
was against his will. Whether there is such a thing as
irresistible, insane impulse to commit crime, and whether it has
existed in any particular case, are questions of fact and not of
law. In this case I think there is no testimony showing that it
can exist by itself as an independent form of insanity, but
rather the contrary. There is, however, testimony tending to
show that such impulses result from and are associated with
insane delusions, and especially with such an insane delusion
as that the party has received a command from the Deity to do
an act. But if such an insane delusion exists, so as to destroy
the perceptions of right and wrong as to the act (which is sub58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECT OF THE GUITEAU CASE.
stantially the defendant's claim), this, of itself, is irresponsible
insanity, and there is no need to consider the subject of impulses resulting from the delusion. On the other hand, if there
wera no insanity, but a mere fanatical opinion or belief, the
only impulse that could have actuated the defendant must have
been a sane one?such a one as, in the most favourable view of
it, a mistaken sense of duty?which impulse the law requires
him to resist and control. In connection with the medical
testimony tending to show that these impulses are always or
generally associated with some insane delusion, if there are
facts tending directly to show the existence or absence of an
irresistible impulse, they may perhaps furnish some evidence of
the existence or absence of insane delusion. But I think, in
view of the undisputed features of this case, it would only confuse and perhaps mislead the jury to give them any instruction
directly upon the subject of irresistible impulse, and that this
particular case does not call for any qualification for the general
rule adopted, as I have mentioned as the test of responsibility.
" The twelfth instruction is drawn with reference to section
5,342 of the Revised Statutes. I do not understand that
statute to create any new species of manslaughter. It uses the
common law definitions of both murder and manslaughter
and (perhaps in view of the doubts I have already spoken
of) applies them to two cases where the mortal wound was
inflicted in one jurisdiction and the death occurred in
another. The terms ' malice' and e maliciously' used in the
statute would have no meaning except by reference to the
common law. We know that the term ' malice' in the definition of murder does not require that proof shall be given of any
special hatred or ill-will to the deceased, but that the deliberate
intent to kill, from whatever motive, constitutes all the malice
that the law requires.to be shown, and that the term f without
malice' in the definition of manslaughter means simply without
premeditated intent?as where the killing occurs in the heat of
passion or sudden quarrel. All this I will explain to the jury
when it becomes necessary to charge them. But the instruction?in its use of the phrase, ' without malice in fact'?
might convey the idea to the jury that if the killing was done
from the motives declared by the prisoner, and if he had, as he
says, no personal ill-will toward the President, it was not
murder. It is objectionable on this ground ; and every object
that could be properly sought under this head will be attained
by the explanations which I have indicated to be made to the
jury. It becomes important, in the first place, to settle the
rules of evidence by which the jury is to be guided in weighing
the proofs.

" THE BURDEN OF PROOF.

" In reference to the question on whom rests the burden of
proof, where insanity is relied on as a defence, three different
and conflicting views have been held by three different courts.
According to one view, it is incumbent on the accused to
establish the fact of his insanity at the time of the commission
of the alleged crime by evidence so conclusive as to exclude all
reasonable doubt of it. But this view derives so little support
from authority that it may be passed over without comment, as
inadmissible. Another view is that the defence of insanity is
an affirmative one, which the party asserting it must establish
to the satisfaction of the jury by, at least, a preponderance of
evidence. That is to say, the evidence in favour of it need not
be so conclusive as to leave no room for reasonable doubt, but
it must have more weight with the jury than the evidence
against; so that they would feel justified in finding the fact as
they would find any fact in a civil suit in which all questions
of fact are decided according to the weight of the evidence.
" Still another view is that the sanity of the accused is just as
much a part of the case of the prosecution as the homicide
itself, and just as much an element in the crime of murder, the
only difference being that, as the law presumes every one to be
sane, it is not necessary for the Government to produce affirmative evidence of the sanity, but that if the jury have a reasonable
doubt of the sanity they are just as much bound to acquit as if
they entertained a reasonable doubt of the comfnission of the
homicide by the accused. After a careful examination of the
authorities?some of which are mere dicta and others not well
considered or even consistent statements of opinion?I am
satisfied that the best reasons and most weighty of them sustain
the views which I now proceed to state. I have examined all
the authorities with great care over and over again. The cases
that are referred to in support of the second rule are somewhat
more numerous than the others. Some of them, however, turn
on the statutory definition of the charge of murder. A great
many of the cases are mere dicta, and some of them involve
utter contradictions. Not one of them contains the least show
of argument. With us there is no statutory definition of
murder. We have the common law definition of murder as
occurring when a homicide is committed by a person of sound
memory, discretion, &c. The opinions which support the last
view are decidedly entitled to most confidence. They are
reasoned out from first principles, and their reasonings have
been unanswered, and are, in my judgment, unanswerable. In
the case of Stone, tried in this court a few years ago, the instructions were as follows :
" ? In a capital case the defence of insanity is required to
be made out by most clear and convincing proof. In this
case, the jury must judge of the evidence offered to sustain
the defence. And if, on consideration of all the evidence
in connection with the presumption that what a man does is
sanely done, the jury entertains a reasonable doubt as to
whether the prisoner committed the homicide charged, or as
to whether at the time of the commission he was in a sane
state of mind, they must acquit him.'

" I shall, however, adopt the suggestion which is found in
some of the later authorities?that is, not to instruct the jury
to acquit if they feel a reasonable doubt about any one fact in
the issue, but I shall instruct them as to the nature of the crime,
and as to all the elements composing it, including that of
responsibility. I shall instruct them as to the presumption of
innocence and sanity, and shall tell them finally that, on the
whole evidence and on the consideration of both those presumptions, if they have a reasonable doubt of the guilt of the
prisoner, the prisoner is entitled to an acquittal.

" The tenth and eleventh instructions asked for on the part of
the defence do not involve any serious question. The eleventh
instruction asks me to say that ' If the jury believe from the
evidence that the prosecution has wilfully suppressed evidence
of the mental condition of the prisoner during two weeks
following the shooting of President Garfield, which it was in
their power to have produced in the trial, the jury have a right
to take that fact into consideration as a presumption that such
evidence, if it had been produced, would have been unfavourable
to the prosecution.' Any instruction ought to be based on
some evidence in the case, and if I were to grant the instruction
in that form I would be assuming that there was some evidence
in the case tending to show a wilful suppression of evidence by
the prosecution. I cannot so assume. It is always, however,
open to either side to argue that evidence which might have
been produced, and which has not been produced, should be
regarded as injurious to the party refusing to produce it. But
I do not think the court ought to give a formal instruction in
the shape of either the tenth or eleventh prayer. I have already
given my views on the twelfth and remaining prayers.
"At the conclusion of Judge Cox's decision the prisoner
remarked : 6 I am satisfied with the law as laid down by your
Honour.' "

Emotional Insanity and Reasoning Mania.

A Psychological view of the mental state of Guiteau.
In the Gruiteau case on the one side, the evidence was supposed lo show a chronic condition of insanity before the crime;
and, on the other side, to show an exceptionally quick intelligence and decided powers of discrimination.
I think the evidence on both sides to have been correct,
and also think that very clearly Gruiteau has for years been the
subject of emotional insanity, taking an exalted form and
being characterised by exaltation regarding religion, pride,
vanity, and ambition. The intellect has been intact, while the
feelings and the moral sentiments have been affected by disease;
the emotional insanity finally taking on a destructive character,
as it not unfrequently does when the propensities, instincts, or
desires are involved ; homicidal mania or suicidal mania being
the form of insanity as the case may be. To convey a correct
idea of what I believe Chateau's morbid mental state to have
been, is, I fear, somewhat difficult. Unless at the last, Gruiteau
thought himself the agent of Grod to accomplish the " removal"
of the President, I believe him to be a man who, while he has
had no decided delusion, has been influenced by the most
exalted notions respecting himself; his every gesture, and expression, and conversation displaying his diseased self-love. He
has exhibited the monomanie vaniteuse, associated, however,
with great intelligence, and an extent of knowledge of which
many sane men in the court-room at his trial might be justly
proud. In the court-room he exhibited the excitement, susceptibility, and fury of a monomaniac, and it is somewhat surprising
that this fact seemed not to be recognised by the many able
alienists present. It is a classical fact that monomaniacs have
a general sense of well-being, and seize on the cheerful side of
everything; that they,are satisfied with themselves and are content with others ; that they are controlled by vanity and self-love,
and delight in their own vain-glorious convictions ; that they are
susceptible and irritable ; that their determinations are violent;
that they are inexhaustible in their loquacity; that they dislike opposition and restraint, and easily become angry and even
furious. Is not this a picture of Gruiteau on trial for his
life? He has exhibited a religious exaltation amounting to
theomania. This is a much rarer mental state than religious
melancholia or depression, but it is a state distinctly recognised
by alienists, and Gruiteau has clearly exhibited it, and it would
not be at all improbable for Guiteau yet, if he lives long enough.
to manifest the opposite extreme of religious melancholy or
depression. In the development of insanity generally, melancholy precedes mania, but these cases of which Gruiteau is an
example are exceptions to the rule. Guiteau has never, I think,
been very different from what he now is; he has never evinced
the slightest mental incoherence on any one point nor any
kind of hallucination. He appears, however, so thoroughly
unconscious of ever having done anything wrong, so completely
destitute of all sense of shame or remorse, and has proved himself so utterly incorrigible throughout life, that I can only
satisfy my doubts by pronouncing him insane. He has been
a scourge to his family from childhood, and on him little moral
influence can be exerted. He appears to be quite destitute of
the moral feelings and without human kindness. I believe that
there is a certain class of the insane, in whom we find the union
of intellectual ability with congenitally feeble moral powers, a
moral insensibility, and necessarily a proportionate irresponsibility. I do not understand how any alienist of experience can
have failed to recognise such cases, if he be a man of any discernment. I know of a case to-day, in which the intellectual
faculties are not only equal to, but far superior to the average,
and where there is, I believe, a perfect moral insensibility. I
believe the disease in Gruiteau's case to be a congenital deficiency,
the result probably of perverted nutrition of the textures of his
brain, occurring, perhaps, even during foetal life. I believe
that his brain has undergone pathological changes which have
induced defective moral power, and think that he would have
been regarded as insane rather than criminal, if his acts had not
made him decidedly amenable to the laws of his country. In
the former case, he would have been a life-long inmate of an
asylum, while now he is consigned to the gallows, society justly
protecting itself against him. Could it be proved that Gruiteau's
brain?the cerebral tissue?had received an injury by convulsions in infancy, or during childhood, we should have a very
plain case indeed of insanity as the ultimate effect of epilepsy,
but I am quite unaware of his early history in this respect.
While Gruiteau is quick, has an excellent memory, and can
acquire knowledge easily, and although in the abstract he undoubtedly knows the difference between right and wrong, as do
most of the insane, yet he has appeared utterly incapable of
following the former like other men. The form of insanity is
moral or emotional insanity proper, with partial exaltation or
exalted emotional condition. It is a reasoning mania, as the
intellect is intact. He has not been deprived of the use of his
reason, but his affections and disposition are perverted. The ego
is perverted, and the case is one of general moral obliquity
dependent upon cerebro-mental disease. In the last act of
Gruiteau's life drama, the ego may have been overborne by an
impulse, not sudden, but which perhaps the will had no longer
power to restrain, as the result of maniacal excitement.
Should Gruiteau live long enough, I should think the prognosis,
of his case very gloomy, and should expect to see him end in
mania or dementia.

Finally, I consider that, had the element of melancholy or
depression predominated in the mental state of Guiteau, rather
than that of exaltation, as it might readily have done, the
nation would then have been spared the profound grief with
which it has been stricken, and the last act in the drama of
Gruiteau's life would have been a suicide instead of a homicide.
