Mad Acctor
===========

TH'E JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.?.
No. 1.
see the players well bestow'd ? for they are the abstract, and
brief chronicles, of the time ; after your death you had better have a bad epitaph,
than their ill report while you live.?Hamlet.
Impersonation is, undoubtedly, the most interesting and perplexing of the supersensuous states, which either the metaphysician or the scientist has to deal. Imitation, whether on
the stage or in ordinary intercourse, is the reproduction, in
the person of the copyist, of expressions, tones, attitudes, and
peculiarities which may so far resemble the characteristics of
the original, as to suggest to the eye or memory of the observer
the features or acts thus physically portrayed ; or this acted
portrait may merge into mere mimicry, caricature, or buffoonery,
and leave no trace upon the imagination except that of merriment and grotesque farce. Representation, on the other hand,
is a more dignified and precise depicting of persons or the scenes
in which they mingle, and in so accurate an embodiment, both
of external deportment and moral qualities, so far as these are
indicated by external signs, or modes of action, that no doubt
can be left on the mind of the spectators as to the vrais
semblances, or rather the realisation of the attributes of whomsoever, may have been dramatised or represented. The hero
or the homicide, the shrinking girl or the virago, or the more
common-place manifestations of human nature which pass
before us, are seen, recognised, and inspire not merely a conception of likeness, but a conviction that these personages are
in your presence. Impersonation, again must be defined.as
PART I. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES. fl
4 MAD ACTORS.
that condition in which the actor sinks, loses or forgets, for
the season, his personal identity and assumes, or, as it may be
expressed, is converted into the ideal which he represents, and
thinks, feels, acts, in the manner in which the original would
have done, or has been known to have done. The double or
mental photograph is deprived of his own nature, and rises or
falls, as the case may be, into that of the creature of his
imagination and creation. Macready has brought out this
singular state into bold and appreciable relief by saying that
on such a night he played or attempted to play Macbeth, but
that on a subsequent night he succeeded because he was
Macbeth. When superficially analysed, this capacity to
identify an actor with passions or feelings seems to consist in
the exercise of that faculty which controls, conceals the
personal thoughts and tendencies, and substitutes for them the
manifestations of another character. The most marked feature
of such a power is an instinctive tendency to conceal our
thoughts and emotions, and to impress upon others thoughts and
emotions altogether distinct and inconsistent with what might
be expected to be present to the consciousness of the actor.
According to Sir Walter Scott, when Napoleon conceived
himself to be closely observed, he had the power of discharging from his countenance all expression, save that of a
vague and indefinite smile, and presenting to the curious investigator the fixed eyes and rigid features of a marble bust.
But there are more profound and what may be styled transitive state of this metempsychosis, which to a certain extent
and for brief periods of time abrogate or limit the functions of
will and of the regulations of thought and action, and which
approach very closely the confines of morbidity. It is recorded of the celebrated Mrs. Siddons, that after enacting certain
of her most difficult and impassioned characters, in which
she had so identified herself with the articulate history of the
part represented, that she could not disembarrass, or denude
herself of the look, the gait, the gesticulations, and, what is
more striking, of the sentiments and emotions which she had
simulated before her audience. This possession, this merging of
herself in the ideas which she had described, or rather, had
imparted, continued for hours, during which she walked to and
fro, casting off, portion by portion of the mental deception or
innocent perversion of her own nature, which she had worn as
she did the articles from her wardrobe. It is not affirmed that
she ceased to be in her own knowledge and conviction Mrs*
Siddons, or that she failed to recognise her surroundings, or to
recollect the events preceding and about to follow existing
circumstances; but it is asserted that she had so entered into,
MAD ACTOflS d
and had become one with an ideal personage, that she could not
cast off the sentiments, the bearing and the moral portraiture
which she had assumed, nor regain her original self and return
to the more commonplace doings and duties imposed upon her.
Another illustration of this condition has come to our notice.
Mr. W. Murray, formerly the manager of the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh, was a man of exquisite comic and simulative or secretive
power. One evening, immediately after the performance, he
was suddenly seized with indisposition, and uttered words which
were regarded as incoherent. His medical adviser, who narrated
the incident, arrived to find the whole dramatic corps in a state
of wild agitation and alarm. Volatile salts had been freely
scattered around, feathers had been burnt; but the terrified
patient was still fixed in a chair close to the footlights, gazing
in fear and perplexity on the darkened cavern of the pit, and
the weird and shabby scenes and wardrobes, now deprived of
all the make-shifts that render them attractive. He saw his
physician without, recognising his well-known features and
continued to shout or sigh, or whisper, " I can't get out ! I
can't get out." He had been playing the part of Midas,
and was apparelled in the tight-fitting leather dress and head
cowl, with the long nodding ears shaking at every semiconvulsive perturbed movement, which is always worn on such
occasions. His restlessness and cries continued for some time,
but, at length, the moral medicine of the gentle persuasive
voice of the doctor, had its desired influence, and serenity and
silence were established, but there remained, for a time, a perplexed and half-conscious condition, in which he knew that
something extraordinary had occurred, but in which memory
supplied solely the conviction that he was Midas, that he would
remain Midas, and that his thoughts, his future career and his
doom must be that of Midas. His terror originated in the
thraldom of this metamorphosis.* It is conceived that such of
our tragedians as have been most successful, and the conception
may be justifiably extended to all distinguished players, have
been those who buried their own personality in the attributes
of another, and that to exercise the paramount even tyrannical
influence of Isabella, Mrs. Haller, Lady Macbeth, over the
hearts, heads, eyes and perceptions of a miscellaneous crowd,
were all endowed with some degree or modification of this
* We possess no evidence that this worthy gentleman was ever affected with
any other nervous symptom than that of somnambulism.
Many anecdotes might be collected of instances where this duality or duplicity
of consciousness became permanent, and could not be dissolved, a new species
of hallucination having thus been created ; but, with the exception of an exampio
which shall be given on a subsequent page, implicit reliance cannot be reposed on
such narratives.
n 2
4 mad actors.
impersonating faculty. But this gift has not been confined
exclusively to those distinguished in histrionic art, who may be
fairly said to have been taught and trained in shrouding their
own lineaments under a mask of widely different aspect and
proportions. In a volume designated Mystifications " published about twenty years ago, and edited, it is believed, by Dr.
John Brown, there are presented eight or ten scenes, in which a
lady of high culture and lofty lineage completely outwitted
many of her most able, astute and imaginative countrymen,
several of whom had been warned, or rather threatened with
the hoax of which it was intended they should be the victim.
Among those subjected to this ordeal were Lord Jeffery, Sir
Walter Scott, &c. The temptress affected but one role. She
was always an old lady scrupulously attired in the dress of sixty
years ago, always a Jacobite, and always armed with subjects
and stories and mirthful anecdotes suited to the taste of her
auditor, and calculated to blind and mystify his perceptions.
It is worthy of note that while completely withdrawing her
individual characteristics from observation, and while leading
astray those whom she addressed into what appeared real but
were fabulous circumstances, and while able to change or
disguise her features so as to resemble anyone but herself, thus
obliterating her individual expression, there sometimes passed
over the mind of the listener or spectator that both Mrs. Ogle
of Balbogle, the oddity represented, and her original representative were both in the room. Should a more extensive view be
taken of the education, manners and history of those public
servants who afford such exquisite pleasure, and sometimes such
solemn and valuable lessons to the public, important data may
be obtained concerning the morbific proclivities which they
inevitably imbibe. Several of our eminent heroes of the buskin
have left military or naval or legal ranks in order to seek for
fame and fortune in the dramatic corps. But the great proportion of performers have first seen the light and their earliest
impressions in a booth or caravan or some half-ruined building
purlieus of a town. They emerge from a nursery where impecuniosity mingled with bare or squalid properties, where
there was a frequent hurried and moonlight change of residence,
where every event imparted a degree of precariousness and
adventure to the family history. The children of the troupe
could not avoid being imitators from their swaddling clothes.
They must have strutted their brief hour on the stage as soon
as they could totter, and they must have breathed the same
moral air as their relatives and tutors. Even in a higher walk
of the profession where many of the appliances of comfort and
een luxury surround childhood or youth, there must hive
MAD ACTORS. 0
been the same unintentional but powerful communication of the
opinions, hopes, fears, pleasures and objects of those around.
Even when pecuniary considerations are constantl}' obtruding,
the great aim of such a society must be public distinction; its
members crave, solicit, pant for praise and plaudits ; their days
are occupied in the unhealthy preparation for the evening display ; in committing to memory thousands of lines of writers
but imperfectly understood; in the iteration of,the same phrases,
sometimes for a hundred nights in succession ; in acquiring
certain attitudes, expressions of face or figure, and in removing
as many of the traces of their own aspect and individuality as
possible, in order to secure the wonder or admiration of those
whom they desire to impress. When the actor has attained a
prominent place amongst his fellows, he does not escape from
these contagious influences; his habits both of thought and action
are comparatively artifical; he inhales a sort of intoxicating gas
and moves through the work-a-day world with fewer ties and
connections, than with the realm of fancy or the romantic; at all
events, unreal existence. It would be absurd to suppose that
persons so constituted generally pass into the condition which
has been described as presented in Mrs. Siddons; but it may be
confidently stated that the player rarely ceases to be the
player, that he cannot entirely dispel the strut, the stare, the
speech and many of the peculiarities which he has laboured to
incorporate with his own nature, and of the predominance of
which he may be entirely ignorant. It is however gratifying
to know that, notwithstanding the unhealthy education to
which this class of men has been subjected, and notwithstanding the pernicious effects which unavoidably flow from the
course pursued, while all, or the great majority, have acquired
elevated, extravagant, and non-natural dispositions and manners,
few have passed the border line of sanity, or have become the
victims of forms of nervous disorder, obviously originating in
their art and occupation.
Charles Macklin, 1690.
There was at one period a favourite theory held by psychologists, that the different species of alienation corresponded in
some measure, modified, doubtless, by personal idiosyncrasies,
education and habits, with the national genius and character of
the people of which the patient was a member. This view did
not refer primarily or chiefly to the endemic and hereditary
forms of arrested development met in mountainous countries
and dependent in part, at least, upon geological and other local
6 MAD ACTORS.
conditions, such as climate, food, and personal surroundings,
as much as upon the transmission of taint. As a corollary of
the doctrine, it was to be expected that while furious excitement
would be encountered in one region or country, melancholy and
depression would prevail in another, and that even the hallucinations distinguishing these different states would bear a
colouring and resemblance which might be traced in the
opinions, superstitions, and moral peculiarities existing in health.
Although certain of our fellow-labourers have hinted the suspicion that the jperfervidum ingenium scotorum may be
detected in the madman springing from the Gael, the Cymric
and the inhabitants of Northern France, an examination of
the cloistered patients in these countries does not bear out
very palpably this speculation. It should be confessed, however,
that nationality does impress a certain stamp upon mental
affections, and especially on delusions, which demand, and should
receive, special study and consideration, as intimately connected
with the etiology of mental disease.
We are about to trace the manifestations of a Celt, but
apprehend that his nature and the close of his career were of
too commonplace a kind to cast much light upon the obscure
matter which has been initiated. C. M. was not a distinguished
player, yet he succeeded in occupying a very prominent place
in the theatrical world during the latter half of the past
century.* His race has not furnished many eminent members
to the dramatic art. This may be an illustration of the
hypothesis alluded to above, that imagination is limited in its
abnormal as well as in its normal influences. A race, however,
represented almost contemporaneously by Macaulay, the son of
a Highland clergyman, as the most eloquent historian of our
time; by General MacMahon, whose ancestors were expatriated
after the battle of the Boyne, and who wielded the destinies of
France for years; by Sir Eoderick Murchison, who stood at the
head of modern geologists, and by Grant, the President of the
United States, cannot lack many of the qualities which contribute to the powers of an actor; nor are examples of brilliant
success by Celts in histrionic art wanting when we recollect
the names of Macready, the Campbells, and their descendants.
C.M., like other great men, must have had an obscure birth and
parentage, as he does not come distinctly into view until he is
acting as an errand boy in Trinity College. Yet he claimed to
be the descendant of kings, bearing the unmelodious name
of McLaughlin, asserted that he had been present at one of a
series of annual festivals given by the chief of the sept, during
* His professional life having extended to an extremely old age.
MAD ACTORS. I
which there were extended to him certain marks of favour and
distinction. A glimmer of fame is shed upon his extraction
by a tradition that during the siege of Londonderry, he had
three uncles within and three without the walls. According to
his own version his launch on the sea of public life was, that
his parents, small farmers, residing near the Bessborough family,
he was selected to play the part of Monimea in the tragedy of
" The Orphan." This incident, and his subsequent apprenticeship to a saddler, his subsequent difficulties on leaving this
appointment, are all compatible with his servitorship at
Trinity College. His failure on his debut in the tragedy of
" CEdipus " led to an insulting condemnation from the manager,
and his connection with a strolling company in Wales. It is
to M.'s credit that his misfortune was due to an appreciation of
the natural mode in which dialogue and declamation should be
enunciated on the stage, rather than in the stilted and bombastic
mouthing then resorted to. Success at a gaming table, and the
example of a companion, led him into extravagance and profligacy, but repentance, or at all events respectability, appeared to
have characterised his appearance in London, although that
appearance still took place in a booth, and in Southwark. But
success, and a friendship with Fielding, attended his representation in the comedy of "The Coffeehouse Politician." According
to certain authorities very considerable decorum prevailed, or
was enforced in the theatre of Co vent Garden, when M. joined
it. But although the dissipated classes were banished, or
absented themselves from behind the curtain, and from all other ?
parts of the house, and although order and tranquillity existed,
occasional disturbances must have taken place, as we find M.
engaged in a ludicrous duel in which he wounded his antagonist
in the eye, his only weapon being a broomstick, an offence for
which he was tried and found guilty of manslaughter. His
great intractability of disposition did not materially interfere
with the decencies of his domestic position, and at this period
he attained his highest reputation, and deservedly secured the
gratitude of the admirers of Shakespeare, by redeeming the part
of Shylock from the base and degraded caste in which, until
then, it had been performed. The reproduction of this
play, and of the distinction obtained by M. on the occasion,
are traced to two circumstances, the onf, the ruin of one
manager, and the usurpation of another, in consequence of
pecuniary difficulties and complications, and secondly to the
sneering criticism and the incredulity as to his powers freely
circulated by the friends of M. Connected with this incident
was the melancholy fact that his eccentricity ultimately, but
long after his triumph, merging into dementia, he had dressed for
8 ' MAD ACTORS.
his favourite character, but forgot altogether the play of which
it formed so conspicuous a feature. Following this decided victory
over prejudice and impecuniosity, a strong admiration and
intimacy associated him with Grarrick, then a rising, although
not a risen actor. This friendship involved various professional
transactions, but ended in a rupture, and his exclusion from
Drury Lane, without money or prudence, or prospects for the
future. During many years M. passed rapidly from one theatre to
another,from London to Dublin, from company to company, but
offending or quarrelling with almost every person, and certainly
every manager with whom he came into contact, by bis pretentious arrogance and infirmities of temper. His irascibility
and unreasonableness may be illustrated by his formidable and
final quarrel with his amiable daughter, who had retired from
the stage on a small competency of her own earning, and which
hinged upon the accentuation of the quotation of " Mercy is
mightiest in the mightiest," she uttering the final word with
the greatest emphasis, he giving the prominence to "in." For a
brief season he acquired a reputation for heroic morality, by
treating a nobleman, who had ventured to address improper
proposals to the father in reference to his daughter, with the
contempt and punishment which he deserved, hurling him
downstairs, with a threat of instant death, enforced by the
proximity of a knife to the throat. He starts a tavern, writes
successful farces, announces his retirement from the stage when
in the vigour of health, and with no intention of actually saying
farewell, and in every proceeding displaying defects of judgment
and peculiarities of disposition which greatly interfered with
his fame and fortune. After the failure of several pieces, he
produced " The True-born Irishman ; " the universally famous
" Man of the World," which were enthusiastically received, and
still retain a hold upon the stage. He accomplished another feat,
remarkable in several respects, by entering upon a totally new
cast of character, appearing with considerable success in Richard,
Othello, and Macbeth, in reforming the dress and properties of
the actors, especially in transforming the latter hero from a modern
military officer into a chief, wearing the garb of Old Gaul, and
in achieving this marvellous effort when he was eighty-five or
according to others ninety-five. But age, probably the death
of a daughter, and above all the original lack of balance in his
mind of self-control, and of a due estimate of his own powers,
brought about mental decay and decrepitude, chiefly betrayed
in the loss of memory and of the perception of the requirements
of his position. This amnesia was detected not merely by. his
friends, but was publicly proclaimed by his forgetting the play
of the evening, although he was dressed for the part of Shy lock,
MAD ACTORS. 9
and surrounded by the inmates of the Green-room similarly
prepared. When realising, but imperfectly recollecting, the
duties assigned him, the poor old man went upon the stage,
spoke portions of the dialogue, but evidently did not understand
or recall what he was saying. After some time he somewhat
recovered, but it was merely to say, " I can do no more," looked
helplessly around and retired for the last time. He never
attempted to act again, and his declining years were marked
by the indications of senile dementia, which, however, were
accompanied by occasional serenity and partial lucidity, by the
capacity to attend regularly in the theatre, and momentarily to
recognise the condescension of royalty when members of the
reigning familv extended some notice to his well-remembered
but fast-failing form. The data upon which any conclusion can
be legitimately founded are insufficient, but enough is known
to justify the belief that the symptoms of the malady did not
differ from what is daily observed in individuals without genius
or imagination, and without that interpenetration of exalted
and artificial sentiment to which the mind of this sufferer was
throughout life subjected. It might be argued that such a
career as has been traced was conservative rather than destructive ; that the extreme old age which Macklin readied,
without impairment, one hundred and seven (?), shows that
health, if not strength of intellect, is compatible with all the
difficulties and vicissitudes of an actor's life ; and with the
incessant strain upon certain of his powers, alike in preparing
and in exhibiting his exercise of memory and impersonation,
the mind would, in all probability, have tottered and fallen in
a centenarian, whatever his mode of life or training; had been.
FiiANgois Joseph Talma, 1763.
It is not, of course, proposed that these sketches should be
confined to the mental disturbances of actors who were natives
of Britain; but had this intention existed, Talma might have
been legitimately included in the melancholy catalogue.
Although born and educated in France, he was brought to
England at a very early age; he spoke its language with
facility and fluency, he admired its literature, he associated
with some of its most gifted sons, and he even essayed, and
with success, to represent certain of our most celebrated and
difficult histrionic creations, such as " Macbeth," " Hamlet."
But although his life-long opinions- and predilections must have
10 MAD ACTORS.
been greatly influenced and modified by his love and admiration
of our land, and language, and institutions, by his friendship
with John Kemble, and his intercourse with other distinguished
members of our community, he was actually educated at Chaillot
in France, pursued his more advanced studies in the College
Mazarin in Paris, making himself familiar with all that was
grand and beautiful in the dramatic literature of his native
country. It is probable that the prosecution of his studies of
the poets and tragedians was dictated and sustained by an
intention of devoting himself to the representation of the
characters which had secured his attention and admiration, and
of imparting to the world his analytic conceptions of the productions of the authors to whom he had for years devoted his
abilities and affections. His ambition was not to be immediately gratified, as it would appear that his debv.t in the
character of " Seide," in the tragedy of " Mahomet," was an
unmitigated failure, pronounced by a council of friends, whom
he consulted, to be destitute of genuine tragic power and imagination, and was followed by a constrained adoption of his
father's profession, and doubtless, by a sweet and stolen indulgence in his former and favourite pursuits and reading. So
vast had then, and subsequently been, the range and grasp of
Talma's conception of the drama that it is recorded he prepared
and introduced upon the stage twenty-one new characters, surrounding each with a nimbus of glory, imparted alike by his
own imagination and the reciprocal admiration of his school.
As many of these parts were founded, and had been prepared,
from Roman sources, it is probable that the events and allusions
occurring in the development may have appealed to the temper
and tone of the French mind, which had scarcely recovered
from the fever of revolutionary excitement, and that applause
may, perhaps, have been showered upon the politics, as well as
the poetry of the piece. His power over the audience which he
fascinated was so paramount that, in opposition to the prejudices, or shall we dignify the tendency with the name of taste,
he spoke the dry, hard, and stiff verse of tragedy as if it had been
prose. He is not to be blamed, we think, for this innovation ;
but, at all events, he may be commended for his daring and
influence. It is interesting that, living during a cycle of transition, and when neither the constitution nor opinions, nor
manners of the community had recovered from the tumultuous
changes of revolution, and were still haunted by that " fear of
change perplexing nations," his talents, tact, and reputation
secured the attention, the patronage, even the friendship, successively of two monarchs differing as widely in their habits,
principles, and objects as Bonaparte and Louis XVIII. Yet
MAD ACTORS. 11
this fascinating mimic had been drawn into the hideous vortex
of the French Revolution ; but although a Jacobin, it does not
appear that he participated in the excesses of the faction, nor
drank the blood, nor imbued his hands in the execution of its
victims.
We possess no account of the physical tendencies of this great
actor, nor whether he was predisposed by descent, or in his own
person, or by peculiar habits to disease, and especially to nervous maladies; but we can readily understand that he was
intensely susceptible to the impressions received in his ordinary
career, and especially to the paralysing and perilous convulsions by which he was environed. Talma is said to have been
subject to strabismus, but whether this affection was congenital
or the sequel of some cerebral affection, or whether it may have
disturbed and perverted his powers of vision, we have no means
of knowing, but that the murders and massacres, the breakingup of society, and, it may have been, his personal danger, must
have shaken his frame to the very centre, may be predicated.
It is certain that, at the commencement of the revolution, of
which he was nothing more, we are entitled to conjecture, than
an affrighted spectator, he became the victim of a nervous disorder. That this was complicated by hallucinations is proved
by the grave and appalling features of his condition. When
partially recovered, he began again to act, but whenever he trod
the stage and gazed down upon the assembled crowds who hung
upon his declamation, he saw not the upturned faces of his
admirers nor any proof that they were human beings at all.
There grinned and gibbered before him, or sat mute and
motionless, a crowd of skeletons which he was able, notwithstanding the awe, the superstition, possibly the terror which
such a spectacle must have induced, to see distinctly, to recognise, and to recoil from. Yet such were his powers of self-command and self-possession that he proceeded with his part,
betraying no emotion, and conducting himself as if unconscious
of the supernatural assemblage before which his energies and
abilities were displayed.
Another famous French actor, even while delighting Parisian
citizens by his unvarying hilarity, his infectious mirthfulness,
his witty extravagance, and convulsing all who came within the
sphere of his fun and folly with laughter, was plunged in profound melancholy. He sought out a physician, skilled in such
affections, and received as a prescription which would inevitably
dispel his depression and effect his cure, that he should frequent
the theatre where Carlin acted ; in other words, that he should
?see himself, and derive cheerfulness from his own nightly exhibition.
12 MAD ACTORS.
Monrose.
Among the deteriorating influences to which actors are subjected in the training and exercise of their profession, and which
restrict them to a narrow, infected, or intoxicating region, the
burden imposed upon memory does not appear to play an important part. That the constant commitment and repetition of the
language and thoughts of others must interfere with and limit the
creation and origination of new suggestions of fancy and imagination, cannot be doubted. But beyond the substitution of artificial
for natural modes of reasoning or sentiment, no injury seems to
be inflicted upon mentalisation. We have before us the history
of a clergyman of the Established Church of Scotland, who
secured the reputation of an eloquent, powerful, and popular
preacher. During somewhat more than an hour he was accustomed to pour forth from the pulpit a continuous stream of
what was accepted as sound reasoning, of solemn and impressive warnings, admonitions of encouragements and grounds of
hope, sometimes in complicated phraseology, but more generally
in clear, cogent or persuasive sentences delivered without effort,
and as if spontaneously arising from his heart at the moment.
This gentleman was necessitated to prepare two sermons in
each week of the length and duration specified, and this task
consisted in his case in writing out, carefully correcting, and
then committing to memory every word of his elaborated composition. He did not write with facility, though with felicity,
and the effort to accomplish his self-elected work required four
days in each week, and he confessed that he had heard the bells
of the parish church often summon to worship before he had completed his weekly toil. On each recurring Monday he consulted
his medical adviser, complaining of indisposition, of great prostration, muscular pain, loss of appetite, inability to engage in
reflection; conditions which appear to have demanded relaxation. But actors undergo much more severe discipline than
has been described. It has been affirmed that certain of the
hard-working members of the dramatic corps have been able to
acquire and retain many thousand lines in a day; but although
this may be rejected as apocryphal, we have ascertained that one
distinguished individual of this body has committed eight
hundred lines in a portion of a day, and delivered them in the
evening. Such may be Titanic triumphs of memory, but when it
is known that new parts may require to be studied, and the
dialogue faithfully impressed upon the recollection every day in
the season, the strain upon,the nervous system appears to be
excessive, and all the aids and accessories of rehearsals, prompters,
MAD ACTORS. 13
and so forth, can readily be conceived as essential to the successful rendering of any character whatever. It is wonderful
that such a course pursued for years, during a long lifetime
indeed, is so little destructive of health and mental integrity.
The act of impersonation, of the surrender of self, of temporarily
excluding the idea of personal identity from consciousness, and
of substituting passions, conceptions, and words, foreign and
even repulsive to our nature, involves a more severe test and
trial on the capacity, self-negation, and acting of the similator.
There were presented on a previous page, several illustrations
of the striking but transitory effects of this power of absorbing
individuality in the representation of intense emotion or ideal
personages, by susceptible and highly-wrought feelings, where
the actor found it impossible to cast off the imaginary moral
attributes which have been assumed. But there is a more painful, because permanent result, of which the fate of Monrose is
an example. This person was at one time an ornament of
the French stage, but bending under the oppression of longcontinued exertion and excitement, his brilliant powers were
obscured by disease from which he never recovered. Defective
as to our information concerning the precise features and progress of his affliction, it is evident from the superintendence of
his medical attendant, during his last appearance on the stage,
that the symptoms involved doubt, if not danger, as to his conduct. But the prominent and peculiar morbid manifestation
was not merely the loss of his personality, but the engrafting of
his favourite character upon his ordinary condition. This
metempsychosis may be observed, although in somewhat modified aspect, in various other affections of the nervous system;
in somnambulism, for instance, in the different forms of trance,
vaguely delineated by Dr. Beard in his* pamphlets published in
New York in the current year; and even during hysterical agitation, mild or premonitory stages of cerebral irritation, and of
fever, there occur self-deception or mystification as to who or
what the sufferer may be, but these are passing perturbations
and momentary phases of physical unhealth, and cannot be
associated with the phenomena under examination. There are,
moreover, in every establishment for lunatics, a department
which might be designated the Hall of Kings or Magnates;
but although the personages thus assembled may have deluded
themselves into the belief, which they loudly proclaim and offer
battle to defend, that they are Louis XIV. or the Admirable
Crichton, they never lose the perception of their original
identity, nor of their real origin, designation, and position, nor
of the humble and harsh surroundings which contradict their
assumption. But the distracted French player not merely con14 MAD ACTORS.
ceived himself to be Figaro, in which part he had attained
distinction, forgot his own name, answered to that of Figaro,
had his gloom dispelled by quotations from " II Barbiere di
Seviglia," and was, in truth, at all times and in all circumstances the Figaro which he had originally only pretended to
be, and by the repeated realisation and enactment of which
part his mental equilibrium and discernment had been destroyed,
and an abnegation of his previous existence and relations interwoven with his thread of life. It has been narrated that lie
was liberated for a single night from the durance to which he
had been consigned, in order to participate in his own benefit,
when his vigilant physician, the audience, and players were
alarmed and excited, but his memory and bearing were perfect, until he was required to utter the words " il est fou," when
the poor demented aged man, as if suddenly struck by the
accidental allusion to his own misfortune, betrayed intense
sorrow and retired never to return again. The celebrated
tragedienne, Rachel, who witnessed the performance, is said to
have been deeply affected by this close of a long and eminent
career. Whether this psychical transmutation was the result
of intense and protracted admiration of the part of Figaro, or
of the incessant iteration and repetition of the words, deportment, assigned to the character, or of the applause which the
representation had elicited, or whether pre-existing disease had
merely received a colouring and contour from the play, it would
be bootless to inquire; as whatever hypothesis as to causation
may be adopted, the delusion was in itself a specific manifestation of mental perversion, deriving its signal aspect from the
circumstances under which aberration occurred. It might have
been instructive to have followed this bewildered patient into
his seclusion, in order to have determined whether the scope
and sincerity of his convictions continued until the close of life
or not. A vulgar belief exists that under the pressure of
chronic disease of a feeble and slackening pulse of all the preludes of dissolution, there is a lightening before death, a brief
glimpse of rational thought and feeling, and the observation of
men of science have not altogether gainsaid this cheering supposition.
There has been related of the famous Mrs. Glover, who was
the daughter of Betterton, that while her infant feet trod the
stage, her earliest recollections must have arisen in a theatre,
and almost her last hour of consciousness was on the stage.
We have watched the disease and decaying powers of a gentle,
but utterly confused and incoherent maniac, whilst waning and
wasting under tubercular disease, but whose absurdities and
extravagance gradually disappeared until within a short period
MAD ACTORS. 15
of her death, she became perfectly tranquil, natural, lucid, so
that, had the question arisen as to her being of sound mind, it
must have been answered in the affirmative. But in cases
where positive derangement cannot be predicated, there may
arise states of error and weakness, and waywardness which may
cease previous to or contemporaneous with the cessation of the
vital functions, but which leave traces of tendencies, and
opinions, and emotions utterly inconsistent with the original
character, and incompatible with the habits and customs of the
surrounding society. These posthumous deviations from the
health and habits of a known individual, are chiefly disclosed in
eccentric or unnatural testaments and bequests; which often,
however, betray long-clierished antipathies or preferences as
well as a complete transformation from what has been gauged
and guaranteed as the real and established convictions and
opinions of the testator. A well-known melo-dramatic notoriety
became excited by the Volunteer Fever, which pervaded this
country when an invasion from France, under Napoleon, was
apprehended as imminent. His enthusiasm was supreme, and
survived his decay, for, craving to demonstrate that "even
in his ashes, lived his wonted fires," he enjoined that his
accoutrements should be interred with his body, and his regimentals, musket, &c., were, in compliance with his farewell
words, buried with him. Nay, as if to perpetuate his devotion,
and proclaim it to other generations outre le tombeau, his
martial gear and arms, even to his chajpeau bras, are carved in
stone, and form his principal monument.
Charles Matiiews, 1776.
The principle of the unifaction of thought has been generally
admitted by metaphysicians.
We cannot think qn two subjects at the same time; we
cannot carry on two different trains of ideas simultaneously;
we cannot concentrate consciousness on an emotion and a
process of reasoning at once. These processes must be embraced
consecutively, and with a clear perception that they are different,
divergent, and altogether alien to each other. But yet there
are many illustrations, which to the philosophical, as well as to
the popular conception, appear to demonstrate that there is no
succession either in physical action or in time; such are the
capacity of Napoleon, and as conspicuously of Canning, to dictate to many amanuenses nearly at the same time, and upon
matters totally unconnected, even heterogeneous; and of the
16 MAD ACTORS.
power possessed by Landseer of drawing at the same moment
dissimilar objects upon separate sheets of paper with both
hands. It may be difficult to detect the distinct and independent operation of the mind in such cases as have now been
cited, but our embarrassment is created by the rapidity with
which the different acts, or events, the successive utterance of
sentences, or the individual contraction of the muscles of the
hand and forearm, by means of which this apparent identity of
volition is effected. In this paper several approximations to
the consentaneous and contemporaneous action of mind have
been related; where, at least, simulated passion or merriment
has shone through the gloom of depression and absolute disease.
We are about to present another instance where a most
wonderful power of affecting humour and burlesque, and propagating them to others, was exercised under the pressure of
melancholia.
The father of Charles Mathews was a Wesleyan bookseller,
and, in all probability, shared in the hatred to theatrical
amusements which Puritans of every age have conscientiously
cherished. His ultimate choice of a profession and life destination are at least traced to his domestic seclusion and training;
although it be more legitimate to conclude that his early friendship with Elliston, and the descriptions and suggestions of that
eminent actor, then a boy in Merchant Taylors' School, may
have led to his choice. His taste was, however, stimulated and
fostered by a clandestine visit to Drury Lane, and by a participation in some improvised private theatricals, all under the
auspices and guidance of his tempter Elliston. His debut took
place in the character of Richmond, when he was only eighteen ;
after this event, which was, of course, a flagrant violation of
paternal injunctions, and an insult to the religious principles in
which he had been educated, his father offered no further opposition to the rash step thus precipitated, or to the subsequent
course of conduct involved, but sent the headstrong youth
twenty guineas, and apparently left him to his own devices.
The adventurer's career led him to appear on various stages,
but his success does not appear to have been decided or distinguished. He was married when twenty-one, but lost his wife,
and subsequently became the husband of Miss Jackson, an
actress ; and the union seems to have been most propitious and
prosperous, as we are told that they fulfilled a brilliant engagement in comedy and farce at the Haymarket. The retirement
of his wife from the stage may have suggested to him the composition and execution of his far-famed Monologue, by which he
was better known, and obtained a broader and deeper hold upon
the public taste and mirthful tendencies than by his more
MAD ACTORS, 17
strictly professional appearances. These were, however, so
marked by ability and comic personation, as to have secured
for him, not merely a well-merited reputation, but as having
obviously prepared the frequenters of the theatre for the
supreme manifestation of his talent. That we may not be
suspected of extravagance or predilection in portraying the
nature and effects of the creations of Mathews' fancy and imitative powers, to which we have been indebted for many a
hilarious, and, it must be confessed, many a happy hour, we
shall quote the words of a biographer who must have participated in our enjoyment. It should be premised that the
fascinations of M's. " At Home " depended exclusively upon
his own powers, that the representation was not assisted by any
of the adjuncts or appliances of stage decoration and deception, the actor latterly sitting, solitary, behind a table covered
with green cloth. " This piece offered peculiar advantages for
the display of his talents, and continued for many years.to
attract crowds. An excellent mimic, full of vivacity, abounding
in anecdote and in humorous descriptions, he exhibited in
appropriate costume characteristic adventures of men of every
variety. His spirit of fun, his gentlemanly manners, and his
clever comic singing, gave an inimitable charm to these performances." His acting was proteiform. This eminent farceur,
with the aid of very few simple contrivances and appliances,
apart from his flexibility of feature, his attitude, his voice infinitely varied in its tones, natural or artificial, often ventriloquial, would nightly, in a brief space of an hour or two, create or
cause to pass before his audience multitudes of faces, figures,
acted dialogues, distinct, individualised, characteristic. Some
of these representations were mere portraits of persons met in
coaches, steamboats, in the ordinary walks of life, wherever men
and women " most do congregate," and owed the interest produced to what they said or did ; but many, the great majority,
were grotesque, absurd, laughter-provoking caricatures. The
attractions, the genius, developed in these entertainments may
be conceived, as they were repeated for hundreds of nights, and
w^re carried to and from America, where they secured the same
eclat and good fortune. Wherever these outpourings of an
exuberant fancy were presented by the solitary performer, they
suggested the impromptu addressed by Walter Scott to Monsieur
Alexandre, the ventriloquist actor :
Of yore, in old England, it was not thought good
To carry two visages under one hood;
What should folks say to you, who have faces such plenty,
That from under one hood you last night show'd us twenty?
Stand forth, arch deceiver! and tell us, in truth,
Are you handsome or ugly ? in ng<3, or in youth ?
PART I. VOL. VIII. NEW SERIES. C
18 MAD ACTORS.
Man, woman, or child ? or a dog, or a mouse ?
Or are you, at once, each lire thing in a house ?
Above all, are you one individual ? I know
You must be, at the least, Alexandre and Co.
But I think you're a troop?an assemblage?a mob?
And that I, as the Sheriff, must take up the job,
And, instead of rehearsing your wonders in verse,
Must read you the Riot Act, and bid you disperse.
Yet this arch contributor to general gaiety and mirthfulness, although he seemed to share in the fun and cheerfulness
which he elicited, was himself a depressed, and, perhaps, a
despairing melancholic, liable, at least, to alternate fits of elation and dejection, and so dreaded the trials and temptations of
his own disposition, that he ordered razors to be removed from
his sight, that suicide might not be suggested. But grouped,
this central and cardinal mental perversion, there were a vast
number of odd and eccentric states and peculiarities, sometimes
painful and humiliating, calling for our sympathy; sometimes
bordering upon his comic vein and provoking a smile. Thus,
when excite'd and joyous in a room with a sunny aspect, but if
necessitated to pass into a badly-lighted apaitment he would
ensconce himself in a corner, and would remain morose and
moody for the day; again, he was annoyed and unhinged for
the day when the sunlight was excluded by window curtains.
Either from conceit or vanity, he was apt to suspect and suffer
from remarks which were not directed against him, and had no
connection with him. The same susceptibility was roused
by trivial circumstances, and he was worried by the housemaid picking up a pair of dirty stockings which he had left on
the floor, as a guide to his recollection of some other circumstance. His equanimity was disturbed by seeing a picture
hung awry on the wall. He was discomposed by the lack of
harmony in the colours of ladies' dresses, by the refusal of
mustard by those around when roast beef was served, by the
breach of some of the most insignificant usages of society, and
carried snuffers in his pocket, that he might top the candles
even in the houses of his friends, so great was his antipathy
and intolerance to untrimmed lights.
It is possible that some of these oddities might have originated in early habits, but, taken as a whole, such deviations
from natural and healthy conduct cannot be interpreted otherwise than as offshoots from mental infirmity.
Mathews became for a season the lessee of a London theatre,
but lie will live longer in the remembrance of his admirers, as
having struck out a new feature in histrionic art, than from his
achievements in the legitimate drama.
His great and versatile talents descended to his son, without
any trace of his eccentricities.
MAD ACTORS. 19
Cohalie Walton, 1830.
Every member of the corps clramatique, whether he may
emerge from a booth or barn, in a village fair or market, or
have been familiar with the mirrored, curtained, carpeted,
luxurious green room provided Mad. Vestris in Covent Garden,
passes his life and acquires and practises his profession in a
non-natural and artificial condition. He has rarely enjoyed the
privilege and advantage of regular training or initiation in a
regular and sedate occupation. His education is carried on
and completed on the stage by rehearsals and public representations, accompanied by private study. His reading is confined
to the authors, whose words he must commit to memory,
whose sentiments he must realise in his mind, in his heart,
and bearing. His associations are unreal; his companions
generally of the same excitable or imaginative type as himself;
the rewards of his exertions or success are the applause and
approbation of his simulated passions, patriotism, or merriment;
and his position in society, although not degraded and branded
as it once was, is still uncertain, undignified, and keeps him on
the outside of those ranks and grades upon whose patronage
and pleasure he depends. He sees and knows the world through
the footlights. His intercourse with his fellow-men is chiefly when
they cheer his assumed greatness, wit, or extravagance, or when
they denounce and hiss his feebleness or failure. He generally
breathes an atmosphere of intoxicating gas, forms a judgment
of the world and its ways from the authors, who furnish him
with thoughts and opinions as well as with bread, and is very
apt to conceive that happiness and the realisation of ambition
is prefigured and shadowed forth in the theatre when brilliantly
lighted up, and in the feelings which attend his own brief hour
upon the stage. He not only acquires the strut, the swagger,
which conventionally have been identified with the heroes of the
buskin, but the stilted phraseology and modes of thinking
which characterise his range of study. This state of the mental
constitution may not amount positively to unhealth, but it
creates an utterly fictitious conception of the institutions of
society, and of the every-day life by which we are surrounded.
An eminent and popular actor, who had passed his whole
life upon the boards, and who hereditarily seemed to be designed
or prepared for the destiny which he invited, has said:?
" The result of my experience is that the stage is the last
occupation a young man of spirit and ambition should think
of following, for this one reason, if for no other?that it seems
to cut him off from the business of life, and from the great
c 2
20 MAD ACTORS.
movements and practical working of the world?the objects of
a worthy and legitimate ambition.
" If employed, hard work and small pay. As he advances
into the position of a regular actor, the amount of study to be
' up in' at short notice, is brain-splitting; in some cases overstudy has produced brain fever. Therefore, let no rash youth,
' with a soul above buttons,' adopt the stage as a means of
elegant idleness; if he do, he will be woefully mistaken, when
he finds that, after a hard week's work, even Sunday is not
always a day of rest." *
These men, thus moulded, do not actually speak in blank
verse, nor act the part of patrons, or potentates, or merryandrews, in their intercourse with others, but many of them
see or seek for romance and the creations of fancy in the
practical and prosaic relations of life; the suspicion that this
tendency may influence their cogitations and be transfused
into their compositions as well as into their conversations, has
led us to receive with some doubt and caution a narrative of
the life and death of the person whose name is placed at the
head of this article. Yet this memoir, which may be accepted
as partly histrionic and partly historic, has been published on
the authority of a distinguished and otherwise trustworthy writer,
who was himself, in a certain sense, the hero of the tragedy.
The heroine, Coralie Walton, is described as possessed of great
beauty and elegance, of unimpeachable moral deportment, but
of a reserved, reticent, and dignified manner ; and in dress and
ornament presenting the perfect personification of the modesty
and harmony of a well-bred woman. She is first seen at a
rehearsal, where she displays a perfect knowledge of her part
and the regular business of the stage, and from which she retires
immediately after performing her part, without miDgling in
the familiarities and flirtations which, occasionally, innocently
enough, take place on such occasions. Coralie Walton is represented by the manager of the dramatic company of which she
is a member, after a year's experience, as a most correct,
modest, and obliging character; as having been admitted,
without introduction, and upon her own personal application,
as a subordinate ; but as having won his favour, and that of the
public, so steadily, but triumphantly, that she had been promoted to the position of his leading actress. Satisfactory in
her conduct as well as in the performance of her professional
duties, he neither knew nor could discover her history, or even
any of her antecedents, which, without any affectation of concealment, she seemed to confine to inexorable secresy and
mystery.
* Recollections of the Stage, by G. Vandenhoff.
MAD ACTORS.
21
Her obliging disposition seems to have tempted her employer to impose extra and extreme duties, which revealed, in
technical language, how " quick she was in study ; " how voluntarily she devoted her nights in order " to get up in a new part,
and the cheerfulness and fidelity which accompanied all these
exertions ; qualities which emboldened her superior to allude
to her former experience and to her home, an experiment
which provoked a passionate demand that he should never
allude to her home again. The obvious conclusion was that
she had some reason and object in shrouding her previous
career, whether theatrical or in the busy walks of commonplace work, in obscurity; and it is highly probable that this
constant effort to elude discovery may have had an important
and deteriorating influence upon her mental and physical constitution, for there is truth in the psychological conclusion that
the effort to limit our thoughts and feelings to our own
thoughts and consciences, to dwell subjectively upon a hoarded
grief, or shame, or sorrow, is injurious to health, and in the
poetical confession:
I have a secret sorrow here,
A grief I'll ne'er impart,
It heaves no sigh, it sheds no tear,
But it consumes my heart.
She is depicted as Virginia, " the perfection of girlish beauty,
the type of classic grace, the ideal of feminine softness, all
tinged and shaded by a pervading sadness," as displaying a
perfect acquaintance with the lines of the poet, as entering
into the tragic character of her part, but as betraying tremor
and agitation whenever either approaches or allusions^ to love
scenes occurred. Insensibility follows the more exciting passages, and it is observed that the repeated application of a
handkerchief to her lips is to staunch the appearance of blood.
In Desdemona, she is equally successful, but is equally abhorrent
of all the tenderer and impassioned incidents, and in this
instance recoils from the writer of the recital, who acted
Othello, but is so calm, and cold, and still, that in the death
swoon he is paralysed by the apprehension that she is actually
dead; and he tests his fear during the action of the scene by
placing his hand upon her heart, but to add to the seeming
reality of the crisis, the lady utters not the required farewell
injunction, nor any response, remains mute and motionless even
after Othello has used his poniard, and proves to have actually
fainted either in the orgasm or hysteria of her temperament, or
in the stage of some more serious malady. Ihe next episode
in this strange, uneventful history, is the appearance of lovers,
attracted by the beauty and isolation of the fair Desdemona.
22 MAD ACTORS.
One of these, animated by violent passions, but base designs,
she shunned,-repelled with dignity and firmness, but required
the assistance of the manager, and an appeal to his father,
before she temporarily escaped from his persecutions. Before
these were renewed, a genuine and honourable protector had
espoused the cause of the injured lady, and having thoroughly
chastised her ravisher, emancipated her from further annoyance.
This chivalrous youth had himself become enamoured of the grace
and talents of Coralie Walton while a constant frequenter of
the theatre, and so sincere and pure was the affection thus
inspired, that in order to accomplish the object of his wishes,
and to come into nearer and uninterrupted association with the
actress, he determined to adopt the stage as his profession;
he became a pupil of the manager, and after prolonged study and
tuition in this school, he was incorporated with the company.
This handsome and accomplished suitor succeeded in captivating at once the admiration and applause of the public, and the
kindly feelings of the person whose attractions had tempted him
to take so important a step. " The course of true love never
doth run smooth " ; and although the result of these romantic
arrangements had been what was aimed at and was desired, and
a deep and exalted affection had arisen between the parties
interested, the lover, apparently either rejected or estranged by
certain obscure conduct or revelations on the part of Coralie
Walton, suddenly announced his change of profession, his
departure for America, declining all remuneration for his really
valuable services, and avoiding all explanation of his present
conduct or his future plans and projects. She who was, in some
inexplicable manner, the cause of this catastrophe, was seized
with brain fever, which proved to be protracted, calling for all
care and kindness from those around. Shortly after her recovery from this formidable attack, she was called upon to act
the part of Ophelia, and is described by the Hamlet of the
evening as agitated by tremulous and spasmodic twitching of
the face when he took her hand, and pronounced the words, " I
did love you once"; the contractions and agitations being
intensified when she replied, " Indeed, my lord, you made me
believe so." On the occurrence of the passage "You should not
have believed me, for virtue cannot so innoculate our old stock
but we shall relish of it?I loved you not," the poor trembling,
agitated girl becomes more and more the image of distress and
despair, evidently recalling and reanimating some faded but
unforgotten scene of pain and separation, representing less
Ophelia than herself, and paralysed rather by real sentiments
and sorrows than by their imitation. A wild wandering of the
eye, and a hysteric catch in the speech were observed, and
MAD ACTORS.
#?
were speedily followed by wild, uncontrollable shrieking, uttered
as she rushed from the stage, and passing at once into hysterical
and ultimately acute and fatal mania. In the course of a few
days this unfortunate victim of impersonation died, whilst still
a lunatic, and in her incoherence muttering confused sounds, in
which might be distinguished " 0 mother! mother!" and " Tell
Hamlet not to forget." Contemporaneously with her sudden
loss of reason there was delivered to the narrator a packet, with
the urgent request that he should deliver it to the person
whose name it bore, should he encounter him in his travels
through America, where he was about to go. Upon the contents of this missive hung the solution of the melancholy
tragedy recorded. The transatlantic journey was undertaken,
and accidentally the owner of the packet was discovered in the
person of an officer of the United States army, who, after displaying much natural emotion, revealed to the narrator all that
was previously inexplicable in the conduct of Coralie Walton.
It disclosed what was throughout anticipated, that the attachment which seduced him from more grave occupations to the stage
was returned by the object of his idolatry; who, however, while
confessing perfect reciprocity, and although there were no obstacles to immediate marriage, gently, but firmly, it was conceived
by her admirer, obstinately, refused her consent to an immediate
union. This event, ardently desired by both parties, was made
to depend upon a proposed visit to the mother of the actress.
This step was at once taken when the betrothed youth finds
himself, to his horror, in a notorious brothel, whose mistress is
the rouged, bedizened, utterly profligate and degraded parent of
his cherished companion. A hurried announcement of his emigration completes the tale, except that the deserted Coralie Walton,
roused to an exciting recollection of her recent misfortune, and
misery by the situation and character in the drama, probably
by some similarity in the person and bearing of Hamlet to her
lover, and by the tenderness and tone in which she was addressed,
was precipitated from fictitious into real alienation.
We are entitled to conclude, although all certain information on the subject is wanting, that while the profession and;
position of her mother, the estrangement of her intended
husband, the false position which she held, with feelings of
shame, degradation, and other moral factors, may have contributed to the catastrophe, physical changes had taken place in
the brain and lungs, of which evidence is afforded in the attack
of cerebral fever and haemoptysis, which were fully adequate to
produce abrupt and fatal derangement. Yet many illustrations
are accessible, in which feigned pride, wrath, indignation, have
rapidly merged into forms of madness, marked by precisely
24 MAD ACTORS.
similar manifestations; where the emotions have been cherished,
encouraged, in other words, cultivated and inflamed, have
usurped' and dethroned the supremacy of judgment, have exercised the province and power and will, and ultimately placed
the system under the dominion of some form of monomania.
It is quite true that in the majority of such cases there is
present bodily disease, which may be unconnected with the disturbance in the nervous functions, but which is often palpably
the outcome or direct consequence of this disturbance, and
where the election of the precise relation in which these organic
laesions stands the moral phenomena, depends more upon the
opinions of the reporter than upon any demonstrative proof
afforded by the alterations themselves.
Companies of Mad Actoes.
In concluding this subject, it is incumbent upon us to
record, not merely that individuals engaged in ministering to
the gratification and instruction of the public in our theatres
have occasionally yielded to the influences of constitutional
causes, or surrounding circumstances, and been doomed to mental
infirmity, as have the performers on the wider and grander stage
of life; but that by a kind of inversion of this Nemesis, the
insane have either individually or in groups, assumed the role
and functions of professional actors, and have appealed successfully to the suffrages of members of their own class, or to the
less indulgent critics from general society. This course has
been adopted, we believe, in all cases, in consonance with the
inclination and earnest desire of the individuals, although suggested, in all probability, by medical guides or other guardians
as a remedy, as a means of distraction from painful and unhealthy thoughts and feelings, and as an inexhaustible source of
enjoyment. The great success which it is believed attended
the effort to produce plays in our asylums, enacted by patients,
has fully justified the safety and expediency of such an experiment, while the benefits which have accrued to those personally
engaged in histrionic representation has conferred upon this
amusement a dignified rank in the scale of moral hygiene.
It may be well conceived that the preparation and actual production of a vaudeville, or farce, or comedy, in an hospital for
diseases of the mind, where, although the accommodation,
furniture, comforts, assimilate the place to a home or a hotel,
but where rigid discipline, and, at the best, pensiveness, depression, or melancholy, "must generally prevail, could not fail to
MAD ACTORS. 25
effect a decided and pleasurable revolution in the hearts and
hopes of all concerned, from the prompter and tirewoman to
the principal character and hero of the piece. This experience
has convinced a large proportion of those engaged in the treatment of insanity that this powerful and popular element in the
excitement, perhaps in the regulation, of the emotions and
sentiments, should not be neglected, although its employment
must be limited alike by the instruments at their disposal, the
nature of the cases and of the cure to which it is addressed, and
by the operation of the higher agents resorted to.
An attempt was made many years ago, by M. Esquirol,
to introduce theatrical representations into the Asylum at
Charenton, as a means of amusement, if not of cure, in the
treatment of the insane. The French have a passion for the
Drama, and a vast number of the educated classes in that
country have been amateur performers ; and so the experiment
might have been expected to succeed. But it failed from a
somewhat singular circumstance. It should be noted that this
development was essayed at no great distance of time, subsequent to the French Revolution ; we have forgotten what the
piece selected was, but it is interesting, both chronologically and
philosophically, to understand that the plot contained, amidst
other features, the deposition of a King by his subjects. The
audience, chiefly composed of patients, regarding this rebellious
act as real and unjustifiable, rushed on the stage with the
utmost tumultuous indignation, and restored the ill-treated
monarch.
Some years after this amusing failure, Moliere's Tartuffe
was successfully placed before the inmates of Salpetriere.
Plays have been, it is reported enacted in Asylums in
Copenhagen. It is concluded that in all these instances the
dramatic company as well as the auditors were, to some extent,
of unsound mind. But no doubt or uncertainty on the subject
was possible when the practice was revived in 1842 in the
Crichton Institution iji the Northern part of this country. We
read that in the first representations of " Raising the Wind,"
" The Irish Tutor," " Monsieur Tonson," &c., there were
invariably four or five insane boarders engaged, one of whom
was a female, and that the principle was laid down that no play
should be accepted or placed before even insane spectators,
unless some of the parts were undertaken by patients. It has
been ascertained that of the persons thus participating one had
been labouring under acute Mania, with convulsions, that another
had recovered from an attack of epilepsy, but suffered from
delusions and intellectual feebleness; that a third was suicidal
and dejected ; a fourth was actuated by delusions, while a fifth
26 MAD ACTORS.
presented symptoms of fatuity with the hallucination that she
saw the head, limbs, &c. of her best friends continually
dropping from the sky. In many cases the patients were in a
state of convalescence ; but in all vestiges of their original
malady could be traced. The step now mentioned was not
merely a temporary test of the practicability of reaching the
mind diseased, but was persevered in for thirty or forty years,
with hundred of dramas, ranging from mere vehicles of fun and
merriment up to " Eed Gauntlet" and "The Lady of Lyons."
In Great Britain, this mode of treatment or amusement has
been and is sanctioned, and has proved curative or calmative in
a large number of similar establishments, and has, it is affirmed,
penetrated even into the region of the Pilgrim Fathers. It would
be invidious and might prove cruel to estimate critically either
the pretensions of these actors, or the approximation effected
to a well constituted and suitably decorated theatre, in the
apartments and make-shifts where their capacities were displayed ; but it is worthy of grave consideration that during these
impersonations there was neither disturbance nor interruption
from the pit or galleries, nor failures of memory or absurdities,
or incongruities, or the manifestation of delusions on the part of
the performers. And we possess the evidence of an accomplished
literary friend, who witnessed these performances, that " everything was, in fact, conducted as in a long-established theatre,
by a well-disciplined corps of actors, and it was altogether a
hearty and kindly representation." While these exhibitions
were generally hailed as marvellous manifestations, it must be
confessed that admiration and approval were not unanimous.
To those who were unable to conceive the influence of reading,
music, or any external pleasurable and exalting sensations in
restoring or reconstructing, or rehabilitating the wrecked and
ruined intellect or imagination, the power of the histrionic art
was regarded as vain and visionary; to those who cherished
conscientious religious scruples or objections to all entertainments of this class, such experiments were unacceptable and
worthy of condemnation. But it may be well to place in
antagonism to such views the remarks of Martin Luther, the
great founder and champion of the Eeformation, made at a time
when that great social convulsion was at an intense heat, and
when the tendency of all those affected by its throes to recede
to as great a distance from what had been sanctioned or tolerated by the Church of Eome as possible: " The acting of
comedies ought not to be debarred for the sake of the boys in
school; first, that they exercise them in the Latin tongue ;
second, in comedies, such persons are artificially feigned and
presented, whereby people are instructed and admonished every
MAD ACTORS.
27
way concerning their offices and vocations, likewise what belongeth to a master or a servant, a young fellow that becometh
him, and that he ought to do. Yea, therein are demonstrated
all dignities, degrees, offices, and duties; how everyone ought
to carry himself in outward conversation, as in a looking-glass.
Moreover, therein are also shown and described the crafty
exploits and deceits of evil ones. In like manner what the
office of parents and young striplings is; how they ought
to bring up and train their children and young people to
the state of matrimony, when time and opportunity serveth.
How children ought to be obedient to their parents, and how
they ought to proceed in wooing. And, indeed, Christians
ought not altogether to fly and abstain from comedies, because
now and then gross tricks and dallying passages are acted
therein; for then it will follow that by reason thereof we should
also abstain from reading in the Bible." *
We conclude by quoting a more modern critic. He says:
" In ancient times the dramatic art has been honoured by being
made subservient by religion and morality, and in the
most enlightened country of antiquity, in Greece, the Theatre
was supported by the State. The dramatic nature of the
dialogues of Plato has always been justly celebrated, and
from this we may conceive the great charm of dramatic
poetry. Action is the true enjoyment of life, nay, life
itself. The great bulk of mankind are either from their
situation, or their incapacity for uncommon efforts, confined
within a narrow circle of operations. Of all the amusements,
therefore, the theatre is the most profitable, for there we see
important actions when we cannot act importantly ourselves.
It affords us a renovated picture of life, a compendium of whatever is animated and interesting in human existence. The
susceptible youth opens his heart to every elevated feeling; the
philosopher finds a subject for the deepest reflections on the
nature and constitution of man."
* Books consulted : Bernard's Retrospections of the Stage ; Gait's Lives of the
Players; VandenhofFs Recollections of the Stage; Biographical Dictionaries,
various; Asylum, Reports, many.
