Suicide
========

82 Art. V.?
No. 1.

Those who maintain the profitableness of studying motives, as
affording the readiest clue to a solution of vexed problems in
human psychology, are never at a loss to explain their discoveries by the aid of observed facts; but it is something more than
doubtful whether all conclusions thus arrived at are not worthless
as regards any real light they throw on the subtler mysteries
of mind, or even on the grosser phenomena of psychical life.

There is a very apparent want of solidity in arguments founded
on such considerations alone ; most of all are they fallacious on
account of the illegitimate nature, so to speak, of their creation.
Motives per se, are not primary factors admitting of selection
for the bases of discussion; underlying them must be, in fact,
those preliminary processes in the evolution of thought, without which thought and its sequences must each and all be
wanting. Motive alone, and by itself, cannot exist; it is a consequence?that it may be a necessary consequence is immaterial
?of certain preceding mental processes; and it is into the
nature and causation of these latter, that we must perforce
inquire if we would arrive at a just and unassailable judgment
of motives. It is perhaps difficult, though it should never be
impossible, to conceive of motives, of whatever kind they may
be, as the outcome of definite arrangements of a permanent
mechanism; and that, further, given a knowledge of special
mechanism in any case, the unalterable consequences of its
activity may be prophesied. To admit this much, however, is at
once to declare a connection between material and psychological
entities, to strip them, or at any rate one of them, of hitherto
generally acknowledged essentials ; and at the same time to
remove forthwith from the category of primitive ideas, that
which the term " motive" popularly embodies. It will be at
once evident that we attribute to motives a subjective character ; they are, it need hardly be insisted, rigidly abstract;
any conception of a motive, save in relation to concrete realities
being an impossibility. This, of course, has been otherwise
stated, but it would profit little to discuss the question afresh
in this place, since there is a pretty universal opinion now-adays favourable to the view here presented. Briefly stated this
is to the effect that motives are the outcome of thought; they'
may be the data of action; they never are the primitive
causes of volition, inasmuch as they are consequent on mental
processes, of which they serve but to mark the conclusion.
Whatever, therefore, is attributed to motives, must be referred
to a prior stage in psychological history, and that stage is
Reasoning.

Whether we may or may not apply this term to include
every mental process which results in the establishment of a
motive towards a certain act, it will be convenient to so consider it temporarily. This explanation is advisable, since in
considering the subject of suicide, to which this introduction
tends, we have to deal with agents from whom the most rigid
classifiers would be inclined to withhold any claims to a higher
ratiocination. Even in the most lowly of idiots, however, there
exists the framework of a mind ; and subtracting from them the
loftier intellectual capacities, they nevertheless retain so much
of practical reason, as suffices to enable them to exercise a
limited volition, and in response to objective (or subjective ?)
impressions to originate the idea of a motive to this or that
action. In what way is the study of the condition thus brought
into play to be pursued ?

Pathological research has done more to found a science of
psychology than is usually attributed to it; but even admitting
all the great advance in this direction witnessed within the last
half century, we are constrained to acknowledge how far
distant still is the time when we shall be able to describe the
least complicated mental process in terms of known and
definite meaning. At present it is possible to do little more
than suggest the lines along which future discovery may be
likely to travel; to lay down directions for guiding inquiries
entered on with a view to elucidating existing difficulties ; and
particularly is this evident when attempts are made to describe
the conditions surrounding suicide. The preliminary work,
perhaps, too, the most difficult to accomplish, has been in part
performed; but laboriously as it has been carried out, it only
avails to demonstrate a physical connection between circumstances of a fixed kind, and the prevalence of the crime.
Chiefly statistical, it affords opportunities for deducing laws,
which though purely empirical in origin, are, notwithstanding,
highly valuable in themselves, and are such as will serve to
lighten the task that lies before the constructor of a scientific
theory of suicide. Moreover, they deal only with externals,
with the objective aspect of the question ; but so far they may be
trusted to lend the greatest assistance to consideration of the
deeper, subtler study of the subject in its psychological aspect.
The work thus achieved has not been done by one or two
observers, but is rather the outcome of extended inquiries on
the part of many labourers. To Dr Morselli, however, professor of psychological medicine in the Royal University of
Turin, is due the credit of epitomising and comparing the data
accessible for the purpose, in a work recently issued in somewhat condensed form in this country.*
The purpose of a review could hardly be served by anything less exhaustive than quotation of the whole book, and we
propose to utilise it in parts in this place as conveying more
clearly than any other modern work, the outline facts on which
the conclusions hereafter described are based. It must, however, be premised that Dr Morselli deals chiefly and almost
entirely with suicide from the statistical side, while the object
of this paper is primarily to insist on the necessity for physical,
and especially pathological, studies, prosecuted with a view to
elucidating psychological states. That physical factors will
have a very decided bearing on the meaning attached to these,
we cannot, at this stage of our knowledge, doubt.

At the outset of the inquiry, we are met by the following
law, which is incontrovertibly established on the strength of
innumerable and regularly classified figures of health. It is
thus stated, " in the aggregate of the civilised states of Europe
and America, the frequency of suicide shows a growing and
uniform increase, so that generally voluntary death, since the
beginning of the century, has increased and goes on increasing more rapidly than the geometrical augmentation of
the population, and of the general mortality." Coincidently with
this increase, has taken place what is usually regarded as
advance of civilisation; but one remarkable exception to it is
offered in the case of England, in which country the porportion
of suicides per million of inhabitants has maintained a " regularity of fixedness " which could not fail to strike the attention
of statisticians. Whatever other country is regarded in this way,
an invariable regular increase in the same proportion is observable ; and bo much interest do these facts possess, that it
will not be out of place to transcribe here the following instructive tables from Dr Morselli's admirable book :?
England.

Proportion of suicide
per million of
Periods of year. inhabitants.
1830- 40 (Farr) 62 8
1838-40 (Radclifle)   62'0
1845-55 (Wagner) 62 0
1840-56 (Davis) 660
1856-60 (Morselli) 65*3
1856-60 (Hanshofer) T  65-0
1856-63 (Oettingen) 65 0
1858-63 (Reg. Gen.) 67'0
1856-65 (Legoyt)   69*0
1861-65 (Mozelli) 65-8
* Suicide; an essay on comparative moral statistics, by Henry Morselli, M.D.
London, C. Kegan Paul & Co.
England.
Proportion of suicides
per million of
Periods of year. inhabitants.
1866-70 (Morselli)
1871-74 (id.) 67 0
1858 (Farr) 6?0
1859  04
1860   70
1861  68
1862  65
1863  66
1-864  64
1865 .   67
18C6    64
1867   62
1868 .   73
1869   70
1870 .   70
1871  66
1872   66
1873 ^
1874   67
1875   67
1876   73
Tlie second table, quoted below, is a similar calculation
based on statistics of the movements of French population from
the commencement of Quetelet's observations", down to those of
Bertillon; and the marked contrast it presents to the foregoing,
will be at once apparent.

Proportion
r " 1 *
xears. on inhabitants. per million. Increase per cent.
827
8281
829 y
830 J
8311
832 I
833 J
834
835
836
837
838
839
840
841
842
843
844
845
846
847
848
849
850
851
852
20,740
18,517
15,596
15,339
13,882
14,207
13,683
12,876
12,102
12,089
12,128
11,839
11,301
11,907
11.478
11,412
9,707
10.724
9,880
9,544
9,525
9,340
48
54
58
54
f 63
61-2
|_61"8
64-9
72
70-4
73
78-4
82-6
82-7
82-4
84-4
88-4
84
87-1
88-7
1037
100-9
93'5
100-8
100 6
102
100
114
124
114
135
139
128
148
149
152
159
168
178
179
183
186
196
193
200
101
236
232
214
23a
233
238

Similar proofs could be afforded by figures relating to many
other countries, but these will suffice to show the general
tendency of the whole, which is to show that there is, generally
speaking, a marked increase observable in the growth of suicide
throughout civilised states. It will be profitable to consider
what this is attributable to.

The influences which predispose to suicide are naturally of
the most heterogeneous and complex character; only in the most
superficial manner do they admit of classification ; and much
as has been already done in giving to them something approaching to their relative importance, it must be admitted that we
are scarcely yet on the threshhold of discoveries calculated to
throw real light on the processes that compel to voluntary
sacrifice of life. Hitherto, all investigation has been necessarily
conducted with a view to collecting solid bases of comparison ;
only when these are witnessed in considerable completeness can
there exist a probable chance of deriving from study of suicides
elementary information concerning their determining causes, and
it is in this way principally that value attaches to the statistical
data compiled so anxiously and laboriously by Morselli and his
co-workers in this field of research. For purposes of comparison
they are invaluable ; nor is it impossible to deduce from them
certain empirical laws, such as that already quoted, in relation to
the frequency of suicide, and also in a certain sense indicative of
the conditions under which the crime is committed. That which
remains to be done, and what is by far the most important
portion of the inquiry, is to determine the structural consequences
to the organism of its submission to these well-ascertained
conditions; and as knowledge of the kind increases so also will
there be gradually evolved a scientific theory of suicide on
which may be founded measures of prophylactic utility.
At the outset the task appears of almost herculean difficulty,
but a beginning has already been supplied in those data to which
reference has been made. Before proceeding to consider their
bearing on the method of future researches it will be as Avell to
recapitulate them shortly. In doing so both the plan and the
matter of Dr Morselli's volume may be followed, the subject
being most fully as well as most recently treated in it.
Of all natural influences climate has ever been assumed the
most potent factor in determining the frequency of suicides; no
absolute rule can, however, be laid down to this effect, for apart
from other and equally powerful associate causes, the mere
geographical position of a country exercises really but little
influence on the rate of voluntary deaths. It is true that
countries to the north are, collectively, more frequently the
scene of self-destruction than are those in the south, but this is
all that can be urged from returns spreading over a number of
years. In Europe, for instance, the highest proportion of
suicides to population is contributed, not by the most northerly
region, but by a district centrally situate in the continent. It
is true though that the countries north of this said region yield
a much higher average of suicides than do those south of it,
and to such extent the theory of geographical distribution is
correct. It will be at once seen, however, that this is widely
different from the assertion that suicidal tendency is a direct
product of the north as compared with the south, a conclusion
generally held at a time when proofs to the contrary were
not forthcoming. With the correction of the error thus committed we are also brought face to face with consideration of
those physical conditions affecting suicide which are comprehensively classed as telluric; and here again we are compelled to
admit the meagreness of available information. What is known
of their influences is but the barest indication of possible
enlightenment; at its best it has the appearance of little more
than guess-work, chiefly because of the slight connection
science has yet succeeded in establishing between cause and
effect, as illustrated in regional peculiarities and their special
endemics. In low-lying countries the practical physician looks
to find certain well-marked groups of diseases constantly
exhibiting themselves among the inhabitants ; but we are still
without clear and intelligible expositions of the reasons for this
constancy; and in a similar way the moral statistician safely
predicts that among the people living in plains and valleys the
average of suicides will be far in excess of those registered
among neighbouring hill-dwelling people. That there is a
direct connection between these two incontrovertible facts it
is impossible to doubt, as also that it will have to be sought
in the effects produced on structural characteristics by the
interaction of the environment and the individual. When,
however, we strive to depict the consequences of such interaction
we are confronted at' once by ignorance of all but the most
evident factors of disease; of their remoter consequences we
have nothing more real than probabilities to guide us in
determining the nature and results; assuredly in this direction
there is an unlimited field of research before investigators, and
one especially well calculated to repay patient and exhaustive
study. Perhaps, too, recent developments in pathological study
are not without value as indicating somewhat of the conclusions
we shall by-and-by be led to form; particularly with reference
to those forms of disease termed " cretinoid." In this country
attention has of late been awakened to an unusual degree in
this respect; and though its results are as yet limited, they may
be regarded as bearing on a future solution of many vexed
problems. The condition known as myxccdema, to which many
physicians have paid consideration, and on which evidence is
rapidly accumulating to demonstrate its clinical features,
deserves to be ranked as having important bearings on psychical
questions as well as physical. Unfortunately, however, the
facts most dwelt upon in connection with it are not precisely
those to forward discussion as to its origin ; but as further
information is gathered this reproach will doubtless be removed.

It is characterised by a universal mucoid transformation of intercellular material, in which the nervous structures participate
alike with all other organs. In effect it may be regarded as an extreme development (rather than retrogressive metamorphosis)
of connective tissue elements, external evidences of its presence
being of cedematous character; and also such as indicate depreciation of intellectual powers. For some years after Sir William Gull
first remarked on the features of the disease, it was considered
as peculiar to women, and as being of rare occurrence. Later,
both these assumptions have been disproved, and now it is
certainly demonstrated that both men and women may become
its victims, and that it is of much greater frequency than was
originally supposed. Beyond dispute it is a condition in which
the subject is mentally depraved; and we have absolute proof
of its influence on psychical states in a case reported by Dr.
Savage, in which extreme mental disturbance was a marked
feature of the disease. In fact this observer places the point of
departure of all the nervous troubles of myxoedema in the
encephalon. For the moment we need not stay to examine the
grounds of objection to this view; they have been raised, but
imperfect pathological and histiological observations may well
be admitted to cover the discrepancies that exist amongst
various writers' opinions. The point to be insisted on in this
place is, that here is a disease, prominently brought into notice
within the most recent years, and of which, in spite of the
assertions of French authors that it is not a newly discovered
affection, we are as yet acquainted with little beyond the
clinical features it presents. That it is directly inimical to the
mental health of the individual it attacks is no longer a matter
of dispute ; contention holds only over the way in which damage
is produced, a very desirable point to ascertain, but one which
cannot possibly hinder the conclusion that it may be, or in fact
that it is, an important element for consideration by the scientific
student of cerebral disturbances, and especially so in connection
with suicide.

(Etiology is admittedly the weakest branch of medical
science. Of even the most common diseases, omitting the
eruptive fevers, we possess but crude and imperfect ideas respecting their causes and origin. Of none can we say (with
the exception already named), such and such conditions will
assuredly produce such and such diseases among those submitted to them; and although we are gradually, very
gradually, approaching to a rough conception of the part
heredity plays in the production of bodily illness, we are remotely distant from the knowledge which will enable physicians
to describe the significance of surroundings in setting up initial
changes. Most of all, too, is this the case in respect of the
subtle lesions to which the master tissues of the body, the
nervous, are subject; the whole of present knowledge on this
point, spite of all the libraries existing, is summed up in
a few empirical deductions of the kind that Ave have commenced
to enumerate. We cannot, however, despise even these; they
are the rough beginnings of a perfect science that will ripen
into splendour as the data of observation increase in number ;
that will be enriched with laws founded on perpetual experience ; and that in the years to come will form the basis for
every study designed to extend the limits of the known yet
farther and farther into the darker regions that surround the
science of cerebral pathology.

Proceeding with our inquiry into the influence of telluric
conditions on the frequency of violent deaths amongst the inhabitants of a district, it must needs be observed that as the low
and more humid regions are left, and the higher and dryer climate
reached, the proportion decreases relatively, but not absolutely.
For a given country the statement is sufficiently accurate,
although exceptions are to be found ; but it may be accepted
as practically true, inasmuch as the discrepancies are due to the
action of social influences to which we shall refer further on.
The conclusion to be drawn from the general rule above given
is of vital import to the whole matter in hand, and will at once
present itself on reflection. It is that, in the districts most
favourable to the gro\vth and spread of disease, we meet with a
more considerable number of voluntary deaths, the two proceeding pari passu with increasing prevalence of conditions inimical
to human health. Further, the deduction is justified from this,
that, judged apart from associations of civilisation pure and
simple, a tendency to throw aside life's burdens, is the inevitable
accompaniment of bodily discomfort; and in the same connection
arises the, at present, unanswerable problem," what is the quantitative relation between mental and physical ill health ?"
Indeed, pursue the inquiry in whatever direction we will, arrive
as we may at seemingly satisfactory solutions of the difficulty
encountered in the search after the causes of suicide, there is
always a final remcinet to disturb the whole structure of our
reasoning, that, viz., of the actual central lesion, the most important of all. A rough and ready way to supply the needed
link would, of course, be to declare, that every disease is
attended with mental disturbance, which may or may not result
in suicidal tendency. This, however, as well as begging the
question, would be utterly unjust and unfounded ; unfounded
because of the absence of pathological proof, and of any observations sufficiently general and extended deserve the name
of evidence. Equally delusive on examination is the plea that
suicidal desires are the outcome of mental degradation, which
at first sight would appear more capable of support. We will not
dispute that there is a reduction of suicides even with a condition
of mental inferiority in comparison with the highest attained
(not to say attainable) perfection ; but even then a gulf of impassable dimensions subsists between the mental qualities of the
uncultivated rustic and the highly-educated scholar, though
both may terminate their existence by self-destruction. In
either case, in different degrees certainly, but none the less
truly, psychical evolution has progressed with advancing
age; and at the time when suicide terminates the career of
each, the actual development of mental power has attained
proportions which raise the mind very far above its condition
at preceding stages of their existence. Hence, though there
may occur a disturbance of intellectual functions, this is in
sense to be regarded as entailing a coincident degradation
no actual psychical attributes. On a priori ground we are
entitled to regard mental unsoundness as inciting to suicide;
the habitual usage of the courts in accordance with which such
deaths are recorded as due to " temporary insanity," is something more than a harmless ruse to evade the violation of personal
susceptibilities on the part of surviving friends ; and even at
the risk of offending the principles of rigid moralists, we must
insist on the probability that self-destruction would be impossible to anyone who enjoyed sound health. Vague, in the
veriest degree as the term is, it yet includes a very considerable
amount of meaning, and seems to definitely limit every instance of perverted function, even though no physical evidence
of its being called into activity is anywhere discernible.

We need not unnecessarily confuse discussion on this subject
by importing the question of spontaneity into it; it has already
been shown that motive pre-supposes volition, and whatever
the direction of resulting determinations may be, whether, that
is, towards good or evil actions, the preliminaries are invariably
of the same character are at all times, that is to say, ratiocinative. In countries where certain diseases are shared in by the
majority of inhabitants, we may naturally therefore expect to
find higher rates of mortality from causes associated with such
prevalence ; it is only inability to trace the lesions of the
nervous systems that are coincident with those of other systems
or organs, that renders the task of exhibiting causal connection
so unusually difficult in respect to suicide. A valuable commentary on the presumed intimate connection between disease
and suicide is further afforded by the facts of seasonal distribution of the latter. With a regularity which possesses all the
significance of law, the maximum of deaths thus caused is
coincident with the months of ending spring and commencing
summer ; that is, at those periods of the year when change from
one season to another takes place, the numbers show appreciable
increase compared with those of fixed seasons. These facts,
moreover, are not materially affected by the proved connections
between warmer weather and the frequency of insanity, if, as we
prefer to consider, another and wider relation between general
disease and suicide can be made out. Recognition, it is true, is
now-a-days generally accorded to the belief that man's psychical
activities are subject to the operation of the same natural
laws as influence his organic functions; and surely it is no improper stretch of possibility to regard bodily infirmities as
initiating a train of consequences primarily involving the mind
also.

The Racial influences which appear to exert determining
power over the commission of suicide, are of a nature that
it would hardly be desirable to discuss separately in the
present connection. The differences that distinguish peoples
are, in this respect, such as it is all but impossible to appreciate
without taking fully into consideration that which has been
productive of their social evolution in all directions. We
cannot in such a review confine attention to merely structural
or morphological details; but in order to arrive at any valuable
conclusion, the reaction of individuals on their environments
would have to be carefully and extensively inquired into; the
mere conformation which reveals so much to anthropologists is no
safe criterion to the moral statistician; and, indeed, one of the
most remarkable facts which meet him at the outset of his
study of suicide, is the little reliance to be placed in merely
ethnological data, as bearing on the act of self-destruction.
Deeply as he may feel that a certain connection does exist in
this relation, every additional fact collected in proof only
brings more clearly into view the vastly preponderating effect
of what are collectively termed " Social" influences.
The sociologist engages in a study that is at once the most
interesting and the most complex of all studies. Human action,
human motive, human thought, incessantly occupy his attention ; and no conclusion that he arrives at can be looked upon
as fixed and unalterable, inasmuch as the changes constantly
occurring in the field of observation are endless and incalculable. It would almost appear, then, that the barrenest
results would reward attention paid to this branch of investigation ; and a decade or two ago this would have been so far true, that
definitions were wanting to it. Now, however, the outline of
law is recognisable in the multitudinous complexities that surrounded the subject; and though even yet there is a vagueness
about it that may at times discourage, sociology is so far a
science that the data on which it rests will admit of examination and classification. Civilisation has been described as
having for its watchword " progress; " in proportion as mankind
has been elevated out of rude, primitive conditions, through
adaptations of surroundings to the needs of humanity, so has it
risen from lower to higher; and in degree, as the process continues, so does civilisation advance. Add to this rough conception that the whole act of progress has been directed by human
intelligence, seeking to supply its own requirements, and there
is at once presented the view of external change and modification to meet the needs experienced by man during his mental
development.

National characteristics take their tone from individual
traits ; the nation is, in one aspect, only a magnified unit, and
the direction of its aims and aspirations more or less surely
reflects the line along which each constituent member of it
thinks and acts. Koughly speaking, some countries are more
highly civilised than others, because they have advanced further
along the path of progress by multiplying the facilities naturally enjoyed by them, and by greater refinements in matters
relating to mutual interests and concerns. All this, however, is
primarily dependent on mental characters, on the extent to
which general intelligence has developed, and on the special
application of such superiority to the improvement of social
surroundings. In other words, civilisation tends to progress
because of the inevitable necessity that mental development
should progress also. In whatever way it is regarded, the one
is the consequence of the other. But with increase in complex
social relations arise also more widespreading reactionary influences, which find expression in the multitudinous factors of
social and political life, with all the distractions and troubles
incident thereto. In the same degree, moreover, as these grow
increasingly numerous, they tend to excite intercurrent disturbances of larger and larger extent; in the same way as the
physiologist sets up a similar series of consequences throughout
the organism by disturbing directly a single set of functions.

Hence, though at first but one or a few members of the
social series may be immediately affected, yet the influence
spreading from them will sooner or later extend its ramifications
throughout the whole body politic. Then it is that a stimulus
or an emotion, confined at first to its centre of origination,
gradually exerts a greater power until at length it becomes
universal within natural limits, and many or all who are within
the sphere of its influence will experience the reaction it produces. It will happen, too, of necessity, that all will not
be affected alike ; individual peculiarities will produce variation
of result; while some will respond healthily and readily, others,
again, will be injuriously influenced.

Quitting generalities for a moment, and selecting a case in
illustration, let us consider the influence exerted by the spread
of a popidar delusion, e.g., so called spiritualism. The idea of
holding converse with the spirits of the dead originated, no
doubt, in a sincere belief on the part of a weak, but wellmeaning enthusiast. From this centre it became widely distributed, until in time every member of the community became
at last acquainted with the main conclusions of the leaders of
the movement. Fortunately, however, only a few accepted
them as bona Jida truths, and such persons were, individually,
unlike the majority of their mentally more robust fellows who
failed to be influenced in any way by the preposterous notion.
They were able to apply the test of reason and probability to
the imposture, and to appreciate its spurious nature. So far
they were of a higher civilisation than the weaker and more
credulous believers, and were thereby removed from the baneful
influence of a superstitious creed. The less fortunate adherents
to it, however, remained free to be subject to every development
their new tenet might display, to every impulse it might suggest, and to be the victims of every inordinate demand it might
make on their diseased imagination. Nor do we need to seek
far for proofs of the injury they thereby suffered ; nor even for
examples of self-destruction directly due to the influence of
abnormal fancies, the direct outcome of spiritualistic dreams.
It would, notwithstanding, be unwise to deny that spiritualism is a fruit of civilisation ; if we choose, ve may refer it
to retrogressive mental action, and declare that it could not
be the result of healthy development of the human mind ; but
none the less it is truly a consequence of mind-evolution though
not in the direction of improvement.

The deduction is inevitable, that as civilisation progresses
both madness and suicide are met with in greater proportion ;
and even in those countries where, as in England, there is an
apparent w stasis " in the one respect, there is an unmistakable increase in the other. It is therefore no barren thought
that suggests an unmistakable connection between the two
conditions of the social organism, viz., suicidal tendency and
insanity. May we not conclude that as the preventive treatment of insanity advances, as persons afflicted with the tendency
to madness are earlier submitted to protective restraint, the
number of possible suicides is being brought under control ?
And, as a further consequence of the same reasoning, that
suicidal proclivities are in themselves the consequence of
incipient madness in the majority of instances. Asylum
experience is rich in proofs of the readiness with which " tractable " lunatics will adopt self-destruction at the slightest
opportunity; and as before observed, " temporary insanity " is
something more than a beneficent chimera invoked to enable
Christian burial to be allowed to the unhappy suicide.
By universal agreement civilisation and intellectual activity proceed hand in hand. Those nations which rank in
supremacy in the world's affairs are by common consent preeminent, by reason of the superiority they enjoy in all that
conduces to refinement in thought and living; and they
contrive to hold such position only as long as they display
ceaseless activity in advancing along the path of civilisation.
Hence they are incessantly exercising the intellectual faculties
by which they are distinguished ; and progressively the national
intelligence grows by perpetual extension of habits of reasoning
and observation among the masses of the people. Thus each
year civilising influences bring a greater and greater number of
the masses within the ranks of those who think as well as live;
and thereby bring an ever-growing majority also under the
influences that determine the proportions of lunatics and suicides
to the whole population.

Religion, culture and political creeds are the main factors
for consideration in this connection. The first possesses a very
high importance in relation to suicide, and one that it is
impossible to ignore. Among Protestants the proportion of
suicides is markedly high, while among Jews, though selfdestruction is less common, madness take high rank in the common diseases affecting them. On the other hand, Catholics are
numerically less prone to self-destruction than either of the
two persuasions named; but here should be mentioned the
law formulated "by moral statisticians who have specially
investigated this subject that " the inclination towards suicide
in the inhabitants belonging to any particular worship, in
any given country, will diminish in direct ratio with their
numerical inferiority." If what has been suggested above in
dealing with the mode in which individuals are affected
by a given belief is true, this would naturally follow; but it
may also in part be due to the concentration of energy such
a numerically small society must exhibit in order to maintain its distinctness from other societies surrounding them.
To explain the preponderance of suicide among Protestant
nations, however, is a more dfficult matter, unless we agree to
accept the conclusion of Dr Morselli who thus accounts for it:
" The very high average of suicides among Protestants is another
fact too general to escape being ascribed to the influence of
religion. Protestantism, denying all materialism in external
worship, and encouraging full inquiry into dogmas and creeds,
is an eminently mystic religion, tending to develope the reflective powers of the mind, and to exaggerate the inward struggles
of the conscience. This exercise of the thinking organs which,
when they are weak by nature, is always damaging, renders
them yet more sensible and susceptible of morbid impressions.
Protestantism in the German states, further exercises this
exciting influence on the cerebral functions in yet another
manner; it originated those philosophical systems which are
based on the naturalistic conception of human existence, and
put forward the view that the life of the individual is but a
simple function of a great whole. These philosophical ideas are
harmless enough to strong minds, and those stored with a fit
provision of scientific culture, but in the democratic atmosphere
of our times the heart is not educated pcivi jpcissu. The religious apathy with which the present generation is afflicted
does not arise from a reasoned inquiry into the law of nature,
or a scientific appreciation of its phenomena; it is not, in
short, a deep conviction of the mind, but springs from a physical inertia, from the little hold obtained by any ideas but
such as are directed to material improvement and the gratification of ambition. To our mind, therefore, the greater number
of suicides is to be attributed to the state of compromise which
the human mind occupies at the present time between the
metaphysical and the positivist s phase of civilisation ; and as
this transaction is more active in countries of marked mystic
and metaphysical tendencies, such as is the case with Protestanism, it is natural that in them suicide should have the
greatest number of victims." The key-note to the whole mystery is struck in this passage, wheie the damage done to
weak minds by excessive and laborious thinking out of questions raised in connection with religion is exposed; and inasmuch as freedom is permitted in this direction to Protestant
people, it is certain to be followed with the result indicated.
Education and culture occupy a somewhat analogous position;
and it remains to examine the consequences of their influence.
