Was Guiteau Insane?
====================

96 Art. VI.?
:Author:  W. A. F. Browne, LL.D., formerly Medical Commissioner in Lunacy, Scotland.

There is no intention of reproducing the somewhat sensational
trial of Gruiteau here. There were in that melo-dramatie proceeding a number of novel, startling, and inexplicable episodes,
calculated to interest and instruct our insular mind, but, except
in so far as these incidents may cast a lurid light upon the
conduct and character of the accused, they shall not be included
in this inquiry. In the many crimes belonging to the regicidal
category which have disgraced Europe during the current
century; in the murder of the Emperor Alexander, in the
machinations of the Nihilists, and in the abortive attempts of
the political malcontents in Germany, there may be detected
an intelligible though detestable incentive and object, but in
the act of Gruiteau it is impossible to see any adequate cause,
unless the assassination be viewed and estimated through the
perpetrator's own moral mirage.

Charles Gruiteau is described as the cadet of a family of
Huguenot extraction, noted for the pertinacious tenacity with
which the original principles which actuated their party were
adhered to. This eulogium must, however, be received with
great deductions, as in the last generations at least of these
hereditary Calvinists, it appears that the father of the culprit,
after vacillating between Presbyterianisrn and Wesleyanism, became ultimately, and died, a Shaker of the community of Oneida.
Adding to this creed that he had attained immortality by his
present union with the Saviour, and declaring on his death-bed
that his fatal illness was unnecessary as a passage to Eternity,
as he had already realised that state. Of the same religious
body C. Gruiteau was for many years an adherent, although
he ultimately apostatised and left the settlement where the sect
had been located. C. Gruiteau appears to have been originally
possessed of astute powers, but sadly destitute of prudence,
sound judgment, and mental balance. He was endowed with an
intensely nervous temperament, ever craving personal, and if
possible, popular applause, forming exaggerated opinions of his
own capacities, of the appreciation of these by his friends and
the public, of his claims upon the influential members of the
State, and of what he had achieved in order to assert and vindicate
these claims and merits. There is good evidence that he was a
man of pure life, and though adopting eccentric and unjustifiWAS GUITEAU INSANE? 97
able means to secure the objects of liis ambition, he did not
descend to vicious or fraudulent courses. Obviously an ignorant,
though pretentious aspirant, his plans were apparently the result of miscalculation or delusion, rather than of hypocritical
assumption. His education cost $100, but must have been
limited or imperfect, as he was declared incompetent to enter
the University, and again entered the Society of Shakers, whose
doctrines, as well as the Bible, had constituted a part of his
studies while at school. His mental culture may have been in
some degree advanced by his devotion to theological works, and
his intimate relations and intimacy with institutions for selfimprovement. He afterwards prosecuted the study of law, and
was subsequently admitted to the Bar in Chicago, where he
practised for a considerable period, greatly improving his
pecuniary resources, but condemned to the ? humbler walks of
his profession. Even at this time, and when occupying what
may be regarded as a favourable position, his friends perceived
indications of erraticence, which may be accepted as the
penumbra of alienation. He exhibited great susceptibility to
the charms of females, and conceived, erroneously, that he had
been addressed by some enamoured damsel worth a million
dollars. His conceit prompted an effort as an orator, which was
attended with signal failure. Influenced, it may be, by fanaticisms, he even before any palpable manifestation of insanity,
cherished the expectation that the Lord would pay his debts,
The very exercise of his ordinary avocations. brought him into
contact with the preparations for the impending Presidential
Election, and with the obscure though powerful politicians, who
concocted and diffused the inflammable materials through the
provincial population which create and ignite the ultimate conflagration. It may be understood how such stimulants as incessant
conversation, canvassing, pleading the cause of a candidate,wrangling, arguing, in all probability quarrelling, must have stirred
such an excitable nature as that of the accused. But there were
other elements upon which such a contest would inevitably act.
Gruiteau had not only to contend against his imperfect, irregular,
and pernicious training, but against constitutional tendencies
which can only be corrected or controlled by high and cultivated moral principle or sound or serene religious discipline.
His congeners are asserted to have been proud of their genealogy,
and undoubtedly inherited many of the sources of taint and
unhealthy tendencies which a long line of ancestry entails.

It appears that one aunt of the prisoner died while labouring under senile dementia; (2) that her daughter, of course
his cousin, became a victim to religious depression in her sixteenth
year; (3) that her sister, another cousin, was deformed ; (4) that
another aunt died insane; (5) that the son of the latter died a
maniac; (6) that an uncle was weak-minded and destitute of
self-control; (7) that the son of this irresolute uncle died insane;
(8) that Gruiteau's mother was in ill-health previous to his birth ;
(9) that he had a deformed sister, and (10) tha this father was
of unsound mind throughout life, in entertaining untenable
religious views, and that he was, in a more marked degree,
insane during the last six weeks of his life. With such strong
and deep-seated predispositions, it would have been ground for
astonishment had he escaped mental obliquity, morbid exaltation of sentiment, and intense systematic irritability ; nor
can it be doubted that, endowed with such an original mental
constitution, he yielded freely and fiercely to the violent passions
and agitations of the strife; that he formed and cherished extravagant ideas of his own importance and exertions in guiding
the storm; that he imagined intimate relations and even intercourse with the leaders of the movement, such as never could
have existed; indeed, during his trial this tendency to delude
himself into the belief that he was befriended and supported by
distinguished friends, was revealed in his expectation that his
defence was to be conducted by eminent counsel who, as might
have been predicted, never appeared.
His craving for notoriety was so extreme that it is believed
he gloried in his trial as constituting him a celebrity, the observed
of all observers, and the most prominent personage in the
United States.

The aspect and deportment of Gruiteau during the long and
exhausting continuance of his trial (72 days),, were those of an
intensely nervous, impetuous, excitable, even irascible person.
He was sometimes pensive, he was even timid and cowardly,
after an attempt to shoot him when passing from the court
to the prison ; he was bold, dictatorial, presumptuous, interrupting the court, his counsel; sometimes by pertinent, more
frequently by impertinent, ejaculations or speeches. He was
impatient of control, insolent to those who were aiding him,
and even engaged in a scuffle with the warders by whom he was
attended. He was even threatened with gagging by the court in
order to repress his intolerable loquacity. If Gruiteau conceived
that his deportment at the bar, sometimes frantic and furious,
sometimes weak and silly, sometimes shrewd and pungent, was
calculated to impress those who watched him for the purpose of
drawing inferences with the notion that he was a lunatic, he
must have been lamentably short-sighted and incapable of
measuring either his own imitative powers, or the proneness
or tendencies of the spectators to be duped or deceived. But if
he entertained no such cunning design, and if he acted under
his constitutional instincts and habitual manners, if, in fact, his
protracted manifestations were the spontaneous and involuntary
outcome of his life, character and present mental condition, he
cannot be declared to be free from disease and moral' perversion.
If the hypothesis that he conceived himself the instrument of
Divine vengeance, or inspired to pursue a particular course, be
excluded from our investigation, his behaviour suggested great
coldness, callousness, and brutality, as he never alluded to the
death of his amiable and irreproachable victim, except as an
event necessitated by the eminent danger of the State, and in
order to reunite the party of the Stalwarts, to which Garfield
and himself belonged ; as independent altogether of such principles as humanity, culpability, responsibility, and as incessantly
claiming a direct agency from Deity, in order to circulate his
book on " The Truth," and as further he displayed utter stolidity
and indifference when the spine of the deceased, presented before
the court for scientific purposes, was handed to him for examination, which he entered into with apparent coolness and interest.
In all his interpolations, Guiteau reveals no anxiety as to his
perilous situation, and voluntarily co-operates with his counsel
in developing from various series of communications to officials,
his real animus in the frightful tragedy for which he has been
interdicted, conspicuously disclosing the fact that he was
actuated, not by patriotism, not even by party motives, but by
disappointment and revenge arising from his exclusion from the
presence and correspondence of the rulers of" the Commonwealth, and from the ruin of his hopes, dictated obviously by
overweening conceit, of an appointment to the consulate in
Paris, or some equally valuable and coveted office. So far as
can be gathered, the rejection of his suit, or rather the silence
of his imaginary patrons, should have been traced to the Secretary,
and not to the President of the Republic, towards the former of
whom he was manifesting enmity even while applying for the
coveted situation, and while affecting courtesy and friendship
in familiar intercourse. Mr. Scoville, in his effort to bring the jury
to view the offence of Guiteau as emanating from some modification of alienation, submitsto them as mental diseases under which
homicide ought to be a symptom. (1) Impulsive insanity ; (2)
monomania, or perversion on one subject or class of feelings; (3)
uncontrollable passion or temper ; (4) tendency to kill or bloodthirst ; (5) a destructive inclination without adequate motives ;
and delusions founded upon the personal or relative experience of
the perpetrator. Greater or more apposite connection of the
latter perversion might have been resorted to, and the subject
of the pleading who hailed the designation of lunatic or insane,
but repudiated that of fool, appears to have detected this
omission, as in his spontaneous confession contained in the suppressed address, which was refused by the court, but circulated
through the newspapers, he insists not solely upon the ground
dismissed by his counsel that the death of Garfield was the
consequence of surgical maltreatment, and not of the wound
inflicted by his hand, but that he was the instrument or agent
of Deity, and that he acted in the accomplishment of certain
plans in the course of Providence, especially in the diffusion of
the doctrines of his book on " The Truth," and, lastly, that he
was influenced and guided throughout, and in the final catastrophe, by Divine inspiration. This theory assimilates his
disease to what is called hereditary delusion, as was demonstrated in the case of the Oxfords ; for his pretended relation to
God very closely resembles his father's assumed union with
Christ, and inherent perpetuity of existence. A most startling
feature of the same document is presented in his adducing the
existence of derived or hereditary taint, as an explanation of
various phases of his conduct in life, and by implication
of his long-harboured design against the life of Garfield. That
such a resort is either unique, or exceedingly rare in the convictions, as well as in the extenuation or justification of lunatics
for criminal acts, will be readily conceded.

But the exposition of the unhealth of Guiteau and of the
character of many of his public doings does not depend upon the
medicolegal justification by Scoville, nor upon the admissions of
the party principally interested. We have the historical evidence
that for a considerable time, and on various occasions, his family
entertained suspicions as to his reason and responsibility. He
delivered an absurd lecture on the Second Advent, he hired a
room in order to address a popular assembly, broke down in the
delivery, betrayed great petulance and irrationality, left his
auditors in the lurch, and was, thereafter, voted by them, fifty
in number, to be .crazy; and as a climax to such suspicions,
armed with an axe he threatened the life of a sister, seduced
into this fratricidal course by impecuniosit.y and physical
disturbance. In place of analysing at length the multifarious
testimonies collected, we have preferred to present in a condensed
shape the essence of the evidence, or the contents of the
voluminous depositions solely when they afford light, or even
twilight in deciphering the superficial or profound obliquity of
Guiteau's faculties and feelings. But a very cursory glance at
these data will convince the observer that the laics almost constantly and the physicians very frequently represent the accused
as displaying qualities of mind which, although not essentially
symptoms of insanity, must have been the result of an illregulated, vitiated, and unhealthy nature. After this alarming
exhibition, Dr Rice, a physician at Merton, and having experience
in similar cases, was called, in 1876, by the family to give an
opinion as to his condition. He executed a certificate to the
following effect?that Guiteau was insane, founding this opinion
upon the following grounds, hereditary influence and exaltation of
his whole emotional nature. "This exaltation was attended
with explosions of emotional feeling, which appeared to arise from
centric causes, not from eccentric causes "; that is, the witness
could not discover any reason for it. He thought that he
could detect more or less incoherence of thought, also an
excessive egotism. He was the subject of intense egotism, also
of an intense pseudo-religious feeling. He was always talking
about Christ and Christianity, and religion without (in his judgment) having become impressed with any of the moral principles
of Christianity. He thought there was also some weakening of
the judgment, and, to that extent, some impairment of the
intellectual faculties. He did not discover that there was
very much disturbance of the intellectual or of the perceptional
powers, and was unable to discover either illusion, hallucination,
or delusion. To summarise the case, he came to the conclusion,
first, that there was strong hereditary predisposition ; second,
that there was more or less congenital moral defect, or moral
imbecility. Ingrafted on this bad state of things came the
effect of puberty, adding to the exaltation of his emotional
nature. It affected mostly the emotions of pride and of vanity.
On the supposition that his diagnosis was correct, he informed
Guiteau's friends that he believed him insane ; that he thought
him dangerous, perhaps incurable, and that he ought to be
secluded, that is, put in an asylum. He either corresponded or
was about to correspond with a neighbouring physician to hold
a consultation for the purpose of having him secluded; but
that movement came to nothing, because Guiteau heard of it
and left the place. He saw him in the course of an evening
conversation, of which religion was not the subject, start up*
suddenly and appeal to the company to come to the Lord, so
incoherently that he could not tell what he was talking about,
Guiteau borrowed some clothing and disappeared all at once.

But independently of what may be stigmatised as the theories
of scientists, or experts, there are laid before us the opinions
(1) of a clergyman, who observed in him peculiarities and wandering in public speaking; (2) of a gardener, who from his grotesque
mistakes regarded him as crazy; (3) of a Miss Lockwood, who
observed his abruptness and eccentricity, and requested him
to leave her house; (4) of Damon, who listened to a lecture of
which the principal topic was Boston and two-thirds of
mankind going to perdition, when his manner was so perturbed
that he was regarded as insane; (5) of Senator Logan, to whom
Guiteau submitted his letter as having been the instrument
which secured Garfield his elevation, upon whom he called in a
summer dress, and wearing sandals when snow was on the
ground, and to whom he made two successive demands for
political assistance which were declined, as the Senator conceived him to be disqualified by his bearing and antecedents, a
conclusion which justified him in warning his landlady to
discourage Guiteau; (6) of Farmer Hubbard, who depicted him
as a quick-tempered man, gesticulating wildly, vehemently, incoherently, or as sitting moodily in a comer and as unequivocally
of unsound mind; (7) of Mrs. Scoville, Guiteau's sister, who
recollected that he did not speak until he was six years old, that
he was a slow boy at the Academy, that he so far neglected his
studies in order to plunge into the mysteries of Shakerism,that she
exonerated his teachers from bestowing further care on his progress ; that in after life he became so violent in temper and
conduct that her son forced his extradition from her home, that he
menaced her with an axe, that his seclusion in an asylum was contemplated, or the establishing of his mental aberration before a
legal court in Chicago, and that since she has always conceived him
to be deranged, or silly, but as without malice or revenge ; (8) of
Honourable Emery Storrs, who describes Guiteau as in a state of
exaltation, as being of ill-balanced mind, ill-balanced judgment,
want of average good common sense, as having been of no service
to the political friends from whom lie expected patronage, expectations which he checkmated ; (9) of George T. Burrows, who discontinued his intercourse and conversation with Guiteau as he
talked incessantly of the second coming of Christ and then became
excited, and from various wild and irrational acts he considered
him to be either a fool or crazy; (10) of Joscelyn, manager of the
Oneida community, who knew him as the most egotistical of all
men, as declaring himself a leader, as sincerely fanatical; (11) of
Guiteau's brother, who said that Panel was ignorant of law,
dangerous although he was not afraid of him, variable in manner,
insane, demonomaniac, but responsible before God; that he
thought God responsible for his board; and added that they
had always been at loggerheads ; (12) of Mrs. Parker, cousin by
marriage, whose husband died insane, who thought the prisoner
crazy, as he made love to her daughter aged 12-13 ; (13) of Jones,
trustee of the Asylum in Jacksonville, who boarded in same house
with Guiteau, thought him of unsound mind; (14) of President
Arthur, who knew Guiteau merely through the ordinary salutation of the day, that he never spoke to him, that he never
rendered any services to the party to which they belonged, and
that he never promised him any recompense or reward for such
imaginary assistance.

These are the facts and impressions deponed to by individuals belonging to various classes in society, many of them
members of the same grade as that to which Gruiteau belonged,
and all of them laics and consequently unacquainted with the
phenomena of nervous disease, and ignorant of the technical
nature of the signs which they had noticed. At a certain stage
this section of witnesses is completed or interrupted, as it may be
interpreted, by the introduction of the accused himself as a
witness in the proceedings of the Court. This step may
impart to us a shock or a surprise, as contrary to our views
and mode of procedure, but the course, or a modification of
it, has long been pursued in France. The obvious objections
to such a crucial test are that the individual arraigned is an
interested party, that if of sound mind the interrogatory
may disturb equanimity, may impair memory, and may involve contradictions which impede or obscure the very object
contemplated; and that, if insane, the responses cannot be
received as reliable revelations of the existing state of intellect
or sentiment; and that self-crimination, or the confession of
absurdities and incongruities and falsehoods, may be volunteered
or extracted in consequence of the very state of mind or of the
surroundings which it is desirable to withdraw from the
consideration of the person under examination. When the
question at issue is simply intellectual lucidity these difficulties
and objections exist in a minor degree; but when an individual is placed before an august tribunal in order to be
tested collaterally as to sanity, but directly as to criminality
and as to conduct which involved life or death, the onus is of an
appalling character. Through this trying ordeal Gruiteau passed,
and in a manner to demonstrate at once his original acuteness
and the peculiarities conspicuous throughout his career. His
autobiography was di-awn with considerable clearness and, as
checked and criticised by the light of preceding evidence,
appeared to be full and faithful. When authorised to go into
the witness box, first on the pretext of authenticating certain of
his letters, and ultimately in ordar to confess much that he had
done, more that he had intended to do,his fancies, follies, failures;
he, on taking the place appointed, requested those around to
stand between him and the audience as if to protect him from the
aim of an improvised executioner. He deponed that the world
was in error as to the future advent of Christ, as he had
descended from heaven already, and had done so ever since our
faith was established, and that his lectures were based upon
this principle. He affirmed that the Shakers regarded Noyes,
their principal, as inspired, as God's prophet upon earth, and that
he ruled every member of the community body and soul, and
that Oneida county was accepted as heaven upon earth. He
described his own inspiration as dissociated from the dogmata of
the Shakers, as by the operation of the will of Grod, as exemplified
in the case of Paul, as an interjection into the brain influencing
the will, the motives, and the life of the individual. He
further confessed that he participated in his father's belief,
that all diseases emanated from Satan, that they could be cured
by an effort of volition, and that medical interference was
superfluous. He spoke much of his peripatetic course of
lectures through the country, his want of success, his privations
and the sufferings to which he was exposed, invariably comparing these to the fate of St. Paul. He expatiated very
lovingly upon his connection with political parties and persons ;
but must have held a very subordinate position, alike in the
estimation of the wire-pullers, and in the working of the
machine, standing evidently on the very edge of the whirlwind
by which he was tossed and troubled ; for notwithstanding his
intercourse with those who coincided in his partisanship and the
circulation of a speech, which might have been delivered, he
does not appear to have come actually into contact with those
whose cause he had espoused, nor been allowed to experiment
as to his powers of eloquence, except once, and for a few minutes
in a convention of coloured voters. One conspicuous event
during these convulsions was his announcing to the future
President his espousal of a lady millionaire, and their united
capabilities for representing the American people in the capital
of Vienna. He sustained a repulse from the Secretary of State
when personally pressing him for a situation, and could extract
no reply from President Garfield upon the subject. When
first instigated to kill the President, he obviously entertained
some suspicions as to the origin of the impulse, and prayed
repeatedly to Grod for enlightenment and guidance, but never
had the slightest doubt that the inspiration under which he
acted was divine and communicated to him for the good of his
countrymen. Whenever this subject was suggested, however
remotely, Gruiteau became excited, gesticulated, and was animated
by a spirit differing from that which regulated the other details of
his deposition. He asserted that in four distinct epochs of his
life was he inspired; that he has been repeatedly the object of
the special providence of the Almighty ; that he harboured the
design of destroying the President for nearly a twelvemonth,
? testing the reality of his heaven-sent motive, but never divulging his intention or his preparations to anyone. He widely
proclaimed that Garfield was his friend, that he had no
animosity towards him, that he killed him as a patriotic deed,
and felt happy and comfortable from the moment that the fata
blow had been struck. He corroborated very minutely many
of the circumstances narrated by previous witnesses, although
occasionally he became flurried, and forgetful as to dates and as
to the interpretation Avhich had been arrived at regarding many
of his acts and opinions. In cross-examination, and under very
severe and prolonged questioning, Guiteau adhered to the assertion that he was the agent of the Deity in the homicide, that he
had no volition in the matter, that his natural feelings and affections were all repugnant to such an act; that for a long period he
engaged in devotional scrutiny of his own thoughts and emotions
in order to determine whether he was following his own purpose,
or that of a higher and omnipotent influence; and only after
long deliberation and self-examination did lie know and feel
assured that the impulse was not his own but inspired.

Although sometimes contradicting or denying former affirmations, he repeated again and again that he was a man of destiny,
predestined to follow out the course which he adopted, that the
nomination, appointment, as well as the death of the President
were all in accordance with the will and by the direct intervention of the Deity ; that his book " The Truth " was a second
or collateral gospel, dictated by inspiration, and that although
mankind were tempted by Satan, he was intensely confident
that his convictions and impulses proceeded from God; that
while humanly and before the law responsible, and although
recoiling from the infliction of pain, even so far as to recoil
from the immolation of his victim in the presence of his wife,
he felt no compunction or remorse since the removal of the
President; that if the citizens who fired at him were moved by
a similar inspiration to his own, they were not culpable; that
he visited and inspected the prison previous to the commission
of his offence in order to ascertain if the amount of safety there
secured would protect him from the vengeance of the mob,
which he dreaded, although satisfied that he was conferring
incalculable benefits upon his countrymen. Obtuseness of
sentiment, utter rejection of a sense of religious duty, or the
supposed triumph of a long-cherished scheme, which would
stamp him as a patriot and politician, his bravery at one stage
and cowardice at another, may to certain minds explain Guiteau's
conduct at the time of the homicide and subsequently; but to
our apprehension his coolness and composure when his victim
had fallen bleeding, and it might be expiring beside him, his
sound sleep on the night of the tragedy, suggest the indifference,
the torpidity, the hebetude, the support of an overmastering
delusion, or some of those morbid affections of the nervous
system which dull sensibility and sympathy and darken our
perception of the claims of humanity and brotherly kindness.

Guiteau was habitually self-possessed, vindicated his proceedings,
calmly embracing the various steps resorted to, preparatory to
his final act, such as the purchase of the weapon, the borrowing the money by means of which the pistol was purchased, his
practice in shooting, in order to test his calmness and precision
of aim, in order to carry out the supreme will, his haunting the
steps of Garfield, night and day, in order to seize upon the
most suitable time and circumstances in which his fatal mission
might be certainly accomplished ; he often displayed indications
of exhaustion and languor and became irritable, passionately
excited and vehement, whenever his removal of Grarfield, to
adopt his own euphuism, was alluded to as murder, and
deported himself in such a style as to suggest involuntary and
morbid propensities, or, at all events, emotions which were
susceptible of strong and sudden and precipitate elevation, and
consequently of determining lines of conduct inconsistent, not
merely with prudence and expediency, but with his own
interests and natural habits of thought and action.
As a natural sequence to what may be accepted as the spontaneous confessions of the accused, it may impart clearness
to this narrative to introduce at this stage, the observations of
the medical experts, called for the defence, who were, it is
stated in attendance during Guiteau's examination, although it
would have been more conducive to the ends of justice as well
to the purposes of science, that these witnesses should have
personally, and separately, and previous to the trial, subjected
Guiteau to rigid and protracted, though private medical and moral
scrutiny, in place of arriving at conclusions, founded upon
hypothetical propositions submitted to them in the Court.
Dr Kiernan, a practising physician for eight years, is now
managing editor of the " Chicago Medical Keview," and lecturer
on mental diseases in the Medical College of that city. Has never
been superintendent of an asylum, but had been connected with
a department for the insane on Ward's Island, and was practically
the medical assistant during his connection with the establishment, as well as apothecary ; represented himself as an agnostic,
as a believer in moral insanity, and in the propositions that five
out of every 25 men were deranged, that there were a greater
number of persons of unsound mind at liberty than in seclusion,
and that those of active excitable habits, were in danger of becoming general paralytics.
This expert assuming that there is in the blood of Guiteau
a strong hereditary taint, that at the age of 35 years his
mind was so much deranged that, according to Dr Rice, he
was a fit subject to be sent to an asylum ; that, frequently
after that date during the succeeding five years, he maniWAS GUITEAU INSANE? 107
fested such decided symptoms of insanity, without simulation,
that many different persons conversing with him, and observing
his conduct, believed him to be insane ; and further that in or
about the month of June 1881, at or about the expiration of
said term of five years, he became demented by the idea that
he was inspired of God to remove by death the President of
the United States; that he acted on what he believed to be
such inspiration, and on what he believed to be in accordance
with the Divine will in the preparation for, and in the accomplishment of such a purpose; thtft he committed the act of
shooting the President under what he believed to be a divine
command, which he was not at liberty to disobey, and which
belief made out a conviction which controlled his conscience,
and overpowered his will as to that act, so that he could not
resist the mental pressure upon him ; and lastly, immediately
after the shooting, he appeared calm and as if relieved by the
performance of a great duty; and that there was no other
adequate motive for the act than the conviction that he was
executing the Divine will for the good of his country ; the
witness conceives that, accepting these propositions as a true
and legitimate exposition of the history and mental state of
the accused, he would say that the prisoner was insane.
Similar assumptions were submitted to all the experts subsequently examined, so that it will only be necessary to state the
amount of their experience, or rather the opportunities for observing the various modifications of cerebral disease which they
had possessed, and the conclusions at which they had arrived as
to Guiteau's condition, derived from their examination of his
symptoms, or from the testimony of those most intimately acquainted with'his opinions and conduct.
Dr Nichols, a most eminent psychologist, Bloomingdale
Asylum for the Insane, was first connected with the New York
State Lunatic Asylum at Utica, then with the Bloomingdale
Asylum, then with the Government Hospital for the Insane
for the District of Columbia; and, lastly, again with the
Bloomingdale Asylum. Guided by the hypothetical statement,
presented above, and from his personal examination of the
prisoner, he would say that he was insane.

Dr Folson, of Boston, for the last nine years had given a
large portion of his time to the study of mental diseases, was in
the McLean Asylum for about a year and a half, has extended
his observations to the Medical Schools of Berlin and Vienna,
visiting Europe repeatedly, and has for the last three years been
the Professor of Psychology in Harvard University. Accepting
the contention of Guiteau's counsel to be correct and trustworthy,
he would pronounce that person to be unquestionably insane.
Dr Godding, Government Hospital for the Insane, Washington, the coming Psychologist of the U. S., taking for granted
that the propositions upon which the opinion of preceding medical
witnesses were based were at once accurate and scientific, but,
without entertaining any convictions as to the truth or falsity,
was of opinion that the person described therein was unquestionably insane.
Dr McBride, of Milwaukee Asylum, concurred in the view of
the preceding witness.

Dr Channing has devoted his attention for eight years to the
observation and care of mental disease in the Asylum for Insane
Criminals at Auburn, N.Y., in the State Insane Hospital at
Danvers, Mass.; and in an Asylum at Brookline, Mass. Kelying upon the -gravamena of the exculpatory document, he
would declare the man to be insane.

Dr Fisher, who has been occupied with the care of lunatics
for 20 years, both as medical assistant and superintendent of
the Boston Asylum, guided by the propositions placed before
him, although unwilling to rely on such restricted evidence,
would regard Guiteau as of unsound mind.

Dr Spetzka has been a member of the profession for eight
years, and engaged for six in the special investigation of nervous
diseases. He studied in Vienna and America; bad been called repeatedly as an expert in the consideration of insanity ; had written
articles upon the subject, and had obtained the international competition prize in 1878, for an essay on insanity. He examined
Guiteau in jail, and believed him to be insane, and nothing in his
collateral observationsas to his physical condition tended to modify
that conviction. The particular phase or character of his alienation
may be conveyed in the statement that he presents a marked tendency to delusive or insane opinions, and to the creation of morbid
and fantastical projects. There is besides an unequivocal element
of imbecility of judgment, and while there was no other evidence
than the expression of his face for this, he had no doubt that he
is a moral imbecile, or rather a moral monstrosity. The witness,
while declining to express any judgment founded upon hypothetical grounds, entertains a belief that the prisoner had been
in more or less of a morbid mental state throughout his life, and
that he was probably insane at the time of the homicide.

On cross-examination, these opinions were not shaken, Dr.
Spetzka firmly adhering to his detection of a morbid delusive
tendency, and to his distinction between the capability of
Guiteau as a lawyer, to recognise the effects of criminal acts,
and his inability to perceive, and to be guided by the difference
between right and wrong.

Dr Fordyce Barker, physician, New York, denied the ex-*
istence of hereditary insanity, but admitted taint and tendency ;
denied that delusions were perfectly pathognomic of insanity;
denied the existence of moral insanity, as not known by psychologists; denied'that an impulse to kill, in obedience to God,
could be accepted as a proof of insanity, unless in the case of
an upright healthy man, who suddenly kills his child, and
refers it to the will of God : denied that uncontrollable impulse
per se is a form or symptom of insanity, and said that if an
individual can at any time control himself, he has not lost the
power of volition. He held the border line of insanity to be
synonymous to " crank " eccentricities in dress, manners, &c.,
and that they may be the result of vanity. Moral perversion
and wickedness may be the result of insanity. Insanity always
accompanied by cerebral disease. Those bom with cerebral or
skull malformation most prone to insanity.

Dr Noble, of the jail where Guiteau was confined, said that
Guiteau had suffered from malaria; attributed homicide to
inspiration, but referred actual death to doctors. Dr Noble
has regarded him very attentively, and regards him as sane,
bright, intelligent. Guiteau said had the President recovered,
God must have countermanded his order, as in case of Abraham
and Isaac.

Dr Allan McLean, Hamilton, New York, psychologist for
more than nine years, believes Guiteau to be sane, but eccentric,
able to know right from wrong, and to know the consequence of
his act.

Dr Worcester, called for defence, now states that after a visit
to Guiteau in prison, and after hearing a series of hypothetical
propositions offered by court, he believed Guiteau to be sane
when he killed Garfield. He for some time regarded him as of
unsound mind, but further opportunities of observation had
exposed his error. Admitted that a religious opinion might
dominate the will, and amount to alienation.

Dr Talcott, psychologist for seven years, medical superintendent of the State Homoeopathic Hospital for the Insane at
Middletown, lecturer on same subject, medical officer Hospital
for Inebriates. He examined Guiteau in jail. From his manner
at that time, and a review of the events of his life, he would
infer that he was sane. He described three cases, one
in which a patient was commanded by the Lord on every
occasion; another who was inspired to build a house, and then
to kill his wife for supposed infidelity; and a third, who was
enjoined by the Almighty to destroy her children, and came
to the asylum in order to avoid obedience ; but did not conceive that Guiteau was dominated by acquiescence in the voice
or will of the Almighty.

Dr Stearns, medical superintendent, Hartford Asylum.

Has had more than 1,000 patients nnder his care. Has examined Guiteau four times in prison, but like many of the other
experts, either pretended to be, or was received as the friend or
partisan of the prisoner ; or, at all events, was so regarded by
him. Apart from certain indications of abnormality in the state
of the pupils, the tongue, the head, and slightly in articulation,
Gruiteau was healthy. He was besides, shrewd, able to recall the
events of his life, and claimed to have been influenced in his
attack upon Garfield by Divine influence. He, Dr Stearns, however, adopting the hypothetical propositions of the prosecution,
regarded him as sane, but acknowledged that the tendency to
insanity was more than ordinarily strong in his progenitors.
He said, moreover, that a lunatic might commit a crime which
he perfectly knew was contrary to the laws of the land; that
preparations might be made for ensuring success in the attempt,
and that the offender might, in anticipation, adopt arrangements
to ensure his escape and safety.

Dr Jamin-Strong, superintendent of the Asylum at Cleveland,
Ohio, containing the average number of 625 patients, had treated,
in all, over 2,000 insane persons. He examined the patient in
prison, and watched him in court; he conceived him to be sane
because he was sound in his perceptions, his sensations, his
thoughts, his will; because he thought quickly and consecutively, recollected accurately; faculties entirely incompatible
with insanity ; but admitted that if the hypothetical propositions
presented by the defence were trustworthy, Gruiteau would be of
unsound mind or a point towards unsoundness of mind.
Dr Shew, superintendent Middleton, Conn., Hospital for
Insane and Member of the Psychological Society. From his
examination of Gruiteau he regarded him as sane, but confessed
that egotism was a marked symptom in criminal madmen ; that
he did not suspect him of feigning derangement in court, but that
he was acting under the influence of his natural dispositions and
manner ; and that a lunatic believing himself to be actuated by
divine prompting or command would indicate a delusion but
not an insane delusion.

Dr Evarts, superintendent of the " Sanatorium," a private
hospital for the insane. He represented Guiteau as sane ; but did
not accuse him of pretending insanity; related instances of
persons believing themselves endowed with eternal life and that
they possessed the power of raising the dead who were of sound
mind ; finally, that Guiteau has been exaggerating his own
defects, but displayed in so doing " egotism, sharpness, smartness, vulgarity, ingratitude."
Dr MacDonald, superintendent of the New York City
Asylum,' has had 6,000 insane cases under his care, was a delegate at the International Medical Congress in London, and was
Professor of Medical Jurisprudence in the University of New
York, is reported to have given his evidence in a most clear
and comprehensive manner. He intimated his familiarity with
cases of imaginary inspiration, that these hallucinations were
generally traceable to the external senses, or to some misinterpretation of the Scriptures ; that such morbid impressions completely overmastered all fear, foresight, and selfish considerations.
He defined irresistible impulses as of sudden origin and execution,
as, if resisted, no longer of the same class. He admitted
hereditary predisposition ; but contended that if insane parents
generally preceded insane children, the whole world would be
mad. He did not recognise moral insanity as a disease, but as
another name for wickedness. He admitted that a monomaniac
might be insane at the moment when a given act was committed
but perfectly sane the next. No maniac would restrain himself
in order to avoid injury to another. He observed that during
the interrogatory in prison Guiteau used the expression " conception" as the originating instigation to his crime, but closed
the allusion by stating that he had prayed to God, whose act it
was, to avert the execution of his purpose, always accompanying
this declaration with an emphatic and loud voice and gesticulation. He believes that Gruiteau has feigned what he supposes to
be insanity and to the best of his ability in court.

Dr Barksdale, superintendent of the Asylum at Virginia, is
impressed with the opinion that Guiteau is sane, that he has been
acting insanity in court, because while calm and stolid in prison,
he catches at every salient point in the proceedings now going on.
Dr Collender, superintendent of the Tennessee Aslyum,
ascertained Gruiteau to be in good bodily health, represents him
to be of sane mind, and on the grounds that his replies were
satisfactory, they were intelligent; they showed a power of
concentrating his attention on questions and the subjects of
questions ; they were entirely coherent and rational, and were
couched in good language. Gruiteau assured Dr Collender that he
slept soundly, both antecedently to and immediately after the
accomplishment of the mission, which he referred to the conception, pressure, inspiration from above.
Dr Kempster, Winnebago, a witness in support of the theory
of Guiteau's mental soundness, admitted that lunatics could
often curb and control their unhealthy tendencies and designs,
till at length the morbid influence controlled them.

Dr Gray, Superintendent of the State Lunatic Asylum of
New York, studied insanity for 31 years, has had an aggregate
of 12,000 lunatics under his care. He does not believe in
moral insanity. In his examination, Guiteau asserted that the
intention to kill the President flashed upon him, that the act
was not his, that the responsibility rested on God; that he was
legally, not medically insane. Dr Gray regarded the accused
as of sound mind, but declined to answer categorically whether
Guiteau was knowingly telling a falsehood in affirming his inspiration, Almighty pressure, &c.; but said such self-control, selfdirection, and self-guidance as he displayed was antagonistic to
anything that he had ever seen in his personal experience with the
insane. Moreover, the presence in him of judgment, reflection,
self-command, in regard to his acts, also the fact that he
controlled himself, as to the time in which he should do this
act, supported this judgment. In cases of insanity there would
be no preparation for personal safety. During the last ten years
he had 300 cases of homicidal insanity under his care. Of
these only three claimed inspiration. All of these were violent
and of long duration.

Dr Bowker, of Kansas, on the part of the defence, t estified that
Guiteau's wife had confessed to him her unwillingness to apply
for the divorce which was subsequently obtained, at all events
until his mental state was proved to be healthy or unhealthy.
Guiteau's wife, now remarried, repudiates this confession as
erroneously stated.

In manipulating the immense mass of American papers
forwarded to us containing the description of this extraordinary
investigation, the chief difficulty has consisted not so much in
the expiscation of truth as in the elimination of the irrelevant
from the relevant. It became necessary rigidly to exclude not
merely extraneous topics, but much of what may be styled
illustrative collateral gossip and tradition ; to disregard as much
as possible the interruptions by the prisoner, although these
were often coherent and illustrative of his mental defects, although
more frequently wild and passionate and incongruous ebullitions
of temper ; to ignore the part taken by individuals remotely connected with the trial; to shut our eyes to the unseemly, but
perhaps merely affected, wrangling of the counsel, and at once
to epitomise and abbreviate the depositions of many of the
witnesses, and even of the experts, as running not merely into
repetition or reiteration, which was perhaps unavoidable, but
which repeatedly embraced the whole wild range of psychology
and of psychical phases which had no connection or relation to
the subject before the court. In our opinion a grand error ran
through the proceedings, although less contaminating the defence;
in divergence to isolated points, to particular forms and stages of
alienation, to purely theoretical speculations which could not,
without great difficulty and dexterity, be made to affect the
opinions of the jury as to whether Gruiteau was a criminal or a
lunatic. The safe and sound course would have been to embrace
the whole life of the accused, and if necessary the history of his
ancestors, and to have traced the different steps and stages of his
motley career, up to the date of the grand and melancholy climax
in which it closed, and to have analysed the factors of the
various transactions in which he was engaged, and to have thus
determined whether these were rational, consistent with the
recognised laws of mental and moral obligations, and with the
conduct and character of healthy, reliable and responsible men.
In our estimation the disquisitions on irresistible impulse were
uncalled for, seeing that, whatever the nature of the grand and
final scenes of the sanguinary drama might be, the incentives or
inspirations, or conceptions of which it was the consummation,
had been passing through the consciousness of the perpetrator
for a long period, had been discussed, if we may use the term,
with his conscience or, as he would have asserted, with his
Creator, and although part of the manifestations of a violent,
versatile, and variable mind, were the result, elaborated from
doubts, difficulties, and deliberation. In the same class may be
comprehended the introduction of moral insanity, which,
whether admitted or not by the psychologists of America, has
been repeatedly pled and recognised in Courts of Law, and,
which is less open to impugnment than that of many other forms
of aberration, such as Mania Transitora, which has extorted
sanction from these cavillers. If moral insanity be not disease or
a class of disease, the Psychology of Dipsomania, Kleptomania,
and a long series of other deviations from healthy motives, must
be expunged from our nosologies and text-books, and the painful denunciations of " wickedness " applied to the perversities, the
incompatibilities, the extravagance or oddities, the cruelties and
crudities, of many pure and gentle and, in other respects,
elevated characters. Had he been influenced by revenge or any
cognate impulse, Blaine should have been his victim. Nor
could Gruiteau be fairly included in such a category, for although
not the perfectly immaculate pietist which he was painted, and
although playing a most absurd and irregular part on the stage
of life, he did not exhibit that deterioration and degradation
which accompanies such a condition ; nor did his assault upon
the President appear to be dictated, whatever its cause really
was, by revenge or hatred, or general corruption, nor any of the
elements which enter into the heart and influence the will
of a moral maniac. Far be it from us to insinuate or even
imagine that the diagnostic penetration of our American
collaborateurs can have been affected by the fervour or fever
which convulsed their fellow-countrymen on the foul parricide
which called them together ; but can they dispassionately aver
that the chronic inebriety of Charles Lamb was not, psychologically morbid, but baldly degrading drunkenness; or that the
wise and virtuous senator of the college of justice, Lord M., and
other noble lords who have adorned our house of peers in
extracting books from the shelves of their bookseller, or gold
or gems from the coffers of relatives, were guilty of vile and
vulgar theft; or that Jonathan Martin in setting fire to York
minster was not a theo-maniac, but a wretched incendiary ?
The insurmountable obstacle which appals and repels these
philosophers, is the apparent irreconcilability of co-ordinate
and it may be contemporaneous operation of a morbid impulse
and healthy and rational motives in the same mind. For is it not
suspected that many minds endowed with robust and splendid
qualities cherish some wild and baseless belief, are haunted by
superstitious fears, or are the unresisting victims of delusion ? The
confessionals of medical men, however, declare the fact, that the
presence of signal and unequivocal eccentricity and hallucination
is compatible with the exercise of sound judgment and brilliant
fancy, with the faithful discharge of vast responsibilities, and
with the external characteristics of perfect sanity. The calm,
contemplative mathematician and satirist, Pascal, rested for
years on the brink of an imaginary gulf; the adventurous warrior who hewed his way to the throne of Sweden was daunted
from his stern purpose by an apparition in a red cloak; Fox,
the founder of Quakerism, was inspired to utter maledictions
upon the unbelievers around. Extreme cases are recorded
where men have been accompanied by a skeleton step by step of
their course; where a gory head has crossed the gaze of the
impassioned orator; where one horrible thought, recurring
periodically, has haunted its victim to despair and death ; but
instances are constantly met with where individuals carry into
ordinary intercourse, and active life, tendencies to destroy
children, grotesque convictions that their frame is tenanted by
unclean beasts, that they are infected by foul diseases, that their
passions are acted on by the will of others, and extravagant
fancies that the future is opened up to them, that they enjoy
communion with unseen beings, that they see and hear and
deal with objects hidden from common observation. In such
circumstances the mind either detects the true nature of the
impression, knows that it is diseased, refuses credence to
the morbid suggestion, and struggles with and subdues the
tendency; or, attributing these to errors of sense or external
circumstances, it disregards their influence ; or, separating them
from its ordinary operations, it is partially affected, but acts
independently of their presence ; or, receiving them as realities,
there remains the prudence to conceal, although there is
wanting the wisdom to resist. It is somewhat difficult to
comprehend the progress of Dr Gray's mental development
from belief to scepticism in moral insanity, and while that
gentleman's experience must be treated with profound respect, it
is impossible to admit that he has studied, fully and faithfully,
cases where the contradictions of vice and virtue, parity and
pollution, truth and mendacity stand or struggle in antagonism
in the same mind. What is there in our knowledge of the laws
of the Nervous System which could exempt the sentiments and
emotions from those physical or psychical influences which
constitute disease, and which assail and destroy the sovereign
power of judgment, and that inlet, that window of the soul,
consciousness ?

By a most appalling Nemesis Dr Gray, who, associated with
Ray, Kirkbride, Pliny Earle, has stood foremost in the ranks of
American psychologists, has been formidably, if not fatally,
wounded by an insane murderer, apparently actuated by some
impressions connected with the trial of Guiteau.
The following extract from the " Albany Times " of March
17, is the chief information which has reached us upon this
painful subject:

" ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION.

"Dr John P. Gray, of Utica, Siiot at by a Ckank.
" The man gives himself wp at the jail and boasts of his
deed?four revolvers, a dirk knife, over 200 cartridges, and
acid in his possession.

" [JJtica Heraldy March 17.]
" Utica was greatly excited about 7 p.m. yesterday by the
rumour that spread like wildfire, that Dr John P. Gray, superintendent of the state lunatic asylum in this city, had just been
assassinated.

" The facts in brief are as follows : About 6.50 p.m., while
sitting in his private office at the Asylum with Rev. Dr Gibson,
the chaplain, Dr G. A. Blumer, assistant physician, and his son
John P. Gray, Jr., Dr Gray was shot through both cheeks by
Henry Remshaw (then unknown), a shoemaker, bath manipulator, and veteran soldier, aged 44 years. The ball entered at
the edge of Dr Gray's whiskers, glanced over the bone under
the eye, passed out through the opposite cheek and into the
window casing, and then dropped on the floor. Dr Gray exclaimed, ' My God, I'm shot!' The assassin ran out through
the hall immediately after the shooting. John Gray and Dr.
Blumer followed him to the foot of the main stone steps in
front of the asylum, when the fellow turned and fired at them,
and again at John's dog, Dr Gibson was blinded by the flash
of the revolver and smoke, and thought that something had exploded. Dr Gray bled profusely, but was able to walk to his
room in a few moments and bathe his wound. No bones are
injured, and he suffered no shock. It is probable that nothing
serious will result from the wound. Eemshaw was followed by
coachman James Mahar two blocks to Faass Avenue, when he
turned and fired at him, and then disappeared in the intense
darkness. Later developments show that he went to his home,
No. 38 Noyes Street, told Mrs. Charles L. Yearhling, who occupies the lower part of the house, that he had killed Dr Gray at
last, danced about, showed her four revolvers, a dirk, and piles
of cartridges, and said he would give himself up. He went to
the Mohawk Street jail, gave himself up to Mrs. Appleton, and
when Jailer Appleton came in, gave up his arsenal, consisting
of two large navy revolvers, loaded; one four-barrel repeater,
loaded ; one heavy calibre derringer, loaded ; one heavy Spanish
dirk knife ; twenty-one packages of 44-calibre cartridges, six in
a package; two cases of large cartridges, and one bottle acetic
acid and opium, and then went to bed.

"Jailer Appleton telephoned Assistant-Chief McElwaine
that Eemshaw had given himself up and was locked in a cell.
An officer was sent to the jail, and he returned to the stationhouse with Eemshaw at 9.30 p.m. Eemshaw declared that he
was an ambassador sent from heaven by the Lord, John A.
Dix, Guiteau, and Captain Jones, October 17, 1880, to kill Dr.
Gray as a friend of the insane, and that he was only permitted
to tell the secrets of heaven to Conkling, Blaine, and Schurz.
He was locked in one of the lower cells, and an officer was
detained to see that he did no harm to himself through the
night. It is variously conjectured that he is a crank, a fraud,
and a blackmailer. lie has never been in an asylum except as
employed by Dr Gray two or three times to teach the children
at the asylum how to swim. Dr Gray's only other knowledge
of the man was gained in the Bagg's Hotel Turkish bath rooms,
where Eemshaw was employed as a manipulator. He claimed
that he had caught lumbago while attending Dr Gray in the
baths, and wanted the doctor to pay him #20, as he had been
poisoned for life.

" Eemshaw had lately made threats that he would shoot
Dr Gray to several persons, but all thought him harmless, and
no attention was paid to him. Wednesday he told his old employer, William M. Owens, that he intended to kill Dr Gray,
and Anthony Sickenberger heard him make threats of the same
kind.

" About 5 r.M. yesterday a man answering Remshaw's description was seen moving about the asylum grounds.
" Dr Gray has been in Washington on duty in the Guiteau
case about two weeks, advising with District Attorney Corkhill.
During his absence, frequent calls for him have been made over
the telephone, and when inquiry was made as to who wanted
him and what was desired, the regular answer was, " Never
mind if he is not at home." It is believed that Remshaw
learned in some way that Dr Gray was expected on the 5.40
p.m. train from New York yesterday, for he was seen at the
depot. After arrest he informed a reporter that he was at the
depot intending to shoot the doctor, but refrained from doing so
then on account of the crowd, fearing he would kill someone else.
" John .Bender, Jr., his nephew, says that Remshaw was sick
about two years ago, he thinks from over-heating and his
exertions sustained in the baths. He claimed that Dr Gray
had made him crazy, and threatened to sue him for $25,000.
He was married to a woman named Wasmer, but lie claimed
that she was not neat enough for his house, and only lived with
her two days.

" When last heard from at midnight, Dr Gray was very
comfortable, and no serious consequences were anticipated from
the wounds."

Now to continue our main narrative:?
The objection which has been urged, may, in like manner,
be directed against the consideration bestowed upon and the
speculation ingrafted upon the inspiration claimed by Guiteau.
The doubt adventured as to his crediting his own professions
cannot fairly be persisted in when the etiology of this assumed
delusion is investigated, and when all the circumstances connected with, if not contributing to, its climax or evolution into a
murderous assault are taken into consideration. " The pressure,"
whether moral, mechanical, or supernatural, which is pleaded
by Guiteau, as constraining him to a course inconsistent with
his foregoing life, , was not the sudden outcome of passion
or disappointment or despair in his own fortunes; nor was
it accompanied or accelerated or precipitated by emotional
excitement or disturbance, nor by detectable intellectual confusion or obscurity of ideas. The delusion as to inspiration
may legitimately be traced back to paternal instruction and
training, and to the contamination of Oneida principles and
practice, where a creed embodying wild fancies as to immortality and personal omnipotence were conjoined with a sanctimonious depravity which designedly, or recklessly, sanctioned
vice in certain of its most loathsome forms. In dealing with
Guiteau's pretensions, it must be clearly kept in mind that he
had been taught the present and palpable interference of Deity
with the will and conduct of men, that He had endowed them
with supremacy over death and the grave, with the power of
triumphing over disease; and should this be steadily applied as
a test to the prisoner's subsequent opinions and to the ultimate
growth and maturity of his errors, the reality of his selfdeception may be readily admitted. Even his habitual introspection, his religious dreams and imaginations, and his habit of
referring what were obviously the suggestions of his own mind
to an omniscient author in early youth, Noyes, the superintendent of the Shaker republic, and in later years to a purer
though still deceptious influence, must have tended to the
production of a similar effect. Whether the partially asymmetrical skull, the inequality of the pupils, the tremor of the
tongue, were congenital in Guiteau or acquired, or could have
any influence upon health in maturity, it is not necessary to
determine. But there are phenomena, connected with infantile
or early life, which do bear intimately upon the capacity to
resist morbid processes of thought and sentiment, or which may
directly ingraft glaring delusions upon consciousness. Guiteau
was long in acquiring articulate language, he was a dullard,
slow and stupid; that education, imparted in school, which
contributes to invigorate and regulate judgment, seems to have
been extremely limited. He became the pupil of a father deeply
impressed with religious extravagance and perversion, and
engaged in a positive propagandism of supernatural romances.
The boy became a willing and apt disciple and for years imbibed,
and long cherished with reverence, fancies which in him assumed
the rank of convictions, which were calculated to mislead, alike
his estimate of what was subjective and what was objective in the
ideas or feelings which passed before his mind. The inevitable
consequences of the doctrines which he long accepted as sacred
and imperative, were to confuse his appreciation and estimate of
the real and revealed relations between Deity and the will and
duties of man, and to imbue him with a belief that he was an
object of divine interposition, an exponent of divine purposes, and
especially designed to carry out a great or national revolution. It
is not, however, in diseased, or deluded intellects nor in exalted
or inflamed emotions that wild and dangerous theories of inspiration have exercised power. Although many circumstances
combine to demonstrate that the motive, the imaginary inspiration which led to the assassination of Garfield was morbid in its
nature, it should not be forgotten that a vile and vicious inclination, long harboured and dwelt on, may have over-turned the
controlling sway of caution and conscience and the sense of
responsibility, and have reduced the perpetrator to a state
of delirium or dementia, although the incentive was culpable
and open to all condemnation. But it is difficult to comprehend what the object of Gruiteau could be in executing vengeance upon one whom he represented as his friend, to whom he
had spoken only a few sentences, and whose destruction could
not wipe away an offence which had never been given, which
was consummated in public with perfect composure and intrepidity by a cowardly attack which would inevitably involve
condign punishment and universal execration, and which could
not even vindicate the wrongs of a party, as the death of Blaine
might have appeared to do. It is worthy of comment, that at
this grand conjuncture, when the fate and peace of America was
declared by a volunteer conservator to depend upon his proceedings, that, if we can credit his revelations, he had debated the
character and all the bearings of the meditated murder, and the
real origin and relation of the transaction to himself before the bar
of his Creator, and again and again subjected his " conception " to
the only analysis of which he was competent, he was, though restless and uneasy, in perfect health, eating, drinking, and sleeping
as at other times when undisturbed by such a momentous crisis,
and that he deliberately engaged in preparations for the terrible
catastrophe, a proceeding which, although denied by Dr Gray
to be possible or probable, in the case of a lunatic, was, according
to our knowledge, most judiciously admitted by Dr Stearns to
be compatible with chronic mania or imbecility. There is this
additional element in the influence of the pretended inspiration,
that it was not confined to the murder of Garfield, but that it
embraced a multiplicity of mental states and resolutions. The
inoculation of his parents' credulity, or rather the trail of the
Oneida corruption, appears to have infected, and to a great
degree vitiated, his whole life, and the notion of direct heavenly
guidance is detectable in even ordinary transactions. He writes
in reference to the Shaker community that he " is driven by
God." He is buoyed up by the expectation of supernatural aid
to meditate or undertake absurd or impracticable schemes and
speculations, disproportioned alike to his abilities and his
resources; his vision of the theocratic enterprise is not less
prompted by this conception than his ludicrous expectation that
the Almighty would pay his debts, in the contraction of which
he manifests a suspicious facility and frequency. The extreme
vanity which is attributed to him, which is even commented
upon by his sceptical wife, the ill-founded ambition to expound the doctrines of Scripture in public, which led to unmitigated disgrace; his presumptuous interference with, and
unfounded pretensions concerning, the party he espoused, and
his behaviour in court when his life hung in the balance?con120 WAS GU1TEAU INSANE?
duct winch, although it enabled him to display both extreme
cleverness and extreme folly, evidently communicated to him
the most intense delight as constituting him the observed of all
observers, the most prominent and notorious personage in the
United States, for the season more interesting than the President himself?all palpably flowed from the error that he was
acting under supreme superintendence and intelligence, and
was part and parcel of his doctrine of inspiration. Discrepancy
is supposed to have been detected by the defence in the evidence of the experts, on the side of the prosecution, as to the real
character of his behaviour. But whether his manner, addresses,
tone, look, were feigned or not, we would contend that dissimulation at such a moment, and in so awful a crisis, amounted
nearly to intellectual perversion, and that a murderer, who
could so simulate, and so successfully simulate, when arraigned
before his country, must have been either mad, or endowed with
capacities hitherto undefined. His mistake as to this situation
is akin to the absence of all remorse or sorrow for the deed which
he was impelled by powers, which he could not resist, to perform, inasmuch as repentance might have been anticipated,
from a healthy though sanguinary disposition, which Guiteau's
certainly was not. It should be further remarked that his
cogitation, and uncertainty, as to the origin of the impetus
which was pressing him forward, is not to be stigmatised as the
doubt and dread of a pusillanimous but revengeful heart, bent
upon retaliation for an offence; as such self-debate is in complete accordance with the moral difficulties and confusion which
have been traced in many lunatics before the commission of
crimes, and even of simple acts, which were interpreted as
culpable or as possibly meritorious, and dictated, by the voice of
God speaking through conscience, or fear, or faith.

We have intentionally kept aloof from all criticism, even
recapitulation, of the speeches of Counsel, as these were naturally
and necessarily dictated by a partisan's spirit, by a dexterous
endeavour to represent events or symptoms in that particular
light which harmonised with the object of the address ; secondly,
as they merely were commentaries on commentaries, glosses, or
colourings of the depositions of witnesses ; and thirdly, as they
were framed with the purpose of directing the minds of the
jury to a judicial, and not to a medical interpretation of the
case under trial. But we propose to include the closing observations in the charge of Judge Cox, when placing before the
jury the grounds upon which the conduct of the accused might
be regarded as indicative of cerebral disease.

Guiteau is described as " a youth born, as it were, under
malign influence; the child of a diseased mother, and of a
father subject to insane delusions, reared in retirement, and
imbued with fanatical religious views; subsequently, his mind
filled with fanatical theories, launched on the world, with no
guidance save his own impulses, evincing an incapacity for any
continuous employment, changing from one pursuit to another,
now a lawyer, now a religionist, and now a politician, unsuccessful in all; full of wild impracticable schemes, for which he had
neither resources nor ability; subject to delusions, his mind
incoherent and incompetent of reasoning coherently on any subject; with a mind so weak, and a temper so impressionable, that
he became deranged, and was, therefore, impelled to the commission of a crime, the seriousness of which he could not understand."
We are disposed to accept these passages as a clear and
fair, but insufficiently comprehensive, exposition of the causes
which led Gruiteau to commit the awful regicide with which he is
charged, and to adopt them as the principal grounds which
justify us in venturing to answer the question which serves as a
title to this paper, by pronouncing Guiteau of unsound mind.
