The Mentally Defective and the Community
=========================================

Paper read by Miss Evelyn Fox at a Meeting of the Psychological Section of
the British Association, Liverpool, September, 1923.

The developments in recent years in connection with the care of the
defective?ascertainment, standardised tests, specialised teaching and the pr -
vision of institutions?have shown to all in close touch with the work (not on y
in this country but in the United States as well) that the problem of the relatio
?f the defective to the community cannot be solved or even serious y ea ^
by these means. It is a ^ar more complex one than even the most ar seeing
imagined. The knowledge gained by practical experience in in ivi ua ca
work over the whole country has brought home to us not only t e num er ? '
concerned, but the endless variety of methods required to deal with their end e y
varied needs. Further, in our efforts to care for the high-grade defective we nave
learnt that this problem is so closely allied with the care of still more
and important classes of the community? the dull and backwar , ie su '
the unbalanced and unstable?that, till we have dealt efficien y an
tively with a side of the question hitherto almost untouched, the care ot the
efective in the community, we cannot approach with any c ance o succe
question of the teaching and training for citizenship of these ot er c asses.
^ubstantTalif u?nPheSSUrd ?f Space some con(icn!Sation of this PaPer ha8 been neceS9ai7? but Jt

We have seen in the past and shall, I believe, see in the future, how the know-
ledge gained through experience with defectives helps us in tackling the problems
presented by other dependent classes of the community. Thus the work of
Madam Montessori in her early days in Rome, the place of manual training in the
school curriculum, the development of individual treatment for children and young
adults, all of which have so profoundly affected the education of normal children,
had their origin in, or owe their chief impetus to, experimental work in connec-
tion with the teaching of the mentally defective. We shall further find, I believe,
that the organised work of supervising and regulating the industrial and economic
position of defectives who remain outside institutions will have far-reaching
effects in helping us to cope with one of the grave problems of the future?the
failure of certain people, through temperament, character, continued bad environ-
ment, or prolonged adverse conditions, to adapt themselves successfully to the
ever-increasing complexities of our modern social organisation.

The problem is so vast that I have perforce limited myself in this paper
to certain aspects only?the ascertainment of defect, and the methods which we
shall need to employ for dealing with the large numbers so ascertained. I have
eliminated from consideration the problem of the defective of low mental grade
who can hardly form part of the community, and have considered only the ques-
tion presented by the feeble-minded, and high grade imbecile.

To many, the problem of the care of the mentally defective presents itself
in comparatively simple terms?the ascertainment of defectives by means of
various standardised tests, the training and education of those so ascertained in
suitable schools and institutions, and for the protection of the community (secon-
darily for that of the individual) their maintenance, when over school age, in
colonies and institutions. To others all these methods are mere temporary
expedients, for to them the whole problem lies in preventing defectives from
bearing children, by means mainly of sterilisation but also by segregation, and
to this all other considerations must be subordinated; for they maintain that the
results of such methods?and more especially of sterilisation?will be so greatly
to decrease the number of defectives as to reduce the whole question to small and
manageable proportions. Holders of both these views envisage defectives as a
large well-defined group of individuals who can easily be diagnosed by experts
and their number accurately ascertained, and who can then be dealt with by one
or two recognised and established methods. If the problem were as simple as
this we should indeed be able to look forward hopefully to its solution, for the
Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, and the Elementary Education (Defective and Epil-
eptic Children) Acts, 1899 and 1914, amended and intelligently administered,
would give us the machinery we need for coping with it, and our sole care would be
to ensure a full and efficient administration of such Acts.

But unfortunately practical experience in dealing directly with large numbers
of cases does not bear out the truth of this contention. We see defectives as an ill-
defined group of individuals the diagnosis of whose condition is a matter of dis-
pute amongst various experts?medical men, psychologists, teachers and social
workers?and about whose numbers and incidence in the various classes of the
community such contradictory figures are given as to be of little or no value. We
see a group, which merges into the other equally ill-defined group, consisting
mainly of young people?the backward, the unstable, the recidivist, the border-
land,?all with this feature in common, that they fail to meet the requirements of
the modern community, and all needing specialised means of help to enable them
to cope with this failure?a group whose members are easily led and influenced,
responsive alike to good and bad?a group containing, besides a conspicuous but
small number of defectives of vicious and criminal habits, an infinitely larger
numbers of defectives of simple and childish characters, as undeveloped in their
sexual as in their mental life, with failings such as those we find in primitive
man and in children, a group of which the individuals vary enormously in their
capacity for work; some able to hold their own under suitable conditions and with
the background of care and training, even in the modern industrial world; some,
though mentally capable of doing so failing through faults of temperament and
character; others capable only of working at their own time and speed, others
again capable of nothing but the very simplest kinds of occupation connected
with their own homes.

This diversity at once rules out as inadequate any one hard and fast method
of dealing with the question. Sterilisation, to which I have already referred in
passing, and which in certain quarters is so hotly advocated, must therefore as a
universal panacea, be rejected as the basis of a constructive policy, for, attractive
as it may appear at the first glance, the more fully it is considered the greater are
the limitations revealed.

{Here followed a summing up of the conclusions recorded in the C.A .M.W.'s
pamphlet on the subject.)

Even with segregation we must realise that, if we accept the contention that
the majority of defectives come from families of bad stock and not from parents who
are actually mentally defective?and the figures now being worked out appear
very conclusive on this point?we shall still have to deal with much the
same numbers as exist at present. Unfortunately reliable statistics on this
question of the number of defectives* are almost entirely lacking. The figures
?f the Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded?4 per
1000?are probably very conservative, but even this low estimate would give us,
in our present population, a total of 151,540 defectives!- In this conjunction
with it, too, must be taken the number of children needing Special School accom-
modation which has been estimated as 80,000.

It must be evident even to the most superficial thinker that to provide per-
manent institutional accommodation for such a number of cases is quite outside
the realm of practical politics and that every other means of safeguarding and
protection must be tried.

If we are to deal effectively with the problem our first necessity is to arrive
at some satisfactory definition of what constitutes mental defect.

Much has been done already to meet some of the difficulties with regard to
children, and the work of the President of this Section, Dr. Cyril Burt, and of
others has gone far to establish standardised tests for them. But no such definite
progress has been made with regard to adults. Although we hope in the future
that the majority of defectives will be recognised as such during childhood, this
^ ill not be the case for many years and there will always be cases whose low or
Unbalanced mentality will only become evident when competition outside school
* The term "defective" is used here and throughout the paper not in the narrow sense of
"tose administratively certifiable under the Mental Deficiency Act but as denot ing persons -vho
re,iuire care, supervision and control for their own protection or for the protection of others.
t See also calculations made by Foard of Control. Summarised on page 81,
life has to be met. We cannot therefore afford to neglect any effort to secure some
common standard for testing adults which shall be accepted by the country as a
whole and which will still be sufficiently elastic to meet the needs of the large and
diverse group of defectives who need help in some form or another.

It has been repeated ad nauseam that mental deficiency is not a psychological,
educational or medical problem but a social one. But have we ever treated it as
such? Have we not been content to state the truism, and then to turn gladly
from the wider issues to a consideration of the question from some special angle?
medical or pedagogical? Surely it is by the response of the defective to his
environment, whether in his family life or in his industrial and economic relations,
or in his wider relations as a citizen of a large community that we must judge
him. Such relations are complex; to realise them will involve not only a know-
ledge of the individual from many different angles but?in the more difficult cases
?this knowledge and observation must cover a long period of years. We cannot
generalise or arrive at an understanding of the failure of the adult defective to
adjust himself to his environment (and without this understanding how we help
and protect him?) as the result of a brief medical or psychological examination,
based on the casual knowledge of one or two aspects of his life imparted often by
biassed relations or by the teacher who has seen him generally only under the
powerful influence of the school, or by the social worker who may have come into
contact with him during some crisis in his life, some moment of stress when failure
was almost inevitable. If our standard of mental deficiency is to be mainly
determined?as the Mental Deficiency Act lays down?by a social criterion, viz.,
the defective's need of care and protection for his own sake and that of others,
such need can frequently be established only as the result of careful watching of
the defective in all his relations over a long period of time; it must not be the out-
come of a short experience in circumstances probably abnormal.

The experience of case work gained specially during the last ten years of work
at the Central Association, has convinced me that to secure this necessary co-opera-
tion, two things are required?an intimate knowledge of the defective and his
surroundings acquired over a long period of time by a supervisor trained for the
work and a better organisation for pooling the knowledge possessed by the offi-
cials of the various authorities coming in contact with him. Our Local Mental
Welfare Associations who visit systematically defectives under the various
authorities, as well as those outside any official purview, can if they select and
train their workers carefully and inspire them with a vision of the work,
ensure for us a living community service for the care of defectives which will
extend throughout their lives and which can at any moment provide authorities,
medical officers, and psychologists, with a record of a defective's past, his suc-
cesses and failures?in short the principle data on which his certification must be
decided.

In addition I should like to suggest, as a practical step, the organisation
of conferences, say bi-annually, over large areas?perhaps even over two or three
counties?of all concerned in the problem, certifying officers under the Mental
Deficiency Act, education officials, school medical officers, psychologists, school
teachers and social workers, who, under expert guidance, would consider the
problem from an entirely practical point of view based on the needs of their own
area. From the experience thus pooled it should be possible to arrive at a uni-
formity of standard in the definition of mental defect that would make a starting
point more accurate than any we have hitherto had, and which should lead us
eventually to evolve the practical methods of help necessary for the cases diag-
nosed as the result of this joint experience.

But whatever tests we ultimately adopt for the determination of defect,
whether in children or adults, this can only be the first step; in itself it will be
useless unless it leads directly to practical measures for caring for the defectives
so detected. It seems hardly necessary to dwell on this but there is a real
danger that some authorities will rest content with fulfilling the duty of ascer-
tainment, possibly of notifying, and be quite supine before the more difficult
question of what to do with cases so ascertained. As an example I would draw
your attention to the following consideration. The Local Education
Authority can notify to the Mental Deficiency Act Committee, children
on or before leaving school who appear to need institutional care or guardian-
ship ; others not considered to need such care are either left entirely without
help or are handed over to a voluntary organisation. In how many instances
has the Local Education Authority kept a record of the lives of such children?
Could any one authority inform us whether, judging by their subsequent
careers, the notifications had been based on right lines ? How many children
not thought to need institutional care have been within a few years before
the Courts, or failed miserably in maintaining themselves and been ultimately
sent to an Institution? Apart from the personal suffering which such failures
involve, the waste of knowledge which should be the basis of future action is
deplorable.

The various ways of caring for defectives other than in institutions and schools
are as yet in their infancy, but no effort should be lost in developing them speedily
to meet the recognised number of cases which call for such treatment.

Out first difficulty is to estimate, out of the total number of defectives, the
number and classes which can be left in the community. Have we any definite
figures? I am afraid none that can be given here, for any statistics we have are
painfully inadequate. During the last ten years when it has been possible to
give institutional care to a certain number of defectives and when we should
have been gathering facts and figures as to the economic and industrial position
?f those not sent to institutions, we have had very abnormal industrial conditions,
First, during the war a very high proportion of defectives were employed and at
good wages, even children excluded from Special Schools as imbeciles earning
good money in simple occupations, thus demonstrating the fact that, some allow-
ances being made, defectives of even a low mental grade are employable. Now
abnormal unemployment makes it difficult to get figures of defectives capable of
industrial work. The gathering of statistics that can be in any way a reliable
guide is further complicated by the differing standards in use in admitting children
to Special Schools. In one area, the bulk of the children may be of a very low
niental grade and include a high percentage of imbeciles; in another, the majority
?f them may be fairly high-grade feeble-minded. This in itself must influence
returns as to employability. Again in some areas?and this fact will have an
important bearing when we consider how to help defectives?there is quite a
considerable amount of employment in factories and mills suitable for them.
In others, such as Liverpool, there is practically none.

On examination of various Returns, including those of the Birmingham After-
care Committee, we should probably not be far out in estimating that about 28%
of the children who leave Special Schools are capable of, and in normal times do
find, remunerative work without any special organised effort being made to pro-
vide them with any particularly suitable occupation or to alter their home envir-
onment. All the figures bear out the fact that the number of defectives under the
care of either public authorities or of our Local Mental Welfare Associations (and
these latter have up to date dealt with some 25,000 cases) forms but a very small
percentage of even the low estimated total of 151,000 defectives whom we have in
the country. It is obvious therefore that this large group of individuals needing
special care and control?which are as essential for the defective outside an
institution as for his brother inside?is not receiving it. Many of them are
living in good homes but it is no exaggeration to maintain that even under these
conditions a defective is usually less well trained and safeguarded, less satisfac-
torily employed (whether remuneratively or not matters little as far as his own
happiness is concerned) than he would be if he could be under skilled supervision
involving some organised method of providing occupation.

The difficulty of estimating the number of defectives outside institutions and
likely to remain so, is, finally, enhanced by the fact to which I have already
alluded?that they are so often indistinguishable as regards conduct, etc., from
the unstable, unbalanced "borderline" cases who are not actually mentally
defective. Not only is this a difficulty in estimating numbers, but it is one which
prejudices the work for defectives, for amongst such borderline cases there will
inevitably be more serious failures than amongst those of mental defect by reason
of the fact that our facilities for dealing with them are so painfully inadequate.
The various methods of dealing with mental defect must always include an
adequate number of properly classified institutions with a large variety of occupa-
tions both for the permanent needs of the defectives who remain there and for
those younger cases who go for a period of occupational training. Such institu.
tions must be in close touch with the outside authorities who send cases to them-
When each authority has the institution or institutions it needs within easy reach,
then I hope we shall see the very closest co-operation between the officer certifying
or advising the sending of defectives there, and the officials of the institution.
The development of each case ought to be marked and recorded and the reports
sent to the certifying officer. It should not be left, as it is at present, to an indiv-
idual certifying officer, teacher, or Mental Welfare worker who happens to be
interested in the defective, to enquire about his progress, but it should be a matter
of course that such workers should be kept informed. I emphasise this point
for it would appear from the records of the last few years, both here and in the
States, that more and more use is going to be made of institutions for the training
of defectives. Many cases will, through low mentality, or irresponsible and
vicious habits or with a disposition too facile or a temperament too difficult, be
obliged to stay in such institutions permanently, but there are many othe s who
will be able after skilled training and teaching, to return to the outside world if
favourable conditions can be provided.

The institution must therefore be in close touch with those responsible for
defectives in the areas from which the patients come, and the work they are taught
to do must bear some relation to their possible future occupation outside. The
defective has, as one of his most marked failings, a lack of adaptability which is
not sufficiently recognised by those employed in training him. He may be so
excellent at one form of handwork (if done in his own time and at his own speed)
that we forget that if placed before slightly different tools or materials he may fail
hopelessly. The institution must aim either at making him adaptable by giving
him the oft repeated rudiments of many occupations, or at training him in some
task or handwork which it will be possible for him to continue to do in the outside
world?a consideration which is at present too often overlooked.

It appears to be an undoubted fact based on the experience of most institu-
tions that many defectives, after some years of training in habits and control do
steady down and can safely be allowed out under good conditions. Some, on
the other hand, as I have said, will never be able to go out, and others will be
tried only to fail. Each case must be decided on its merits. The States are
tackling this problem by providing working hostels for boys and girls institution
trained from which they go out to daily work. At any time in case of failure they
can be returned to the Institution, but if they ' 'make good'' they leave the hostel
on parole and are ultimately discharged altogether. A similar experiment is
about to be made in London where a small Certified Institution is buying a house
to serve as a Hostel for those girls who, after preliminary training, can be sent out
daily to domestic work.

Besides the Institution, there are great possibilities in urban areas of develop-
ing other methods of training?Special Schools (which, I am inclined to think
should be reserved for children who are likely to earn their own living or to contri-
bute materially to their support in the outer world) Occupation Centres and Em-
ployment Classes, on the lines of those already opened in many areas whose
further development is only a matter of time.

{Here followed some account of these experiments.)
The problem of the defective trainable and employable presents extraordinary
difficulties in rural areas. It is true that in most such areas defectives can prob-
ably find employment more easily than they can in towns, yet undoubtedly the
grosser cases of indecency and vice we come across are more common in rural areas.
The overcrowding is as great as in towns and there is more isolation which appears
to re-act unfavourably upon the community's sense of responsibility for the
defective. The solution lies in the training and occupation of the defective not
only for his own sake but for the added sense of responsibility that is thereby
given to those concerned with his welfare. I am inclined to think that the only
possibility of making such provision is by the appointment of visiting teachers
for those defectives who have responsible parents, who would teach them how to
occupy him in ways such as the ordinary home permits with, in addition, some
simple handicraft; the co-operation of Women's Institutes might be secured here
to ensure that technical help and encouragement shall be at hand in between the
professional visits. If no such arrangement is possible for occupation and train-
lng 5 then the defective in a country area should be sent away to an Institution to
secure for him these vital necessities for his welfare. * In connection with this
scheme of visiting teachers, I would suggest that the future will see an extension
of visiting teachers for the blind and probably also for physically defective chil-
dren, and that by combining one service for all these purposes, each teacher could
have a small area and thus visit more frequently than would otherwise be possible
once a fortnight perhaps instead of once a month.

* It is regrettable that the institutional care of defectives will thus fall more heavily on the
less wealthy rural areas than on the wealthier urban ones but there seems no help for it.

Having indicated some practical methods of training and safeguarding defec-
tives in the world, the great question which faces us is how to provide for the needs
of the defective who, though employable, is only so under favourable conditions.
In speaking of this question of employment we must recognise that the ele-
ment of uncertainty, the risk of unemployment, will always be specially great
for defectives, for the less efficient will fall out the first. Haunted as we now are
by the unemployment tragedy one hesitates to press the claims of this special class
of the community. But surely no civilised nation can long contemplate the con-
tinuance of the present state of things?degrading, brutalising and uneconomical
as it is,?and we are entitled to look forward to and prepare for a time when there
will be at least a reasonable amount of work available for all.

Formerly even in times of trade depression, a certain proportion of defectives
have been able to find work, and with proper organisation we should be able to
increase this number. I do not by this mean to imply that in each area employ-
ment will be possible, but that by the use of boarding-out, working hostels,
grouping in cottages, etc., we should be able to distribute defectives in places
where there is a market for their work. Very mechanical occupation of the
simplest nature, some simple forms of agricultural work, some seasonal work,
should be always available for such properly organised and controlled groups.
We are apt to sigh hopelessly when we are told that occupation outside institu-
tions must be found for the defective of a mental age of 6 or 7 but we forget that
for generations there were workers in employment of that age. Anyone who
reads accounts of child labour in the past will realise how many of the occupations
carried out were possible to the mentality of a child though so unsuited to his
physical and moral stage of development. But this latter reservation does not
apply to the defectives of whom we are speaking and for them work of this kind
must still be available. We must moreover always bear in mind that the safe-
guard of the future will be the full operation of the law which enables us to send
any defective neglected or without visible means of support to an Institution.
Those who fail repeatedly in the different kinds of work which organised effort
has found for them, or who, whilst succeeding in the work, fail through bad con-
duct or incapacity to adapt themselves even to this specially chosen environment,
will not be cast adrift but will be sent back for a further period of institutional
training and strict control, or if necessary for permanent care. We shall not be,
as in the past, fitting the hopelessly round peg into the hopelessly square hole;
we shall be able to deal with the misfits not by abandoning them to a life of
misery, but by placing them in one more suited to their limited capacity.

But any such organised scheme of employment for defectives must be depen-
dent on three factors; they must be living under control and in a suitable environ-
ment; they must be under the strict supervision of the trained and responsible
officer of an authority or association; and they must be protected from the possi-
bility of exploitation, or of working under bad conditions. The first will be
simplified by remembering that no task, no home life is suitable for the untrained
undisciplined defective, whose place must be in the institution, and that the
experience of boarding out defectives under guardianship has demonstrated that
for those who are trained but who have no homes or unsuitable ones we can
always secure proper surroundings and care. I have referred to the task of our
Voluntary Associations in providing a community service for defectives; it will
be for them to see that no defective subject to the strain of life in the community
is without a visitor in touch with every authority, with every means for obtaining
help for him when necessary. How to protect him from being exploited will I
think need some further legislation. Either the very loose and inadequate pro-
vision of the Trade Boards Act for the exemption of certain workers from the
minimum wage will have to be tightened up, and the condition of work and wages
of defectives be specially under the charge of inspectors, or additional provision
may be needed under the Mental Deficiency Act. I am inclined to think that some
modification of both Acts will be needed?the Trade Boards Acts for all those who
work at trades coming under the Act, and the Mental Deficiency Act for those who
do not. In the present position of the Trade Boards it is, however, impossible to deal
fully with this aspect of the problem. All we can do is to bear in mind that for the
defective in employment special legal provision of some kind will have to be made.

I have not dwelt on the danger of the defective in the community procreating
his kind and so handing on the very evil we are dealing with. The danger to my
mind is an exaggerated one and can be safeguarded against. It is but seldom that
the defective with strong sexual tendencies is entirely fit in other ways for freedom;
he has generally other tendencies which make detention in an institution neces-
sary. But under the conditions I have laid down as the only suitable ones for a
defective if he is to remain in the community?a good home and adequate super
vision and control?it should be possible to protect the great majority of the
feeble-minded of stable temperament, both boys and girls, and experience of a
large number of elderly defective women has shown me that even in an ordinary
home this can be done. If it cannot, because the defective is too facile or too un-
controlled , then his place is in an institution. But even with these limitations we
shall, I am convinced, still find that the large number of defectives will remain in
the community and must be cared for there.

It is useless to look back to the happy days when we saw in permanent institu-
tion care a solution of the whole problem. We must face the fact that the number
of defectives will remain fairly constant for at least some generations to come and
we must organise our resources to meet this position. With some vision of the
work in its wider aspects, with good organisation, trained workers and above all
with an enlightened public opinion, I do not despair of the future, but look
forward hopefully to the time when, whether in he community or in the institu-
tion, there will be provided for every defective the care and control which he
needs,
!
