The Memory of the Feeble-Minded
=================================

:Author: E. O. Lewis M.A., D.Sc., M.R.C.S.

Some modern writers on mental deficiency regard the feeble-minded as a class
that has some one mental defect in common, varying in degree only. This simple
conception is perhaps due to the tendency of late years to emphasise the quantita-
tive aspect of mental deficiency and to neglect qualitative distinctions. But
teachers, psychologists, and medical officers, who deal with the practical prob-
lems which the mentally defective present, are more impressed by the diversity
than by the uniformity of mental types. When dealing with defectives
individually it is, to say the least, as helpful to think in terms of
Cental types as in terms of mental quotients. Whilst it is generally
conceded that the quantitative investigations of the intelligence of children have
done much to ensure better and more uniform standards in the certification of the
mentally defective, at the same time it is well to avoid the extreme of being
tyrannised by decimal points, when dealing with the mentality of children.

Defective memory is more characteristic of certain types of the mentally
defective than others. Thus epileptics, especially in cases in which the disease
is progressive, present the features of retrogressive amnesia. After a fit, or series
of fits, recent events are forgotten, and knowledge last acquired is lost first. Very
often, there is loss of memory of all events within certain time limits. Then
again, congenital paralytics are said to have poor memories. They do not forget
recent events with the same completeness as epileptics. The paralysed child
often surprises us by recalling trivial incidents of the past; although he may be
unable to repeat a simple task upon which he spent much time and effort quite
recently and had apparently for a time thoroughly mastered. But notwith-
standing their memory weakness, paralytics frequently acquire considerable pro-
ficiency with some special tasks. A congenital paralytic I saw recently whose
general appearance is that of an imbecile, can read standard literary works intel-
ligently. Another case whose guardians stated that be was unable to recall even
most recent experiences, played draughts and cbess fairly well. Instances of this
kind are by no means uncommon; and they show the necessity of further observa-
tion in order that we may be able to state more precisely the memory defects of
paralytic cases.

A detailed study of the memory defects of these and other clinical types of
defectives would be most valuable. This paper, however, deals with some pre-
liminary observations I made of the learning and memory processes of a group of
feeble-minded children. The group consisted of various mental types, and data
obtained from such a heterogeneous group should obviously be interpreted cau-
tiously.

It may be of interest to state what induced me to collect these data. Mr.
Burt in his extensive statistical and experimental studies* has demonstrated how
much more retarded defectives are in educational subjects such as reading, writing,
and arithmetic, than they appear to be when examined with mental tests. This
fact was also brought home to me when I compared the performances of feeble-
minded boys with formal laboratory tests (such as learning a handmaze blind-
folded) and simple educational tests, with the performances of normal children.
The disparity was much greater with the educational tests. Several recent
researches indicate that the educational retardation of defectives is approximately
twice their mental retardation. Why is this? Many reasons suggested them-
selves. One of these which seems well worth investigation is whether the men-
tally defective have exceptionally poor memories. The learning of a school sub-
ject such as reading is a cumulative process progressing in complexity; and success
depends largely upon the pupil's ability to retain what he has learnt in the initial
stages and to recall it as occasion requires.

Teachers of the feeble-minded frequently deplore the inability of the pupils
to remember what has been learnt, and several writers straightway infer that the
feeble-minded child is greatly handicapped from birth by defect of that physio-
logical endowment called retentiveness. But it is well to bear in mind that
memory is a complex process; and comprises at least the three processes of learning,
retaining and recalling; and defective memory is by no means synonymous with
defective retentiveness. The behaviour of defectives, in some respects, leads us
to infer the very opposite, namely, that this mechanical factor of retentiveness,
or brute memory, as it has been called, is unduly potent. Enslavement to a
restricted group of habits is a characteristic of the mental life of most defectives.
Some of the hall-marks of mental deficiency, namely perseveration in speech and
automatism in action, are examples of the predominance of retentiveness. The
inferiority of the feeble-minded is not due to failure to form certain habits, physi-
*Tbe Distribution and Relations of Educational Abilities." P.11.

cal and mental, but rather to inability to form a wide range of these habits.
Another a priori consideration that seems to suggest that retentiveness may be a
factor of secondary importance only in mental deficiency is that it does not corre-
late highly with general intelligence. Therefore, it seems that the part played
by defective retentiveness in mental deficiency is still an open question; and in
this paper the discussion will be limited to this special problem.

It will be helpful, before we proceed to discuss the data of the present inves-
tigation, to summarise briefly the conclusions of previous writers. The Chief
Medical Officer of the Board of Education in his 1920 Report writes as follows:

Absence or impairment of memory power is the one quality which all mentally
defectives hold in common, and with which all other psychological manifestations
are related. A child who cannot remember has nothing to store?he has not the
mental material to enable him contrast or compare, and thence to form a proper
judgment whether in visual or abstract imagery. Consequently, his emotions
fail in their proper setting, and his direction towards life, his volition, his action,
language, and movements, suffer. He becomes in fact, incapable of managing
his own affairs and for the basic reason that his memory power is imperfect."
These remarks naturally carry weight because they express the views of experts
who have spent many years in the study of the educational activities of defectives,
and because they are probably based upon opinions obtained from
teachers of special classes in all parts of the country.

Contrary to expectations, the number of experimental investigations of the
memory of mentally defectives are relatively few and meagre. Galton* found
that most imbeciles failed to repeat more than four digits: while several imbeciles
who had remarkable memories for dates or passages in books showed equally
remarkable failure (a span of only three) in immediate memory for digits.

Johnsonf concludes from his data that the degree to which the memory of feeble-
minded children is inferior to that of normal children is net commensurate with
the disparity in general intelligence. NorsworthyJ compared normal and feeble-
minded children as to their memory for related and unrelated words. Her
results show that 5% of the feeble-minded do as well with the related-word and
6% do as well with the unrelated-word test, as 50% of the normal children do.
Smedley? found that incorrigibles, defectives, and truants, are inferior to normal
Pupils in memory power, and the disparity increases with age. Smith's testsjj
with epileptics show that in the auditory letter-span test they are subnormal and
that they make on an average three times as many errors of insertion. Burt in
his volume on "Mental and Scholastic Tests" cites several interesting cases of
specific memory defects, some of mechanical and rote memory, others of long?
and short?distance memories.

* "Supplementary Notes on 'Prehension' in Idiots. "Mind, 12. 79.
t"Contribution to the Psychology and Pedagogy of Feeble-Minded Children." Pedog.
Semin, 3.245.
J "The Psychology of Mentally Deficient Children."
5 "Report of Dept. of Child Study and Pedag. Investigations." (Chicago Public Schools)
No. 8.
H* 'British Journal of Psychology." 1.240.

EXPERIMENTAL DATA AND CONCLUSIONS.
-----------------------------------

How is this basic factor of memory, retentiveness, to be tested ? It was at one time thought
that by choosing material devoid of meaning or any other rational associations, for example,
nonsense syllables,?nog, vit, zeg, it was possible to measure retentiveness, pure and simple.
Psychologists no longer adopt this view. In fact, the learning, retaining, and recalling of a
list of nonsense syllables involve a complexity of mental processes not less, to say the least,
than those where 'sense' material is used. Moreover, the marked failure of many of my defec-
tive subjects to learn a short list of twelve nonsense syllables showed the unsuitability of such
material. Even after thirty or more repetitions distributed over several days many of them were
unable to reproduce the twelve syllables correctly.

It was therefore decided to use tests that would at least interest the mentally defective boys
and girls. The material of the tests in the first place had to be such that they could understand
easily, and consequently were able to learn thoroughly. Much of the disappointment of teachers
when they come to test their pupils is due to the fact that the subject matter had not really been
mastered during the learning stage. In much of the immediate or short-distance memory work
of children, and especially the mentally defective, there is a delusive proficiency. The fact
that a pupil has reproduced a list of words correctly once is not sufficient proof that he has learnt
the list thoroughly. In these tests complete learning was not assumed until the child repro-
duced the task correctly at least three times in succession without any help.

The data of this investigation were obtained by testing sixty feeble-minded boys and girls
some of whom were at the Littleton House Residential School, Cambridge, and others at day
special schools in Cambridge and London. Their ages varied between eight and sixteen; and
their intelligence quotients (as assessed by Binet's 1911 Scale) varied between .55 and .75, with
the exception of four cases whose I.Q's were higher. Twenty normal children who served as a
control group had ages varying between eight and twelve. Their mental ages on the whole were
higher than those of the defectives. It would have been better had it been arranged that the
mental ages of the two groups were approximately the same.

1. The Construction Test.
---------------------------

In this test the subjects learnt to construct a simple model of an aeroplane. The material
used were thirty sticks of various lengths ; in fact there were only four sizes. The sticks could be
interlocked by means of notches cut in the sides. Some of the sticks had one pair of notches,
others two, three, and four pairs of notches respectively. The subjects copied a model placed
before them; and as each subject was tested individually (and this was the case in all the tests
here described) every help was given in the learning stage. The subject repeated the construc-
tion until it was obvious that he could construct the model without the slighest aid either by
looking at the standard model or from the experimenter. Alter a month had elapsed, during
which time the subject had no access to the material or to any model, he was asked to construct
the aeroplane without receiving any warning that he would be retested. Thirty-five mentally
defective children and twenty normal children performed this test. The method of recording
the results which I adopted, was to count the number of errors in the completed model. This
was no easy task ; and in some cases, it must be admitted, the assessment was somewhat arbitrary.
A model with more than twenty errors was regarded a failure. The data may be summarised as
follows:?

Table 1. Number of Errors.
O. 1?5 6?10 11?20 Failures.
Defectives .. 15 3 9 4 4
(Total 35).
Normals. .... 11 2 4 2 1
(Total 20).

2. Association Test.
---------------------

The task set in this test was to learn twelve arbitrary associations of letters and pictures;
thus the letter B printed on one card was presented simultaneously with the picture of a monkey
on another card; and the subject said Monkey?B. The test was given because it embodies a
mental process of association of fundamental importance in the initial stages of learning to read ;
and it is now realised more clearly than ever, that reading presents very real difficulties to the
majority of the mentally defective. The subjects were shown the twelve pairs of associations in
series; and they were tested after each presentation. The method used for testing was to spread
the pictures of the twelve animals on the table and show one of the letters; the subject wa?
required to point to the picture that had been associated with the latter. They were told after
each response whether it was right or wrong. The series was shown until the subject gave all
twelve responses correctly without hesitation. A week later they were re-tested; and this was
repeated three weeks afterwards, that is, a month after the initial learning. Twenty-five
defectives took part in this test; and fifteen formed the control group of normal children. The
following results were obtained:

Table 2. Number of Errors.
After 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 5.-f
Defectives. lweek. 11 2 5 1 3 3 ?
(Total 25). 1 month ? 5 3 0 2 4 4 7
Normals. 1 week. 9 2 3 ? ? 1 ?
(Total 15). 1 month. 6 1 5 1 ? 2 ? ?

3. Recitation Test.
--------------------

This was a simple educational test of learning a six-line stanza containing thirty-three
words. The context of the stanza was such that the lowest of the defectives tested could under-
stand it easily. As with the previous test, reproductions were required a week, and a month
later. The method of recording the results adopted, was to count the number of times each
subject had to be prompted. Twenty defectives and twenty normal children gave the follow-
ing results:?

Table 3. Number of Promptings.
After 0. 1. 2. 3. 5. 5 5?10 Failed.
Defectives. 1 week. 13 4 ? 11 ? 1 0
(Total 20). 1 month. 6 12?31 2 5
Normals. 1 week. 10 2 1 ? ? 1 ?? ?
(Total 20). 1 month. 11 2 ? 2 2 ? 3 ?

Several other tests such as learning a number of novel geometrical figures, and lists of names
of common objects, reproducing simple stories, and describing cinema pictures?these and other
simple tests were given, but the data cannot be included in this article, although some of my
conclusions are chiefly based upon these data.

The chief feature of the data given in the above tables is the surprisingly good results of the
defectives, and especially in the shorter distance memory tests. That in all three tests approxi-
mately half the defectives were able to reproduce correctly (in the construction test after a
month's interval, and in the other two tests after a week) was a result I had not expected; and
unexpected results have to be interpreted cautiously. Therefore in order to interpret these data
rightly, it is necessary to emphasise some of the features of the tests used, and of the methods
adopted in this investigation.

In the first place it is well to bear in mind that all three were short-span tests. The defective
once he had learnt the construction of the model areoplane could reproduce it in a few minutes;
and the association and stanza tests could be reproduced in a few seconds. To argue from these
tests to the protracted cumulative processes involved in the learning of ordinary school subjects
would obviously not be justifiable. This was soon proved by the comparative results obtained
from defectives and normal pupils when set to learn lists of words with ten, fifteen, twenty and
twenty-five items respectively. The disparity between the records of the defectives and normal
pupils increased at a much greater rate than the ratio of the number of items. Whatever re-
deeming feature of retentiveness the feeble-minded may possess, it is certainly of very limited
span.

The conditions and general methods of conducting these tests also were very different from
those that are possible when a teacher has a class of fifteen to twenty pupils. Each child was
taught individually; and therefore it was possible to give a measure of help that would be out of
the question in class teaching. Special effort was made to ensure that each defective was
interested in the tests. Each of the tasks set was well within the comprehension of the defective
and meant something to him. It is scarcely necessary to say that results obtained under such
ideal conditions are not fair standards for judging the attainments of the mentally defectives
taught under modern class conditions.

Again, the emphasis placed upon thorough learning in these tests had much to do with the
results. It is only recently psychologists have investigated the subject of over-learning in
memory work. In these tests the defectives seemed to profit more than the normal pupils at the
over-learning stage. The normal child soon loses interest in simple tasks such as those given on
this occasion, when he has repeated them correctly once; but most of the defectives seem to take
an added interest in what they had mastered. The joy of ach ievement perhaps is one factor that
accounts for the large part played by 'perseveration' in the mental life of defectives. My
general observation of defectives suggests that over-learning is a subject that may prove of
special interest to teachers of the mentally defective. A piece of knowledge or a group of actions,
in order to become part of the permanent stock-in-trade of the mentally defective child, has to be
assimilated with a thoroughness that we generally associate with the formation of a habit as
contrasted with mere memorisation. This emphasis of the need for repetition in the learning
processes of the mentally defective is not an endorsement of tedious mechanical grind. As
already suggested the defective child finds much pleasure in these repetitions, although no doubt,
there is a limit beyond which they become tedious (and therefore unprofitable) even to him.

These particular features of the tests must be borne hi mind when attempting to interpret
and to apply the results obtained. Nevertheless, it is a fact of no little interest that the group of
defectives made comparatively good records in the short-distance memory tests. It is true that
in addition to retentiveness there were several other factors that helped to determine the records.
But the answer these few data gives to the simple practical question "Do the mentally defective
remember what they learn?" is that with simple short-span tests, they compare favourably
with normal children during the earlier stages of the forgetting process. The fact has beca
appreciated long ago by those who are experienced with the mentally defective. The superin-
tendents of colonies for the mentally defective soon realised that the defective often shows
special ability in performing a few well-defined occupations, but that he shows very little
versatility. It is doubtful however whether educationists and teachers have made the most of
the comparatively efficient short-span and short-distance memories of the mentally defective.
Would it not be better to fractionise the curricula of the special school into a number of short
well-defined tasks and occupations than to attempt to repeat even on a small scale the curriculum
of the ordinary elementary school ?

What about the remote or long-distance memories of the mentally defective ? My data are
far too meagre to enable me to make any dogmatic conclusions as to the rate of forgetting; but
tney suggest one or two interesting points. Ebbinghaus who used nonsense syllables mostly in
his tests with adults, formulated a law that the rate of forgetting is proportional to the logarithm
of the time that has elapsed. Thus, according to this law much more is forgotten proportionately
during the initial than the later stages. Subsequent investigations have proved that Ebbing-
haus's law, even when regarded as a very rough approximation, exaggerates considerably the
rate of forgetting in the initial stages; and the data given in the above tables also suggest this to
be the case. The point of special interest, however, is that the records of the mentally defective
subjects depart from the law stated by Ebbinghaus to a much greater extent than even those of the
normal subjects. The tables indicate that whereas the defectives compare favourably with
normals in short-distance memories they are distinctly inferior in long-distance memories.

My attention was first drawn to this feature by a decided contrast between two successive
records of one of my subjects in recalling a story I had told him. His records at the end of the
first, second, and fourth weeks had been fairly creditable. When tested at the end of the second
month I could not make my subjert understand what story he was required to recall. I then
asked him a number of questions which should have suggested various items of the story; but his
failure convinced me that he had completely forgotten it.

This marked poverty of the remote memories of the mentally defective has also been brought
home to me when I have met some of my defective acquaintances after a year or more has elapsed.
Seveial of them had spent much time with me in performing various tests and in the more
pleasant pastimes of games (I hasten to add this last phrase to forestall any uncomplimentary
interpretations some of my Freudian friends may suggest). The intervening time produced
much greater changes in their external appearance than in mine; but whereas I recognised them
immediately, it has been with the greatest difficulty they have been able to recall me: and in
more than one case, the defective has obviously forgotten me completely.

It is regrettable that circumstances prevented me re-testing all the subjects who performed
the construction test (which is the most interesting of the three tests cited in this paper), so as
to give the data necessary to complete table I. I was able, however, to retest twenty-four of my
defective subjects and eighteen of the control group of normal children after a period of about
three months had elapsed from the time the test had been learnt. Only five of defectives repro-
duced the model correctly, three others made 1-10 errors, four made 10-20 errors, and the
remaining twelve failed badly. In the control group, eight reproduced it correctly, se\en
made 1-10 errors, two made 10-20 errors and only one failed completely. Therefore in this test
also the defectives compare very badly with the normal children in remote memory work.
One characteristic feature of the reproductions of most of the defectives in these tests should
be mentioned in this context. When the defective reproduced correctly, it was done without
much hesitation or faltering: and in a case where only a portion was remembered this was recalled
fairly readily, and no matter how much time and encouragement he was given he did not im-
prove much upon his initial effort. The reproductions of the normal children were frequently
very different from this. Often they would make a most unpromising start, but given sufficient
time their final results would be creditably if not absoloutely correct. The difference was not
merely one of perseverance. The reproductions of the defective showed more of the mechanical
precision of habit, whereas in those of the normal subject, rational associations played a most
important part. The responses of defectives in these tests reminded me of behaviour that con-
formed to the all-or-none principle.

This characteristic difference between normal and defective pupils suggests
one explanation why the latter group were so inferior in long-distance memory
work. The ability of the normal person to reconstruct or recall the events of the
distant past is largely due to the fact that the contents of his mind are systemati-
cally organised by means of the many-sided associations. It has been proved
experimentally the more remote the memory recalled the greater is the relative
importance of the associations compared with the mere physiological persistency
of impressions,?that is retentiveness. The mentally defective show marked
inferiority in ability to form rich and potent mental associations in all learning
processes. The conclusion these facts indicate is thai the memory work of
defectives is so inferior to that of normal persons primarily because of its poverty
?f rational associations; whereas subnormal native retent'v.vess is a factor of
secondary importance only. It is by following this line of thought we are most
likely to discover the real cause of the failure of the mentally defective with ta; ks
of progressive difficulty such as learning to read.

Some of the individual records in this investigation were of special interest.
One boy whose mental defect was largely temperamental, had a verbal memory
quite superior to the majority of the normal children. He memorised the thirty-
three word stanza after only three repetitions: and reproduced the twelve associa-

tions of pictures and letters correctly after two repetitions only. His long-dis-
tance memory with these two tests was also distinctly good. With the construc-
tion test his records were below the average. In six other cases there was marked
disparity between their learning and retaining records; that is, they were excep-
tions to the general rule that quickest learners remember longest. It was some-
thing more than a coincidence that three of these cases were cerebral diplegies,
two were hemiplegies, and one was a typical case of congenital syphilis. All six
cases had creditable learning records with these tests, but when they were tested
a week later they failed badly. Therefore, these cases are exceptions to the
majority of the defectives tested, as their defective memory seems to be primarily
due to subnormal retentiveness. Cases like these frequently give rise to much
difference of opinion. The psychologist or medical officer, if he bases his judg-
ment chiefly upon the responses this type of defective gives to mental tests, is
likely to adopt too optimistic a view of the progress that the defectiv e is likely to
make. The teacher, on the other hand, soon finds that these defectives make very
little progress with school subjects. Congenital paralytic and syphilitic cases
are two classes of defectives in which intelligence quotients are apt to be mis-
leading .
?z
