How the Mental Deficiency Act is Working
=========================================

The Ninth Annual Report of the Board of Control has just been issued. *
It is perhaps of special interest this year in that it deals not only with the
work done during 1922 but contains a critical historical retrospect of what has
been accomplished since the passing of the Mental Deficiency Act in 1913. Taking
as their criterion the principles enunciated by the Royal Comm ssion on the
Care and Control of the Feeble-minded,?especially the basic principle of all, viz.,
that of ' 'unity and continuity of care and control?the Commissioners set themselves the task of considering how far the Act, as it is worked at present, can be said
to embody those principles, and in what directions improvement in methods and
amendment in machinery are needed. The result as recorded in this Report, is
not very inspiriting, unless we regard the fact that the problem has in this way
been lighted up by the searchlight of official criticism as itself an augury of hope.
The intrinsic defects of the Act and the present difficulties of its administration are ruthlessly laid bare. ' 'It cannot be said,'' we read, ' 'that the Mental
Deficiency Act is at present exercising unity or continuity of control, though it
undoubtedly aimed at creating the machinery by which these conditions could be
secured. It is still to a large extent true that mentally defective persons pass from
one Authority or Institution to another, helped or detained a little in each, but
permanently cared for by none.

The Report then proceeds to justify this criticism by discussing how far the
few clauses of the Act which do make some provision, however inadequate, for
continuity of control are working by showing in each case how great is the need for
more co-operation between the different authorities concerned, and by indicating
possible lines of advance.

The Need of Co -operation.
-------------------------First in importance is placed the need for greater co-operation between the
Local Authority and Education Authorities, for the provision of the Act which gives
the latter the power to "notify" feeble-minded children needing protection is
4 'the one provision which seems to have been framed with the idea of preventing
disaster and securing continuity of care for those who need it and if thoroughly
carried into effect it would go far towards meeting the whole problem." As
everyone knows however this provision is in too many instances a dead letter and
must remain so until the Education (Defective and Epileptic Children) Act is put
into active operation. If this cannot be done at once, the Commissioners urge the
making of some temporary provision whereby it shall be made a duty for Local
Education Authorities to notify feeble-minded children leaving or not suitable
for ordinary elementary schools, in order to ensure their being brought under the
protection of the Mental Deficiency Act.

Co-operation between the Local Authority and Poor Law Authorities is
again too often conspicious by its absence, for although Section 30, Proviso ii
of the Act provides means whereby continuity of control for defectives coming
into the hands of the Guardians may be secured "only a comparatively few"
* To be obtained from His Majesty's Stationery Office, Imperial House, Kingsway, W.C.
Price 7s.

It have been dealt with in this way. The Board reiterate the suggestions previously
made by them on this point?the establishment of some system by which all
defectives leaving Poor Law Institutions are reported to the Local Authority, and,
as soon as possible, the enactment of legislation simplifying the whole procedure
of transference.
Section 16 of the Act provides for the transfer of a defective from a Mental
Hospital to an Institution, but notwithstanding this, numbers of defectives still
remain in Mental Hospitals, and until Medical Superintendents or Visiting Committees make a point of reporting every such case on discharge, here again no
"continuity" can be secured.
Dealing finally with the position with regard to co-operation between the
Local Authority and Criminal Courts, the Report states that although there is
here a ' 'slow but steady advance'' many prisoners, not dealt with under Section
0, are still discharged from prison without any steps being taken to communicate
with the Local Authority so that protection under the Act may be forthcoming.

Ascertainment.
-------------Turning to the question of ascertainment the Commissioners can report but
little progress. Some Authorities report the ascertainment of as high a number
as 3.50 per thousand, but there are still others who have not yet ascertained a
single case. Some interesting statistics are given in this connection. Five Urban
and five Rural areas in which the largest proportions of defectives have been found
have been selected. "The five Urban areas have a combined population of
3,500,681. The total number of defectives ascertained is 5,793 or a ratio of
1.65 per thousand. The five Rural areas have a combined population of 1,214,730
The total number of defectives ascertained is 2,286 or a ratio of 1.88 per thousand.
If similar proportions obtain in the whole of England and Wales as in the above
ten areas, the estimated number of defectives to be ascertained works out at
64,783."* The total number actually ascertained on January 1st, 1922, was
25,470 or a proportion of 0.67 per thousand of the population which makes it
evident how much ground there is still to be covered.

Supervision.
----------The same unsatisfactory position exists with regard to the provision ol supervision. On January 1st, 1922, 9,854 defectives were being dealt with in this
way but the effectiveness of the method depends almost entirely upon the personality of the supervisor and the "importance of obtaining for this Avork persons of
good judgment and with the requisite experience cannot' ' in the Board's opinion
' 'be over-estimated.'' This Section of the Report contains a sympathetic reference to Occupation Centres which it is expected will ' 'tend to decrease the number
of cases who will ultimately have to be sent to an Institution.'
'
Guardianship.
-----------At the close of 1922 only 370 defectives were under Guardianship. The
Commissioners regret that "there has been no organised effort to increase the
number of cases'' and they commend to the attention of the larger Local Authorities the possibility of organising a scheme of work somewhat on the lines of that
carried out by the Brighton Guardianship Society.
* Page 45.? 

la this connection attention is drawn to an anomaly in the Act which, while
providing machinery (Section 7) for the transfer of cases from Guardianship to
Institutions contains no provision for the reverse process?transfer from Institutions to Guardianship. ' 'The want of this creates a constantly recurring difficulty and militates against the whole spirit of the Act which was intended to
prevent defectives from being detained in institutions longer than is necessary.''

Institutional Accommodation.
--------------------------The existing accommodation at the present time is as follows:?
On January 1st 1923, there were under care a total of 15,786 defectives. Of
those, 10,017 were in Certified Institutions, leaving (nominally) 1,215 vacancies;
these were, however, chiefly in one or two large recently opened Institutions and
generally speaking were only available for cases from a particular locality. In
"Section 37 Institutions" there were 4,391 cases, but again, although this
appears to leave a large number of vacancies the position is misleading: such
accommodation is only suitable for a comparatively limited number of defectives
(of whom the great majority must be adults) besides being often confined to
patients living within the boundaries of the Unions providing it; moreover, the
whole of the total number of beds certified is not invariably actually available,
for some may be unavoidably occupied by ordinary Poor Law patients. In short,
the difficulty in securing vacancies remains as great as ever, and no new Institutions have been opened by Local Authorities during the year.

"A fair amount of progress" is the final verdict of the Report on the year's
work, and even this temperate estimate may seem to some to err on the side of
undue optimism. No mental welfare worker can rise from a reading of it without
feeling the need for redoubled effort, so clear is it that as yet only the fringe of the
problem has been touched, and that years of hard steady work lie ahead.

In the State Institution
In Certified Institutions
In Certified Houses
In Approved Homes
In Approved Poor Law Institutions (Section 37)
368
11,232
330
379
6,953
Total.. 19,262
