Obituary
=========

90 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.

We greatly regret to record the death of Mr. Ernest W. Locke, Superintendent
and Secretary of the Western Counties Institutions, Starcross, which occurred on
Friday, August 10th. The following account kindly sent to us by Mr. S.
J. Towill, of Seafield House Institution will give our readers some idea of
the value of his work for mental defectives and of the loss which their cause has suffered
through his death:?
For the past 43 years he had been connected with the Institution, the last 23
of which he was Superintendent and Secretary, succeeding his father, the late Mr.
William Locke who was Superintendent for 25 years. Thus the name of Locke
has been synonymous with the Western Counties for nearly 50 years.
Mr. Locke was well known for his work amongst mental defectives and all
who have visited the Institution must have been struck by the splendid results
attained under his excellent management. He was a strong believer in manual
and industrial training for defectives and the highly efficient state of the Western
Counties' Institution testifies to the indefatigable efforts of his father and him-
self?both died in harness?the pioneer and the developer.
Under his management the Institution expanded; two wings were built, the
workshops extended, an up-to-date Laundry and Recreation Hall erected, three
house snear by added to the Institution to increase accommodation and Hospital
Blocks added to the Boys' and Girls' sides. He was just contemplating a
Recreation Hall for the Girls and the addition of a Chapel to the Male Recreation
Hall. His energy was never at rest and up to the last he was actively planning
improvements to the Institution and for the welfare of those in his care.
The loss of Mr. Locke is a sad blow to the Western Counties' Institution and
to the cause of Mental Defect generally. Practically his whole life was devoted
to the work and to the advancement of the methods of dealing with Defectives.
He lies buried within the view of the Institution of which he was so justly proud,
and, if any monument is needed, one had only to turn to the huge pile of buildings
to see the best monument any one can leave behind?the result of his work. May
he rest in Peace.
