Studies in Mental Deviations
=============================

:Type: Reviews and Abstracts.
:Author: Pro-fessor S. D. Porteus. Vineland, N.J.

 Publications of the Training School.
 1922. Price $4.

Early in 1919 Professor Porteus came from
Australia to the United States to succeed Dr.
H. H. Goddard as Director of the Psyehologi-
C&1 Laboratory of the Vineland Training
School. His book now published brings
together the results of his various researches
during three years' tenure of that office. His
Material, however, is drawn, not only from
Personal investigations carried out within
that period, but also from all the data amassed
bY the Laboratory during the past fifteen
years. As he himself insists, both the Vine-
land School in America, and all workers and
institutions throughout the world that ha\ e
to deal with the mentally defective, are
indebted, directly or indirectly, to the support
?f Mr. Samuel Fels, of Philadelphia, who,
^vith the generosity so characteristic of his
country, has financed the Laboratory through-
out the years of its existence.

?Dr. Porteus opens his book with a new and
suggestive definition of mental deficiency:
A feeble-minded person is one who by reason
?f mental defects, other than sensory, cannot
attain to self-management and self-support to
the degree of social sufficiency." He states
that he and his colleagues "have never seen a
moral imbecile, meaning by that a person
^hose only distinguishable defect is a lack of
So-called moral sense." In this his experi-
ence is in close accord with that of British
Psychologists. At the same time, it will be
observed that his definition is specifically
ramed to include those extreme cases of
^otional instability which certain writers in
i *s country have proposed to denominate
temperamentally defective.' As he himself
explicitly states, the word 'mental' must for
,, e Psychologist cover and include, not only
ose who are defective in intelligence, but
a S?. those who are unstable in emotional dis-
position. He justly emphasises the risk that
ose who diagnose deficiency may attend too
exclusively to defects merely in tested intelli -
gence; and adds that, while it may be difficult
to over-estimate the importance of intellectual
level, it is equally easy to under-estimate the
importance of temperament.

Among the newer features of his book is an
interesting attempt at a ' 'social rating scale.''
This is a scale for estimating those tempera-
mental qualities upon which great stress has
thus been laid. By a series of successive
enquiries, Dr. Porteus finds that it is possible
to combine closely related character-qualities
into psychological groups; and suggests that a
quick and effective assessment of personality
may be based upon separate estimates of seven
relatively general traits?impulsiveness, ex-
citability, moodiness, obtrusiveness, suggesti-
bility, irresolution, and the lack of executive
power. According to the correlations ob-
tained, these component estimates are to be
weighted; and the sum of the weighted results
gives the final ' 'social rating.''
He also offers an original rating scale for
industrial capacities, resting upon a some-
what similar scheme. Industrial capacity is
to be analysed into efficiency in various simple
industrial occupations; and these are weighted
and marked according to the level of skill
required.

Such rating scales as these should form a
valuable adjunct to the data supplied by the
customary mental tests. As has been so
often urged in this country, psychologists of
late years have been apt to neglect the method
of observation and to rely mainly upon the
method of experiment. Provided they are
based upon a scientific plan, reports derived
from observation are quite as essential and
quite as trustworthy as those derived from the
more usual experimental tests.

Dr. Porteus discusses in succession the
applicability and value in the diagnosis of
mental defect of various methods of approach
?of anthropometric measurements, of the
Binet tests, of his own familiar maze tests,
and of a new scale for measuring educational
attainments. He also describes another of his
original tests which is not sufficiently well
known in this country?what he calls a Form'
and-Assembling Test. This is a test which
combines the good points of a form board test,
a picture completion test, and a mechanical
construction test. The child has to match
drawings of such objects as a hammer, a pen-
knife, a chair, and a tea-pot, by fitting
together other drawings containing the com-
ponent parts.

An instructive chapter of detailed case-
histories is included in the volume. These
are chiefly selected to throw light upon seem-
ing discrepancies between various methods of
diagnosis. The publication of case-histories
is a valuable method of study, already familiar
in other branches of medical enquiry, but too
seldom employed in psycholgical investiga-
tion. The gradual compilation of a series of
cases, both typical and anomalous, should add
much to our knowledge of the mentally defec-
tive. The whole book concludes with a brief
chapter emphasising the importance of individ-
ual treatment, of studying each particular
defective "as a child and not as a case."
Cyril Burt.

Herring Revision of the Binet-Simon
Tests. Examination Manual. By
John P. Herring. Harrap & Co., Lon-
don. 1923. 5s. net.

This is, as the title indicates, still another
revision of the Binet-Simon Tests of intellig-
ence. The form of many of the tests differs
but little from the original tests and the new
form does not appear to have any special
advantage over the old. Certain new tests
are added but their significance as tests of
intelligence is not very clear. In all there are
38 tests arranged in five groups, all of which,
or any single group, may be administered in
order to calculate the mental age of the
individual by reference to a scale-table of
mental age equivalent for each group.

The book is apparently intended for the use
of teachers who have had no training or
experience in educational psychology, and
the claim is made that (presumably by the aid
of this manual) ' 'Public School teachers are as
able to use individual examinations like the
Herring-Binet as they are to teach reading,
and if we consider merely the process of
obtaining mental ages, and certainly more so.' *
This is, in our belief, a wholly untenable
claim. The revision appears to be an attempt
to reduce the testing of intelligence to a mere
rule of thumb procedure. Hence in order to
allow the examiner to adhere rigidly to his
instructions, all those tests which have to be
seen or read by the child are printed upside
down so as to be read by the child seated
opposite the examiner. Specimen answers
are given to give an estimate of the range
between satisfactory and unsatisfactory
answers.

We cannot recommend the revision for
general use, for unless the examiner is thor-
oughly competent and has made an adequate
study of the subject, he is likely to fall into
many of the pitfalls which beset the path of
the inexperienced and thus to bring into dis-
repute the whole subject of mental testing.

G. A. Auden.
Psychology and Morals. By J. A. Had-
field, M.A., M.B., Ch.B. London:
Metliuen & Co. 1923. Pp. vii. I86*
6s. net.
Dr. Hadfield remarks in his preface that the
psychologist is "in a position to speak of facts
which neither the moral philosopher nor the
practical pastor or teacher can
afford to

ignore.'' This is the starting-point and
justification of his book, a book which is well
written in an easy and informal style, and
which many people will find useful and sug-
gestive. Dr. Hadfield has seen very clearly
that the application to educational practice of
recent advances in psychological knowledge,
particularly the psychology of the instincts
and the ' 'unconscious,'' involves a tacit or
deliberate reconstruction of ethical theory,
and that any further development of the
latter must take these psychological facts into
serious account. We share his sense of the
ultimate significance of recent psychology f?r
education and for morals; but we confess that,
on the whole, his book tends to confirm our
private doubts as to whether, on the one hand,
the time is ripe for any but the most tentative
"applications,'" and, on the other, whether
the working psychologist is the person to ma e
them. We must admit that we distrust
nothing more than the didactic tempei in t e
psychologist. It has been a drag upon the
"science" since its earliest beginnings, an
this was never more marked than it is to-day.
The psychologist and the moralist in Di.
Hadfield spoil each other. When he says, for
instance, that the "(Edipus complex, like all
other complexes, is the result of such en\ iion
mental conditions. . ? ? Since it is t le
environmental conditions of early childhood
which have given rise to our abnormalities of
character. . ." (p. 19), he is greatly over-
simplifying the facts in the interest of practical
advice. It would be convenient if the facts
were so simple; but they are not. The fre
quent references to the sexual trauma as a
principal source of neurosis, and the confusion
with regard to the sexual perversions would
appear to have the same origin. Dr. Had-
field remarks (p. 47) that ' 'repressed sex may
give rise to fetichism," a statement sur-
prisingly misleading, and giving no hint of
the detailed ontogenetics of the sexua
instinct. This "instinct" is evidently still
conceived by the author as a single psychologi-
cal entity, which may be ' 'repressed or
sublimated" as a whole. One suspects that
he has been so busy teaching people how to
| sublimate that he has not had time to find out
xuliat is sublimated.

I And the preacher in Dr. Hadfield suffers no
less injury at the hands of the psychologist
than he inflicts upon him. The great doctrine
"the middle wa?/" becomes, in fact, that
of the middle class, middle class with the
Merest flavouring of bohemianism, just
enough to show that our observances aie
Voluntary, not the result of "repression."
Hadfield's discussion of the problem of
evil, though perhaps sound physician's sense,
draws uncomfortably near banality if it is
taken seriously. Not even the psychologist,
the most modern psychologist of us all, can
simplify life and good and evil so far. One
begins to fear, indeed, wrhether the most
subtle ' 'self-fantasy'' of all is not that of the
I *unipotent Psychologist! g. S. Brierley.
An Outline of Psychology. By William
McDougall, F.R.S. London: Methuen
and Co. 1923. Pp. xi, 456. Price 12s.
net.

This new volume of Professor McDougall's is
intended as an introductory statement of
psychological problems for beginning students,
in terms of the author's own approved form
of "purposive psychology," and is "largely
a polemic" against all psychology of the
mechanistic type. Professor McDougall means
to catch his psychologists young, before they
can have become infected with the mechanistic
virus. He desires to "set their feet upon a
better way,'' in company with the true elect.

The opening chapter had already appeared
as "Prolegomena to Psychology," in the
Psychological Revieiv, January 1912 and
has its importance not only for the learner,
but as a re-iteration and further development
of the point of view of the author's volume in
the Home Un versity Library, with its preg-
nant criticisms of ' 'ideas'' and other historical
confusions. Professor McDougall's position
in relation to "extreme" behaviourism and
to Neo Realism is defined, the develop-
ment of behaviourism in its most recent
forms creating in him a desire to dis-
claim his own earlier definition of psycho-
logy as the study of behaviour. The later
chapters of the book provide an outline survey
of the main problems of psychology in the
author's own terms; and it is scarcely neces-
sary to say that the exposition has the highest
degree of clarity, forcefulness, persuasiveness
and sweep of comprehension, and that it is
the most important statement of psychology
from the given single point of view that can
be put into the student's hands. It will, in
fact, be an indispensable part of the future
student's reading; and, as a part, invaluable.
But, it must be said, that as the main nutri-
ment of the "aspiring psychologist," its
influence could not be other than pernicious.
And this, not because it is a one-sided exposi-
tion, but because of the unfortunate temper
which it reveals in the author and would be
likely to foster in the unsuspecting reader.

In his anxiety to save the students who
are his pupils from the dangers of atom-
ism and mechanism and other evils,
Professor McDougall seems to have for-
gotten his responsibilities as a serious critic
to the students who are his fellows. The book
is marred throughout by a lofty pontifical atti-
tude to those who, in his judgment, err, differ-
ences of opinion being treated almost as moral
perversities, and certainly as mental aberra-
tions. Even at this date we confess to aston-
ishment that it should be possible for any
reputable author to say (p. 4.30) of ' 'the popu-
lar Freudian dogma that all love is sexual,"
that ' 'the main fallacy is the common one that
whatever things have the same name are essen-
tially similar. Another is that, because
children are produced through the agency of
the sexual instinct, therefore all interest in
them is sexual." Professor McDougall pres-
ently laments this "melancholy evidence of
the weakness of the human intellect." We
lament with him; but go on to include in our
Jeremiad, the rarity and weakness of the
sentiment of intellectual honesty, and the ease
with which even learned men of high standing
may fall into gross misrepresentation of the
views of those from whom they differ.

But the Freudian theories, it may be con-
ceded, act as an almost universal irritant, and
there is nothing very individual, even in a
discreditable sense, about Professor Mc-
Dougall's mis-statements here. It is left for
him to achieve this form of distinction, and to
offer us a truly surprising piece of self-revela-
tion, in an incredible reference to Mr. Bertrand
Russell, whose free open mind is evidently
too high and rare an atmosphere for the "pur
posive psychologist." Professor McDougall
dismisses himself rather than Mr. Russell,
when he remarks, in speaking of the mechan-
istic type of psychology (p. ix), "Its latest
exponent, Mr. Bertrand Russell, has per-
formed the service of reducing it to the lowest
level of banality (in his 'Analysis of Mind').''
S. S. Brierley.

Some Contributions to Child Psychology.
By Margaret Drummond, M.A. Edward
Arnold & Co. 4s. 6d.
All workers among 'the children who never
grow up' know full well that some of the
greatest problems with which they have to
deal arise not so much out of the limited
capacity of their pupils to acquire knowledge,
but rather from their weaknesses of character
and strange abnormalities of conduct. We
tend to tackle these problems in a very grop-
ing fashion, each in our own way, and no doubt
most of us in time develop more or less skill in
dealing with them. Even the most experi-
enced, however, will be grateful for this little
book in which Miss Drummond has put at the
disposal of all the results of her careful
investigations into the behaviour of young
children. She interprets those conduct pro-
blems largely in the light of the newer psycholo-
gical theories, and by a wealth of examples
from child life brings these theories within the
reach of all who have the care of children.

Miss Drummond has considerable acquaint-
ance with mentally defective children and
makes occasional reference to them here. On
page 122 she puts forward an interesting sur-
mise which awaits proof by some Itard of the
future. ' 'It seems not impossible that many of
the children of whom medical science can say
only that they are suffering from defect of
intelligence have gone beyond the danger
point, have given themselves over to phantasy
which is largely unconscious, or at least
wordless, and have abandoned the struggle
with an unyielding world."

Some of us look forward to the day when ^ve
shall be even stricter economists than we are at
present: when we shall realise the waste in-
volved in a child welfare system which sa^e*
guards bodily health while paying little hee
to mental health. Meantime this book will do
much to help teachers and others to recognise
and deal with, at an early stage, the root
causes of which deviations in conduct are the
symptoms, and what is still more important,
to prevent their recurrence. Most of all it
will help to bring about that sympathetic
understanding which will make the rough
places smooth and the earth a happier place for
many.

e.l.s.r.

' 'Mental Hygiene, '' July, 1923. Published
quarterly by the National Committee for
Mental Hygiene, 370, Seventh Avenue,
New York City. Fifty Cents a copy.
Five Dollars a year.

The July number of "Mental Hygiene
should be a particularly interesting one to
those concerned with the problem of mental
defect as no less than six of the articles deal
directly with it.

Dr. Bernstein reviews the present possi-
bilities of "Colony and, Parole Care for
Dependents and Defectives" and gives the
latest results of the method as used at Rome
State School, New York. 40% of the en-
rolled population of this Institution are now
being cared for in colonies or on parole. (In
Colonies 702: on parole at home 218 : on parole
forking 172). During 1921 there passed
through the colonies 690 boys and 710 girls,
a total of 1400 of whom nearly one third were
found fit to proceed thence to parole and dis-
charge. The number of colonies is now 32:?

18 for boys and 14 for girls. In the 10 farm
colonies the total earnings amounted to about
??% of the total costs and the 232 boys accom-
modated in them thus earned enough to cover
the entire cost of their housing and a large
part of the cost of their maintenance. At
three of the girls' colonies the inmates are
^rnployed in mills in the neighbourhood and
Jt is recorded that a manager of one of the
mills concerned waxed enthusiastic over the
reliability and industry of his "colony
prls,'' and stated that their output was at
east 75% as efficient as that of the normal
Workers.

Dr. Bernstein declares that "the whole
character of the school has changed as a result
of our colony and parole policy. Our former
policy of custody for life for as many cases as
Possible inevitably had a depressing, dis-
eartening effect upon our patients, resulting
ln an atmosphere of hopelessness and listless-
ness that had its effect in turn upon employees
a^d officers. An entirely different attitude
? hopefulness and cheerfulness has been
brought flVinnf ?4- 3

the community through colony life and parole
is open to all with the exception of cases of
extremely low-grade inte ligence and de-
praved and chronic delinquents."*
A rather despondent article on "More
Community Aspects of Feeblemindedness,'' by
Gordon Hamilton (Secretary, Sub-committee
on Feeblemindedness, Charity Organisation
Society, New York City) deals with the experi-
ence of the New York C.O.S. in supervising
defectives who have not had any special pre-
liminary training in an Institution, pointing
out how full of difficulties the work is, and how
sorely those who are wrestling with it feel the
need of more knowledge and skill.

In an article on ' ''The Classification of
Mental Defectives'' Dr. Howard Potter.
(Clinical Director, Letchworth Village, Thiells,
New York), contends that the present classifi-
cation does not adequately represent the state
of our knowledge on the subject, and puts
forward a new classification more in touch
with demonstrated facts. His five main groups
are, "Idiots," "Imbeciles," "Morons,"
"Mentally Defective" (unclassified), "Men-
tally Defective with Psychosis," and "Not
Mentally Defective," and each group he sub-
divides into three?Neurologic Type, Endo-
crinopathic Type and Idiopathic Type. Fur-
ther he puts forward definite criteria for classi-
fying in this way. He regards his scheme as
purely tentative but considers nevertheless
some method of the kind must sooner or later
be adopted if further progress is to be made in
our knowledge of mental deficiency. We can-
not continue to work with such "large hetero-
geneous units as the idiot, the imbecile and
moron groups."

Another interesting article is one reporting
the results of a ''Study of One Hundred Feeble-
minded Girls with a Mental Rating of Eleven
Years or Over'' made by the Superintendent of
Wrentham State School, Mass. The purpose
of the survey was to answer the question
"What brought these girls to the institution?
Why should girls of this mental rating be
confined in an institution when our observa-
tion compels us to believe that many indivi-
duals no better endowed with mental ability
are apparently making good in the commun-
ity?"

Each girl was studied from three view-
points :?(1) That of her reactions during daily
life in the Institution, (2) that of her history
before coming there, (3) that of her family his-
tory, and observations were made as to (a)
temperament and disposition, (b) morality
and habits, (c) social relationships, (d) nature
and quality of work. Detailed statistics are
given in the report revealing the wide preval-
ence amongst the girls studied of temperamen-
tal instability and uncontrolled impulses, and
o1 unsatisfactory family records. The writer
is therefore constrained to believe that their
need for institution care is due not merely to
subnormal mentality but to a general "faulty
make-up" which prevents proper adjustment
to social requirements.

Finally, an article entitled "The Defective
Child?What can be done for it V' by Nellie
L. Perkins (Psychologist and Resident Doctor,
Wayne County Psychopathic Clinic, Detroit)
outlines a program for the proper care and
training of mentally defective children, the
scheme including the provision of facilities
for diagnosis, special classes, schools and insti-
tutions, and adequate supervision by a per-
sonnel of "especially trained workers who are
temperamentally suited to handle the defec-
tive."

Besford Court Catholic Mental Welfare
Hospital for Children. Sixth Annual
Report.

Besford Court is an Institution in Worces-
tershire for feeble-minded boys, certified by
the Board of Education, the Board of Control
and the Home Office and under the direction
of that strenuous worker for mentally defec-
tive children, the Right Rev. Monsignor
Newsome.

Its Sixth Annual Report is an attractive
document containing many photographs and
a graphic account not only of the year's work
but of the principles?ethical and intellectual
?which have animated it.

Thus in a section headed "The Philosophy
of Mental Defect." Mgr. Newsome reveals
what is perhaps the secret of the Home's
success. "Every case," he maintains, "how-
ever defective, however burdensome to the
community, however repulsive, is defective
only as regards the body and its organization
and not as regards the soul. Resident in that
body as in a ruined temple, there is a human
personality with all the dignity that pertains
to a human person and with undiminished
rights and privileges. Since society exists
to protect individuals, it follows that the
needs of such a defective being greater than
that of a normal person he has a greater claim
upon the compassion and protection of the
human society of which is he a member.''

For the policy of educating defectives in
Day Special Schools Mgr. Newsome has little
sympathy; indeed he sweepingly condemns it
as "useless and wasteful." He does not how-
ever advocate, as the alternative, "permanent
care", but considers that after long and
careful training in a specially adapted environ-
ment the high-grade defective should have
every chance of making good in ordinary life
and states that a ''large proportion'' (it would
be interesting to have further details on this
point) of Besford Court Boys are now doing so.
He points out however that there are always
some cases who, being sent to the Home as late
as 12 or 13, are not ready for discharge at
16, and who urgently need a longer period of
training. For these boys it is hoped later to
provide in an "industrial Colony" but at the
moment only a very few can be retained.

The Report emphasises that it is for the
high-grade defective that Besford Court is
primarily intended and although at first low*
grade cases were received these have now been
gradually transferred to other Homes. It 1S
now possible, as a result, to plan the educa-
tional work to meet the needs of the high'
grade cases in a way which before was difficult
and a special department has been opened for
boys over 13. Organised games are given a
prominent place in the curriculum and a
photograph of the "First Eleven" included
in the Report is a striking testimony to what
lias been achieved in this direction,
A Report such as this should be placed in
the hands of every parent to whom the idea oi
"an Institution" is fraught with fear and
foreboding for we know that such devoted
work as it records is now being done by many
other Homes and Institutions up and down
the country and its significance and value is
thereby enhanced.
