Lunacy Law and Institutional and Home Treatment of the Insane
================================================================

:Author: Lt.Col. J. R. Lord

C.B.E., M.B. (Edin.)
Being the Final of a Course of Lectures on Psychiatry for Local
Secretaries of Mental Welfare Associations delivered at
Horton Mental Hospital, Epsom,
(The Lecturer after having briefly epitomised the provisions of the Lunacy Act of
1890 continued as follows):

It will thus be readily seen that the chief aims of this Act are to secure:
(1) That no person is received as a patient into a mental hospital or other approved
place unless of a certainty he is a lunatic within the meaning of the Lunacy
Act., i.e., an idiot or a person of unsound mind,

(2) That a person so admitted shall be discharged immediately he is no longer
certifiable as a person of unsound mind, and a proper person to be detained
under care and treatment.

(3) That he is not illtreated or neglected while under detention.

(4) That in case of his death in the mental hospital, the cause and circumstances
thereof are the subject of special report and possibly searching enquiry.

It assumes the possibility of moral turpitude, in carrying out its provisions,
on the part, of the judicial authority, the patient's relatives and friends, the
doctor, the nurses, the Managers and even the Commissioners. Its attitude is
that of suspicion throughout , and threats and penalties are plentiful?quite enough
I should imagine to satisfy the most rabid reformer.

The Lunacy Act of 1890 has been much criticized of late, in fact it has become
almost fashionable to abuse it. As a legal measure it undoubtedly was most
carefully and conscientiously framed. Personally I have a real healthy respect
for it in more senses than one and underlying it are many great principles and
ideals. It must be remembered, however, that it is a consolidating act and repre-
sents, with but few innovations, the English lunacy law as it has evolved since
the time of Edward II.

As a measure designed to secure the best treatment of the mentally unsound,
it is, however, singularly incomplete. It portrays almost entirely the legal atti-
tude of mind to the insane. The "patient" it deals with means every person
received or detained as a lunatic or taken care or charge of as a lunatic (Section 114
of the Lunacy Act, 1845). Pie is not the "patient" in the medical sense. It is
not the onset of disease which makes him a "patient" but an act under the law.

It is not the cessation of disease which occasions his ceasing to be a ' 'patient" but
the failure to find sufficient cause for detention. The medical view of insanity is
secondary. Respect for the liberty of the subject Is accounted of more im-
portance than that those who are afflicted with mental disease should have every
opportunity of obtaining the best treatment at the earliest possible moment and
under the most favourable circumstances for their recovery. There is undoubtedly
a legal aspect, and an important one too; the liberty of the subject cannot lightly
be tampered with, but the medical aspect of insanity, its prevention, its cure,
should be the basis of the law on lunacy.

In effect the attitude the law takes to a person suffering from mental disease
is that he shall not enter an asylum for care and treatment unless circumstances
force it, nor shall he remain there if it is possible for him to be outside. Nowhere
does it urge upon citizens the duty of taking prompt steps for the proper care and
treatment of the mentally afflicted; on the contrary, it treats such steps with
suspicion and imposes restrictions; so much so that those primarily concerned,
i.e., the patient, his medical attendants, and the patient's friends and relatives,
avoid invoking the law's aid. Lunacy is a contamination and anathema to many
medical men and they decline utterly to have anything to do with it.

The Lunacy Act gives only a meagre recognition of the onset or early stages of
mental disease and of the stage of convalescence. The "Urgency Order"
machinery which is meant to "secure the speediest possible treatment of the first
symptom of derangement" is either a seven-day measure or a prelude to full
certification, and this procedure is limited to patients with means. A poor
person who can be certified as of unsound mind, but who is sufficiently cognisant
of the state of his mind to enable him to seek admission into one of the 97 county
or borough mental hospitals, cannot, without infringement of the law, be received
there until he has been duly certified as of unsound mind, and, until a justice's
order has been ontained for not only his reception and retention, but for his
detention too. (Vide Dr. Bond's Presidential Address to the Medico-Psychologi-
cal Association, 1921). Only those registered hospitals and licensed houses with
provided accommodation can admit him as a voluntary boarder. The "urgency
machinery" in the case of a pauper or poor patient is admission to the workhouse
through the kindly intervention of a constable or relieving officer or overseer of a
parish, and subsequent certification.

As regards convalescence the "absence on trial" the Lunacy Act permits
depends upon the patient being still certifiable, i.e., still of unsound mind and a
proper person to be detained under care and treatment.

Time does not permit of my discussing this subject more exhaustively, but
briefly the I junacjr Act wants "completing," as it were, at both ends, in order to
cover more appropriately and effectively the early stages of mental disease and the
convalescent period. Much of it needs also recasting to bring it more within the
spirit of the times. Why a hitherto respectable citizen, immediately he has to
handle a lunacy matter in any capacity, should at once be regarded by the law
as being capable of the deepest villainy I cannot conceive. To-day such an
attitude to the practice of psychiatry is surely an anachronism, at least, let us
hope so.

My own views put shortly are:

(1) That all institutions, hospitals, homes, etc., treating mental patients free or
for profit should be licensed, registered, and subject to periodic inspection by
some central authority.
(2) That all admissions thereto which arc not voluntary should be notified to some
central authority with discretionary power to investigate and act.
(3) That no person who objects to indoor mental treatment and loss of liberty
for the purpose should be sequestered without the sanction of the law.
Let us hope that the future evolution of the lunacy law will be along these
lines.

You will no doubt, in the course of your labours, often meet cases of slight
mental breakdown or even cases of definite insanity in its early stages. I have
already discussed with you five types of borderland cases. I have also pointed out
that such cases can readily be confused with the types of cases you as Voluntary
Associations are designed to deal with under the Mental Deficiency Act of 1913.
Indeed, in many instances there is no clear distinction to be drawn between them
except the previous history?which maybe imperfect. Thus you may be asked to
express an opinion as to whether the case is one for home or mental hospital
treatment.

Now the universal experience in mental hospitals is that the cases which
recover are those of short duration prior to admission. The longer the patiert
who is ultimately admitted is kept away from us the fewer the prospects of re-
covery. At the same time there is undoubtedly a "stigma" attached to an
ex-mental hospital patient.

By avoiding mental hospital treatment, the case may become a hopeless one;
by adopting it, a life may be partially wrecked. Thus the real difficulty is this
'stigma" which seems ingrained in the minds of the people. Only a bold
attempt to teach the rising generation better ideas regarding insanity will remove
it. The educational code of our national schools should decree a course on both
mental and physical hygiene for senior pupils, and children should all be taught
that:

(1) Mental disorders are as common and as natural as common colds;
(2) That mental and physical hygiene are one and the same problem and that
such terms as "general debility," "run down," "fed up," "need a
change" are descriptive of mental exhaustion and that insanity is only
mental breakdown of a more severe character ;
(3) That mental hospitals are merely special hospitals for the treatment of
severer forms of mental complaints and the physical disorders which
accompany them;
(4) That superstitious views regarding insanity or mental disorders belong
to the past and that the adopting of a superior, a scornful, a ridiculing, or
humorous attitude to an insane person or one who has been mentally
unsound is both unkind and foolish, prevents the early treatment and
recovery of such cases and favours the accumulation of incurable
insanity which is a burden to the community.

Now, if these notions were to prevail generally among the community most of
he troubles regarding the treatment of mental diseases would disappear. It
would not matter a button where a patient was treated or what the institution was
called so long as the most effective treatment was secured.

Another point you should bear in mind when considering institutional v. home
treatment is that a depressed state of mind carries with it possibilities of suicide.
In other words all melancholies are potential suicides. If the risk is taken in such
cases and the patient remains at home for treatment certain precautions are wise.
They must be tactfully carried out. A ground floor bedroom should be selected,
suggestive weapons and all keys should be removed and the bolts on the inside of
doors rendered non-effective. Continuous observation is essential, but it is
difficult to carry out in a private house. As regards a deluded patient, should he
show any tendency to take action as an outcome of his delusions, confinement in a
mental hospital is absolutely necessary.

Remember that when a hitherto respectable and orderly citizen becomes a
"wrong 'un," begins to speculate and develop extravagant habits, becomes a
devotee at the shrines of Venus and Bacchus, and coquettes with the bankruptcy or
divorce courts, these may be the early symptoms of mental disorder and some-
thing more serious than ' 'wickedness.'' Urge in such cases a medical examination
if only for the sake of his wife, children and other relatives.

Again, it is often necessary and in many cases imperative that marital
relationship should cease when signs of mental breakdown appear. It is a difficult
matter to separate the sexes in a private house and home treatment may entirely
fail for this reason.

If in grave doubt, the case might be referred to the special outpatient depart-
ment for nervous and mental disorders attached to several of the general hospitals
or to the Maudsley Hospital for advice.

There is really very little to say in favour of home treatment, especially in the
case of the poor. It is often quite impracticable, because working class families
look askance at any cessation of work on the part of the bread winner for any
reason other than physical. Home treatment, in fact, would never be even dreamt
of if people had confidence in the mental hospitals.

To combat this want of confidence:?

(1) Mental hospitals should, as far as practicable, be thrown open in the same
spirit as are the general hospitals and the cleansing and stimulating influence
of a correctly informed public opinion brought constantly to bear upon mental
hospital care and treatment. Mental hospitals should be part and parcel of
the everyday life of the community and not an excrescence hidden away and
remote from the public eye;

(2) The welfare of every mental hospital patient should be considered as a
communal responsibility. Broadly speaking, the influences which cause
mental breakdown are cosmic in addition to being individual. The insane,
as a class, are people broken on the wheel of the fierce struggle for existence
and each of us by our survival contributes to the slaughter. About no section
of the community can we less dare the query "Am I my brother's keeper?"
Under the Common Law, the King, the Head of the Nation, is the general
conservator of his people and Guardian of the Insane. What title can he be
more proud of? Yet many of his subjects, howbeit kindly treated, languish
in our mental hospitals absolutely friendless. It should not be; no patient
should be friendless. Can any worse calamity be imagined than being
afflicted with unsoundness of mind? It cuts at the root of everything life
stands for. When those so afflicted have no relatives or friends other than
professional custodians to take a kindh interest in their welfare, a spirit of
thankfulness that this terrible fate has not fallen to our lot should bear fruit
in the form of practical altruism. What better direction could this take than
the "adoption" of these mental derelicts by kindly disposed and charitable
individuals?

(3) In addition every mental hospital ward or convenient group of wards
should have its social visitor. I am not advocating the advent of a crowd of
fussy, unbalanced men and women, but of level headed, discreet and kindly
women, and in some cases men, with some idea of mental disorders, who
would bring into our wards regularly a breath of fresh air from the outside
world to combat institution conventionality and narrowmindedness. These
social workers, failing others, would pay particular attention to friendless
patients. They would act as a communicating link between the patients and
their homes. They would gather reliable information regarding the patients'
home environment of great value to the Medical Officer and thus help him
materially as regards causation, treatment, and subsequent disposal of the
patients on recovery. They would interest themselves in the social life of the
wards, the entertainment and recreation of the patients, and be a consolation
and comfort especially to those confined to bed for physical reasons. I am
glad to say that with the permission of the London County Council Mental
Hospitals Committee, we have made a move in this direction at this hospital
by the appointment of Miss V. M. Dale as Hospital Visitor. She is gathering
experience and exploring the directions in which she can be useful and will
train others in due course. I hope this movement will spread. One of the
reasons why I so readily welcomed you here was that you should hear of this
good work and help it forward. It is another way in which the public can be
brought into closer touch with the mental hospitals. Such social workers in our
wards, when they spoke?say in annual conference?the public would listen
to and have confidence in what they said. How can the public rely upon
what many of the so-called reformers say, many of whom know not the insane,
and have never been in a mental hospital except perhaps when handicapped by
a disordered mind.

Now a few final remarks before we separate.

The establishment of a new group of institutions for the treatment of incipient
insanity is advocated?asylums really but with camouflaged names. I am not in the
least opposed to them?rather the contrary?but this step will not settle the problem
In a few years they will be tainted places just as the present mental hospitals are
m the public estimation. Other and still more camouflaged institutions will
then be called for. No, the questions first to be answered are "What is wrong
with our public mental hospitals?" "Have they failed, and if so why?"
Obviously in a measure they have, for there is a vast held of mental work they
scarcely touch. Why do they fail ?

(1) Because of the continuance of public ignorance as to what insanity really is
and the prejudiced attitude the public adopts to the insane and the ex-mental
hospital patient.

(2) Because the mental hospitals are too much bound by law and rule. They are
not free to experiment, expand, evolve, and progress with the general advance-
ment of medicine like general hospitals. Liberty and money are necessary
for progress.

Wliat is required to make the public mental hospitals really efficient ?

(1) They need public sympathy and support. They want the public with them
and not against them. They work too much in isolation and secrecy and are
thus easy victims to misrepresentation and abuse. There should be more
opportunities for public co-operation with and for public criticism of and
public appreciation of, the work of the mental hospitals.

(2) Old and out of date mental institutions should be abolished and replaced
by smaller mental hospitals of modern type.

(3) There should be better provision in all mental hospitals, preferably in
detached buildings, for the treatment of voluntary boarders and incipient
insanity, and the law altered to permit of this.

(4) Propaganda against public prejudice and superstition as regards mental dis-
orders and the insane.

(5) More freedom for districts to adopt their own measures for the care and treat-
ment of the insane, measures best suited to district requirements, and
subject only to national control on broad lines (vide " General Improvement
in Lunacy Administration including the Grouping of Areas for certain
Purposes." Proceedings of Lunacy Conference, 1922.

This brings our course to a conclusion. You have been very welcome and
your visit has given the hospital the greatest pleasure. There is no doubt in my
mind as to the essential unity of problems of mental deficiency and mental disorder,
and there is everything to be gained by a unity of forces. They have both the
same object in view that the mental hygiene of the community should progress
pari passu with the progress of science, education, and political economy in order
that these may be made the best use of to promote happiness and human efficiency
and not become destructive of human character and instruments of mental regres-
sion.
