Mental Diseases. A Public Health Problem
=========================================

:Type: Book Reviews.
 :Author: James V. May, M.D., with a
preface by Thomas W. Salmon, M.D.,
Boston. Richard G. Badger, 1922.
Demy 8vo., pp. 544. Price $5.00.

One concluded the reading of this book with
a feeling of regret that none of our standard
British works on psychiatry and allied subjects have been written from the point of view
of mental hygiene in its widest application.

We say mental hygiene although Dr. May
names his treatise "Mental Diseases: A
Public Health Problem" yet, strictly speaking, it is the mental aspect of public health he
deals with.

Mental hygiene is a big subject and enters
into all problems affecting communal life.
Thus physicians, judges and magistrates,
social and philanthropic workers, legislators
and municipal governors, ministers of
religion, educationalists, political economists,
leaders of labour, and others in the course of
their ordinary professional, social, and pol itical
activities have either to deal with the insane or
with problems involving mental efficiency and
inefficiency. A knowledge of the aetiology
and forms of mental disorders, methods of
care and treatment, the prevalence of insanity
and mental deficiency and their effect on the
social cosmos is vital to a clear and practical
understanding of these problems and this Dr.
May attempts to convey in the book befoxe us.

It is thus no ordinary text-book of insanity
written for the instruction and guidance of
practitioners and students. It is at once an
education and an appeal, a historical retrospect and a vivid presentation of the present
position. He designs to speak to a large and
increasing audience on a subject the importance of which is becoming more and more
recognised by the public generally.

The appearance of Dr. May's book is opportune, and though it will be most appreciated
by American readers, the greater part of it is
of general psychiatrial interest. Althoug
we can bear comparison with America in j
domain of psychology and psychology
medicine, we have more to learn from tn
country in the matter of organised welfare an
other social work which has been taken nP
there more seriously. The movement in tn
country is virile and the workers enthusiast10
but it is still capable of much expansion 111
many directions.

It is not our purpose, neither is there spaC^
for it, to write a critical digest of Dr. Hay
book; we must content ourselves with
description of the ground it covers. Part ?
is devoted to General Considerations, aD,
Part II. to the Psychoses. Part I. will be 0
most interest to welfare workers. The open
ing chapter is on the "Social and EconcmlC
Importance of Mental Diseases.'' Arguments
and statistics are adduced to show that "^e
intimate relation between mental disease
alcohol, ignorance, poverty, prostitution*
criminality, mental defect, etc., suggests
social and economic problems of far reaching
importance, each one meriting separate an
special consideration." Much depends up?n
psychiatry for the solution. The next
chapters treat of the ' 'Evolution of the
Modern Mental Hospital'' and the ' 'Organi2^*
tion and Functions of State HospitalsThere will be general agreement with tbe
statement that their field of influence extends
far beyond the hospital walls. Out-patient
work, aftercare, social research are matters
now recognised to be matters of vital imp01^*
ance. After a largely medical chapter on the
"Hospital Treatment of Mental Disease,
Dr. May sketches the "Development of the
Psychopathic Hospital." America founded
its first "Maudsley" at Boston in 1912. *
fate had not willed otherwise the institution
just inaugurated at Denmark Hill might have
opened the same day. An inspiring chapter
on "The Mental Hygiene Movement" followsAlthough each chapter of Part I. is in itseli
a finished essay yet there is a certain continuity
subject-matter and interest, and a development along historical lines which enables one
tQ readi ly fo llow the author. Thus successive
^apters on "Aetiology of Mental Diseases,
'Immigration and Mental Diseases," "Men^1 Diseases and Criminal Responsibility,"
The Psychiatry of the War," "EndoCrinology/' naturally lead to a dissertation
"The Modern Progress of Psychiatry."
&rt I. concludes with "The Classification of
Cental Diseases."

In Part II. the main psychosts are
Presented chieflv historically and descriptivey* American statistics are freely quoted and
m>ne of these chapters will be found difficult by
ay readers; while practitioners and students
^ill find there facts of great interest which
^?uld otherwise need searching for, far and
*ide.

In conclusion Dr. May is to be congratu^ted upon a most readable and informative
b??k which can be wholeheartedly commended. J. R. Lord.
^ ? La Methode Decroly . By Mile.
Amelie Hamakle, collaboratrice du Dr.
Decroly a Bruxelles. 6 frs. suisses.
* L'education des Enfants Anormaux
(2nd edition). By Mile. Alice Descoeudres. 4.75 frs. suisses.
' Le developpement de l'enfant de 2 a
7 ans. By Alice Descoeudres. 7.50
frs. suisses.
These three French Books of special interest
0 those concerned with education, particulary that of the subnormal child., are published
^^etachaux and Niestle, Neucliatel.
The first by an ardent admirer of Decroly
suffers somewhat from a lack of perspective.
. e niethod cannot claim to any great original1 y > though in many ways it makes new uses of
precepts such as the Herbartian, observa,!?n> association and expression, while correlais regarded as a new principle.

The method should ensure intelligent,
active children if properly used under perfect
c?nditions, but, unlike some excellent modern
methods, teachers must use the whole, and not
adaptations. There are a good many little
suggestive ideas and it seems an excellent
plan for the author to describe the method,
then to give an example of the working.

The training of the defective child, so long
neglected by writers, has of recent years
become a more popular subject. The work of
Mile. Descoeudres shows a surprising ignorance of the writings of English and American
educators (or even of Phillipe et Boncours
whose useful little book bears an annoyingly
similar title) but thorough acquaintance with
both literature and education of France,
Belgium and Germany.

This book covers a wide field of things pertaining to Special Schools, training and aftercare, but it is particularly on account of the
ideas for apparatus work and games that the
book will be valued. It is full of practical
suggestions for gaining and keeping the
attention of the slow-witted as well as the
scatter-brain. It shows teachers how to
present clear associations by means of active
repetitions.

The games are delightful, but they vary considerably in difficulty, and the examples
cited show wide differences in capacity. This
is certainly a book which should be in every
Special School, and it is to be hoped that an
English translation may be forthcoming.
The observation of little children has a real
bearing on the education of those whose bodies
are bigger though their minds are young.
Mile. Descoeudres has brought skilled observation to this work, but one cannot help feeling
that she has propounded her theories and then
sought evidence to prove them. Two points
strike our British minds. Are the poorer
children innately more generous than the
richer ones? This would require far wider
proofs than those that the writer gives. Tests
carried out during the chance meeting with a
strange child in the park may be extremely
interesting, but not conclusive evidence.
This is a delightful book and thoroughly
interesting in its freshness. M.F.B.

The Problem of Population. By Harold
Cox, Editor of the ' 'Edinburgh Review.''
198 pp. Jonathan Cape. London. 6s.
net.
Mr. Harold Cox has given us in this work an
extraordinarily clear, concise, and convincing
argument as to the controversies under discussion to-day relating to the problem of
population. It is a book which is especially
timely and which demands the serious consideration of all those responsible for or
interested in social welfare. The book is in
the main devoted to the discussion of the
economic problems arising from the inevitable
problem of population, which is itself succinctly stated and supported by overwhelming
arithmetical argument. There is no escape
from the arithmetical necessity that the rate of
growth of any population must be reduced as
the volume of that population increases, and
if we are to achieve this end we are faced with
a Scylla and Charybdis, a choice between an
increase of the death-rate or a decrease of the
birth-rate. We are shown that the overgrowth of population is the most persistent
cause of war and that in any large population a
low birth-rate is a necessary condition of
racial progress.

The only way out of the dilemma is found to
lie in a wholesale adoption of the practice of
birth control and a widespread dissemination
amongst the masses of the knowledge relating
to contraceptive measures, for "the only
practicable method of getting rid of the evil of
slum life . . . is to persuade the slum
dwellers to refrain from continually refilling
the slums." It is further held that all
defectives must be eliminated and that steps
must be taken to prevent them from reproducing their kind, for which purpose sterilisation is strongly advocated. The autb?
however does not give us any reason to belief
that he sufficiently realises the practi ^
difficulties involved in the application
sterilisation to mental defectives, and it is
this point that must join issue with him.
he himself recognises, "in the case of perso1
so mentally deficient that they could not eVel1
give consent to the operation, the question
does not arise, for in any case it would p^?
bably be necessary to keep these persons una
permanent restraint." We would point 0
also that even in the case of mental defectiveS
who would be able to give assent there ^
large group for whom permanent restrai
would still be necessary on account of the
social failings and anti-social propensity5'
and that amongst the remainder the difficulty
which would arise in the actual diagnosis an
selection of cases?difficulties which in t]1
opinion of the experts in mental deficit j
cannot be lightly brushed aside?raise very
considerably doubts as to whether the stern
sation of mental defectives is a practical pr?
position. Moreover the author does not p?in
out the important fact that not only are the#
some cases of mental defect which are no
transmissible but that the majority of cases o
mental defect are the children of parents,
though being ' 'carriers'' of the defect are to
all outward appearances perfectly normal, and *
we are to produce any appreciable results ^
should have to deal with the "carriers" an
apply sterilisation to about 10% of the popu
lation.

We are grateful for the last chapter on t?e
ethics of birth control, in which the basis ?
the creed which condemns the deliberate
limitation of births is fearlessly examined an
shown to be full of inconsistencies.
E. Prideaux