Sterilisation and Mental Deficiency
====================================

News and Notes.

The C.A.M.W.'s pamphlet on this subject, to the preparation of which we
referred in our January number, is now published.

It consists, first, of a statement drawn up by the Executive Council on the
policy of Sterilisation in its social bearings, and secondly, of the report presented
to the Council by its Medical Committee, embodying their views on Sterilisation
in its medical aspects.

The theme of both reports may be summarised as follows:?

(a) That Sterilisation is not a practicable policy at the present time.
(b) That at any time the sterilisation of certifiable mental defectives would
only have a very limited effect in preventing mental deficiency. The fact
of the transmission of mental defect by mentally defective parents is not
disputed, but in the majority of cases defectives are the offspring, not of
parents who are mentally defective, but of those who are apparently
normal, although frequently "carriers" of defect, or who are suffering
from insanity, psychoneuroses or a mild degree of mental or physical
abnormality which is not certifiable. The sterilisation, therefore, of
only certifiable defectives cannot achieve any very startling results.

(c) That a policy of sterilisation, whilst thus achieving comparatively little
in the way of prevention, might be attended with serious harm in other
directions. For it would lead to a false sense of security and result in
many defectives being thrown upon the world who should be under care,
to the disadvantage of themselves and the danger of the community.

The C.A.M.W. therefore place on record their conviction that the only sound
foundations upon which a national policy for dealing with the problem of mental
deficiency can be built up are those consisting of segregation for defectives who
cannot adapt themselves to the existing social code, and of Supervision (including
the use of Occupation Centres and Employment Classes) for those who are not
possessed of marked anti-social tendencies?in brief, by the active carrying out
of the Mental Deficiency Act.

Copies of the Report (price 2d. each) can be obtained on application to the
offices of the Central Association for Mental Welfare, 24, Buckingham Palace
Road, S.W.I, and we hope that our readers will assist us in securing for it a wide
circulatic n.

Courses organised by the C.A.M.W.
Course for Medical Practitioners.
This Course of Lectures in Mental Deficiency arranged by the University of
London Extension Board in co-operation with the C.A.M.W. was held during the
week beginning Monday, May 28th, in accordance with the arrangements an-
nounced in our last issue.

Forty-one Medical Practitioners attended, all of whom expressed their
appreciation of the Course and its value to them in their work.

Short Course for Teachers.
-------------------------

This Course, organised by the Board of Education in conjunction with the
C.A.M.W., is being held at Birmingham as we go to press.
Fifty-three teachers are in attendance, of whom four are from schools in
Scotland and four are overseas teachers from South Africa, New Zealand and
Australia, who are taking the Course as private students.

Proposed Course for Magistrates.
-------------------------------

The Council of the C.A.M.W. decided at its meeting in April that should
there be a sufficient demand, they would be prepared to organise a Course for
Magistrates on their work in connection with the certification of cases under the
Lunacy and Mental Deficiency Acts. It is suggested that the Course should be
held for four days, if possible in London, in the autumn, and should consist of (a)
lectures by medical men and other experts, and (b) visits to Institutions, Mental
Hospitals, etc., for demonstrations. The fee would probably be fixed at Two
Guineas.

The Course will only be held if the demand for it is sufficient and Miss Evelyn
Fox, 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I, will be glad to hear at once from
magistrates who would like to attend. Suggestions as to subject matter and
length of the course will also be welcomed.

The C.A.M.W. Film.
------------------

The Film showing methods of training defective children, the preparation of
which we announced in our last issue, has now been completed and has been
shown already at the Annual Meetings of two Local Voluntary Associations, as
well as at the Annual Meeting of the Central Association on July 9th.
The general title of the film is "A Simple Record of Modern Progress in the
Care and Training of Mental Defectives." It is divided into some 60 scenes,
half dealing with low-grades and half with high-grades, and takes about 20
minutes to show. Amongst the subjects are:?low-grade children being taught to
walk; exercises for increasing muscular control; the game of ' 'Rabbits''; the toy
band; skipping, stepping, jumping and balancing exercises with planks, boxes,
wheelbarrows, etc.; a washing-up lesson; dancing; a lesson in word-building;
high-grade defectives working at brush-making, mat-making, tailoring, stocking-
knitting, etc.

The experiment is, we think, a complete success, for by showing so vividly
the actual process of training defectives, the film arouses an amount of sympathetic
interest which speeches and pamphlets, however eloquent, can never arouse to a
like extent.

Application for the use of the film at meetings should be made to the Central
Association by whom terms and conditions will be gladly supplied.
Meeting of British Medical Association at Portsmouth.

At the Annual Meeting of the British Medical Association to be held at
Portsmouth from July 24th to 27th, the section of Medical Sociology has chosen
for July 27th the subject of "Mental Deficiency in its Social Aspects." The
C.A.M.W. will be responsible for exhibits of apparatus for Mental Tests, and of
the work of defectives in Special Schools and Institutions and is also shewing its
new film on methods of training defectives.

Dr. Brackenbury, the Chairman of the Education Committee of the
C.A.M.W., is the Chairman of the discussion on "Mental Deficiency in its Social
Aspects,'' and the speakers asked to take part include the Hon. Secretary of the
Association, Miss Evelyn Fox, and two members of its Medical Committee, Dr.
Potts and Dr. Prideaux (Hon. Medical Secretary.)

The full programme of the discussion is as follows:?Morning Session:
Opening Papers by Dr. Potts and Mrs. Pinsent; by Dr. Devine on "Segregation,''
and by Dr. Macfie Campbell, U.S.A., on "Organisation for Supervision."

Afternoon Session: Papers by Miss Evelyn Fox and Dr. Prideaux on "The Educa-
tion of Defectives," by Dr. Norwood East on ' 'The Incidence of Crime and Mental
Defect," and by Dr. Robert Gibbons on "Sterilisation."

Tickets for the meeting may be obtained on application to the Central
Association, 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.

Mental Treatment Bill.
----------------------

This Bill, promoted by the Ministry of Health, has successfully passed the
House of Lords, in which it was introduced, and as we go to Press is awaiting
consideration by the Commons. It constitutes in our opinion, a piece of pro-
gressive legislation for which there has for long been a demand, and passed into
law it should be of great value to mental welfare workers, who should therefore
acquaint themselves with its provisions.

Briefly the Bill enables early cases of mental disorder to secure, without
being certified under the Lunacy Acts, treatment in Mental and other Hospitals
approved for the purpose and further empowers Local Authorities, subject to
certain conditions to pay for such treatment.

Clause 4, provides that on the recommendations of two medical practitioners,
any person suffering from mental disorder who is considered likely to benefit from
temporary treatment in an institution, may, without a reception order under the
Lunacy Act, be received as a patient into an approved Institution for a period not
exceeding six months. This period may be extended for a further period not
exceeding one year, if it appears "reasonably probable" that he will recover
during that time.

Patients recommended for treatment under this clause must express them-
selves as willing to submit to it. unless they are minors when the consent of the
parent or guardian must be obtained, or are "incapable of volition," and in
these two latter cases the recommendation for treatment must be supplemented by
a statement signed by a magistrate or by a minister of religion.

A patient received under this Clause may leave the Institution at any time,
after giving 72 hours' notice, unless he is a minor when the notice must be given
by his parent or guardian.

An approved Institution may be a Mental Hospital, a Registered Hospital,
a Licensed House, or any other Hospital approved by the Board of Control.

Other Clauses of the Bill which should be noted are:?
Clause 1. To empower Local Authorities to co-opt a limited number of members
on their Visiting Committees under the Lunacy Acts, and to lay down the
stipluation that on every such Committee appointed under the Act, at least
two members shall be women.

Clause 2. To empower Visiting Committees, subject to the approval of the
Board of Control and to the consent of the Local Authority appointing
them:?(i) to take joint action with other Local Authorities: (ii) to provide or
arrange for the treatment as out-patients of persons suffering from mental
disorder; to receive voluntary boarders in any Institution under their
control; (iv) to make provision for the After-Care of Mental patients on
discharge: (v) to undertake research in relation to mental disorder and to
make contributions towards the expenses of any body of persons engaged in
such research.

Clause 3. To reduce the number of paid Commissioners under the Mental Defi-
ciency Act to 8, and to give to Inspectors the powers with regard to visitation
and inspection which are now held by Commissioners.

Clause 7. To empower Local Authorities to defray out of the rates any expenses
incurred by a Visiting Committee under this Act.

We hope to deal at greater length with this important Bill in its relation to
Mental Welfare work in a later issue.

New Home for Mentally Defective Blind Babies.
----------------------------------------------

There is to be opened in the autumn a Home for Mentally Defective Blind
Babies and young children at Reigate, in Surrey, primarily intended for low-
grade cases for whom so little provision at present exists.

It will be certified by the Board of Control and cases will be also received
from Boards of Guardians.

The Home which has secured the patronage of Miss Ellen Terry is being run
as one of the activities of the Braille and "Servers of the Blind" League. En-
quiries and applications for terms, etc., should be addressed to the Org. Secre-
tary, Arthur Burgess, Esq., 3, Upper Woburn Place, London, W.C.I.
Royal Eastern Counties Institution, Colchester.

This Institution has recently bought Bridge Home, Witham, Essex. Bridge
Home was till recently used by the Metropolitan Asylums Board as a training
home for high grade mentally defective youths. The Home will make the sixth
branch belonging to the Royal Institution, and will be used for four classes of
Mentally defective male patients over sixteen years of age. It has accommoda-
tion for over two hundred cases and will bring the total number of beds in the
Institution up to about a thousand and fifty. It consists of a central adminis-
trative block with wings on either side, another detached block, a hospital
block, a steam laundry, accommodation for five training shops, a chapel, a
gymnasium, and a large orchard from which in the past, tons of jam and preserved
fruit have been made. Alterations and improvements are now being carried out,
a*id it is expected the new branch will be occupied in August.

The rooms at the main Institution at Colchester, vacated by the four classes
going to Witham, will be used as additional accommodation for women patients.

The Possibilities of Spinning as an Occupation for Defectives.
---------------------------------------------------------------

The following is an account?kindly sent to us by Miss Evelyn MacKenzie,
Hon. Sec. of the Cambridgeshire Voluntary Association for Mental Welfare?of an
experiment that failed, but failures have often as much to teach as successes and wc
draw attention to this one as illustrating some of the difficulties which beset the
path of those are are trying to explore the possibilities of ' 'self-supporting em-
ployment classes for defectives:?

In October 1922 an attempt was made to start an Occupation Centre for girls
over School age that would be self-supporting. There is a demand locally for
home-spun wool and it was hoped that some high-grade mentally defective girls
might be taught to spin sufficiently well to contribute out of their earnings towards
the expenses of a room and a Supervisor. It was proposed to train cripple girls
also, and a grant of ?15 was given to the Voluntary Association by the Cambridge
Invalid Children's Aid Association. A large room in a central quarter of the
town was hired at the low rate of 7s, 6d. a week (including gas firing), and a
Supervisor who could spin was engaged to look after the girls. As she was a
knitter by profession she was paid only 12s. 6d, a week on the understanding that
she might work at her knitting while at the Centre. The room was open for five
hours on five days and three hours on one day in the week. A local Weaving
Industry undertook to supply fleece and to buy the yarn when properly spun.
The Centre opened with two mentally defective girls who had previously had
some lessons. One had lately left a Special Class for "backward" children,
and came from a very poor home; the other was the daughter of well-to-do
parents and was aged 23, but was subject to fits of violent temper and had never
been able to do any regular work. Later, two cripple girls were admitted and
three or four mentally defective girls were tried for varying lengths of time. The
cripples learnt quickly, but the mentally defective girls proved so slow that it was
found impossible to pay them for the yarn they had spun. After nearly six
months the Centre had to be closed.

The chief difficulties were:?(1) The limited supply of high-grade girls near
enough to get to the Centre. (2) Parents' objection to allowing their daughters to
attend where there was no monetary gain for some time; they prefer the girls at
home to help in the house or to be nursemaid to their own or to the neighbours'
children. (3) The Supervisor, though very kind, was unused to mental defectives
and did not get the best out of them. The success of the cripples damped her
interest in the defectives. (4) The commercial element had some drawbacks; a
great deal of fleece was spoilt at first and the girls were made to re-spin it, which
kept them back when they were improving, disheartened them unnecessarily and
prevented them from earning anything.

The Centre, however, gave the girls very real pleasure and all the parents
testified to their mental improvement; even the cripples developed independence
and self-confidence by "going out to work" for the first time. Now the Centre
has closed, one cripple has her wheel at home and is able to earn about ?1 a week;
the other was hindered by illness. Of the mental defectives, one has at last
learnt to spin yarn that is saleable, thanks to the encouragement of her mother;
another also had her wheel at home, but the mother took no interest and the girl
has done nothing. The other mental defectives who were tried all proved failures
while the Centre was open.

Experience has shown that a Centre of this kind would only be worth running
if six or eight girls could be found to attend regularly under a Supervisor with a
knowledge of special teaching, and with other simple industries besides spinning,
which takes months to learn. Normal girls should not be admitted, and there
should be no question of making money, either by the girls and their parents or
by the Association. Full expenses should be met by the Association, and in
course of time it is possible that the girls may make saleable goods and be able to
earn and to make some return to the Centre.

"Extra-Institutional Care."
-----------------------------

Two interesting documents have recently reached us from the United States
in which this problem of the provision of care for defectives in the community is
discussed.

In the 4th Annual Report of the New York State Commission for Mental
Defectives, we find, in a section headed '''"General Policies''' this significant pro-
nouncement (the italics are ours):?

"During more than a decade this restricted custodial policy has been
modified. The parole and discharge of inmates has increased and with this
change and many others, a new era in the care of mental defectives has taken
place in New York State." .... While the exact number of mental
defectives in the State cannot be determined at this time, it is now quite well
agreed that all do not require continued institutional segregation.''
But lest this should be taken to imply a reversion to a policy of laisser-faire,
the writers of the report are careful to point out:?

"While a large number of mental defectives can live in the community
and be self-supporting if supervised to some extent, it cannot be too strongly
emphasized that they require this supervision. If not supervised, they
become dependent sooner or later, they do not remain self-supporting and a
certain number of them become criminals.''

How is this supervision to be effectively provided?
One solution is the provision of what is known as "Colony'' care, and those
of our readers who were interested in an article in a recent issue of this journal by
Miss Susan Hoagland, are recommended to obtain a copy of the 28th Annual
Report of the Board of Managers of the Rome State School, New York State, where
exhaustive statistics on this work amongst girls are given.

Some equally interesting statistics casting a searching light on the intricacies
?f the problem, so much greater than the early advocates of permanent institu-
tional care for all defectives realised, are given in the same Report by the
Medical Superintendent (Dr. Bernstein) as to the categories into which an Insti-
tutional population of 2,500 cases are likely to fall, viz:?

Of 2,500 cases made up of a general run of admissions and all accepted:
20% will be of school age, of which about 10% will ultimately be returned
home, and 10% will be suitable for colony life.

40% will be purely custodial cases, of which about 10% will be good workers
but delinquent and needing close care.

40% will constitute the "stable and economically efficient high grade im-
becile and moron group suitable for colony and parole life." and of
these 20% will pass each year to an independent existence.

It would be interesting to know whether this classification of Dr. Bernstein's
is found to be in general agreement with that of Superintendents of similar
Institutions in this country.
