News and Notes
===============

"Mental Deficiency in its Social Aspects."

The discussion which took place on this subject at the recent meeting of the
Section of Medical Sociology of the British Medical Association at Portsmouth
was one of great interest, and we have pleasure in giving our readers a short
summary of the proceedings taken from the official report which appeared in the
British Medical Journal of 11th August, 1923.

The discussion was opened by Dr. W. A. Potts whose introductory paper outlined the problem of Mental Deficiency as a whole and touching some of its ramifications?venereal disease,
alcoholism, crime, the "unemployable," the "borderline" and unstable?showed its complexity and pleaded for a "larger vision" in dealing with it.

Mrs. Pinsent (Commissioner, Board of Control) followed with a paper on the Mental Deficiency \.3t ? .vhit it hi? accomplished and what it has failed to accomplish. She stressed
specially in this latter connection its failure in providing for defectives that continuity of control
the need of which the Commissioners in their Report of 1908 emphasised so strongly,* but
showed that if such sections of the Act as do attempt to make provision for this were fully carried
out, and specially if the Education (Defective and Epileptic) Children Act could be thoroughly
and scientifically worked, much might be done to secure it even without an alteration in the law.
Dealing with the question of the provision of Institutions Mrs. Pinsent produced figuresf to
show how little had yet been accomplished in comparison with what still remained to be done and
pointed out, moreover, how inevitably slow further progress in this direction will be. She
therefore urged the need for more intensive study and more experimental work into the whole
subject. The following questions, in particular, she contended, call vitally for an answer:?

(1) Is there any method of community control outside institutions which would ensure th *
safety of the defective and the protection of the interests of the community ?

(2) How far is complete segregation of large numbers and varying types practicable, and if
rigorously carried out how far would it cut off the supply ?

(3) If the community decides that the segregation of defectives is essential for its welfare,
what steps can be taken to render it less irksome for the individual ?

(4) Is it possible to promote scientific research which may reveal the causes of congenital
mental deficiency and suggest its prevention?

In a paper on the Segregation of Mental Defectives, Dr. Devine (Medical Superintendent,
Corporation Mental Hospital, Portsmouth) discussed from the sociological point of view the
limitations and the possibilities of segregation as a method of dealing with the problem of the
prevention of Mental Defect. As a eugenic policy he contended that segregation would never
have any but limited results and we should always be left with a "large number of mentally
unstable and intellectually deficient people who for various reasons cannot be segregated, but
who, nevertheless, are a source of anxiety and need help and guidance." To prevent these
Persons from propagating is then our problem and probably it is along the lines of educational
method's which we must look for its solution?a solution which will not in his opinion, present
itself in terms of 'cut and dried methods.'

This view was not shared by Dr. Gibbons, (Gynaecologist to Grosvenor Hospital for Women)
who read the next paper before the meeting, for he considered that "Sterilisation" was likely to
prove the sovereign remedy, or at any rate one which should be specially tried.

Dr. Norwood East (Senior Medical Oflicer, H.M. Prison, Brixton) with a paper on "The
ncidence of Crime and Mental Deficiency'" % which contained statistics showing the value of the
: *eiital Deficiency Act in preventing recidivism, but showing also how fallacious were some ideas
prevalent in the past about the relation between crime and mental deficiency.

In a suggestive paper on ' 'Organisation for the Supervisioji of Mental Defectives" Dr. Mackfie
^ampbell, Director of the Boston Psychopathic Hospital, Mass., pleaded for what might be
termed a ' 'change of heart" towards defectives. People in America (though he concluded this
is not so much the case in England) were inclined to be too much obsessed by intelligence quotients , forgetting that what mattered was adjustment to environment, and that many individuals
with a low intelligence quotient could be made into useful members of society if care was taken
, ^ * For further discussion of this point see Miss Fox's article and Summary of Report of Board
of Control (page 80).
t Summarised on page 81.
t See * 'News and Notes,'' P84.

to provide i'or them an environment suited to their capacity. The psychological motive behind
the cry for measures of segregation was too often, he said, the wish to be spared the ' 'bother" of
defectives?a reluctance to undertake personal responsibility for them. He suggested that
instead of envisaging the problem as consisting of 0.5 defectives per cent. multiplied by the total
population and so becoming overwhelmed by its magnitude, we should think of that 0.5. as being
assimilated by every 100 normal members of the community?in other words we should emphasise the fact that for each defective in the community there are 200 normal people, and that to
expect them to join together to shoulder the burden of him is not making an excessive demand.
In conlcusion Dr. Campbell stressed the responsibility of the medical profession in this question,
and urged the importance of introducing into medical training from the outset that study of the
neuroses which has led to the treatment of the patient as a "sick person at grips with destiny"
rather than as a ' 'laboratory animal.''

Sir Frederick Mott in a paper on "Heredity and Social Conditions among the Mentally
Defective'''' gave an account of the investigation which was carried on in this subject by Miss A.
Ivelley in Haggerston in 1915* and expressed the hope that the investigation might be pursued by
either the Board of Control or the Eugenics Society, so essential was it that the facts of the problem should be brought to light. He was not disposed to advocate a policy of sterilisation.
Ill the discussion which followed these papers both Miss Evelyn Fox and Dr.
Prideaux took part, dealing principally with the subject of the education of defectives and the problems involved. Dr. Prideaux also drew attention to the need
of educating the medical student in psychological medicine.

The proceedings terminated with an address from the President of the Section,
Dr. H. B. Brackenbury, who gave a most masterly summing up of the whole
discussion.

Later on in the same day Miss Evelyn Fox exhibited to the members of the
Section the C.A.M. W. Film on the training of mentally defective children which
aroused great interest.

Some Recent Statistics on Mental Deficiency and Crime.
-----------------------------------------------------The following statistics on this important subject are the most recent which have
been put forward. They should, we think, be given a wide publicity amongst Mental
Welfare Workers in order that they may be in a position to dispute some of the wildly
exaggerated statements which are from time to time made in the press and elsewhere,
and we therefore lay them before our readers:?

Of 66,715 prisoners received into prison during the year 1921 to 1922, 223
were certified as Mentally Defective. Of some 60,983 prisoners received into
prison in 1922?1923, 246 were so certified.

During the two years April 1st 1921 to March 31st 1923, 16,017 prisoners were
admitted to Brixton Prison on remand or before trial; of these, 1,517 were remanded for special psychological examination but only 139 were found to be certifiable under the Mental Deficiency Act.

In the opinion of Dr. Norwood East, Senior Medical Officer of H.M. Prison,
Brixton, who has made public the statistics given above, an accurate estimate
of the incidence of mental defect amongst unconvicted prisoners would be 5%.
At one of the recent meetings of the British Association there was again
emphasised, in a discussion on liThe Delinquent Child" the comparatively
small part which mental defect plays in the production of juvenile delinquency.

It is true that Dr. Cyril Burt stated that of the children examined by him 40%
were ' 'educationally backward'' but actual mental deficiency he found in only
about 8% of the cases. The estimate given at the same discussion by Dr. W. A.
* See report published as Supplement in Board of Control's Report for 1915.
t Paper read at meeting of Brit. Med. Assoc., Portsmouth, July, 1923. Since published as
a pamphlet (see Bibliography).

Potts was lower still; in his experience only from 3 to 5% of the children brought
before the Courts in Birmingham could be certified under the Mental Deficiency
Act.

In a Report made to the London County Council, * Dr. F. C. Shrubsall, Senior
Assistant Medical Officer, comments upon "the very small proportion of Special
School children who subsequently get into serious conflict with the law." Some
interesting statistics he has lately published on the whole question we hope to
record fully in our next issue.

The Record of a Mentally Defective Boy.
-------------------------------------The fact that, as seen from the figures given above, the mentally defective
criminal or delinquent is rarer than is commonly supposed does not mean that
the problem when it does occur is any less serious or that we need slacken our
efforts to reduce it to still smaller proportions. How serious it is, regarded in
terms of human suffering and wasted opportunities ma)7, be gathered from the
following record which has been brought to light by the Scottish National Council
of Juvenile Organisationsf and which is, unfortunately, typical of many others
hardly less glaring. The child, at the time of committing his first offence was
10 years old. This is the pitiful tale of his next four years:?

Appearances in Court. Offence. Treatment by Court.
-------------------------------------------------3 Nov. 1917 (1st appearance) Theft Admonished.
12 Jan. 1918 Malicious Mischief Adminished
26 Mar. 1918 Attempted House-breaking ,,
24 July 1918 Robbery Birch Rod?8 Strokes.
19 Jan. 1920 Theft Proceedings dropped
8 May, 1920 Theft, House-breaking Admonished
2 Mar., 1921 Theft Proceedings dropped
2 April, 1921 Theft, House-breaking Proceedings dropped on
ground of mental defect.

Comment is needless. We need only note that to prevent the continuance of
this state of affairs in Scotland the Committee urge the organisation of a scheme
whereby special medical examination shall be ensured in all cases of the kind and
in towns with a population of, or exceeding, 150,000 the services of a specially
qualified medical man shall be procured for the purpose. In the formation of
the Scottish Association of Care Committees which, with the appointment of an
Organising Secretary is now in full working order, lies also, we feel, the hope of
better things.

Mental Tests and the Influence of Education.
-------------------------------------------Mr. Hugh Gordon, one of His Majesty's Inspectors of Schools, has been conducting an inquiry into the effects of schooling on the response to mental tests,
with a veiw to ascertaining whether as is sometimes claimed, such tests are in no
way influenced by the subject's education or lack of education.
* Annual Report of the Council, 1922. Vol. III. "Public Health. Page 95. P.S.
King & Son. 2s.Cd.
t Report of an Enquiry into Juvenile Delinquency. P. 29. K.M. Stationery Office.
. net.

The results of the inquiry have been published by the Board of Education*
and the Report contains material of great interest which no one concerned with
Mental Testing in either its theoretical or practical aspect, can afford to neglect.
Mr. Gordon took as his material four groups of children, viz., children attending schools for the physically defective, children attend ng "Backward Classes,"
Canal Boat children and gypsy children, and to each group he applied the Terman
Revision of the Binet Tests as well as certain scholastic tests standardised by Dr.
Ballard and Dr. Cyril Burt.

In all these groups (the average physical age of which was between 9 and 10)
the average mental ratio was discovered to be very low (P.D. School children,
85.5; Canal Boat Children, 69.6; Gipsy Children, 74.5; children from Backward
Classes, 68.6 and 74.9) and it was found that the lower the average school attendance the lower was the ratio, except in the case of those backward children whose
retardation was due to natural dullness rather than to lack of opportunity for
development.

From this and other data recorded in detail in the report, Mr. Gordon arrived
at the conclusion that "it is quite evident that although the mental tests used do
undoubtedly test some kind of ability or abilities, such abilities are not developed
without schooling or its equivalent, and as a consequence the tests do not
evaluate them apart from schooling, except perhaps in the case of children under
6 or 7 years of age.''

He notes, however, that it does not follow that because the tests used failed
to reveal mental development of an intellectual nature the children in question
therefore lacked mental development in other directions, and suggests the need
of devising and standardising tests suitable for the special kind of environment
in which these children live in order that some fairer estimate of their capacities
may be reached.

After-Care in Home Office Schools.
--------------------------------The Home Office has recently issued a Circular on the subject of the provision
of After-Care for boys and girls discharged from its Schools urging its necessity and
outlining a scheme for its systematic operation.

The primary responsibility for such After-Care is to continue to rest with the
Managers of the schools, but it is impossible for them unassisted to ensure that
it is provided in every case and it is proposed that a ' 'net-work of helpers'' willing
to act in conjunction with the schools shall be set up.

The Home Secretary has already secured the co-operation of a number of
societies and agencies and amongst them is the Central Association for Mental
Welfare which has offered its help in making provision for the After-Care of any
defective, subnormal or unbalanced children for whom such care is desired.
"After-Care." Some Recent Statistics.

The Report of the Birmingham After-Care Committee recently published
contains some interesting statistics concerning the 2933 ex-Special School children
of the City of whom records have been kept since the year 1903.
The percentage of cases "doing remunerative work" in 1923 was 35, as compared with 32 in the previous year. A comparative table shows that the highest
* Mental and Scholastic Tests among Retarded Children. Education Pamphlets, No. 44.
H .M. Stationery Office. Price la. 3d. net. $7
number recorded in work was in 1916, when 49% were employed, the lowest in
1906 when it was only 16%.

The number of cases in Institutions has fluctuated between 2% in 1903 (when
there was of course no Mental Deficiency Act) and 26% in 1915 and 1916. Since
1919 there has been a drop and in 1920, 1921 and 1922 the percentage in
institutions was 16.

The Committee has records of the Marriages of 153 boys and girls of whom
64 have had families varying in size from one to 5 children.
These statistics are not of course in any way complete but they serve to indicate what would be the value of extensive and scientific enquiry into the subject,
undertaken with a view to formulating a constructive policy.

The Problem of the Dangerous and Violent Defective.
--------------------------------------------------In the Board of Control's Report for 1922, just issued,* there is published as
an Append ixf a report of the Medical Superintendent of Ramp ton State Institution on the year's work which gives a vivid picture of the types of defective for
whom the Institution exists and the difficulties which their care Involves. Such
statements as the following seem to present the problem for a moment in high
relief and merit the attention of those of us who are inclined to criticise too
hastily the Rampton regime. Dr. Rees Thomas states, speaking of the need
for more single rooms:?

4 'It is necessary that patients who are subject to fairly frequent outbursts
of violence should sleep alone, otherwise, as their conduct invariably acts
as incitement to others, our troubles would be materially increased. Again,
for reasons such as bad language, smashing propensities, constant talking
and quarrelling, moral depravity, intense attachments with subsequent
outbreaks of jealousy, suicidal tendencies, extreme irritability, a consider ab e proportion of single rooms become a necessity. Lower grade patients
are markedly imitative, and their conduct reflects the vices of others, and
is no real index of their turpitude.''

A continued effort has to be made to prevent too close association and it is
found essential that patients should be isolated "as soon as they show any signs
of undue excitement or violence." It is interesting to note that these outbreaks
are far more frequent on the female side; for the male patients seclusion is only
rarely necessary.

The difficulties experienced in organising occupations are indicated in the
following passages:?

"The average daily percentage of patients employed is 94. The greater
majority, however, are untrustworthy and quarrelsome, which makes it necessary to employ a very high proportion of attendants to working patients.
Great difficulty is experienced in finding suitable occupations lor the female
patients. Outdoor occupations available are few, while
"indoor industries requiring any marked degree of concentration react
adversely on many of those employed in them and workers have to be carefully selected and gradually trained. I may instance in this connection
lace-making. A number of our more intelligent patients were at first
?See page?80.
tAppendix D. Pp. 102 et seq.
employed at this work with the unfortunate result that their instability,
loss of control, excitement, and violent outbreaks were exaggerated; some
indeed became totally unfit for this special occupation. We new employ
only those of lower grade, and although they learn the work more slowly
they are less intolerant, and the concentration has a beneficial effect on their
mental state and behaviour."

On the subject of "recreation" we read:?

"As the greater proportion of our patients take any and every opportunity to escape, outdoor exercise and recreation presents many difficulties."
Nevertheless, country walks are persisted in, and outdoor games and physical
drill form part of the regular routine. Dancing and concerts are popular as indoor amusements.

Dr. Rees Thomas divides his patients into three groups:? (a) simple mental
defectives, (Males 20.9%, females 5.1%); (b) mental defectives with instability
(Males 26.4%, females 37.2%) and (c) mental defectives with psychosis or neuropsychosis (Males 52.7%, females 57.7%).

He is fully alive to the fact that not only each group but each individual
patient needs separate treatment, and that there is scope at Itampton for a "large
expert medical staff." Until these conditions arc provided progress must be
slow and it is only possible to make in certain of the most promising cases the
detailed study which should be given to each of the 331 who were on the books
during the year under review.

A rich field of research is lying untilled in the interests of ' 'economy'' ; that
in a nutshell, is the position at Rampton.

Education (Institution Children) Act, 1923.
-------------------------------------------This Act deals with the education of children who are sent by Boards of
Guardians or by a Charitable Institution to a public elementary school or a school
certified under Part V of the Education Act 1921,* located in an area other than
that to which they belong. It provides that in such cases the Local Education
Authority concerned shall be empowered to exact payment from the Local Educat:on Authority from whose area the children come in respect of every child so
educated.

In the case of Poor Law Children the ' 'area to which they belong'' shall be
that in which they have a ' 'settlement.'' In the case of children in a charitable
Institution it shall be taken to be:?
(i) the area in which they last resided for 6 months (other than the Institution), or
(ii) if this cannot be ascertained, the area in which they were born, or
(iii) if neither of the above facts can be established such area as the Board of Education may determine.

This Act merits the attention of Secretaries to Voluntary Associations as
amongst the children whom it will of course affect are defectives who are boarded
out by Boards of Guardians in order that they may attend Day Special Schools.
?This is the Section of the Act dealing with the education of Defective and Epileptic
Children.

Special Schools and the Board of Education.
-----------------------------------------The official view of the Board of Education with regard to Special Schools is
recorded in their Report recentty issued, in the following paragraph:?
' 'The cost of Special Schools is the main obstacle to their provision on
a comprehensive scale, and the Board have had under careful consideration
ways and means of reducing this cost. With this object in view they have
issued a Circular (Circular 1297) in which they have formulated a revised
standard of staffing. As explained in this Circular, the Board do not disparage the ideals which have been pursued in the conduct of the best of
these schools; but they have been forced to the conclusion that some compromise with these ideals is necessary if, within a reasonable time, adequate
provision is to be made for the children who require the special forms oi
education offered by Special Schools, and they believe that the balance of
advantage lies on the side of making less costly arrangements for greater
numbers.

It should be noted in this connection that the Circular referred to above
has met with considerable opposition from Special School teachers and soon
after its issue the National Special Schools Union sent a deputation to the Board
which was received by Mr. Wood, and Dr. Eichholz.

The Hon. Secretary of the Union (Mr. J. H. Hudson) opened the case for
the teachers based on the contention that the efficiency of the schools was incompatible with "diminished expenditure, larger classes and dilution of the teaching
staff." He further urged that in future the Union should be consulted by the
Board before any far-reaching Circulars of this kind were issued.

Mr. Dodds (London), and Miss Collingwood (Birmingham), then spoke from
the point of view of teachers in M. D. Schools and Miss Lockwood (London) from
that of teachers in P.D. Schools; Miss Jackson (Manchester), Miss Bennett
(Birmingham) and Mrs. Swallow (London) took part in the subsequent discussion.

The Deputation received a sympathetic hearing but Mr. Wood was unable
to hold out any hope that the Circular would be withdrawn. He offered, however,
to consider carefully any cases in which it was felt that hardship would result
and suggested that if at the end of six months the Special Schools Union had to
report any cause of serious complaint the Deputation should meet him again.
He emphasised the fact that any money saved by the economies outlined in the
Circular would be devoted to the opening of additional Special Schools and that
the Board had no intention of accepting any teachers less competent than those
permitted under the existing regulations.

""Report of the Board of Education, 1921-22. Page 74. H.M. Stationery Office, 2/-.
