Foreign Born Parentage and Social Maladjustment
===============================================

By Joseph Miller
Director of Guidance, City Schools of Willces-Barre, Pennsylvania
Two recent studies of delinquency, '' Delinquency Areas, 1 and
''Five Hundred Criminal Careers,' 2 again demonstrate that certain
factors in their environment cause children of foreign born parents
to become delinquent more frequently than children of American
born parents. Many of these factors have been studied thoroughly,
but there are some which are most obvious to the psychologist who
comes in daily contact with the maladjusted school child of foreign
born parentage. Very often there is a lower standard of living in
the homes of the foreign born and a different cultural background
which may make the child feel out of place in his community and
cause him to rebel. Perhaps the most important of these factors,
however, is the lack of knowledge of the English language in the
home. 1 v
The lives of many of these parents are confined to their own
national group and they are too busy earning a living and raising
a family to learn the language of the country to which they have
come to live. So it happens that they live in America for decades
without becoming members of the American English speaking community. They continue to live the life of the country from which
they came, keeping its language, customs and feasts.
The child of such parents often does not learn an}7 English
before entering school. Knowing little or nothing of the language
spoken by the other children and the teacher, lie begins to feel out
of place, lost and bewildered. This is his first step into the life of
organized society and this step is a stumble. From the beginning lie
feels different, inferior to the group, and a stranger among his mates.
At the same time he comes to expect that allowances will be made
for him. The teacher of course cannot expect at the start the same
quality and quantity of work from him as she does from his English
speaking fellow pupils. Whether these experiences will frighten the
child into being retiring and shy or whether they will cause him to
assert himself by becoming boisterous and a bully, depends on his
1 Clifford E. Shaw and Frederick W. Forbaugli: Delinquency Areas.
1 Sheldon and Eleanor T. Glueck: Five Hundred Criminal Careers.
20 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
previous experience and training and on his physical condition.
Either of these attitudes will make it difficult for him to make
friends. He may come to feel resentful toward the school as a
whole. He does not feel at home there since he achieves little of
either academic or social success because of his language difficulties.
Little is therefore necessary to make a truant of him and truancy
of course easily leads to other delinquencies. He feels different
from the group in any event, and consequently does not mind increasing this difference by uneonformed behavior.
Many children of course overcome their first language difficulties in school, become good students and take an active part in all
school activities, but later the language problem enters in another
form. The children have learned to speak, read, and write in
English. They begin to feel superior to their parents because they
can speak a language which the parents cannot understand. The
normal parent-child relationship becomes reversed. Whereas normally the parent interprets the world to the child, in these families
the child has to interpret all the important happenings to the
parents. Often he is even called upon by neighbors to interpret for
them. This gives the children an idea that they are very important
and superior in their own social group. They have no one to respect, no authority to guide them. They realize that in many ways
they know more than their parents. If the child learns to respect
authority at home, he will the more easily comply with the rules
and laws of the school and later with those of the commonwealth.
The child who feels he is the intellectual superior in his family
and knows that he can outwit his parents by such simple devices
as misinterpreting a communication, will naturally later sneer at
other kinds of authority and try to outwit other laws and rules.
These two factors, the feeling of superiority and power in his
own group on the one hand and the feeling of inferiority which results in resentment toward the outside alien world 011 the other, form
the basis for the mental attitude of the gangster. He can bully his
own world and he also wants to impress and bully the people whom
he considers superior and of whom he is really afraid. Such delinquent children of foreign born parents form one of the most difficult problems for the psychologist. So many links are missing in
their upbringing that it is difficult, to re-educate them. They have
to be given a new point of viewr, a new sense of proportion, a new
attitude to life. Either their whole families have to be readjusted
FOREIGN BORN PARENTAGE 21
or they have to be taken out. of their home and placed in a new
environment.
Two cases described below may illustrate the points already
stated. The first is a girl, Catherine, thirteen years old, in the eighth
grade of public school.
Problem. Sex delinquency.
Family situation. The family is Russian. The parents came
to this country nineteen years ago. The father is a grocer and also
works in the mines. The mother is a suspicious, frightened little
woman. Both parents understand and speak the English language
only very moderately. They are quite intelligent, however, and
greatly concerned about their children. They have a nice home in
a rather good section of the town. The parents seem to be in a
constant state of confusion and fear. They have lost their European
standards but, due to their poor knowledge of English, are unable
to acquire American standards. They are unable to give their
children any real guidance, and communicate to them only a fear
of everything strange and new. Every suggested change, even one
which ought to be pleasant, is met by shrinking fear. Catherine
resents this fear and tries to be like other American children. As
her parents cannot associate with American born parents and there
are few Russians in their neighborhood, Catherine is forced to pick
her friends among boys and girls whose parents do not care or are
unable to supervise their activities.
The mother nags persistently and complains in an ineffectual
way, and Catherine responds with growls and such remarks as,
" Vou don't understand anything anyway." The father seems to
let things run their own course in his family over long periods of
time, looking on rather helplessly, and then suddenly gets into a
frenzy of "trying to do something about it,'' punishes the children
excessively and does many rash things which he later regrets.
School report. The permanent record card shows consistently
good work in practically all subjects. Recently she began to fail in
two subjects because, according to the teachcr, her mind was not on
her work. She was reported to be by far the most sophisticated
pupil in the class. She was definitely the leader of a small group of
girls, but was principally interested in boys. In the classroom she
was always writing notes, usually to boys. She played in the school
orchestra and was captain of the girls' volleyball team. She expressed a desire to become a teacher.
22 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Mental test. On the Binet-Simon test, Catherine obtained an
Intelligence Quotient of 97. On a non-verbal test, the Healy Picture
Completion Test II, Catherine scored twenty years or over. The
difference between the very high score on the non-verbal scale and
the mere average on the Binet-Simon test illustrates the language
handicap.
Personality. The girl is a well developed, strong child, always
clean and well dressed. She wears much cheap jewelry and makes an
effort to appear sophisticated. She is frank to an extreme. She
seems to be easily bewildered and frightened but takes care not to
appear so and assumes instead an air of bravado and uses vile language whenever she is afraid. Her English vocabulary in matters
not connected with school work is poor and there is a suspicion
that she often uses obscene language simply because it is the only
kind she has at her command to express herself. She is a "good
sport." She takes all the blame and is anxious not to cause her
boy friends any trouble. She will never tell a lie to protect herself.
She can be very resentful when treated harshly but is friendly and
responsive with the person she likes. In Kenneth, her present boy
friend, she was most impressed by his indisputably American parentage and name. "His name is Kenneth," she reported, "can you
spell it?"
Events leading up to discovery of delinquency. A few months
ago Catherine met Kenneth, eighteen years old. He was an insignificant looking boy, weak, smaller than Catherine, and most of
the time out of work. The two became friendly and at one time
Kenneth took Catherine in his car to a neighboring state for a weekend trip. The girl's parents knew nothing of this trip. They knew
only that she had stayed out two nights and punished her for it. A
teacher who went through Catherine's desk found notes telling of
this trip and other proposed trips. These notes also indicated sex
experiences. The matter was referred to the guidance department.
The girl was seen and admitted sexual intercourse since the age of
nine. She was given a thorough explanation of sex and it was arranged that one of the visiting teachers should keep in close touch
with her. While the investigation was still in progress the parents
who were alarmed but obviously failed to grasp the interest of the
guidance department in this matter, found a note in the girl's desk,
which they thought indicated a plan to run away again with Kenneth. They called in the police. The girl was taken by the police to the
FOREIGN BORN PARENTAGE 23
detention ward for women. After this experience it was felt that
it would be best to send Catherine to Sleighton Farms particularly
as the girl preferred this solution to a return to her parents' suspicions and the strained school atmosphere.
Recommendations for treatment. That Catherine be given such
instruction as would encourage a serious attitude in sex matters.
That effort be made to correct her mistaken idea of American customs. That, in consideration of her good school grades, her school
activities, and her expressed interest in the teaching profession,
she be given as much opportunity as possible to continue academic
training.
The second case is a boy, David. He is eleven years old and in
the sixth grade of public school.
Problem. Stealing at home and unruly in school.
Family situation. The father owns two drygoods stores. One
of these is connected with the family's home. The home is clean,
well furnished but is situated in a poor neighborhood on a busy
thoroughfare. The father is an extremely religious man, a Russian
Jew. He is intelligent and tries hard to do all he can for his children. The mother is a very nice and friendly woman, but rather
weak. Both parents speak fairly good English. There are four
other children in the family, all older than David. The next child
is six years David's senior and one brother and one sister are married. All the members of the family seem very fond of each other.
The parents always insisted on strict religious observance and all the
children attended Hebrew school regularly after public school hours.
Many of the habits and customs of the parents are still those of rural
eastern Europe. For example the father's favorite hiding place for
his money is under his pillow, the mother's in a cup on the pantry
shelf.
Mental test. David's Intelligence Quotient is 104. The boy
lacks concentration, makes little effort and tries to "bluff."
School report. He is generally very poor in his school work;
is failing in several subjects. The teacher complains that he docs
not pay attention and is very disturbing in class. Talks constantly.
Personality. The boy is a tall, thin, weak looking youngster.
His features are very characteristic of his race. He is usually untidy in appearance. His manner is pleasant and friendly, he reacts quickly, is good at "repartee" and likes to play little jokes
even with very new acquaintances and teachers. His jokes are ne\ er
24 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
malicious or impertinent. However he is obviously used to being
the center of attention at home and to being admired and coddled
and nagged and scolded constantly. He has been ill with asthma
since he was a baby, which of course tended to increase the importance of his position in the family.
Problem. The parents asked the guidance department for advice, because, as they said, they felt helpless in solving David's difficulties. He was considered queer in both the public and Hebrew
school, because he talked incessantly and behaved childishly. At
home he was disobedient, often came home as late as midnight and
even if at home, he could not be induced to go to bed before eleven
o'clock or later. If the parents remonstrated with him, he would
bring out books to his aid to show that authorities stated that he
did not need as much sleep as his parents thought he did. Recently
the parents discovered that he had taken money from them, several
times in small amounts, and twice as much as twenty-six and twentyseven dollars. The twenty-six dollars he took from under his
father's pillow, the twenty-seven dollars from the cupboard. He
spent all of the money treating other children to sweets and other
presents, as his mother put it, "If you would at least buy things
for yourself with the money, perhaps ties or something like that.
But you spend it on children that are nice to you as long as you give
them things and tomorrow they will hit you."
David threatened suicide twice when not allowed to have his
own way and once was found to carry a bottle of iodine.
Causes of problem. (1) Feeling of inferiority based on the
foreign origin and customs of parents, (2) the boy's position in
the family which led to his being pampered and made dependent?
weak parental control, (3) his poor personal appearance and poor
health, (4) lack of free time for recreation due to Hebrew school
after public school hours, (5) poor understanding of the value of
money?David was never given any allowance.
Treatment. The following factors had to be considered when
planning treatment: (1) David's inability to associate with the other
children due to his personality difficulties, (2) his great desire for
the companionship of these children, which led him to stealing, (3)
his lack of free time in which to acquire a more successful social
method, (4) his irresponsibility and lack of systematic eating and
sleeping habits.
The parents were co-operative and with their help it was arFOREIGN BORN PARENTAGE 25
ranged that the boy be required to go to Hebrew school only twice
a week. For the remaining afternoons supervised recreation uas
planned in which clubs and co-operative games were included.
David was transferred to another school, where there were more
children of foreign born parents and where he would be made to
feel more at home. Finally a definite schedule for the whole week
was devised, which included some time which David might spend as
he wished. A rating card was given to David, to his parents, and
to the teacher. The teacher was asked to report weekly 011 David's
progress and so were the parents and David himself. David's rating
card included his whole schedule even to the bedtime and he was
asked to report how well he followed it out. The boy was co-operative and seemed to consider the rating a rather interesting game.
He was proud when he could show a perfect score. An improvement
in school was soon marked and although he still voiced objections
from time to time, he did go to bed on the hour agreed. There lia\e
been no serious complaints about David since then and he seems to
be improving steadily even in his social adjustment.
What remedies would then be suggested to improve the situation
of children of foreign born parents? The ones which the author
suggests are outlined below. 1. Give these children better informed parents. This can be accomplished by using the immigration laws in such a way that 110 larger number of immigrants will
flock in than can be successfully assimilated and educated, and then,
too, an extension of schemes of adult education, including the teaching of the English language. 2. Educate the community. Gi\c
the American community and particularly the teachers a new point
of view toward the foreign born and instruct children about
the importance of the cultures and the meaning of the customs of
the various countries from which the immigrants come and the contributions they can make to American life and culture. Ilien the
child of foreign born parents would be made more welcome and
it would be easier for him to feel himself a full member of the community into which he has been born. 3. AVatcli for the fiist
signs of social maladjustment in school and from the very beginning
enlist the help of the school psychologist and the visiting teachei
in order to make the child feel at home in school and well adjusted
in his own home. 4. Restrict the number of hours spent by children in national schools after public school hours. The added stiain
has often been found to cause difficulties.
