The Significance, Limitations and Possibilities of Psycho-Biochemistry Findings
================================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1930, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XVIII, No. 8
January, 1930

By Max Trumper, Ph.D.
In charge of Psycho-biochemistry Laboratory, Psychological Clinic,
University of Pennsylvania
The importance of making biochemical studies of cases that
come to the Psychological Clinic has been shown in a previous
paper. The results obtained have been made possible by the perfecting of rapid but accurate chemical methods requiring but a few
cubic centimeters of blood. In 1919 I had to obtain from one to
two ounces of blood and work intermittently for several hours to
determine the amount of uric acid in a case of gout. Today the
same test is done more accurately, requiring only a few drops and
in an emergency can be rushed through in one-quarter of an hour.
At that time in order to obtain the necessary large amount of blood,
we had to leave the needle sticking in the patient's vein for a period
of from five to ten minutes. This was quite an ordeal and the only
patients who responded kindly to this procedure were those suffering from high blood pressure to whom bleeding in itself often gives
relief. Obviously this procedure with its attendant mental strain
precluded any blood studies being made that might have been of
value to the Psychological Clinic. Czezowska and Goertz in Compt.
rend. soc. biol. 98, 147, 1928; report that the wide differences in
sugar content of successive samples of blood drawn fifteen minutes
apart are attributed to the excitation of the vegetative nervous system and to psychic influences. These authorities report also that
subcutaneous injection of one mg. of neutral atropine sulphate immediately before taking the sample by finger puncture annuls the
variations of sugar content from the above mentioned causes. In
* This is the second of a series of articles on the subject of Psycho-biochemistry to be published in this Journal. This article is based on an address
delivered before the Northern Medical Association of Philadelphia on November 18, 1929.
230 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
1919 the biochemical methods had not been perfected; there was
not a single book published on blood chemistry and only two pamphlets were available. Now all biochemical works contain data on
blood chemistry and the information so gained is being utilized and
extended by the Psychiatrist, Neurologist and Psychologist. In
many cases we can obtain the necessary chemical data by analysis
of the saliva, of the alveolar air, of the oxygen consumption, or by
rebreathing tests and cardio-respiratory tests. These tests are well
adapted to use in a Psychological Clinic because they do not cause
physical discomfort or mental strain to the patient.
Previous to the World War, clinical laboratories confined themselves chiefly to the study of secretions and excretions in diseased
conditions. The biochemical methods were too cumbersome and
inexact to be used regularly in the Psychological Clinic and the
Medical Clinic. The recent advances have so fundamentally extended our knowledge of the normal metabolic activities that even
functional derangement may be detected before the irreversible
pathologic conditions have developed. This particularly applies to
the study of the glandular dystrophies which have so profound
psychologic and physiologic effects. Furthermore, clinical laboratory studies are being made to determine the chemical changes that
accompany emotions and to discover the psychic factors present
in specific toxicities. All these advances do not detract from the
value of the data obtained from the study of secretions and excretions. Likewise the advances made in Psychological Tests have
neither displaced the necessity nor lessened the value of the ordinary clinical examination. In any case the Psycho-biochemistry
laboratory should be used as an adjunct to the general clinical
examination, being in itself an aid to diagnosis rather than a sole
means to that end.
We all know the tendency of the specialist to place undue
emphasis on the value of his own subject. This applies to the
medical as well as to the psychological specialists. For example,
there is the failure of the Gastro-enterologist to diagnose persistent
vomiting as due to increased intra-cranial pressure. There is also
the all too frequent removal of appendices when the discomfort is
caused by inter-costal neuralgia. For this reason the Psycho-biochemist must be on his guard, especially in the Psychological Clinic,
against the assumption that his laboratory findings make unnecessary a case history, obtained by thorough psychological and physical
examinations. It would be a waste of time to ask each psychologist
PSYCHO-BIOCHEMISTRY 231
to be his own chemist but it is essential that the Psycho-biochemist
know the significance as well as the limitations of his tests, especially
in their application to the cases that come before the Clinic. On
the other hand, the Clinical Psychologist should not neglect the
findings of the Psycho-biochemist since such laboratory tests supply
information which forms an important supplement to clinical evidence.
Significance of Psycho-biochemical Findings
First: Give information clarifying a doubtful case. Many of
the cases that come to the Clinic present a picture of undernourishment, malnutrition or anemia. Blood sugar and blood count studies
will differentiate the proneness to fatigue due to a sub-normal concentration of sugar in the blood from that due to a lack of hemoglobin and red blood cells. The primary anemias are not common
in children and present facts of neurological rather than psychological interest. But the secondary anemias, common in all periods
of life do present themselves to the Psychological Clinic. The ready
fatiguability and lack of energy in these cases can easily be mistaken for laziness and indifference. The failure to advance in school
as well as the inability to perform the normal daily occupations of
childhood is therefore often due not to an inherent or congenital
defect but to a lack of proper cell nutrition. Some of these cases
also show mild but typical symptoms of anoxemia readily confirmed
in the laboratory by determining the oxygen-carrying capacity of the
blood and the arterial and venous saturation.
Second: Confirm or deny a tentative diagnosis. Without the
aid of the laboratory it is extremely difficult to distinguish between
sub-thyroid activity and a chronic deep seated infection. In the
Clinic the recent case of Jane R. is illustrative. This child was
brought to the Speech Clinic because of mental dullness and backwardness in speech. The child's skin was pasty and cold and gave
the impression of sub-thyroid activity. Treatment with thyroid
extract, however, led to no improvement. Subsequent laboratory
tests revealed specific evidence of either a severe bladder or kidney
infection. Preliminary treatment of this infection resulted in striking clinical improvement which should render her teachable. The
child became interested in her surroundings and was playful for
the first time. Her appetite improved and her general appearance
was better. The infection has not been eradicated as yet as it will
require more prolonged and perhaps more intensive treatment. It
232 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
occurs to me that a good plan would be to give cases of this type
mental tests before and after treatment to determine the degree of
restitution of the mental faculties.
Third: Make more certain treatment and prognosis. What is
generally called irritability of muscles, nerves and glands seems to
be influenced basically by the balance between sodium and potassium as opposed to calcium and magnesium. This relationship is
by no means a simple chemical one but is greatly complicated, among
other factors, by the existence of diffusible and non-diffusible fractions of these ions, each having its specific effect. Thus the maintenance of the normal calcium concentration and ionic partition in
the blood and tissues is dependent upon several factors: the parathyroid hormone, vitamin D, the hydrogen-ion concentration, the
amount and nature of serum proteins and the concentration of phosphate and carbonate ions. Vitamin D is closely related to the action of ultraviolet light and perhaps also to the parathyroid hormone and all of these have the power of affecting the level of the
blood serum calcium. Due to the comparatively recent discoveries
in the relationship of calcium and parathyroid glands, our knowledge of the influence of calcium has become of practical value. Blood
serum calcium and especially its ionized fraction is a neuro-muscular
depressant. It is indirectly an accelerator of heart action by its
depressant effect on Vagus tone. When a calcium deficiency exists
many symptoms appear which are difficult to distinguish from
other conditions unless the serum calcium is determined. Thus the
unstable, hyper-excitable individual often belongs to the hypocalcemic type who can be improved, if not stablized, by calcium
therapy with or without parathyroid hormone. The spasmodic
jerky movements usually attributed to mere nervousness may also
be due to calcium deficiency. Thus we see the need of laboratory
data in the treatment and prognosis of these cases.
Fourth: Decide between alternative views. In cases of unstable personalities with no gross pathology the hyper-excitability
closes approximates the hyper-activity seen in Hyperthyroidism.
The only way to differentiate these cases is to do frequent Basal
Metabolic Determinations. It is useless to do a single metabolic
test since this invariably will be higher than subsequent tests. In
these cases more accurate laboratory data are obtained from two
short tests of eight minutes each rather than a single test extending
for sixteen minutes. Instead of placing the patient in bed I have
obtained better results by placing the subject in a canvas semiPSYCHO-BIOCHEMISTRY 233
reclining chair at an angle of about 45 degrees. This position was
not only restful but made it possible for the subject to read some
non-exciting literature and served to direct his attention away from
the metabolic test.
An additional diagnostic aid in these cases is the determination
of the vital capacity because as Rabinowitch of Montreal (Vital
Capacity in Hyperthyroidism, Arch. Int. Med. 1923, 31, 910.) has
shown in cases of hyperthyroidism the decrease in vital capacity is
in direct ratio to the increase in the metabolic rate. This observation is in itself very satisfactory clinically but in our Clinic the
picture is further complicated by the fact that so many of the cases
have a low vital capacity not because of thyroid disease but rather
because of poor breathing habits. Fortunately if the subject is
young and free from pathology and the anatomic breathing mechanism is not fixed we have found improvement in the vital capacity
following extended breathing exercises. Here the laboratory is of
aid by helping to decide between alternative views and assists in
following the cases.
Fifth: In a limited number of cases?make the diagnosis: Mental retardation due to continued and persistent absorption of exogenous or endogenous toxins, can often be suspected but is conclusively proven by biochemical methods. Specific conditions like
chronic lead poisoning, chronic carbon monoxide gas poisoning present many psychic features whose unraveling is by way of the laboratory. Finally, Encephalitis with its problem and behaviour syndromes often presents a typical history but at times is dependent for
its diagnosis primarily on the sugar content of the spinal fluid.
Limitations of Psycho-biochemical Findings
First: In some tests the so-called normal range is very wide.
Thus the basal metabolic rate of the same case may have increased
say from a minus 10% to a plus 15% over a period of time. This
is a change of appreciable magnitude and of clinical significance
and yet each finding would have been considered normal if only a
single basal metabolic rate had been determined. (The normal range
being from a minus 15% to a plus 15%). Here is an instance of
the limitation of the performance of but a single test and the advantage of repeated tests. The same considerations are also apparent when we recall how easily the basal metabolic rate may be
increased by mental stress. The average of 18 metabolic tests made
on a woman student while qualifying for her Ph.D. was 40.12 Cal234 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ories per sq. meter of body surface per hour. Eight additional tests
made after all her scholastic work had been finished showed a drop
of 10.5% from her previous level. ''The mental let-down is the
only apparent cause for this decrease in the metabolic rate."1
Second: The absence of positive findings from the laboratory
is no proof of the absence of organic dysfunction or of disease. An
organ may seem to function normally so far as our present tests
can indicate although that organ is the seat of much disease. In this
connection it is well to remember the large margin of safety in all
our organs, making it possible for individuals to get along with one
kidney, or one lung, or with half their stomach removed. With the
advances made in this country and abroad in Encephalography it
is amazing to see how much of the brain may be destroyed by disease
and yet permit an individual to function normally both mentally and
physically as a member of society, even to the extent of self support.
Third: The degree of sensitiveness of the test used is most important for its interpretation. From time to time improvements
are made in a given test and it is therefore essential to know which
particular test gave the results obtained. The new Belote's fluorescein test which is a modification of Fresenius' test for the detection
of bromine is so sensitive that one part of bromine can be detected in
50,000 parts of urine. Thus we are now able to diagnose very
early cases of bromism which previously were reported as negative.
Formerly we had to wait until the mental and physical symptoms
became marked before this diagnosis could be made.
Fourth: Many chemical changes that occur in mental disease
are not pathognomonic and may also be present under normal
conditions. For example, there are many mental conditions which
are associated with acidosis in varying degrees. The chemical change
taking place here with the presence of acetone is the result of the
absence of sufficient carbohydrate in the diet. This may also be
found normally when the diet lacks carbohydrates.
Psycho-biochemical Possibilities
Psychology needs biochemical assistance since the processes of
thinking as well as the transmission of impulses through the nerves
are associated with chemical changes. The cases seen in the Clinic
as a rule have not reached the degree of irreversibility that characterizes the pathologic cases that come before the psychiatrist and the
alienist. When the underlying physico-chemical mechanisms as1F. A. Hitchcock, Columbus, Ohio. Variations in the Basal Metabolic
Rate apparently caused by the mental state of the subject. Xlllth International Congress of Physiologists, Boston, August 19, 1929.
PSYCHO-BIOCHEMISTRY 235
sociated with behaviour are discovered the so-called instances of
spontaneous cure will be greatly reduced.
Years ago observant clinicians noted some curious facts about
immunity and spontaneous cure. One of the most recent examples
has been that infectious diseases, particularly those accompanied by
high fever, sometimes caused the remission of symptoms in some
forms of cerebro-spinal syphilis. Many years passed before anyone applied the mechanism present in high fever. It is now applied
in the malarial treatment of paresis. This represents a disease
mechanism which is antagnostic in effect to another disease and in
this case is applied as a therapeutic procedure in late syphilis. More
recently Loevenhart has demonstrated and Leake has confirmed
the stimulating cffect created by brief periods of inhalation of a mixture of 30% carbon dioxide with oxygen inducing mental clarity
and intelligent responses in certain cases of dementia prtecox catatonia. These favorable effects are only of ten to fifteen minutes
duration.)
Another group of phenomena involving intrinsic bodj7
mechanisms centres at the present time in the problem of epilepsy.
The cause of idiopathic epilepsy is unknown. Many theories have
been presented but found unsatisfactory. The most promising trend
at the present time is a physico-chemical approach involving such
factors as water balance, distribution of ions, carbon-dioxide, oxygen
tension and acid-base equilibrium. The last factor has been used
as a basis of a form of treatment from which satisfactory results
have been obtained. It rests on the observation and assumption
that the development of a condition of relative acidosis reduces the
frequency of these attacks. This state is brought about principally
by the use of a ketogenic diet and restricted water intake. In this diet
carbohydrates are reduced to a minimum and fats increased with the
view of increasing the hydrogen-ion concentration of the body tissues
and presumably of the sensitive brain tissue, the irritation of which
occasions the attack.
The utilization of a mechanism antagonistic to another specific
condition offers a fertile field of inquiry to the Psycho-biocliemical
laboratory. It seems to me in this regard that a study of possibly
great value would be an investigation of the infrequent co-existence
of diabetes and epilepsy. In diabetes we have an existing ketosis
with dehydration while in epilepsy we strive to produce a similar
ketosis with dehydration. Such an investigation would in my
opinion reveal that the diabetes has a therapeutic effect on the
epilepsy.
