Shall We Continue to Train Clinical Psychologists for Second-String Jobs?
=========================================================================

By J. E. W. Wallin,
Baltimore Department of Education and Johns Hopkins University
The following facts are well known:
1. The American Psychological Association twelve years ago
established a section of clinical psychology whose fundamental aim
was to "advance professional standards in the field of clinical psy-
chology." In furtherance of this aim, the section adopted as the
minimal requirement for membership, the Ph.D. degree in various
branches of psychology, and the publication or the preparation for
publication of "a contribution of importance to the literature of
mental tests or of clinical psychology."
2. Because of the recommendations of leading clinical psy-
chologists and because of the example set by a few institutions of
higher learning, the curriculum for clinical psychologists has gradu-
ally been expanded to include not only the major branches of psy-
chology, such as normal, abnormal, clinical, criminal, experimental,
genetic, child, educational, industrial, and social, but also group
mental and educational tests, educational diagnosis, the education
of deviating types, mental hygiene, psychoanalysis, psychopathology,
mental deficiency and disease, nervous disorders, and frequently
other branches of medicine.
3. To obtain a major appointment in clinical psychology, it is
now necessary to have the Ph.D. degree, to have obtained about
four years of specialized training (counting the senior year in col-
lege), and, in all probability, to have had several years of practical
clinical experience. This exacting requirement is not excessive in
view of the technical nature of mental diagnosis, provided re-
sponsible positions are available for thoroughly trained clinical
psychologists.
4. It is notorious that such positions are becoming less and
less available, if we exclude a few teaching positions in the univer-
sities, a few research positions, and a few directorships of public
school, state education department, or institutional clinics or bu-
reaus. Most of the directors of mental hygiene clinics or child
guidance clinics are physicians, and most of the directors of testing
1 Prepared for the Ninth International Congress of Psychology, New
Haven, Connecticut, September, 1929.
SECOND-STRING JOBS? 243
bureaus or departments for handicapped children in school systems
do not possess the qualifications of clinical psychologists, nor are
they required to have such qualifications, in fact many possess very
limited technical training for the handling of work which is, after
all, essentially technical.
5. The reason for the situation depicted above is fairly ob-
vious. Organizations have been established for the definite purpose
of bringing about the establishment of child guidance or mental hy-
giene clinics everywhere, for the purpose of extending the scope of
such clinics to include all types of mentally maladjusted children,
and for the purpose of placing physicians at the head of such clinics
at a remunerative professional wage.
Some of these organizations maintain alert intelligence divi-
sions, whose function is to discover projected private or independent
clinics and exert friendly pressure to have physicians appointed as
directors, while they studiously withhold recognition from all bu-
reaus, clinics, or departments not directed by psychiatrists. The only
function of the clinical psychologist in a clinic, according to the
theory on which this system of promotion is founded, is as a subordi-
nate technician, to give and score tests. The clinical psychologist is
referred to indiscriminately as the "psychologist" or the "psy-
chometrist," whether or not he or she (usually she) is a technically
trained clinical psychologist with a Ph.D. degree, or merely a tyro
just out of college, or a grade teacher who prefers testing to teaching.
The salary varies from about $1,200 to $3,000, occasionally somewhat
higher. Frequently, the salary scale is lower than that in effect in
large school systems for elementary teachers, while the professional
status is about the same. The "psychologist" often occupies a place
distinctly inferior in stipend and rank to the so-called psychiatric
social worker, who frequently is a teacher, a nurse, or a young college
graduate with a semester or two of training in psychiatric social
work. No matter how well equipped, the psychologist in these clinics
is merely a helper, a technician, a tester. A considerable number of
them have secured very limited technical training. A few courses
offered by departments of psychology and a normal school diploma
or a bachelor's degree is about the extent of training of many of
these so-called psychologists.
6. Two outstanding consequences have followed in the wake
of this organized attitude toward the psychological clinician. In
the first place, with a few notable exceptions, a distinctly inferior
type of psychologist represents the profession on clinic staffs. With
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
the term psychologist indiscriminately applied on the one hand to
any infra-psychologist who may be employed to give mental tests,
and2 on the other hand, to the brood of pseudo-psychologists swarm-
ing over the land and deluging the daily press with bombastic ad-
vertisements of their magical esoteric powers, is it to be wondered at
that the term psychologist has become a stench and a reproach.
In the second place, the well-trained, experienced clinical psy-
chologist, even though he may be better qualified to direct a guidance
clinic than a young physician who has pursued a few months' course
in a child guidance clinic and who has no technical preparation what-
ever in the field of differential education, is forced into teaching or
research or some other line of activity, although he has faithfully
prepared for and prefers to devote himself to organizing and di-
recting clinical work for mentally maladjusted children.
7. Society and the state are fully justified in setting up effi-
ciency standards for all types of public service in order that the
public funds may be wisely and economically expended.
8. But neither the state, nor any private organization, is justi-
fied in bringing about the establishment of personnel qualifications
which discriminate in favor of the members of one profession and
against the members of another profession who are as well trained or
better trained for the work in hand.
9. It is notorious that clinical psychologists, with the training
now offered by the leading departments of clinical psychology, are
fully as competent to direct behavior, or mental hygiene, or psycho-
logical, or child guidance clinics, as most of the physicians now in
charge of such clinics. It is equally notorious that the physicians who
have achieved highest success in this field have done so not because of
their medical training but because of their psychological training
and insight. In point of fact, because of the high income which first-
class psychiatrists command in private practice, compared with
the modest income of college professors, is it not probable that a
higher order of clinical psychologists than of psychiatrists can be se-
cured for the directorship of public child guidance bureaus. After
all, the work which such a bureau or clinic must do, and the require-
ments with respect to staff and technique remain the same whether
it is directed by a clinical psychologist or by a psychiatrist.
3 Of course, both the clinical psychologist and the psychiatrist require
the services of well-trained mental testers or psychometrists. No criticism of
them is implied. They subserve a very important function. But they are not
clinical psychologists.
SECOND-STRING JOBS? 245
10. If I have presented the situation correctly, and I believe
this has been done in all essentials, psychologists are faced with two
alternatives.
Either the departments of psychology should inform their stu-
dents that there is little future for upstanding clinical psychologists
without the M.D. degree, except in teaching and research, and ad-
vise students who want to go into psycho-clinical examination work
to transfer to medical schools, no matter how poorly the training of-
fered in such schools may prepare them for the fundamental psycho-
logical work which must be expertly done in mental hygiene clinics
if the service of such clinics is to be of a high order of merit.
Or, if the psychologists are convinced that adequately trained
clinical psychologists are fully competent to direct bureaus or clinics
for mentally maladjusted children, no matter by what names such
clinics may be known, and if, because of such belief, they continue
to train clinical psychologists for clinical service, then the associa-
tions of psychologists and the universities should assume the ob-
ligation to see to it that the clinical psychologists get an even break,
and that they shall not be deprived of their place in the sun by
legislation drawn in the interest of a class, or be discriminated
against by organizations or individuals in control of appointments.
What should such a square-deal program involve? It might
include (1) campaigns of public education to neutralize inimical
propaganda and to secure the support of educational and social
organizations and institutions which have no axes to grind, but
which are unselfishly devoted to the improvement of the mental, edu-
cational, and social welfare of society, especially its juvenile mem-
bers; (2) the appointment of state legislative committees to assist
in shaping desirable legislation; and (3) the maintenance of some
type of organization whose function should be to secure setups in
mental clinics or bureaus supported by public funds which will not
discriminate against properly trained clinical psychologists. That
legislation can be secured which accords psychologists legal recogni-
tion is shown by the enactment of the New York Mental Deficiency
Law of 1919, and the Ohio statutes of 1929, a decade later. The
latter authorize juvenile and probate courts to place psychologists
on their staffs of examiners.
Shall we as psychologists frankly face the question here pre-
sented, or shall we continue to dodge it? I content myself with
merely raising an issue, which I know is giving concern to many
psychologists.
