News and Commments
===================

Semi-annual Meeting of the Feebleminded Club
On Saturday, November 9, The Feebleminded Club convened
at the Vineland Training School for its semi-annual meeting. The
presence of superintendents from nearby institutions, of psychologists and psychiatrists interested in the experimental study of
feeblemindedness, attested to the continuing interest on the part of
the members of the club in the problems of the feebleminded.
Contrary to the usual custom, the meeting of The Feebleminded
Club Avas given over to a formal program consisting of reports by
members of the staff of the Vineland Training School, of research
which is at present being conducted under the auspices of that institution. The reports presented at this meeting are briefly outlined below.
Sarah E. Crowell, B.S., University of Pennsylvania.
Genetic Development of Infants in Feebleminded Families. A
field study of children under six years of age (from feebleminded
stock previously investigated) for the purpose of determining (a)
the present mental development of such children by means of standard scales of infant mental growth,, especially the Gesell Scale, and
(b) the developmental histories of such children as far as they can
be obtained with reference to the differential use of such data in
the clinical syllabus. This study has two other aspects, (a) determination of present mentality of adults formerly examined when
children, and (b) the quantitative aspect of heredity by comparing
the intelligence level of one generation with another in the same
families.
August K. Eccles, B.S., Columbia University.
An Abbreviation of the Behavior Score Card. An attempt to
reduce the number of items in the Yepsen Behavior Score Card and
avoid duplication of items in order that this instrument may be
made more practicable for routine use.
Benjamin Frank, M.A., University of Pennsylvania.
Social Adjustment of Discharged State Patients. An analysis
of thirty-five State cases discharged from The Training School,
whose social adjustment has been investigated by the Central Parole
Bureau of the State Department of Institutions and Agencies, with
257 NEWS AND COMMENT
special reference to living conditions, employment, economic supervision and social adjustment, including a correlation of these with
age, mental age and length of residence, for the purpose of evaluating parole policies and training programs.
Cecelia Gorsuch, M.A., Ohio Wesleyan.
Adaptive Behavior of Idiots. An experimental study of the
adaptive behavior of low-grade feeebleminded children in problemsolving situations involving a comparison of their adaptive behavior
with that of normal infants and anthropoids.
Carl Ingvolstad, A.B., University of Minnesota.
Theoretical Study of Idiocy. A critical review of the literature
on idiocy from the point of view of general orientation and theoretical exposition, for the purpose of providing a unified background
for a series of research studies on various aspects of idiocy with some
formulation of the research problems presented by this category.
J. T. McIntire, A.B., West Virginia University.
The Emotions of Idiots. An experimental study of the emotional behavior of idiots, with special reference to the psychogalvanic
reflex and with reference to the different types of idiocy and with
attention to the outward display of emotions and possibly the factors
conditioning emotional response.
Ruth T. Melcher, M.A., University of Kentucky.
Mental Deficiency Following Birth Trauma. A descriptive
study of birth injury as a category of mental deficiency, with special
reference to the measurement of the mental and motor capabilities
in this group and their improvement under muscle training.
^Gordon L. Riley, M.A., University of Minnesota.
The Personal Constant. A comparison of the relative values of
the Intelligence Quotient and the Personal Coefficient proposed by
Heinis, with reference to the curve of mental growth in feebleminded subjects, for the purpose of obtaining a better predictive
index for mental prognosis.
In addition to these reports, a lively discussion of the research
projects and informal chats served to add interest to the meeting.
Morris S. Viteles
University of Pennsylvania
258 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
With the resignation of Dean W. F. Fleming of Yanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, Dr F. C. Pasehall, formerly of the
Psychology Department of the University of Pennsylvania, has been
promoted from Associate Dean to Dean of the College.
A laboratory of psychology has been opened at Mt. St. Joseph's
College, Chestnut Hill, Philadelphia. It will be in charge of J. Ellis
Voss who was last year in the psychology department at the University of Arizona, and previous to that an Assistant in Psychology
at the University of Pennsylvania.
The next annual meeting of the National Vocational Guidance
Association will be held on February 20, 21, 22, at the Hotel Chalfonte, Atlantic City, New Jersey. The program will include an
extended discussion of psychological techniques in vocational guidance. Of particular interest to the clinical psychologist will be a
joint meeting with the staff of the Vineland Training School, to be
held at the Training School on the afternoon of Saturday, February
22, devoted to a discussion of the vocational guidance of the mentally
defective. Institutional and clinic representatives will be found on
the program, which is being arranged jointly by Dr E. A. Doll,
Director of Research of the Vineland Training School, and Dr Morris S. Viteles, University of Pennsylvania, Chairman of the Program
Committee of the National Vocational Guidance Association.
The International Council for the Education of Exceptional
Children will hold its annual convention in Philadelphia on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, February 20, 21, and 22, 1930. Arrangements for meetings and entertainments of the delegates are
now being planned by Dr Gladys Ide, Director of the Department
of Special Education in the Philadelphia Public Schools. The headquarters of the Council during the convention will be at the Hotel
Pennsylvania, Thirty-ninth and Chestnut Streets. Some very interesting sectional meetings will be held, inviting discussion on such
topics as The Physically Handicapped Child, The Gifted Child, and
The Problem Child. Visits will be made to some of Philadelphia's
Orthogenic Backward classes and special class centers, and on Saturday afternoon there will be trips to nearby institutions?namely,
Overbrook School for the Blind, Pennsylvania Training School for
Feebleminded Children at Elwyn, and the Widener Memorial Home
for Crippled Children.
