Eugene, a Brilliant Boy who Failed in School
=============================================

By M. Lavinia Warner, Ph.D.
State Bureau of Juvenile Research, Columbus, Ohio.
The school principal called Eugene's mother into his office
and told her that Eugene would have to be expelled from school.
This was the second school principal who had given the mother this
information and this was the second time that Eugene had been
actually expelled from a school. In each school, the teachers had
conferred with one another and had come to the conclusion that the
boy was mentally slow, morally unclean and a hopeless disciplinary
problem.
The school report stated that he did not get along well with other
children, that he was quarrelsome, and that he would both fight
and run from a fight. Several times he was observed on the play-
ground doing "dirty tricks" to the boys. "The boys did not seem
to have much use for him." "He really did no real school work."
"He twisted himself into so many shapes, that he often fell out of
his seat onto the floor." One teacher expressed herself by saying,
'I worried along with him." Another teacher "absolutely refused
to have him in her room." He chewed pencils, squirmed, and
bothered other children. He attended school regularly, but, his
mother was responsible for his regularity. Eugene did not like
school and consequently he required much persuasion from his
mother to keep him in attendance. "He was often tardy and did not
care if he was late." The teachers reported that Eugene did his best
work in history and that he did poor work in all other subjects and
was especially poor in "hand work." His grades in deportment
were "poor."
He had failed to be promoted from the fifth grade. He was
such a poor student at that time that the teacher wanted to put him
back into the fourth grade. He was conditioned the following year
into the sixth grade because of a rule that a child should not remain
more than two years in the same grade, regardless of whether he
was doing the work or not. He was failing in that grade when the
principal called the mother into his office. The mother, feeling that
something was seriously wrong with her boy, brought him to Dr.
E. J. Emerick, Director of the Bureau of Juvenile Research, for a
neuropsycliiatric examination. Eugene was 11 years and 11 months
old.
144 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Eugene was not a disciplinary problem at home, except when
he was told to do his school home work. His mother said "He just
wouldn't do the work." He was "actually failing." "He would
not try to do anything" with his school subjects.
Eugene had a defect in vision which was due to a high degree
of far-sightedness. His vision was first examined when he was five
years of age by one of the best of oculists. It had been carefully
cared for since that time and had improved a great deal. With the
use of glasses, his vision was normal. The oculist advised that the
use of his eyes should not be restricted.
Eugene's mother reported that he was naturally shy and that
he was fidgety and nervous. He had had measles, scarlet fever and
whooping cough. His general health had always been good. There
was nothing unusual in his health or personal history. It was that
of a normal child. He read a great deal, was quite active mentally
and was interested in the activities of life. He was especially in-
terested in mechanics.
Family History
Eugene's father was a college graduate. He had received
grades of "A" throughout college. Eugene's mother was a normal
school graduate, an intelligent and apparently a stable woman. The
paternal grandfather was a physician and had a good practice.
The paternal grandmother was a writer of note. Her books were
listed among the best one-hundred. The great-grandmother was a
recognized writer, also.
The maternal great-grandfather was a "wide awake mechanic,"
and the maternal great-grandmother was a school teacher. The
maternal grandfather was a graduate of a normal school, had taught
school and later established a successful business of his own. The
maternal grandmother was a university graduate and had taught
elocution and music for a few years before her marriage. There
were no subnormal or eccentric individuals in Eugene's ancestry
known to the mother.
Home Situation
The father had been killed in an automobile accident when
Eugene was eight years of age. Since that time, Eugene and his
mother lived with the maternal grandparents. The grandfather
was an active business man and took the attitude that Eugene was a
boy to be left alone to work out his own problems, not to be petted
EUGENE 145
or spoiled and that he was not unusual in any way, and should not
receive any special privileges. He admired the boy and was fond
of him. There was an uncle about twenty years of age in the home,
who seemed to take the part of a big brother to Eugene. The
mother worked in her father's office in order that she might have
something to occupy her time. She was careful not to let her work
interfere with her job of being a mother to her son. The grand-
mother took the leading part in the care of the home. Eugene
helped her with chores about the house and in the garden. The
home life situation seemed to be good. Eugene was happy in the
home and especially enjoyed the companionship of the twenty year
old uncle. He presented no problem except when urged to do his
required school home work as heretofore mentioned.
Eugene's Own Story About His Record in School
Eugene said that he caused his teachers trouble in school by
"not, minding." "I did not want to do the stuff they had in
school." "I did not like the teachers or the school work." "I
talked back at the teachers." '' Oh! I acted smart, made faces at
other kids and did different things like that." ''The teacher would
send me out in the hall, and always left me there until the others
marched out and they all jeered at me." "Sometimes she sent me
down in the basement."
He said that he failed in the fifth grade because he did not
work. In a tone of disgust he said, '' I was the only guy who failed.''
In speaking of his class room recitations, Eugene said that the
teacher in the 3rd and 4th grades was accustomed not to call upon
him until the last one, that she gave the other children a chance to
answer the questions, and if they could not answer them correctly,
then she called upon him. When asked how he felt while the other
children were being questioned he said "I felt anxious to get it
out for fear the others would tell and I wouldn't get called on."
"I would get restless waiting. I would get to moving around a
lot."
In tracing his habit of not directly obeying his teachers, Eugene,
after much questioning by the clinical psychologist and after much
thought on his part, recalled what he thought to be the first incident
of his not obeying a teacher. It happened when he was in the 2nd
grade. He had found a prize marble and because he prized it, was
playing with it in school. The teacher asked him to bring it to
146 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
her. He did not want to give the marble up, so hesitated to take it
to her. While she was talking to another boy, he returned with the
marble to his seat and put it with his pencils. He said, "I didn't
want to give it up, and I thought that I would hide it, or put if off
long enough so that she would forget it.'' After much deliberation
and confusion, the teacher finally secured the marble and placed
it on her desk in a can with others. Eugene was concerned about
this marble and evidently gave the incident much attention. He
believed that this was the beginning of his disobedience to teachers.
Examinations Made at the Bureau of Juvenile Research
The pathological and physical examinations made of Eugene
were negative and showed him to be in good health. His weight
was average and he was well nourished. His general responses ob-
served over a period of time were quick and he had many nervous
and purposeless movements which were at first thought to be a con-
genital characteristic.
The mental and educational examinations revealed a startling
bit of information. Eugene did not rate below the 7th grade on
any educational test. These were given at the time when he was
failing in the sixth grade and after he had spent two years doing
failing work in the fifth grade. Eugene's educational age on the
Stanford Achievement test was 1 year and 4 months higher than his
chronological age. His mental age on the Stanford-Binet test was
17 years and 1 month, when he was 11 years and 11 months old,
chronologically. This gave him a test age quotient (I.Q.) of 142
and a ranking of superior mental ability. Other mental and edu-
cational test results correlated closely with these tests and showed
Eugene to be superior in mental endowment.
During the administration of these tests, Eugene seemed nerv-
ous. He would jump at sudden noises, his actions were quick, and
his motor control was poor. He easily became self-conscious when
he could not answer a question. He showed some indications of in-
stability. His reasoning was logical and good, however. He did not
apply himself well to self-administering tests, but when working
with the clinical psychologist on the psychometric tests, he showed
good application.
After the preliminary testing was completed, Eugene's mother
came to the Bureau to listen to what she expected would be a fatal
story. She was all primed, with tears of deep grief in her eyes,
EUGENE 147
to hear the Bureau's staff tell her that her boy was hopelessly
neurotic and mentally handicapped. When she was told that he had
a bright mind and that he had been responding perfectly normally
to a school situation which was the wrong one for a correct and
desirable reaction, her face had a bewildered expression, as though
she did not know whether to believe what was being told her or not.
The story Avas too different from what she was expecting to hear
for her to grasp the significance all at once. She was told of
Eugene's splendid possibilities and her tears of grief became
mingled with those of gladness.
Since Eugene had been expelled from his school and because he
presented the interesting problem which he did, he was accepted
as a day pupil in the School for Psychopathic Children at the Bureau
of Juvenile Research.
Eugene's Behavior in the School for Psychopathic Children
The clinical teacher in the school said that she had a problem
to keep Eugene busy. "He works so rapidly and has so much
energy." "He soon devours any assignment given him." "He is
very active and wants to be doing something all the time." "He
quickly exhausts a task and is ready for another." "The clinician
feels that nothing has yet been presented him which will tax his
powers enough to keep him busy." "He has ample time to keep
ahead of the group and at the same time entertain them. He wiggles
constantly in his seat, jingles nails in his pockets, taps on the floor
with his feet, in fact, does anything except be quiet." "He is ap-
parently unconscious of his actions."
He worked very slowly in arithmetic drills and they seemed
to be a drag to him. Through a diagnostic study of his individual
difficulties in the fundamental processes in arithmetic, it was dis-
covered that Eugene had not learned some of the simplest facts
in the processes. He had many irregularities and was not stand-
ardized in arithmetic-computation. He made many mistakes in addi-
tion and had no method in his work. He would add from the top
of an addition column one time and from the bottom at another
time. In all the four fundamental processes in arithmetic, Eugene
used the trial and error method. He used "brains" in his arith-
metic work, but he showed that he had not been taught, or he had
not learned, the accredited processes. He commented upon his work
by saying, "I do them every way."
148 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
He was a rapid reader and especially enjoyed reading about
world facts. He read fiction, but not as much as lie did stories of
history facts and world events. He was interested in mechanics
and would, undirected, make extensive and complicated drawings
of mechanical apparatus.
Eugene was honest and trustworthy. He was left alone in the
school room for an hour every day at noon, and at no time did he
disturb anything and he never had to be told or cautioned about
other people's personal property. He always offered to "make it
up" when asking for permission to leave school early or for a day's
absence.
'' The clinician has not yet found him when he has lost his place
or failed to give attention." There were many times, however,
when he did not obey the clinical teacher's instructions or directly
follow her programs for his work. This disobedience occurred when
he considered the clinical teacher a part of the school. He was
always very polite and courteous when he considered her per-
sonally.
School Attendance and Achievement
Eugene had an attack of influenza and was absent from the
School for Psychopathic Children for six weeks. This was about the
middle of the term. His name was on the School's attendance list
for seven months, but his absence of six weeks made his school term
a little less than six months. During this time, he was given all
regular academic subjects and also practical arts and shop work.
At the close of the school term, he was given the same educational
and mental tests as had been given him at the beginning of the term.
This was done to show how his rating on the tests would compare
after he had received the special instruction.
The Stanford Achievement test showed an increase in grade
equivalent of exactly one grade and an increase in educational age
of 1.1 years. The mental tests showed an increase in mental ages
as would be generally expected, with the intelligence quotient re-
maining constant. The Otis Classification test given at the close of
the school gave him a rating in educational age of 17 years and 0
months, and in mental age of above 18 years. This correlated
very closely with other test findings and indicated that he had the
mental ability to do much higher grade academic work than he was
doing.
EUGENE 149
Psychological Impressions
Why did Eugene, a boy with brilliant mentality, fail in school?
Why did he cause the teachers so much trouble? When he was
failing in the fifth and sixth grades, he was classified with children
whose mentalities averaged around 10 and 11 years, if they were of
the type usually found in these grades, and they most likely were.
Eugene's mental level was around 16 and 17 years; that was about
G years higher than the average child in those grades. He was high
enough mentally to compete with high school, or even with university
students. He was well read and had had a good general experi-
ence in life. He had traveled and had, up to the time of his school
failure, lived in a university community and had lived the life of
university people. This, added to his high mentality, made him
quite superior to the other children in the school.
No doubt, Eugene grew restless when he was forced to listen
to the other children answer questions poorly in the recitations, and
in many cases, give mistaken information on subjects which were
commonplace to him. This caused him to become anxious to answer
the questions and to discuss the subjects himself. When he could
not, his restlessness grew into "moving around" in his seat. This
grew into a habit, and "nervousness," or what took the form of nerv-
ousness, resulted. It became a habit?a learned condition in him.
He also acquired the reaction of not paying attention as a
result of the subject material usually being of a quality too familiar
to him. This reaction continued to the extent that when some new
material with which he was not acquainted was presented, he did not
hear what was going on and consequently he did not learn it. This
could account for his poor methods in the fundamental processes in
arithmetic.
The teachers were not prepared to keep him mentally occupied.
Because their time was taken with the average children in the
school room, instead of supplying Eugene with work on his own
level which would keep him busy, they asked him to be quiet and to
pay attention until he grew to dislike them. More trouble would
naturally follow. Eugene was punished by being sent out of the
room, conspicuously into the hall and sometimes into the basement.
He was "shy" and this treatment only made matters worse. This
not only interfered with his learning the school subjects, but made
him more self-conscious, more different from the other boys, and
would cause them to dislike him. All of these items resulted in his
150 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
disliking the teachers, the school and the school subjects, and was
the cause of his tardiness. The fact that Eugene was never a dis-
ciplinary problem at home except when school work was concerned,
indicates that it was the school work and not Eugene's personality
that was the real cause of his nonsocial reactions in school.
It is possible that the experience of hesitating to sacrifice the
cherished marble, mentioned above, to the can on the teacher's desk,
was a contributing factor to the beginning of Eugene's disobedience
to teachers. He hesitated considerably, and afterwards gave the
incident much thought. This would make it the beginning of a
learning process. He most likely responded in the same way to other
similar commands and combined with the fact that the school work
did not meet his needs, the responses grew into the habit of not
giving attention to his teachers and to the work which they pre-
sented to the class. It is most probable that the school work, which
was boresome to him, was the greatest factor in causing his misbe-
havior in school.
Eugene never expressed a dislike for the School for Psycho-
pathic Children. He was never tardy, although his attendance neces-
sitated a trip of one hour on the street car, and he was never absent
without a legitimate excuse. He never hesitated to come to the
school on holidays when the other children in his neighborhood were
remaining at home. The School for Psychopathic Children had more
of an opportunity to treat Eugene on his own mental level, than did
the other schools. It had made a study of his abilities and dis-
abilities, and it gave him material which satisfied his mental urge.
He had an opportunity to work and plan for himself, at the same
time, the clinical teacher was ever present to help and guide him
with an understanding hand. He enjoyed the school and conse-
quently he learned the school subjects.
Eugene, because of his superiority, did not have the proper
stimulus in the regular fifth and sixth grades to produce in him
the proper reaction. The work in these grades was too easy and
did not meet his mental needs. The regular grade teachers, trained
to teach academic subjects to average children, were not to blame
for their mistreatment of the boy. They did not know what was
back of his behavior. The school administration is to blame, how-
ever, for not supplying a means of making a study of its children.
Eugene was physically well and energetic. Because the schools
did not occupy his time, he occupied it himself with the material
which he had at hand. About the only material which he had was
EUGENE 151
the other children and himself. There was not much left for him
to do but to "make fun," play, tease the other children, squirm in
his seat, and the like. These responses were interpreted to be an
instability. In fact, Eugene was most stable and dependable.
Recommendations
At the close of his stay of almost six months in the School for
Psychopathic Children, Eugene rated in the 8.4 grade equivalent on
the Stanford Achievement test. His educational age on this test
was 14 years and 4 months. He was then 12 years and 6 months
old chronologically. Because of his youth and because the school
did not want to deprive him of companionship of children near his
own age, it was recommended that Eugene be placed in the seventh
grade of the junior high school for the next school year, rather than
in the eighth grade as the test results indicated. If there had been
a special class for brilliant children, it would have been recom-
mended that Eugene he placed in it, providing it had been made up
of children near his age and mental ability.
Placement in a junior high school was recommended rather than
a regular seventh grade of an elementary school, because it was
believed that the school spirit would be more prominent in a high
school than in an elementary school building and that this spirit
would be an incentive to Eugene and would give him more mental
stimulus and variation.
Because there were no junior high schools in his own city, the
mother offered to move any place where the School for Psychopathic
Children would recommend and where her son could attend the type
of school which would best meet his needs. Eugene's home life with
the grandparents seemed normal and wholesome in every way and
more desirable than for him to live alone with his mother. So it
seemed best that he remain with them and that he attend a high
school in a nearby residential district.
Prognosis
If not rightly treated and classified in school, what would hap-
pen to Eugene? Would he continue to be a source of trouble to
his teachers and would he continue to fail in his school work? The
schools had expelled him, but if they had permitted him to attend,
he most likely would have continued in his undesirable manner. He
would perhaps have learned to be more cunning in an unconformed
152 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
way and would have spent his time for other things rather than for
school work. He most likely would have continued to dislike school
until he had reached high school at least, and perhaps would have
continued the dislike through high school. He might have left
school as soon as the law permitted and before graduation from high
school. It is a fact that he would have lost many opportunities to
learn and to acquire the foundation of knowledge which he was so
capable of building and also a foundation for good mental habits,
had he continued to respond as he was doing.
He might have become more of a truancy problem and would
have been in danger of developing further and more serious delin-
quencies as he grew older through the contacts made on his truancy
episodes. His attitude towards life would not be as desirable as was
possible for him and it perhaps would have been absolutely detri-
mental. Many pitfalls?physical, mental, social, and moral are
found along the way in which he was directed. His ability would not
have been stimulated in the right direction, and even if he had
chanced not to go far in the wrong direction, he would not have had
his mental and social possibilities utilized to their fullest extent,
and society, as well as the boy, would have suffered a loss.
What are his chances if he is rightly treated and classified in
school? Many brilliant individuals have made a "success" in life
in spite of poor opportunities. It is doubtlessly true that these in-
dividuals are a few exceptions and that there are hundreds of others
equally gifted who have remained undiscovered and not as produc-
tive to society as they were capable, due to poor training and to the
wrong type of training. Perhaps the successful ones would have
made more of a success if they had had better training facilities.
Eugene had the opportunity of being one of the very few who make
good regardless of poor schooling, or of being one of those probable
many who are neglected, undiscovered, and not as productive as their
abilities would permit. Eugene's school history showed that he was
quite likely to be one of the undiscovered ones. His teachers believed
him to be mentally subnormal. He was failing in school and was
learning wrong mental and social habits and his high mental powers
were used to disadvantage rather than being developed to give so-
ciety the best of which they were really capable.
Eugene's ability would make it possible for him to be trained
to fill a profession, or a highly skilled occupation, or a high type
business, if he received the proper training and treatment. He had
the possibilities of construction and invention.
EUGENE 153
Conclusions
If a child is failing in school or is expressing a dislike for
school, is a disciplinary problem either at home or at school, is per-
forming in a nervous manner, or is responding in any unusual way,
a specialist in clinical psychology should be consulted. This clini-
cian would make investigations into the mental status of the child,
consider how and what he has learned, why he is responding as he
is and advise the consultation of whatever specialists in other fields
seem to be essential.
Every school system should have access to a ps}rchological and
educational guidance clinic. It should make some provision for a
study of its children and especially its children who are presenting
a problem, either in discipline or in academic subjects. A child is
never a problem of any kind without a cause. Eugene's high men-
tality was undiscovered because there were inadequate facilities in
his school for mental and educational testing and for investigations
into children's problems. His problem looked so big and impos-
sible to the school officials that they expelled him from school, thus
depriving themselves of an opportunity of discovering and observ-
ing the growth and development of an unusual mind.
Small school systems which can not financially afford an elabo-
rate psychological and educational guidance bureau, can not afford
not to have at least one worker, a psycliometrist or better, a clinical
psychologist, who can administer tests and look into the causes of
the problems which individual children are presenting. This would
require not much more expense than the cost of two teachers. That
is certainly a reasonable proposition, especially so when its returns
could be so great. Many brilliant minds are lost to society and many
are developed into wrong social channels, because provisions are not
made for their discovery. This is surely not socially economical.
Apparently, Eugene failed in school; actually, he was failed
against. It was the school administration that failed. It failed to
make provision for his discovery and for his care. A brief testing
program would have indicated that he was not subnormal as the
teachers judged him to be, but that he was unusually high in
mentality and that he was above the grade work in attainment.
Eugene is an example of what many other children are experiencing
in our public schools; some of them to a lesser degree, perhaps, and
some of them as much as he.
The organization of special classes for brilliant children should
be in the minds of every school official. If the school population is
154 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
too small to supply a large enough number of brilliant children to
make up a class of 10 or 15 cases, then the teachers should be in-
structed in ways and means of caring for the individual children in
the regular grades. This is not an impossible task for the well
trained teachers who have an interest in and a fair degree of under-
standing of child life and who have a supply of information in
methods of instructing them, and a reasonable amount of equipment
and know how to use to advantage the equipment which they have.
A brilliant child, such as Eugene, can be fairly well cared for
in the regular grades if the teacher knows that he is superior men-
tally and that he can do more work than average children. She
can assign him more work to do, can give him an opportunity to
search in wider fields on the subject matter and to read more books
on the subjects to be discussed in class. A well trained teacher can
do this so tactfully that neither the brilliant child nor the other
children will recognize that the one is doing more than the other.
The classroom procedure can be organized so that each child in the
class can contribute individually to the group discussion, the assign-
ment and contribution depending upon the child's mental ability
and achievement. In this way, the brilliant child will not develop
a priggish attitude and the others will not develop a dislike for him
because of his attitude or because they feel that he is favored, and
they will not become discouraged because they can not do as much
or as well as he.
The organization of special classes under the direction of
especially trained teachers is the better plan. In these classes, a
more varied subject matter can be given, new subjects can be in-
cluded in the curriculum, the children will be competing with their
equals and they will have work which will challenge them. They will
have more of a chance for proper mental stimulus so that their men-
tal capabilities will be guided in the right direction.
All teachers should receive some training in clinical psychology
so that they would be on the outlook for children who need special
consideration. "When a child is not responding normally in school,
either in behavior or in the school subjects, the teacher in charge
should be so trained that she would not be satisfied until his diffi-
culty has been discovered and he is started in the right direction.
The teacher should also be capable of helping to unravel the prob-
lem and of leading in its correction. It would have been a great
achievement for a teacher to have discovered or to have been re-
sponsible for the discovery of a child like Eugene.
EUGENE 155
Subsequent History
Eugene entered the seventh grade of the junior high school at
the beginning of the term in September, after the close of his attend-
ance in the School for Psychopathic Children at the Bureau of
Juvenile Research in June.
On his first report card, he received grades of C in two sub-
jects, of which arithmetic was one, and grades of B in the other
subjects. He "made the first team in football" which he regarded
as a great accomplishment. He was now making "passing grades"
in "a regular school" and his mother felt that he was beginning
to climb. He began to work more on his home work. His mother
said, "where he used to dislike his arithmetic and try every way to
put it off, now he does it first and refuses any help or suggestions
from anyone. He wants to do it alone and he says he likes to do
it, which is entirely different from other years." " He is trying hard
at home in his school work to keep it up to the 'high standards of
?  Junior High School.' In fact, his most convincing argu-
ment is 'when you go to a school with high standards, you've got
to?' get the work done. It delights his mother for when, before
he went to the School for Psychopathic Children, did lie care what
the school was trying to do?"
"Eugene made a grade of 100 in the mid-term examination in
arithmetic?the only one in his class. When his mother hugged him
and rejoiced, he gloomily said, 'Probably I got a bum grade in all
the rest of them.' But it was evident that he was deeply pleased.''
Eugene displayed some inattentiveness and some nervousness
and moving about in his seat during the first few weeks of his at-
tendance in the junior high school, but it was not long before the
teachers said they had not noticed him, which "was a sign that he
must be over it."
He received passing grades in all subjects during the first se-
mester and was promoted into the next higher grade. "He made
the highest grade in his class in arithmetic?99."
