How the Feebleminded Live in the Community
===========================================

By Clara Harrison
Towne and Grace E. Hill. Buffalo, N.Y. The Children's Aid
Society. Pp. 284. 1929.
Since the epochal work of Itard at the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury the training of the feebleminded, apart from their mere custodial care,
has been a concern of psychologist, physician, educator and sociologist alike.
Numerous schools have been established by the state for such training through-
out the country, but everyone at all acquainted with this problem knows that
there are not nearly enough institutions to provide for the children who re-
quire such training. The British investigation of the incidence of feeble-
mindedness in 1929 places the number of feebleminded at 8.56 persons per
thousand. This is considerably greater than most previous estimates. Any
study of the incidence of feeblemindedness must first of all concern itself with
102 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
the proper criterion of mental deficiency, a fact whicli the authors of this
report emphasize. There are nevertheless many more persons who, on almost
any criterion of mental deficiency, belong in an institution than can be cared
for in the institutions now existing. Consequently the policy developed by
Dr. Bernstein at the Rome State School in New York becomes of particular
interest and importance.
The aim of the policy developed by this school is to replace its charges
in the community after a period of stabilizing training within the school.
Parole by the Rome State School is always under supervision, but the staff
has never been adequate in number to make such supervision very extensive.
The report here reviewed is the result of the detailed investigation of the re-
placing in the community of one hundred and tliirty-six Erie County feeble-
minded persons, who had been inmates of the Rome school for periods ranging
from a few weeks in some cases to thirteen years in others. The study includes
all replacements during the period covered (1905 to 1924 inclusive) except
twenty cases which could not be traced, and its purpose is to determine how
many persons socially inadequate before placement in the Rome school were
rendered adequate by their training there.
The cases were studied individually by a trained social case worker. Four
groups wore differentiated: Unmarried Men, Married Men, Unmarried Women,
Married Women. These groups numbered 79, 9, 20, 28 respectively. Three
criteria of adaptability in the community were used. (1) Ability to support
oneself. (2) Ability to regulate life without financial or supervisory assist-
ance from family or social agency. (3) Ability to live in the community with-
out infringing upon the law to the extent of commitment to correctional or
penal institution. There were also differentiations within the criteria.
Of the cases 120 were born in the United States, but only 47 had both
parents born in this country. There were 88 men and 48 women. Fernald
believed that the placement of women in the community was more difficult
than the placement of men. Since their release from the School 58 per cent
of the women and 10 per cent of the men have married. It would seem that
marriage increases man's necessity to earn and decreases woman's, or ex-
pressed differently, to marry, a man must have earning ability while a woman
must have earning ability to remain unmarried.
Of the total group only 22 persons or 16 per cent were totally self-support-
ing during the period after release from the School. The period varied from
six months to fifteen years. Of this group 13 were unmarried men, five wero
married men and four were unmarried women. In only ten cases was there
independence throughout the period of release. One of these had a prison
record, and another was known to be a sex pervert, leaving only eight entirely
acceptable persons on all criteria. They were all men, only one married.
Careful study of these cases shows no common factor which might account for
success or assure it. It seemed rather to be a combination of fortuitous cir-
cumstances.
Nine persons, all single men, were self-supporting with supervision. Of
these three have criminal records and four have given offense by sexual prac-
tices. Eighteen, ten single men and eight married women, have been partly
self-supporting. Of the ten single men six had been in prison and three were
REVIEWS 103
dead. Only one of the eight married women was free from a record of mis-
conduct, mostly sexual.
In all, 49 cases were either independently self-supporting, self-supporting
under supervision or partly self-supporting. This makes 37 per cent of the
entire group. If the flagrant behavior failures are deducted only 21 of this
group remain or 15 per cent of the entire group of 136. Sixty-three per cent
ure absolute failures from the economic point of view.
The results given here cover the group as a whole, these are then analyzed
in the four groups mentioned before. Individual histories are given for each
case, and these histories make up about two-thirds of the report. The data
iire summarized in tables which show at a glance the record of each case.
This report should prove of great interest and value to every one con-
cerned about the social problem of the feebleminded. The material has been
gathered painstakingly and treated with discernment and intelligence.
Is there for the higher grade of feebleminded persons any alternative
to the miserable living in the community discovered by this report except
permanent institutional care? This question naturally arises as a result of
these findings. The authors think not. A type of supervision very different
from any yet attempted will have to be developed. Most supervision of the
feebleminded has been like that provided for normal individuals by social
workers and for delinquents by probation officers. The feebleminded are es-
sentially different.
We must take into consideration three factors in this problem. First, the
limitations of the feebleminded in mental ability must be recognized and under-
stood, and also certain peculiar characteristics of theirs which properly treated
may be assets as well as liabilities, e.g., their suggestibility, lack of initiative
and resistance to monotony; second, the school and vocational training of the
feebleminded in special classes and training schools; third, the adjustment of
the child after his school and vocational training which might best be accom-
plished by some sort of industrial institution where the feebleminded person
could work gainfully under supervision, live at home or in a colony, and escape
much of the usual institutional atmosphere.
Miles Murpiiy
