Teaching Student Assistants to use Objective Aids In Their Interviews with Younger Students
==============================================================================================

By Esther Allen Gaw
Dean of Women, The Ohio State University
In this report are described the steps and materials used in
teaching upper-class student assistants to the Dean of Women at
Ohio State University to conduct successful and profitable interviews with freshman students. The report does not include a description of the preliminary training of the assistants in the technique of the interview, nor does it include the method used for developing in them a "mental hygiene" attitude, both of which are
extremely important as the basis of any interview designed to have
a constructive educational effect.
Under the supervision of the writer's staff, each student assistant is given access to almost any records in the files. These
records include (1) scholarship records before and after entering
the university, (2) vocational and extra-curricular questionnaires,
obtained when the student enters, or soon after, in the halls of residence, (3) the questionnaires giving family background, records of
health, etc., and (4) miscellaneous statements concerning living conditions, as well as indirect measures of socio-economic status and of
cultural background.
The student assistant assembles everything that she can find
on a sheet called "Data concerning background" before her first
interview with the younger student. During the period of contact,
which may last a quarter or may last a year, the assistant records
all information available on a second sheet called "Data while in the
University." Since this sheet is made to cover the complete record
during the student's university course, it will not necessarily be
finished at the time the interviews cease, but the same blank may be
continued by another student assistant, or by a member of the Dean's
staff at a later time.2
1 Ecad at the annual meeting of the Vocational Guidance Association,
February 21, 1930, Atlantic City.
2 These blanks are at the present time purely experimental, and reproductions are therefore not included. Mrs. Josephine Clousing Kurtz, research
assistant, is making an intensive study which will soon tell us what items of
information are most significantly correlated with the college entrance record
and with academic success.
OBJECTIVE AIDS 117
The student assistant also uses certain pamphlets and blanks
during the successive interviews to give a purpose to each meeting.
After a discussion of the suggestions for efficient study in the Freshman Manual,3 issued by the Freshman "Week Council, the student
assistant helps the freshman fill out the "Distribution of Time"
blank, copied from the Syracuse Questionnaire.4 For the sake of
dramatic visual effect the average weekly distribution of time is
compared with Crawford's5 distribution of hundreds of college students. In this way the freshman is able to see how she is actually
using her time. The student assistant then helps the freshman
make a plan of her days with definite periods for study, recreation,
meals, etc. The assistant encourages the freshman to follow this
time budget and later helps her to modify the plan if impossible.
She often gives the freshman specific instructions on how to study
some particular subject.
The assistant also asks the freshman to fill out the Ohio Personality Trait Check List,6 evaluates it, and talks it over with the
younger student. In cases of special need the assistant uses an
adaption of the Mitchell Trait Comparison Chart7 exposing the traits
which should be brought to the attention of the particular freshman. In a few cases, also, the graduate student assistants have used
the "Aids to the Vocational Interview"8 recently published by the
Psychological Corporation. Other blanks, which cannot be described
in this report, have been, and are being, used. Among them is an
Evening Activity Card for Freshmen in the dormitories.
So much for the devices used to teach the student assistant
3 Reeder, Beck and Lumley?The Freshman Manual, 3rd Ed., Columbus,
Ohio State University Press, 1929.
4 Allport, P. H. A reaction study for the measurement of student opinions
at Syracuse University. To be published by Stoelting and Co., Chicago, 111. Exact form iu the Appendix to this article.
6 Crawford and Goldsmith. IIow college students spend their time,
School and Society, Vol. 27, March 31, 1928, pp. 399-402.
"An objective study of students' personality traits.
a) Gaw and Clousing, The Eleusis of Chi Omega, Vol. XXX, May,
1928, pp. 107-11S.
b) Gaw, Fifteenth Yearbook, Nat'l. Assoc. Deans of Women, 1928, pp.
115-117.
' Wiggam, The secret of getting along with people, American Magazine,
Feb., 1928, pp. 7-9.
8 Leahy, Achilles and Bingham?Aids to the Vocational Interview, New
York, Psychological Corporation, 4th Ed., 1929.
118 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
to '' head up'' her interviews. In addition she must make a record
of each interview. Then, from the material provided in such running comments, she makes a rating of the freshman on a revised
form of the personality scale of the American Council on Education
(Personality Rating Scale).9 Here she is taught that the rating
is of practically no value unless accompanied by a description of
the act, spoken words, or involuntary expression of an emotional
attitude in the freshman observed. We feel that the assistants' rating of the younger students accompanied by the "specifics" are of
the greatest value in our understanding of the freshman. In illustration, there are given below the "specifics" on a student actually
rated by five people during her sophomore and junior years in accordance with the scale referred to above:
4?Attractive, quiet Jewess.
4?Fairly attractive, seems liked by others.
4?Very good, more mature appearance than most. Well, neatly and appropriately dressed.
3?Dressed in sport clothes?somewhat mannish clothes.
4?Attractive looking, neat in appearance, wears suitable clothes, is clean,
with well groomed hair and nails.
II
A la?On probation two quarters?but was not apparently concerned about
spending the whole evening away from her studies. Says she cannot
buckle down to study.
A la?I have been prodding her along all quarter, and yet she is failing. Seems
to work by spurts?just after "prodding."
C4?As student assistant makes reports promptly and thoroughly.
C4?At least this high a rating. She is very co-operative as a student assistant although I would not describe her as creative.
C4?Has done well as a student assistant. Is always ready with pertinent
remarks in the student assistant meetings.
III
4?Works well with her freshmen.
4?Much interested in the student training period. Seems to have pretty
well formulated social objectives.
4?In her camp work last summer she did not feel that she must, with neglect to everything else, force her personal decision about the smoking
of the younger girls, i.e., she has a rather sane perspective.
3?An excellent friend. Others find her generous, affable, comradely. Has
9 The exact form is given in the appendix to this article.
OBJECTIVE AIDS 119
been nice to a queer girl -with whom her roommates refuse to associate.
3?Although somewhat clannish (possibly induced by her race) she works
well with the other student assistants. She is not clannish enough
to be "2b" and yet not so constructive as "4," hence the middle
ground "3."
IV
3?Is a student assistant voluntarily.
3?Seems to have some influence as a student assistant.
2?Follows the lead of her best friend in social plans.
3?Volunteered to act as chairman of the student assistant meeting.
V
4?Good poise.
4?Is poised and unafraid in all discussions.
3?Worried about her class work while she is at the movies or on a hike.
Carries a divided mind?not well integrated. Occasionally irritated
about the snobbishness of others in the dormitory.
3?Much worried over her lack of ability to do good work in school. Takes
a sensible attitude, as she has twice told me she feels she should not
be in college. (Percentile is 15 so sho judges her ability rightly.)
Is worried over her inability to have made grades for initiation and
the necessity of giving back her pledge pin to the sorority. Takes
disappointment well. Appears happy and good-natured.
VI
4?Listens attentively. Responds courteously.
4?Thanked me for the training period and told me how interesting it was.
4?Better manner than the average student. Quiet, pleasant, low voice.
3?Usual common courtesies plus an unusual generous heartedness to her
friends.
3?When told she might take my check and get from my brief-case a book
I was lending her, she was much pleased and suggested that she might
bring the case to me to take out the book. In walking through the
hall she showed the usual courtesy, but did not offer to carry any of
several articles.
The blanks are frankly being used at present not so much for
the deriving of material for statistical evaluation as a basis for
concrete help in self-evaluation by the freshmen. The author realizes the importance of validity and reliability in the tools of the interview. But while those who are primarily concerned with devising
valid and reliable instruments are slowly making improvements,
teachers of human relationships such as Deans of AVomen, are
forced to work with what is available. The older students, whether
120 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
good advisers or bad, are having interviews every day with younger
students; they are setting their stamp upon the freshmen. Our
problem is to use the existing materials to make the inevitable advicegiving a better process than it otherwise would be.
This project is double edged. There is no doubt that the freshmen are helped, perhaps more than if older and more skillful interviewers were meeting them. In addition, student assistants themselves get a most extraordinary education from the process. They
are learning to take an objective unemotional, constructive attitude
toward the behavior of others.
APPENDIX
PERSONALITY EATING SCALE
November, 1929
Adapted from that of the American Council on Education10
I. How does her appearance affect others?
1. Appearance such that she is avoided by others.
2. Appearance somewhat adversely criticized.
3. Appearance not commented on either favorably or unfavorably.
4. Appearance given approved comment.
5. Appearance so beautiful that she is sought for that alone.
II. Does she need constant prodding? Does she go ahead without being told?
A In college work?
B In working for pay?
C In committee work?
la. Needs much prodding.
2a. Needs occasional prodding.
lb. Aimless trifler.
2b. Aims just to "get by."
3. Does ordinary assignments of own accord.
4. Completes suggested supplementary work.
5. Seeks and sets for herself additional tasks.
III. "What are her social and group attitudes?
la. Actively engrossed in realizing "anti" objectives.
2a. Somewhat "anti."
lb. Abnormally clannish.
10 For original form see: Report of Sub-Committee on Personality Measurement, American Council on Education, 26 Jackson Place, Washington, D.C.,
Educational Record Supplement No. 8, July, 1928, pp. 57-64.
OBJECTIVE AIDS 121
2b. Somewhat clannish.
3. Has vaguely formed social objectives: works fairly well with her
friends
4. Shows good constructive social program with her friends.
5. Can make co-operative adjustment with any individual or any group.
IV. Does she get others to do what she wishes?
1. Probably unable to lead her fellows.
2. Satisfied to have others take the lead.
3. Sometimes leads in minor affairs with her own friends.
4. Sometimes leads in important affairs with campus groups.
5. Displays marked ability to lead: always leads important affairs in
any groups.
V. Does she control her emotions?
la. Too easily moved.
2a. Tends to be over emotional: often weeps or gets angry,
lb. Unresponsive to apathetic.
2b. Tends to be unresponsive.
3. Almost always well-balanced; occasionally irritated or worried or in
tears.
4. Well balanced rarely shows irritation or worry.
5. Remarkable balance of response and control; never imposes irritation
or worry on others.
VI. What is her attitude toward other individuals as shown in speech and
courteous manners?
la. Definitely rude and inconsiderate to everyone.
2a. Ignorant of common courtesies.
lb. Definitely rude to any but her clique.
2b. Courteous only to her especial friends.
3. With the usual common courtesies to every one.
4. Shows more courtesy and consideration than the usual college student.
5. Remarkably pleasant attitude of courtesy and tlioughtfulness to
others, no matter who they are.
DISTRIBUTION OF TIME
Office of the Dean of Women
Ohio State University
Name   Class   Columbus Address
Name of Student Assistant
Inclusive dates of week, From   To
122 TEE PSYCEOLOGICAL CLINIC
Write in the days of
week below.
Total of 6 days
Average time for 6 days
Sunday
Total for Sunday
o
p
The hours in one day are found by beginning at the time of rising one
day and going up to but not including that time the next day, e.g., from 7:00
A.M. Monday through 6:59 a.m. Tuesday.
The days of the week are to be written in by the student according to the
day on which she begins to keep the record.
