Measuring General Intelligence by Interview
=============================================

By Donald Snedden
Harvard University Graduate School of Education
By means of a standardized interview, experimentally developed, it was found possible to measure general intelligence with a
high degree of reliability ( + .96) and with a substantial degree of
validity (+ .82).2 The interview took an average time of 9.33 minutes. The experimental group had a standard deviation of about
30 months mental age, and the criterion used was a composite of
the Otis Higher Self Administering Test of Mental Ability, the Terman Group Test of Mental Ability, and Army Alpha Form 9.
In spite of these facts, the writer has no desire to recommend
this technique too heartily?for several reasons. In the first place,
the particular interview used in the original investigation cannot
very well be used in any but a purely experimental set-up. For
the vocational guidance situation, or the employment situation, different interviews would have to be standardized. Several workers,
including the writer, have made a beginning on this, but all have
found that the difficulties involved in constructing plausible yet
discriminating items were all but insuperable. In the first place,
items in such a disguised test depend upon their known level of
difficulty in comprehension for their validity, and also on the certainty with which the interviewer can tell whether or not the interviewee understands the question. For instance, on a high level,
the interviewee might give an adequate answer to "What evidence
have you of your stamina?" or "What kind of work have you done
involving pertinacity V', but these questions, in the form given, may
easily appear silly when presented to an adult in the course of a
guidance interview. It has not seemed to be readily possible to
construct an employment interview that was not a little more ridiculous than would be desirable.
In the second place, the value of this technique depends on
another question of rather fundamental importance. Just what do
we wish to obtain through the interview? This question may, of
course, be answered in various ways, depending on the particular
1 Read at the annual meeting of the National Vocational Guidance Association, Atlantic City, Feb. 21, 1930.
2 Snedden, A Study in Disguised Intelligence Tests. Teachers' College
Bureau of Publication. 1928.
132 TEE PSYCEOLOGICAL CLINIC
situation in which the interview is used. However, aside from all
that, it seems perfectly fair to answer it in general by saying, "We
wish to obtain through the interview data, important for our purposes, which cannot be more efficiently and effectively secured in
any other way.''
In what specific interview situations, then, would it be the case
that data on the verbal intelligence of the subject could not be obtained through regular tests better than through a disguised interview test? Not, certainly, in the well conducted vocational guidance situation. It is perfectly possible to obtain such test scores as
are desired in any vocational guidance organization worthy of the
name. In any situation associated with the school system tests are
so much a part of that system that no overwhelming difficulty should
be found in obtaining such scores as seem pertinent.
In the employment situation it is perhaps not so easy to administer tests, but it has been found practicable to give them in
most cases. Adult prejudice against tests, while still great enough,
is appreciably melting before the enforced modesty of the testers.
It is true that in the employment situation, as in all situations where
it is desired to obtain a "verbal intelligence" rating, there are several factors to keep in mind. The first of these is the curious lay
association of the word '' intelligence'' with '' sanity.'' In somewhat
the same way "mental ability" has unfortunate connotations.
However, it has been found relatively easy to get parents to do a
"vocabulary" test in order to compare the results with tests of
their children, while to coax the same parents to co-operate in an
"intelligence" test Avould have been very difficult. Johnson O'Connor avoids the word "test" entirely and substitutes the wholly nonalarming phrase, for instance, "Worksample number 15." The
College Entrance Examination Board has undoubtedly avoided a
great deal of misinterpretation in naming their general intelligence
test the "Scholastic Aptitude Test." It is unfortunate that most
of the published tests have their titles so clearly displayed. Much
may be accomplished, as everyone knows, by choosing one's words
carefully.
Another factor of some importance, occasionally overlooked, is
that a reasonably good index of "general mental ability" can be
obtained from the educational record, about which it is always legitimate to ask. The highest grade reached is, of course, of importance,
but often of more significance is the age-grade relationship. The
GENERAL INTELLIGENCE 133
fact that individual A left school at the sixth grade means something, but the fact that A was 16 when he finished the sixth grade
presents an entirely different pictures from that of A finishing the
sixth grade at 12 y^ars of age. Of course, in individual cases the
age-grade relationship may be unfair to use as an index because of
certain factors, such as much sickness and consequent school absence.
This, however, is somewhat unusual.
Still another possibility, in estimating the intelligence of adult,
or child, subjects, is that of adapting the technique reported by Dr.
David Levy3 in 1925. This has not been standardized for adults but,
working with over 400 children from five to eleven years old, Dr.
Levy obtained by a "directions" technique during the physical examination, intelligence scores which correlated + .94 with StanfordBinet Mental Age. The "doctor" is, generally speaking, more privileged to make strange requests than is the interviewer. A request
to "Put your hands way out in front of you, palms downward; then
spread out your fingers far apart and turn them around until the
palms are upward; then stick out your tongue." (the hardest of
Levy's directions) may seem odd, but much of the medical examination is odd. Dr Levy merely used directions of increasing complexity. A series of five was used, and a system of partial credits for
correctness of response gave the score. If it were desired to extend
Dr Levy's scale for use with adults it might be improved by including, in addition to "directions" material, a certain amount of
vocabulary material, as for example: "Tense your right arm," "In*
clinc your head," "Contract your left hand." These might or might
not improve the validity of the test. A merit of this type of disguised test is that many employment situations require the physical
examination anyway, and by a very small amount of extra time
on the part of the examining physician (or an assistant specially
trained) the score could be obtained without embarrassment.
The general subject of the discussion of which this paper forms
a part?"Objective Methods in the Interview"?is of great interest, but Ave should be constantly on our guard lest, in our zeal to
make more objective and scientific an instrument that is generally
recognized as very highly subjective, we do not borrow too much
from the more quantitative techniques. The case under discussion
s Levy, D. M. A Method for Determining the Mental Ago During the
Physical Examination. Archives of Neurology and PsycJiiatry. 1924. v. 11.
p. GG9 ff.
134 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
(Measurement of Intelligence through Interviews) is one in point.
The writer found it possible, in his own experimental work, to do
this job of interview intelligence measurement reasonably well. The
subjects had no idea they were being tested and the validity of the
test was good enough. This is an interesting fact, but from this
fact we are not at all forced to the conclusion that this is, in general,
the most effective way to measure intelligence. In a very real sense
the interview has a residual function. Left to the interview are all
those items of relative intangibility which are not measurable in
a more direct and a less subjective manner. Generally speaking,
before the days of intelligence tests one of the interviewer's chief
concerns was to estimate the intelligence of the interviewee. How
well this can be done, or rather how nearly impossible it is to do,
is, or should be, a matter of common knowledge among workers in
this field.4 But, there have been developed instruments for measuring intelligence in a rather reliable manner, and if a knowledge of
the amount of general (Verbal) intelligence is called for, it should
by all means be obtained by an undisguised test, or by the same
test disguised merely in name, as in Johnson O'Connor's worksamples. Only where it is altogether undesirable or impossible to
use such well standardized objective measures should consideration
be given to working out and using either (a) an extension of Levy's
technique, which has the merit of being rather generally applicable
since the routine physical examination is a part of many guidance
and placement situations, or (b) a standardized interview based
on the writer's technique, or (c) illuminating (when checked) indices of "verbal intelligence" based on the age-grade relationship.
4 (The typical correlation, between interview estimates of intelligence
and fairly reliable test results, varies, depending on various circumstances,
around -f- .20).
