Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania
=========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1930, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XIX, No. 6 November, 1930
the clinical examination and diagnostic
teaching of cases at the psychological

By Arthur Phillips, Ph.D.
Executive Officer of the Psychological Clinic,
University of Pennsylvania
PART I.
CLASSIFICATION OF CLINIC CASES IN THE
SUMMER SESSION OF 1930
During the Summer School, 1930, Dr. Lightner Witmer conducted a mental clinic on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday
mornings from ten to twelve. In the examination of cases he was
assisted by Dr. Miles Murphy, Dr. C. L. Altmaier and Dr. Arthur
Phillips. Seventy-two cases were examined. Of these, five were
demonstration cases previously examined in the Psychological
Clinic, three of whom were children who are receiving orthogenic
treatment. The other two, superior children, were used for demonstration in Psychology 1 C. In the case of two, diagnosis was deferred pending further examination. The remaining sixty-five may
be grouped as follows: (1) Superior, 19, 29.2%, (2) Modal group,
(middle 60%), 19, 29.2%, (3) Inferior, 27, 41.6%. Of the superior
group, five were diagnosed as being in the group of 1% superior to
99%; 10 were in the group of 10% superior to 90% and 4 were in a
group of 10% superior to 80%, according to the Witmer standards.
The inferior group may be further subdivided as follows: Normal
mentality, intellectually deficient, 16; Borderline, 5; Feebleminded,
6. Of the feebleminded three were Low Grade Imbeciles and three
Idio-Imbeciles.
The I.Q. distribution ranged from 32 to 170. In the case of
three of the feebleminded no I.Q. was obtainable. For the 62 remaining cases the average I.Q. was 96.97; standard deviation, 27.70
probable error of the average, .84.
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Of the seventy-two cases fifty-five were diagnosed as being
mentally normal. Seventeen were diagnosed as borderline, ten as
feebleminded. The percentage of feebleminded in this group of
cases was, therefore, 15.3%. The percentage of feebleminded in the
population at large is variously estimated as being from .4 to 6.1%.
This wide range is due to difference of opinion as to what constitutes
feeblemindedness. The medical point of view which is dominantly
sociological in its implications is responsible for the low estimates
and the psychological point of view, based on objective intelligence
tests, is responsible for the larger estimates. As the standard for the
determination of feeblemindedness in this Clinic is based on social
considerations, due to the practical clinical problems that arise in
the placement of children in institutions where the problem of social
competency is to the fore, it will be seen at once that the number of
clinical cases is extremely weighted at the lower end of the curve of
distribution of mental traits.
In this Clinic on the score of social competency cases are divided
into two main classes: (a) Normal mentality, (b) Feebleminded.
The feebleminded or mentally defective are "those who have so
many and such severe mental defects that they are unable to overcome these defects as a result of expert training, and must therefore
reach adult age arrested in mental and moral development, industrially incapable of earning even a modest livelihood and socially
a menace oftentimes to themselves and their families, and always to
society, either by virtue of their own behavior or their retained
capacity to reproduce their kind."1 In the article cited above,
written in 1913, Dr. Witmer urged the substitution of the term
socially unfit or socially defective on the ground that the implication of the definition of mentally defective children is not that
they are mentally defective but that they are so mentally defective
as to be socially unfit. Some children who would be diagnosed as
feebleminded on the quantitative score, whether of mental age or
Intelligence Quotient or on a percentile basis, would therefore fall
within the class of the mentally normal or socially competent. This
distinction has been recognized by Pintner and Patterson who
recommended a mathematical percentage definition of feeblemindedness. Pintner says, "Many who could be diagnosed by this
method as feebleminded or psychopathic would be socially compe1 Witmer, Lightner "Children with Mental Defects Distinguished
from Mentally Defective Children," The Psychological Clinic vol. 7, pp.
173-181, 1913.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 171
tent in a simple environment."2 Terman makes practically the
same distinction between intelligence as indicated by the Intelligence Quotient and endowment "in other mental traits" so that
individuals with an I.Q. as low as 70 may manage as adults to get
along fairly well in a simple environment while children with an
I.Q. as high as 80 may have to be classed as feebleminded.3
Normal mentality or social competency is defined by ability
to meet minimum requirements. If a child has enough ability to
discriminate between right and wrong as understood by society in
general and conforms to this standard sufficiently to keep him from
becoming either a nuisance or a menace to other people, if in addition there is a reasonable probability that he will be able to support
himself independently of external aid, he would fall in the group
which is described as normal, though he may be deficient intellectually.
The normal group of these cases examined in the summer
session of the Psychological Clinic may be subdivided, therefore,
into three general classes: (1) Superior, (2) Modal, (3) Inferior on
the intellectual scale. It is the purpose of this article to present in
each of these groups as well as in the group of borderline and
feebleminded a number of typical cases. The object is to show the
variety of cases that come to the Psychological Clinic for orthogenic
guidance and treatment and consequently become cases for study
for those enrolled in the courses in clinical psychology and diagnostic education conducted by Dr. Witmer and his assistants.
The Superior Group
The Intelligence Quotients of the nineteen children in this
group range from 117 to 170. Competency in general is an aggregate
of many component abilities. In the child of superior competency
we expect to find alertness, speed in performance, ability to acquire
and use knowledge with efficiency in the solution of original problems, whether in social life or in the school curriculum.
The chief reason why the children under consideration were
brought to the Psychological Clinic as given by the parents, though
variously phrased, amounts to interest in the examination for the
purpose of determining the mental status of their children and to
2 Pintner, R. Intelligence Testing, New York Henry Holt and Co.
1925.
3 Terman, L. The Measurement of Intelligence, New York: Houghton
Mifflin Co. 1916, pp. 87-88.
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
obtain expert educational advice. Of these nineteen children of
superior competency, fourteen fall in this category. In the other
five cases there was some specific cause. These causes are: inferior
work and poor conduct in school despite an Intelligence Quotient of
143; anti-social behavior, maladjustment in school, home and on
the playground, and lying and stealing.
Case No. 8767, girl, C.A. 7-3; M.A. 12-4; I.Q. 170; attention
span, auditory 6, visual 6, reverse 4. The father is a newspaper
editor. She displayed superior intelligence and efficiency in the
psychomotor tests. Her performance on the Dearborn formboard
was in the upper fertile of ten year old children. Throughout
the examination the child was alert, (cooperative, entirely at
her ease. She displayed self-confidence. Her vocabulary score was
50?the fourteen year level. Her definitions were superior.
She attends a private school and does third grade work in all
subjects except arithmetic for which she shows a distaste. She
prints or does manuscript writing beautifully, spells phonically.
She read from Terman's "Measurement of Intelligence" working
out for herself phonically such words as "individually," "environment," and other polysyllables. Her favorite reading books are
"Alice in Wonderland," and "The Five Little Peppers." She told
of taking a course in Aesop's fables which toward the end became
monotonous to her. She is studying French and music. She prefers
to play with older children because children her own age tend to
boss her. She is diagnosed as having a general competency of 1%
superior to 99%, specific language talent.
Case No. 8768, boy, C.A. 3-9; M.A. 5-4; I.Q. 142; brother of
former case. Attention span, auditory 5. He showed some of the
distractibility of the small child. He refused to undergo examination and for a time did nothing but scream. Temper tantrums
are a part of the picture of this child. He is distinctly spoiled. The
usual method employed to get him out of a tantrum is bribery. He
is self-willed and hard to manage. His behavior is that of a child
who is allowed to have his own way. Had he been cooperative his
I.Q. would probably have been higher. His general competency is
estimated as being that of 1% superior to 99%.
Case No. 8813, boy, C.A. 6-0; M.A. 8-6; I.Q. 142; Attention
span, auditory 6, visual 6, reverse 3. He is the only child. The
father and mother are college graduates, the father a Doctor of
Philosophy, the mother a Master of Science. Both have taken their
degrees in chemistry. According to the history he learned the alphaCLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 173
bet at 20 months, knew all the printed letters at 30 months and
could read time on the clock at 42 months. He now reads from the
newspapers, knows his multiplication tables, types his own correspondence. In the Clinic his conversation was beyond his years
in many respects. He proved resourceful in amusing himself during
the interval of waiting. He is socially well adjusted. In the psychomotor tests he showed good motor control, discrimination and distribution of attention. He read the fourth reader with ease and
Rood expression; showed 3A proficiency in spelling and 2A proficiency in arithmetic, though never having gone to school.
Case No. 8818, girl, C.A. 3-9; M.A. 5-2;' I.Q. 140; attention
sPan, auditory 4. Father and mother are graduates of the University of Pennsylvania. In height and weight she is the median
for 5 years, active, vivacious, determined. She is most happy in the
presence of adults. She was cooperative throughout the clinical
examination, talked continuously. If anyone entered the examining
room the child informed the newcomer that she was working and
did not care to be disturbed. She was well poised and displayed
Rood powers of observation and attention. She described a fly as
an insect and herself as a human being The mother is disturbed
because of her antisocial tendency; she will not play with children
her own age. She will not defend herself and is easily imposed upon.
The child will be enrolled in the pre-school group of superior children conducted by the Department of Diagnostic Education for
further study and socialization.
Case No. 8788, boy, C.A. 2-9; M.A. 3-9; I.Q. 136; attention
span, auditory 3. He is the only child of Russian Jewish parents.
1'he father is a salesman for a fruit store. The boy does not like to
play with other children and is not interested in toys but enjoys
Working with tools and mechanical objects. He has a bad habit of
screaming when strangers come into the house; he seems to get real
delight in this sort of behavior. He is a great pal with his father
who fosters the boy's mechanical proclivities at times. The boy
helps the mother with the house work in simple duties like drjring the
dishes and holding the dust bin for her when she sweeps. In the
Clinic he showed some stubbornness and obstinacy of an infantile
character at the beginning of the examination. He was disarmed by
placing in his hands the parts of a lock and a screwdriver. Immediately he set to work to put the lock together. In the examination the responses which involved some sort of action were executed
more promptly than those calling for language responses. He is
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
lefthanded but frequently uses both hands. In the psychomotor
tests he showed good discrimination, excellent comprehension and
persistence. He performed the Witmer formboard with a score that
put him in the superior one per cent of boys his age. He matched
colors. He became restless and bored when he lost interest. The
second performance on the formboard was inferior to the first.
For the present he lacks efficiency. Motivation is good. His disposition is equable and in the main his behavior well-conformed.
He was diagnosed as being in a group of 5% superior to 95%.
Case No. 8776, girl, C.A. 9-7; M.A. 14-6; I.Q. 120; attention
span, auditory 5, visual 7, reverse 4. She is the youngest of three
children, the second child having died before she was born, and the
oldest, a boy now 23 years old, works with his father, a prosperous
merchant. The family are Friends and live in a community where
the Friends have a very close social and school life. The child attended the Friends school. Her height is above the median for a
twelve year old girl. She is well built, attractive, alert. She was
brought to the Clinic because of lying and stealing.
Her mother is of an emotional type, cries easily in discussing
the child about whose welfare she entertains great doubts. From
time to time the girl has been guilty of petty theft from her mother's
pocketbook and occasionally she stole articles from children in
school. Her lying is usually connected with the thefts. She has been
punished by her father but she has not responded to the punishment.
She is highly imaginative. As her mother puts its, she knows how
to make a story sound good. Another item of distress to the mother
is that she has been unable to make the child see the distinction
between mine and thine in the home. From early childhood she
has been in the habit of ransacking drawers and trunks, dressing
up in her mother's old clothes, pretending that she is grownup.
She appears to live in a world all of her own. Recently she purloined
a compact which she found in her brother's drawer, the property
of one of the young man's lady friends. The child is very frank in
saying that she knew that the compact was neither hers nor her
brother's and that she took it because she wanted it. She came home
from school one day with a nice pocketbook which proved to be the
property of another child. When she was taken in the fault, without hesitation or embarrassment she took it back to the child.
Upon investigation it proved that this child, born into a family
of adults at the time when the hearts of the parents were tender
over the loss of their second child, was allowed to grow up much as
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 175
she pleased, without much restraint. Her investigating habits which
were not interfered with when she was younger have now become
vexatious especially to the older brother who desires to have his
things let alone. Information obtained from a competent source
in the community seems to indicate that the child is living an
isolated life in a family of adults with no close friends of her own
age. The family spends much time in the summer in a camp where
she associates with girls who are much older than she. When our
Social Worker made a visit to the family, the information given
above was confirmed. She is regarded as a baby and treated so by
the three adult members of the family. Her home is dominated by
the spirit of thrift and extreme caution in spending money for what
they regard as unessential to the child.
The most recent theft is that of a dollar from her mother's
Pocketbook on the 4th of July which she spent for candy, etc. She
stoutly denied this theft but admitted it to the clinical examiner.
More recently she was accused of the theft of fifteen dollars from
her aunt in whose charge she was when her parents were away.
She maintained her innocence, which was later proved. This incident is characteristic of the treatment which the child has received
also in the school which she attended. When there is a theft of any
article, suspicion naturally falls on her. The teachers with whom the
child has been in the school are all women in middle life with the
strong bias of their religious persuasion toward high ethical conduct.
The mother is deeply affected by the disgrace that has come upon
the family in the community of Friends, the child being looked
upon as of marked deviation from the orderly life that solid Quaker
people prize.
The case is one primarily of maladjustment in the home?a
child of less than ten with an orientation much beyond her years
and who displays maturity in her conversation and in her attitude
to life in general. The situation has been unduly exaggerated by the
strict moral principles of a sect that is noted for its discount of
dogma and favor of conduct of its own peculiar pattern. Undoubtedly the child finds satisfaction in the stealing. This is her way
?f expressing a feeling of independence and of her ability to do just
as she pleases. Too much effort has also been exerted in trying to
bring out the emotional reaction of conventional repentance in
the child but she is not a sin-sick soul and the probability is that
there is no likelihood of her becoming so. She has become immune
to ethical instruction and de-sensitized to threats of dire consequences to ensue.
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The case is still under treatment and the prognosis is uncertain.
She has been removed from the school where her reputation is bad
and where she has received social ostracism and has been placed
in another school under the direct supervision of a tactful, intelligent woman who is deeply interested in the development of the
child and who has had experience in connection with this Clinic
in handling difficult moral cases.
The Modal Group
In the modal group were 19 of the 62 cases, their Intelligence
Quotients ranging from 91 to 113. All of them fall within the 60%
median mode according to the Witmer standards. Terman places
the lower limit of his modal group at I.Q. 91 and the upper limit
at 110. All of our cases, therefore, fall within Terman's modal group
with the exception of a boy of seven years with an I.Q. of 113.
According to the Witmer standards, based on examination of five
hundred school children in the first grade of Philadelphia public
schools, the upper limit of the modal group is 117.5. The lower
limit is 90.4.
The modal child is the child of average expectation. A priori,
one would judge that the cases who are examined in the Psychological Clinic would come largely from the upper and lower quintile
and that there should be few cases from the median mode. However, in this summer school session nearly 30% of our cases came
from this group.
The problems presented by the children in this group are largely
problems that fall under the category of motivation. Among the
reasons listed for bringing these children to the Clinic are: nervousness, emotional instability, maladjustment in home or school, fear
obsessions, lying and stealing, temper tantrums, non-conformed
behavior. Two were cases of retardation in school duo primarily
to physical causes. One was a reading problem in which motivation
played an important part. Another was brought because of failure
in arithmetic. While the number of cases in this study is too limited
for general deduction, it would appear, however, that the modal
child is not as a rule found among the cases of the Psychological
Clinic unless there is disordered or unconformed behavior of some
sort involved.
Case No. 8806, boy, C.A. 7-1; M.A. 8; I.Q. 113; attention
span, auditory 4, visual 5, reverse 3. He was brought to the Clinic
because of emotional instability. This boy is a scion of an old Quaker
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 177
family. His father and mother are college graduates, the father a
sales engineer and the mother described as very musical. Two
aunts of the mother have become insane; one became so depressed
that she committed suicide and the other is at present in a sanatorium.
The boy entered school at the age of six. He made his grade
and was promoted to the second grade. His conduct in school was,
however, very poor. He was constantly pinching, pushing or hurting other children, and seemed to enjoy doing so. Neighbors reported him to be "terrible" and not amenable to discipline. He
Was troublesome while in the Clinic and had to be watched or he
would have destroyed anything he laid his hands on. He attempted
to tear some mail that was lying on the desk. The recorder described him as having a mean and destructive streak. In addition
to this, at home he has been guilty of taking money from members
of the family. His father seems to be the only one who has any
control over him. To the wishes, requests and commands of others
he pays practically no attention whatever. As the father is away
a great part of the time he is subject to almost no discipline. He
presents the picture of a child whose non-conformed behavior may
be traced to neglect of proper discipline. He is a case of a child
sacrificed on the altar of business and "society."
Case No. 8832, boy, C.A. 16-10; M.A. 17-6; I.Q. 109; attention span, auditory 7, visual 8, reverse 6. Pie was brought because
?f desire for advice as to his future schooling. He is the third son.
The older boys gave no trouble. Upon investigation, behind the
reason given was discovered a maladjustment at home as well as at
school. He shows no affection for his parents or his brothers. He
shows discontent with his home and his lot, resists parental authority, is insubordinate and insolent to his mother. He has communistic
ideas obtained from reading a popular current magazine. One of
his ideas is that the present social structure based upon the family
is incorrect; that children should be taken from their parents and
educated by the state in groups. The world is not right for this
young man. He has some very definite ideas as to how it should
he fixed up.
His education has been conducted in private schools for some
years. He is working at sub-maximal efficiency. He is content
merely to "get by." He sees no reason for trying hard. His chief
interest is in science, especially chemistry and biology. He has
not attempted to study either seriously, his interest taking the
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
shape of "hanging around the laboratory a lot after school." He
is careless about his personal appearance; appeared at the Clinic
unshaved, with dirty nails and ears; even his clothes were dirty.
Questioned about his family he says that whenever he advances
any of his ideas at home his family become silent and seem to laugh
to themselves. He can offer no suggestions on any topic without
fear of ridicule. "They think of me as a baby but I think a lot about
life." He is not close to his older brothers; he appears to have little
interest in them. Asked about his father he remarked: "He knows
his stuff; he doesn't know me; he is not a pal to me; all he does is to
scold me instead of giving me some encouragement." The mother
volunteered the information that after he had expressed his communistic ideas on the family that his father punished him by refusing
to take him along when the family went to the movies saying,
"He doesn't like us; why should he go along with us?" His mother
and the housekeeper have pampered him. The housekeeper has
been with the family since the boy was a baby. He says his mother
thinks of him still in terms of a ten year old. He has an aversion
to all women.
Here is a boy who wants to be a man among men. He idolizes
his father and wants to be his companion, to talk things over with
him man to man, but all he gets for his all too blundering and confused ideas of things is ridicule and scorn. The kindness of his
mother and old nurse, well intentioned as it is, has palled upon him.
He has come to feel like an Ishmaelite, every man's hand is against
him. Unless this condition can be remedied, it is safe to predict that
his hand will be against every man. The school attitude is but an outgrowth of the home situation. Nothing appears to him to be worth
while. Instead of discouraging this boy's independence of thought he
should be encouraged.
Case No. 8764, girl, C.A. 12-4; M.A. 12-1; I.Q. 98; attention
span, auditory 5, visual 7, reverse 4. Brought to the Clinic because
of reading difficulty. She is the youngest of seven children, daughter
of a clergyman. She is in the 8th grade in school and proved to have
only 4th grade proficiency in reading. She was referred to the Clinic
Teaching Department; received two months of individual instruction, her teacher being a graduate student enrolled in Dr. Witmer's
course in Orthogenics. Her reading difficulty was due partly to bad
eyesight, partly to short perception span. She showed much improvement after two weeks' instruction. Investigation of the case brought
out the fact that her motivation for reading was very poor. The
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 179
correction of her eyesight and the prescription of a method of reading, the analytico-synthetic method, would still leave unchanged this
problem of motivation. She was very self-conscious and sensitive
toward her defect. Her deficiency was in striking contrast to the fact
that the other members of her family were all good and fast readers.
Too much emphasis in the home had been placed upon her defect.
She had probably been subjected to some scorn and ridicule for being
so slow in reading. Further, her motivation had been killed off by
her constant sense of failure. She had lost interest in reading. The
prognosis in this case is exceedingly favorable, inasmuch as the
family is intelligent and cooperative and did not resent criticism of
the attitude toward the child within the home and inasmuch as the
Clinic Teaching Department had discovered the method by means
of which she was already making rapid improvement in the production of reading.
Normal Mentality and Intellectually Deficient
In the next three groups there are 27 cases or 41.6% of the cases
of the entire group. All these cases fall in the lowest 20%. The first
sub-group, normal mentally, intellectually deficient, reach as far
up as the 20th centile and as low as the 5th centile. The I.Q.'s of the
cases in this group range from 70.5 to 90. Of the sixteen cases, ten
Were referred to the Clinic because of school retardation, two because
of interest in mental status, one for nonconformed sexual behavior,
one for lying. All were pedagogically retarded. The characteristic
thing about this group is that those who fall within it are not able to
make ordinary school progress, that is to complete eight grades in
eight years. They constitute the dull or backward group. Socially
they display sufficient competency to be classed as mentally normal.
Rarely would they be classed as feebleminded and recommended
for institutional or custodial care. As is commonly expressed by the
parents, outside of school they are all right. As in every group considered so far, the cases fall into two classes: good and bad or conformed and nonconformed in behavior. In a simple environment
many of them would have no difficulty in managing their affairs and
with proper training can be prepared to contribute productively in
the social and economic world. Some of them show in contrast to
their intellectual deficiency a good and occasionally a superior
mechanical ability.
Case No. 8831, boy, C.A. 10-0; M.A. 8-9; I.Q. 88; attention
span, auditory 5, visual 6, reverse 3. He was referred by a physician
180 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
because of school retardation and nervousness. He is one of six
children of whom none is retarded but the oldest girl who is 1G years
of age and in the 9th grade and our subject who is ten years of age
and in grade 3B. He shows a nervous, almost hysterical, condition.
He does not sleep well at night, tosses around in bed, bangs his head
on the pillow until his forehead is bruised. He loses his temper very
easily. Usually holds his mouth wide open. Tonsils and adenoids
have been removed. He masturbates. His weight is about median
for a twelve year old, his height median for an eleven year old.
He is fairly well adjusted at home, gets along with his brothers
and sisters with only an occasional quarrel. Outside the school he
has many friends with whom he gets along well. He helps his father
in the summer on the huckster wagon selling fruits and vegetables.
For his wages he receives a dollar a week which he is saving to buy a
bicycle. He is hyperactive, never seems to tire. He is always looking
for something to do. His chief interest is in mechanical toys. His
retardation was first noted when he entered school. Up until this
time his mother described him as bright. Recently he has the sniflles;
nose running constantly.
In the psychomotor tests this boy showed good comprehension
of the problem involved in the Witmer cylinders, good form discrimination. He corrected his errors as he made them. The same remarks hold for the Dearborn formboard. He showed intelligence,
discernment and some degree of efficiency in his first trials. His
performances were not superior quantitatively as his discharge of
energy was slow, but qualitatively they were excellent. On the
second trial he showed superior trainability?ability to profit by
experience. These performances are classed as quantitatively in the
upper quintile. The contrast here, then, is between the intellectual performances that are in the lowest quintile and the mechanical
performances that are in the upper quintile. On the intellectual
scale he may be ranked as a High Grade Imbecile, Barr classification.
Probably under most favorable circumstances he will not go beyond
the sixth grade in school. It has taken him five years to acquire 3A
proficiency in reading and spelling and 2B proficiency in arithmetic.
The recommendations in this case were that the boy be placed in a
special class in school and that he be given manual and mechanical
training in order to fit him for a useful place in life. A complete
medical and neurological examination was also advised.
Case No. 8795, boy, C.A. 8-6, M.A. 7-0; I.Q. 82; attention span,
auditory 5, visual 8, reverse 3, syllables 15. The youngest of nine
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 181
children, ages ranging from 30 to 8-6. His father is an insurance
agent. He is undersized, being about the median for seven. His
weight is good enough for his height. Headgirth is 19.5 inches, which
is inferior to 75% of five year olds. He is having trouble with his
teeth; they are coming in irregularly. On the left jawbone there is a
hard lump either due to infection or a new tooth. His tonsils are
large and inflamed. His circulation is poor. His hands show cyanosis, cold and clammy. A well behaved boy he cooperated in the tests
as far as he was able but showed no great interest. The school has no
complaint of his conduct. He plays with children his own age; shows
ability to take his own part in childhood's disputes; goes on errands,
brings back three or four things without a note. He was slightly infantile in the Clinic where he was confronted with a new situation.
He cried and showed fear because he thought his mother had left him.
His general orientation is good.
In reading and spelling his proficiency is not 1A though he has
been to school two years. He knows his letters but has no idea what
their sounds are. His writing is good third grade. He is almost as
good with his left hand as with his right. His arithmetic proficiency
was IB. He did some examples in 2A though he had never been in
this grade. Performances on the formboards were inferior on both
first and second trials. With the Witmer formboard and cylinders
quantitatively he is in the lowest decile. This was largely due to his
slow discharge of energy. He is lacking in intelligence and in comprehension of the problem. With a minimum of instruction his performance rapidly improved. In the cylinders he changed from a trial
and error to an analytical method and displayed good analytic discrimination. The Dearborn he comprehended immediately. The
approach was analytical. Second trial was quantitatively and
qualitatively a great improvement over the first. Recommendations
were: thorough medical examination with special reference to tonsils
and teeth and a period of clinic teaching to complete the diagnosis.
Case No. 8809, boy, C. A. 14-11; M.A. 12-10; I.Q. 75; attention
span, auditory 5, visual 8, reverse 4. The mother has been in the
Philadelphia General Hospital for five years with a nervous disease.
His home is in charge of a housekeeper who also serves the father as
a mistress. This condition is known to the boy. The general health
of the boy is only fair. He is tall for his age being in the upper 25%
of sixteen year olds and his weight is the median for fifteen. He
lacks initiative, is slow in his responses. Performances on the Witmer
cylinders and Dearborn formboard were fair. His trainability, however, was better than average.
182 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
He started school at the age of six and repeated the 5th and 7th
grades. He is ready to enter the eighth grade. His work in school
is poor and his conduct bad. He does not like school. His school
proficiency in reading and spelling is 5B, arithmetic 6A. The boy's
antipathy to school is largely due to the fact that he is accelerated,
attempting to do work beyond acquired proficiencies. He is one of
that too numerous class who are promoted on size. Naturally, he
has no interest in work which he cannot do. This with the bad home
situation has apparently precipitated nonconformed behavior. He
desires to leave school and work.
His uncle runs a truck to neighboring cities. The boy enjoys
trips with his uncle. In fact, he likes to travel and has done so on
his own account. While in New York on one of these excursions he
was picked up by the Society to Prevent Cruelty to Children. This
was the immediate occasion of his being sent to the Psychological
Clinic for examination. Diagnosis was: normal mentality, intellectually dull. Recommendations were: that he have a physical examination, leave school and be put to work.
Borderline Mentality
The second sub-group of the lowest quintile is the borderline.
The I.Q.'s of the cases diagnosed as belonging to this group run from
57 to 80. They all fall in the lowest decile, according to the Witmer
norms. The characteristic of this group is intellectual deficiency
plus a mental deficiency that makes it doubtful whether they will
ever be able to reach social competency, that is be able to look out
for themselves without supervision. In a simple environment they
might be able under favorable circumstances to succeed at simple
occupations. Intellectually they may be classed as lying between
the Middle Grade and High Grade Imbecile. Morally they are
often a risk. They constitute membership in that social group that
is often exploited for criminal purposes by the more intelligent. The
girls are particularly likely, if they are at all attractive, to become
sexually a-moral. In complex situations and environment they are
likely to degenerate rapidly and therefore need a most favorable
environment to] keep them from deterioration. Excitement, illness
or over-stimulation would make their defects highly noticeable. In
fact, in these cases either the emotional, moral or physical condition
of the individual seems to render normal social life doubtful.
Case No. 5148, boy, C.A. 14-2; M.A. 11-7; I.Q. 80; attention
span, auditory 5, visual 6, reverse 4. Brought to the Clinic by his
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 183
mother because of desire for educational advice. This boy was examined in the Psychological Clinic in 1923. His I.Q. at that time was
107, attention span, auditory 4, visual 4. An I.Q. taken by the Department of Special Education, Philadelphia, about the same time
was 100. He has lost from 20 to 27 points in I.Q. in the last seven
years. He is an adopted child, parentage unknown. His school
history shows that he repeated the third and fourth grades. At the
time of the examination he was in the 7A. His school proficiency,
however, is 4A in spelling and 6A in arithmetic, which accounts for
his failure to be promoted from the 7 A grade. His work at school
was poor, his conduct fair, the only complaint being lack of concentration.
There is a history of the usual children's diseases and an automobile accident when he was five years of age. The boy is blind in
one eye due to a congenital cataract. Socially he does not cooperate
well in group games. He failed to adjust himself in a camp for boys.
He enjoys doing mechanical things but does not succeed at them.
Examination in the psychomotor tests ranks him in the Witmer
cylinders and Dearborn formboard as belonging in the lowest decile.
His second performance on the cylinders was inferior to the first; the
second on the Dearborn was superior to the median performance.
His analytic discrimination in these tests was poor.
He has reached his educational limit. His ambition is to go to
sea by way of the Schoolship Annapolis but this is obviously beyond
his ability. The picture then is one of borderline mental deficiency
as proved by his inability to adjust himself in social groups at his
own level and an intellectual deficiency as demonstrated by his
I.Q. and school proficiency. It was recommended that he return to
the Clinic for vocational guidance.
Case No. 8789, girl, C.A. 9-7; M.A. 5?G; I.Q. 57; attention
span, auditory 4, visual 4, reverse 2. She showed good comprehension and fair discrimination in her performance on the Witmer
formboard. Her performance on the cylinders was that of the
median six year old child. She is the oldest of two children. Father
is an automobile salesman. Birth of the child was preceded by
thirty-six hours of difficult and painful labor. The child has a scar
over her right eye caused by the pressure of the instruments. There
was no history of retardation in walking or talking or habits of
cleanness. At three and a half she had an injury to the left eye which
threatened the sight of that eye. Her vision, however, has now been
pronounced normal. Her general health is good. Her father says
184 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
she was bright up until the time of the accident. At four and a half
she began stammering. Although her retardation may be due partly
to the injury at birth, and the accident to her eye, her entire appearance is suggestive of lack of development in utero. She has some
Mongoloid features. She is conformed in her behavior, gets along
well with other children but displays some emotional instability.
Her orientation is not that of a ten year old child. In school she
repeated the first grade and is about to repeat the third. In three
years of schooling she has acquired a IB proficiency in reading and
spelling, and second grade competency in these subjects, that is to
say, she has done one year's work in three. The prognosis is that she
will not advance beyond the third grade. Her pleasing personality
and desire to cooperate, the interest of the family and their economic
background are factors that favor a social adjustment. However, it
is questionable whether she will attain to a measure of self-support.
Feebleminded
In this group there were six cases. In two cases no I.Q. was obtainable. The other I.Q.'s ranged from 32 to 66. Three were diagnosed as Low Grade Imbeciles and three as Idio-Imbeciles, on the
Barr classification. The types represented were microcephaly, one
case; Mongolian, two; post-encephalitis, two; physical degenerate,
one.
Case No. 8817, girl, C.A. 8-6; M.A. 2-9; I.Q. 32, attention
span, 2. She performed the simpler Seguin formboards but failed
the Witmer. She could not match colors. Her height as median
for 8 year olds, weight median for 9 year olds. Headgirth, 18 inches.
The youngest of ten children in an Italian family. Parents come from
the region of the Apennines, good sturdy stock. Nine children are
well and normal. She was accompanied by a married sister who is an
intelligent, high type woman. The child was born when the mother
was forty-seven years of age. Pregnancy was not diagnosed until
late. The child weighed three pounds at birth. She is a typical
Mongolian child?round bullet head, slanting eyes, indetermiate
mouth from which her cross fissured tongue protrudes. The body
below the neck was quite normal except for some excess growth of
hair, sloping shoulders, and square stubby hands and fingers. She
makes typical Mongolian gestures such as putting her finger to her
nose and eye, pointing and calling out objects and people. She
bathes herself every day, is clean, feeds herself, goes to store for
one thing at a time, helps a little about the house. She is non-eduCLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 185
cable and non-trainable except in a few simple directions. She was
diagnosed as an Idio-Imbecile.
Case No. 8766, boy, C.A. 13-1; no I.Q. or attention span
obtainable. Could not match colors; had no form discrimination.
The third of six children of Polish ancestors. The father is a coal
miner in northeastern Pennsylvania. At 15 months he had double
pneumonia which was later diagnosed as encephalitis. He entered
the first grade at the age of nine and has made no progress whatsoever. The boy is slightly negativistic. Diagnosis: Idio-Imbecile
Recommendation: institutional placement.
PART II
SIX CASES OF DYSLEXIA
The classification of clinical varieties of reading problems is a
difficult task. A study of twenty-five reading problems referred to
the Department of Diagnostic Education of the Psychological Clinic
of the University of Pennsylvania by clinical examiners, under the
direction of Dr. Lightner Witmer, for the purpose of diagnosing their
reading difficulty, revealed the fact that rarely in an individual case
can any single factor be assigned as the sole cause for the deficiency.
Efficiency in learning to read as efficiency in learning in general
is always a matter of the establishment of certain habits. In this
process there are a multiplicity of factors that serve as determinants
in the production of the goods we call reading. These factors or
determinants may be catalogued readily. Such a classification,
however, breaks down when the effort is made to pigeonhole a particular case which may be filed under more than one, often under
several of our chosen categories. In any instance, it may be possible
to select some predominating defect as basic, but generally the
situation is complicated by the operating presence of other defects.
Each case presents, not a clear cut picture of the working of a single
factor, but a complex or syndrome of factors working together in the
production of a reading difficulty.
An exception to such a statement, even with its limiting qualifications, may be taken at once in the case of congenital alexia.
Where the visual memory for words and letters is lacking or strikingly deficient, it is useless to look for further causes for non-reading.
Hinshelwood restricts the term congenital word blindness "to cases
of localized defect only where we have one definite cerebral area
186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
affected in an otherwise undamaged and normal brain."1 Cases of
physiological variation in the visual word center of the brain or of
some slight defective development of this center, causing varying
defects in the ease and rapidity of learning to read, are not regarded
as pathological. For such cases he reserves the name dyslexia.
Of the twenty-five cases under review, there is only one, case
6?Delia, that approaches in purity and gravity of type Hinshelwood's description of word blindness. In this case there was an
undoubted difficulty in storing up and in retaining the visual
memory of words. This was the only evidence of defect in any of the
categories or factors to be enumerated that this young lady showed.
She was otherwise a most intelligent child, functioning at a high
level of intellectual achievement for her age and grade, possessing excellent auditory and kinaesthetic imagery. The ordinary methods of
instruction in reading in an excellent private school failed to produce
results. The six weeks of special training, however, were sufficient
for her cure. There is more than a suspicion, however, that in her
case also, there was a contributing cause?inadequate and poorly
adapted methods of instruction which produced bad reading habits.
In this case it would be precarious to diagnose congenital word
blindness. The indication points rather to some congenital biological
variation in the development of the visual word center.
The other twenty-four cases are very decidedly cases of dyslexia
in which several factors cooperated in making it difficult to establish proper reading habits.
Classification
I. Primary Causes.
No attempt is made to give a complete list of the causes which
are basic to failure to learn to read. The classification represents the
more common types.
A. Sensory defects. Fundamental to the learning process or the
formation of new habits are normal sense organs. The commonest
physical cause for failure to learn to read is an ocular defect. A
diseased condition of the eye, a refractive error, a failure in coordination of the muscles which control eye movement, are frequent causes
of failure to read. The eye examinations conducted by the Medical
Department of public school systems have undoubtedly reduced the
percentage of cases that may be attributed to this cause. It is no
1 Hinshelwood, James. Congenital Word Blindness. London: H. K.
Lewis & Co., 1917. p. 81.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 187
reflection upon the school eye examination to say that there are
still many cases that appear at the Psychological Clinic that can be
traced either to a failure to discover defective vision or the failure to
have it corrected on the part of the parents. Indeed this is so common among clinic cases that it is a wise practice before attempting
diagnostic teaching or any remedial work to have the eyes of the
subject examined by an expert.
B. The second primary cause is a deficit in imagination and
memory due to central causes, i.e. non-development of the visual
memory for letters and words. Here may be listed congenital and
acquired word blindness, congenital and acquired dyslexia. Cases
of alexia may be described as due to non-development of the visual
memory center for letters and words or to the loss of visual memory
through disease or trauma while congenital dyslexia may be described as due to a physiological variation in the development of
the area and acquired dyslexia to a similar condition induced by disease or trauma. The dividing line between alexia and dyslexia
proves to be one of degree. The diagnosis rests primarily upon the
ability to have correct visual images of words and letters and upon
the ability to retain and recall such images. The ease and rapidity
with which learning to read may be accomplished is a function of
the accuracy and retentivity of visual images, for letters and words.
Failure to discriminate small differences in the form of letters may
be due to either the inaccuracy of the images or failure to recall correct images. Another defect of memory that conditions the learning
Process in reading is the lack of trainability or the capacity for
improvement. It is measured by the number of repetitions that are
necessary in order to retain a given quantum of material.
C. The third primary cause is a limited capacity for associability. It is measured by the co-discernment or attention span, the
number of units which an individual is able to recognize as discrete
and hold together as a unit in one single moment of attention. A
limited attention span is basic to many failures to learn to read and
conditions the rapidity with which the process may go forward.
Especially in learning to spell is the limitation of attention span
noted. A child with a limited attention span, e.g. three, would
have difficulty in both spelling and recognizing four or five lettered
words. A deficit in associability is also shown in another direction.
Frequently non-readers show difficulty in associating images of
different sense modalities, e.g. the sound of a letter with the written
symbol of the letter, or in synthesizing the sounds of letters to form
syllables 01 the sound of syllables to form words.
188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
D. The fourth primary cause is found in the field of attention.
Two general attention types may be described. The first type has a
restricted range and a high degree of concentration of attention.
This type is commonly called the "fixating type." The second type
has an extended range and a low degree of concentration of attention. This type is commonly called the " fluctuating type." It is the
"fluctuating type" that is most commonly met with in reading
problem cases. An excessive distribution of attention accompanied
by feeble powers of concentration furnishes that distractibility
which is often the despair of the clinic teacher and is a primary cause
of failure to learn to read.
II. Contributing Cause.
A. Motivation. Motivation is an affair of desire and desire an
affair of energy. Its roots reach back to a physical basis in the
amount of energy that is available in the individual for the production
of desirable effects in any field of operation. It involves the question
of vitality or the ability to resist and recover from fatigue. It determines the speed or the rate of work and is defined by the presence
or absence of mental alertness, promptness to decide and to execute.
It bears also upon the ability to concentrate, determining the readiness with which the individual can summon and marshall his powers
to the task and keep them at it. In a sense the matter of energy is
fundamental to all efficiency in establishing new habits or in learning
new material. Motivation is listed as a contributing cause, not because its importance is underestimated, but because its nature is not
specific to the reading problem but pertains to all learning, all thinking, all doing. It determines not only the strength of desire but the
attitude of the learner and especially his ability to carry through
any given operation to successful completion.
III. Secondary Factors.
Under secondary factors may be listed:
A. Inadequate instruction. It is well recognized that the
"look and say" or the word and sentence method is not adapted to
children whose visual memory center for letters and words is poorly
developed. Such children do not learn to read in groups where the
presentation of the material is largely visual. Many of these children
have excellent auditory and kinaesthetic imagery and may be
taught to read by the old fashioned alphabet method combined
with phonetics.
B. Faulty reading habits. Non-readers pick up many habits
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 181)
that are a detriment to further progress in reading such as guessing
at a word from the first syllable and sometimes from the last, or the
failure to differentiate small words whose general appearance is
similar. Much of the tedious drill work connected with remedial
reading consists in the stamping out of these old bad habits and the
stamping in of good habits.
C. An acquired aversion to reading induced by the sense of
constant failure. In order to acquire efficiency in any line of endeavor, problems must be set before the child in which there is the
probability of his succeeding most of the time. A sense of failure
produces discouragement and cuts the nerve of endeavor. A child
cannot be expected to be interested in anything in which he has no
sense of victory nor any confidence in his ability to win out. Sometimes the child receives for his failure to learn to read censure and
ridicule which effectually dam up the wells of desire.
The way in which these various factors are combined in learning
to read is illustrated in the following cases. It is to be noted that
these six cases occur at almost any level of achievement. The I.Q.'s
of the children considered are in the order of their presentation 90,
99, 101, 111, 124, 138. Reading problems are thus found throughout
the entire range of distribution of I.Q.'s. Two of these cases have as
their primary cause defective vision, two have limited associability
as indicated by a deficit in attention span, and two a non-development of the cerebral visual memorial area for letters and words.
Richard
Richard, age eight years, five months, was brought to the Psychological Clinic by an elementary supervisor of schools in a district
suburban to Philadelphia because of inability to make progress in
school. He had entered the first grade at the age of six years and
three months, repeated the first grade, and was in the second grade
at the time of the examination. His work in academic subjects was
described as poor and his handwork good. His conduct was described
as variable, at times poor, at other times very good. Dr. Witmer
diagnosed him as of normal mentality with the general competency
of a group of 20 percent superior to 40 percent and inferior to 40
percent of boys his age. His Intelligence Quotient was 90. His auditory attention span was 5 and his reverse span 2. On performance tests
he worked in a planful, intelligent manner and displayed very good
concentration of attention. Dr. Witmer advised an eye examination
immediately by a competent oculist and a period of diagnostic
190 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
teaching in order to determine the cause of his deficiency in reading.
At the time of this examination Richard did not have first grade
proficiency in reading.
The eye examination revealed "No need nor indication for
glasses; no indication for training of the fusion sense." The oculist
reported his belief that Richard did not know all of his letters as he
skipped certain letters even on the larger types whereas he read all
the numbers very easily.
Richard reported for clinic teaching on October 15, 1929. He
was under observation two hours per week for twelve weeks. At the
beginning of his clinic teaching, his attention span was taken again.
There was no change in the audito-vocal span but the reverse was 3,
showing an increase of 1, and a tendency toward a 4. Richard had
learned the trick of reversing digits. He memorized the series forward, using kinaesthetic imagery, and then after memorizing,
reversed the series. Richard's chronological age is now nine years,
six months. Sixty percent of eight year olds in the third grade have
a forward attention span of 6 and 40 percent have a reverse attention
span of 4. In co-discernment span therefore, Richard is inferior to
60 percent of boys his age.
The type of reading errors that Richard made indicate a deficit
of visual discrimination. He had difficulty in discriminating between
the words very, every and ever. He read how?who, saw?was, from?
for. His deficit in discrimination extended also to letters, so that
when he was told to write o, he wrote a. However when words were
placed before him and he was asked to note the differences, his
discrimination functioned. Therefore combined with slowness in
visual discrimination, there was a deficit in attention evidenced by
the fact that when he was compelled to attend and to note differences
visually, he was able to do so. His retention is also below average.
He was not however lacking in motivation and showed considerable
interest in learning to read which compensated somewhat for his
deficiency in attention and retention. As he had learned inattention,
to find differences in letters and words he had to be taught attention.
He was taught by the alphabet method because his limited attention
span made it difficult for him to construct words. Phonic analysis
was also employed and Richard showed considerable ability after
training to synthesize the sounds of letters and syllables to make
larger units provided the units were not too many for his limited
attention span. At the close of his clinic teaching period he was
reading the fourth reader, very slowly indeed, but with few mistakes,
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 191
working out difficult words such as conversation and explain by
phonic analysis with little or no assistance. The prognosis is good
provided this method is continued.
Joseph
Joseph, age ten years, ten months, referred to the Psychological
Clinic by the Principal of a suburban public school because of retardation in school work, was examined by Dr. Miles Murphy May 8,
1929 and diagnosed as of normal mentality, intellectually backward.
At the time of his examination he was in the fifth grade. He had
never repeated a grade but was doing very poor work in reading,
writing and arithmetic.
He obtained an I.Q. of 99. His attention span was, audito-vocal
forward 6, visual 8, reverse 3. The auditory forward span was adequate but the reverse span indicated a definite deficit in ability to
re-organize his perceptions.
Clinic teaching began October 14, 1929. He received twentyfive hours of clinic teaching. His attention span was taken again.
His forward span was unchanged. His reverse span was found to be
5, 2 more than on the initial examination, thus duplicating the
performance of Richard. He, too, had hit upon the plan of learning
the series forward and then reversing them one by one. The type
of imagery used was audito-kinaesthetic. His school proficiency
taken by the clinic teacher gave him an inferior rating to that obtained at his first examination. He received 2B proficiency in spelling and reading instead of fourth grade proficiency. His proficiency
in arithmetic remained unchanged?3B. He spelled like?lick,
made?mad, wreck?reck, and automobile?otanonbeal. He was also
found to be incapable of reciting the multiplication tables. He did
not know the answers to such simple problems as 3 times 9 and 6
times 4. He was at this time repeating the fifth grade. At the conclusion of his period of clinic teaching he had advanced to 4A
proficiency in addition, multiplication and division, but not in
fractions and problems. This was as a result of intensive work in
mechanizing the elementary processes.
In his reading, by his confusion of letters, we were led to suspect
an eye defect. Upon examination it proved he had a marked strabismus of the right eye apparently due to a weakness of the internal
rectus muscle for he was unable to focus his eyes on a single point
for many seconds. Only by effort can he make the convergence
necesary for fixation. When he confused a letter, if his attention
192 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
was called to it, he could by effort succeed in focusing and discriminating the letter. He complained frequently that his eyes hurt
him. There is not much doubt but that his retardation in both reading and arithmetic was largely due to this eye defect. On inquiry it
was found that his eyes had been refracted and glasses recommended
which he wore occasionally. When he wore them, his work was
considerably improved. The correction of his eyes by the use of
glasses however did not remove the careless reading habits which
Joseph had acquired. It had been easier for him to guess at a word
than to undergo the strain of focusing. Some of these bad reading
habits were corrected during his period of clinic teaching. He read
lowly but his work showed great improvement.
His comprehension of what he read was good. His school reports showed that during his period of clinic teaching he had
advanced in reading, geography and history.
The conclusion, then, with reference to Joseph is that his retardation in reading is due to defective vision which produced a poor
visual discrimination for letters. While not of an intellectual type,
Joseph works better with his mind than with his hands. His codiscernment span is entirely adequate for the work he was supposed
to have been doing in the fifth and sixth grades, certainly above the
median in this respect as the re-examination of his span showed. In
general comprehension he is above the average. His trainability is
good. His motivation and persistence were all that could be expected from one who had failed so consistently to learn to read.
His school complained of his behaviour, that he wasted time.
In our contact with him he was exceedingly friendly and cooperative. It was scarcely any surprise that his attention wandered in the
school room for he was attempting to do work for which he was not
prepared and in which he could not succeed nor develop interest.
It is to be regretted that this boy who was not physically strong and
shows some symptoms of nervousness, did not receive earlier the
kind of medical attention that his case requires. In this case the
home is to blame. He is the oldest of two children of an Italian
barber. The boy has not received good home training and it is
surprising that he is as amenable to discipline as he proved to be.
An earlier correction of his visual defect backed up by proper home
influence would have made it possible for this boy to have advanced
at least through the grades. Without individual instruction there is
no possibility of his advancing beyond the fifth grade in which he
now is and for the work of which he is absolutely unprepared.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 193
Thomas
Thomas, age eleven years, ten months, brought to the Psychological Clinic because of backwardness in reading, spelling and writing, was examined by Dr. Murphy July 10, 1929. Thomas entered
first grade at six years and now is in the fifth grade of a parochial
school. He repeated third grade and was repeating fifth at the time
of his examination. His school proficiency taken here in the Clinic
showed that he was not first grade in either reading or spelling and
that in arithmetic he had fourth grade proficiency.
His I.Q. was 101. His attention span was auditory G, visual 0,
reverse 4. On the formboards he showed good analytical discrimination, coordination and trainability, ranking in the upper quintile.
The diagnosis was normal mentality, general competency in a group
of 20 percent superior to 50 percent and inferior to 30 percent. The
recommendations were an eye examination and orthogenic treatment in spelling and reading.
On October 15, 1929 Thomas reported for clinic teaching. He
has received fourteen hours of instruction. His eyes were refracted
and glasses were provided. A part of his difficulty was due to this
eye defect. It could be very plainly seen that when Thomas attempted to read without his glasses, he made very foolish errors in
discrimination and after only fourteen hours of instruction he made
considerable advance in reading.
His attention span was taken by the clinic teacher during his
period of clinic teaching. He showed an audito-vocal span of 5 forward, 6 on the fifth trial. His reverse span was 3, 4 on the third
trial. Thomas has a very definite deficit in associability. Pie falls
below the 30th centile in co-discernment of children in the fifth
grade in the public schools of Philadelphia. His deficiency in associability is borne out by the difficulty that he had even after
breaking a word up into syllables, in synthesizing the parts to make
a single word unit. Thomas also has dyslalia. His speech shows a
slight thickness, a lack of clearness in enunciation. This deficit is
not however as deleterious as his eye defect because Thomas in his
failure to get correct visual images of words had compensated by
depending on his audito-kinaesthetic imagery. A word that he
could not recognize or even sound out, he could spell out and know.
Another factor in Thomas' case is social, the unwise treatment
accorded the boy at home. His father calls him stupid when he cannot read while his mother coddles him. The boy fears and obeys
his father but disobeys his mother. On the whole, he seemed to be
194 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
a boy who had been greatly repressed both at home and in school and
who had been drawn in on himself by the criticism that had been
made to his face. He was very quiet and retiring?seemed to lack
confidence. It was some time before he mustered up courage to ask
his clinic teacher questions. His motivation was good. He was anxious to learn to read. His persistence was on the whole fair. Probably from lack of interest or from a sense of failure, he was distractible.
With these factors operating, it is not surprising that this boy
had little proficiency in reading. His sole method in reading was
spelling out the letters. This was necessarily slow. One of the results
was that his reading was expressionless. He read in a dull monotone
and paid no attention to punctuation. His reading was simply the
"sad mechanic exercise" of spelling out word after word. He was
taught by the phonetic method and received considerable drilling
on the sound of letters and their synthesis into syllables. Syllabification was resorted to to make up for his deficient attention span.
Under individual instruction he improved greatly and the prognosis favorable for his being able with further individual instruction
to acquire enough reading ability to make him comfortable in a world
where reading is a social requirement.
His retardation is due to dyslalia, defective eyesight and deficient associability. Secondary factors are the bad habits acquired
before his eyes were refracted and the acquired aversion to reading
brought on by unwise ridicule. The department recommended that
he be dismissed from the Clinic Teaching Department because the
diagnosis was complete, and that the boy receive training suitable
to his personal talent which is in the mechanical rather than the
academic field.
William
William, age eight years, six months, was brought to the Psychological Clinic by his father and mother because of his inability to
read and spell. He was examined by Dr. Miles Murphy on October
5, 1929. His home background is excellent. His father is a prosperous business man. His mother graduated from college before she
had reached her twentieth birthday. His two sisters will graduate
from high school at sixteen. Then comes William presenting a problem in reading and spelling.
William entered the first grade at five years, apparently getting
off to a good start. He is now in the third grade of a progressive
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 195
suburban school. He carries the work of his grade in arithmetic and
writing efficiently. Our proficiency tests confirmed this. They also
revealed that he had no proficiency in reading and spelling. Three
years schooling had brought him next to nothing. His eyes were
refracted and found to be all right.
His I.Q. was 111 which places him above the median for boys
his age. An analytical study of his Binet-Simon responses showed
that he had good imageability in the field of form, powers of abstraction and generalization beyond his years, at least equal to the
median for ten year old boys in the fifth grade of Philiadelphia
public schools. His attention span was, audito-vocal 5, visual 7, reverse 3. His performances on the formboards were qualitatively
above the median though quantitatively slow. His performance on
the Dearborn was both quantitatively and qualitatively good.
The diagnosis was normal mentality, general competency superior
to the median of boys of his own age. He was referred to the Clinic
Teaching Department for futher analysis of his reading deficiency.
Clinic teaching began October 9, 1929. William received
twenty-two hours of instruction. His associability was again tested.
His audito-vocal attention span proved to be 7 which is an increase
of 2 over his first examination. He gave 8 digits on the sixth repetition. His reverse was 4, an increase of 1. His span therefore must be
judged adequate as he is above the median of boys his age, superior
probably to 60 percent.
In reading he resorted to the familiar device of children who
have been taught by the context method and failed to profit by it.
He studied the pictures at the top of the page and proceeded to guess
at the meaning of words. His guesses were good, showing good
comprehension. He read wings instead of fly, dove instead of -pigeon,
happy instead of glad. He gave back the meaning of the story without the loss of a single detail. His analytical discrimination for
letters was poor. This defect is basic to his reading disability. Pie
spelled girl?grle and plays?plas. By the use of the analyticosynthetic method, William made excellent progress and at the end
of his period of clinic teaching he had a 2B proficiency in spelling
and frequently received 100 for a spelling lesson. His reading was a
good second grade. He read the third reader with some degree of
proficiency. These results are remarkable considering that at the
time of the examination he had no proficiency in reading and
spelling.
As a help to diagnosis he was given work in arithmetic. He had
190 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
no difficulty with problems in his grade, nor in applying the mechanics which he had well learned to new problems. His intelligence
in this field is good. He showed no lack of discrimination between
one number and another and established the fact that his defect
was of a very specific character and limited to letters and words.
Another interesting contrast was his ability to make discriminations between the parts of machines simply by looking at the pictures. His reading disability had led him to develop an interest in
another direction for which as judged by his formboard performance
he has only an average ability. The Popular Mechanics Magazine
interests him. From the pictures he can explain the workings of a
machine. His interest showed further development in his planning
buildings, railroad terminals, etc. which he constructed with his
toys. This is a beautiful illustration of disability in one field leading
to a development of ability in another.
In addition to his deficit of analytical discrimination, the problem of raising his proficiency in reading was complicated by his
utter lack of motivation. He was two boys, one during the reading
lesson, and another during the arithmetic lesson. In the reading
lesson his attention wandered. In the arithmetic lesson he was
absorbed. He frankly confessed that the reasons for his desire to
learn to read are because his failure to learn to read makes the other
pupils look down on him, causes his teacher to fret and makes his
parents unhappy. Here in this intensive social urge was found the
force that was exploited in the attack on his problem. It was pointed
out to him that while reading plays very little part in his life now
and while at present he was able to compensate for it by his interest
in other fields, that his further progress depends upon his success in
securing the tool called reading. He was intelligent enough to see
and grasp this point, and under the spur of this hope of being able
to take his part in the world in line with the educational traditions
of his family, he buckled down to work.
The third factor that conditioned William's progress in reading
was his health. He had been examined by several child specialists
who had given a negative report. Our observations of him in the
Clinic seem to indicate that he was not manufacturing enough
energy. His vitality was not that of a normal eight year old boy.
First this appeared as a ruse to avoid work. Further observation
showed that it was a condition of lowered vitality. Even when he
was unobserved, he would lay his head on the desk as though he
was very tired. Consequently he was sent to Dr. Max Trumper,
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 197
Bio-chemist of the Psychological Clinic for examination. The examination showed he had a deficit of hemoglobin. The red cell count was
low indicating a moderate degree of secondary anaemia.
Our conclusions therefore in this case are that William is conformed?that his abilities are conforming to expectation in all ways
except in reading and spelling. His intelligence, comprehension
and analytical discrimination are superior to the median in every
field except reading and spelling. His auditory and kinaesthetic
imagery are good. His visual memory is good in every field except
that of letters and words. His specific defect in reading and spelling
is probably due to a functional variation in the cerebral mechanism
for language. He was discharged from the Clinic Teaching Department with these recommendations?first, that he receive medical
attention to put him in as good condition physically as is possible;
second, that he be given private instruction until his reading proficiency is brought up to grade.
Bert
Bert, born February 14, 1921, age eight years, three months,
Was brought to the Clinic by his mother because of difficulty in
reading. He was examined by Dr. Miles Murphy. Bert's father
was a school principal and his mother before her marriage was a
teacher of backward children. The significant thing in his medical
history is that his birth was Caesarian, the operation being performed after three daj^s of hard labor. His head was so badly
bruised by the instruments that an operation was necessary when
he was one week old, following which he had a series of abscesses.
At three years he had whooping cough and pneumonia. His development was not retarded. He walked at thirteen months and talked
a few words at ten months. His head as a result of damage done at
birth is misshapen. The malformation is especially noticeable
when his facial muscles are in action as in smiling.
Bert was first examined in this Clinic when he was two years,
three months old. He obtained an I.Q. of 144. He returned to the
Clinic May 18, 1929. He was then in the 3A grade in school and the
best student in the class in all subjects except reading. His I.Q.
Was 124 which is inferior to about 5 percent of ten year old boys
in the fifth grade of the public schools of Philadelphia. His attention
span, audito-vocal is 8, visual 8, reverse 4. His forward span correlates closely with his I.Q., placing him superior to 98 percent of
ten year olds. On the formboards his performances were not super198 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ior either quantitatively or qualitatively. His second performance
on the cylinders was inferior to the first. On the Dearborn, the
examiner remarked that he showed more analysis than efficiency
and trainability, and suggested that he was more educable than
trainable. During the entire examination he exhibited considerable
restlessness which increased as he became tired. He fatigued
easily. He was diagnosed as superior to 80 percent. He was rated
low in the category of efficiency. He was referred to the Clinic
Teaching Department for a further analysis of his reading difficulty.
He began his clinic teaching October 23, 1929 and received
sixteen hours of instruction. His eyes had been refracted but
many of the bad reading habits accumulated prior to treatment of
his eyes survived. On his first lesson he did not have his glasses.
His reading was poor. He skipped lines. He made the same mistakes
in the primer as he did in the fourth reader. He took one look at a
word and then guessed what it might be. Did was read done or
does. Cottage was read cabin. In the one case he guessed by the
looks of the word and in the other by the context. His spelling was
equally poor. He spelled were-where, and where he spelled war.
They, their and there were hopelessly confused. However he showed
excellent motivation and a desire to become a good reader.
In contrast to his failure with small words was his ability to
read big words. The large words he analyzed out phonetically and
synthesized. Owing to his necessity of working out each word as it
appeared, he read slowly. The same contrast was noted in his spelling. He had no difficulty in spelling words like parcel, portion, least,
summit, enemy, immediate, volunteer, assistance, and regulation, but
he spelled cross-cress and they-thay. On December 16 he was making
the same type of mistakes?left for fell and for for to. Invariably
when his attention was called to errors in small words, he corrected
his errors. His comprehension was excellent. He was interested in
knowing the meaning and application of each new word. His errors
suggested bad habits that could be traced to defective vision and
that had not been stamped out by individual instruction which the
boy needed. His failure in discrimination was due to carelessness
and inattention rather than to any inability to discriminate the
forms of letters and words. There was no suspicion of any cerebral
injury to the visual memorial area. At the end of his teaching
period he read accurately though slowly. The mistakes that he
made were usually at the end of the lesson when he was fatigued
On December 4 Bert had an audito-vocal attention span of 9, 10 on
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS 199
three repetitions, showing good trainability. This was an increase
of 1 over his performance in May 1929. His reverse span was now
definitely 5.
The diagnosis in this case as far as his reading difficulty is concerned is that it is due to defective vision, a secondary factor being
bad reading habits. He showed no intellectual deficiency of any sort.
His specific talent is in the field of the abstract rather than the
concrete. He is of the scholarly type. The only complicating factor
in the situation is fatigue. With continued individual instruction
such as the boy fortunately may obtain in his own home, he will
completely master his bad reading habits.
Della
Delia, age nine years, nine months, was brought to the Psychological Clinic because of difficulty with reading. She was examined
by Dr. Miles Murphy December 12, 1929. The home background
in this case as in the case of Bert is excellent. Her father is an
attorney, a graduate of this University, and formerly an instructor
in one of its schools.
Her I.Q. was 138 which places her superior to 99 percent of
ten year old children in the fifth grade of the public schools of
Philadelphia. Her attention span is, audito-vocal, 9, visual 9,
reverse 5 which correlates with her I.Q. The diagnosis was normal
mentality, general competency that of a group of 5 percent superior
to 95 percent. She was referred to the Clinic Teaching Department
for diagnostic teaching in order to determine the cause for her
retardation in reading.
Delia received twelve hours of clinic teaching. At her first
appearance she seemed excited, a bit apprehensive. At times she
manifested a quickened breathing, almost a gasping for breath.
In her reading the usual bad habits of the non-reader were
discovered. She guessed blindly when she did not know words
and put in and left out words according to her idea of what the meaning required. She failed to discriminate one group of letters from
another of similar character. She displayed no failure to discriminate between letter and letter, but she was unable to carry the
image of a word after being directed to observe it on a printed page
long enough to be able to transcribe it on the board. Her spelling
Was all done phonetically and would have been good enough if
the mother tongue were spelled phonetically. She spelled ache-ake,
afraid-afrade, already-alredy, cheese-chese, journey-journay, legend200 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
legand. Evidently she spelled as she pronounced. She sounded
out for herself the words University and Pennsylvania, syllable by
syllable and made the necessary synthesis, pronouncing the words,
merely misplacing the accent. When asked to spell the word
Pennsylvania on the board, she did it, merely substituting i for y
and y for i. Her auditory imagery is excellent. She met the word
ground in the text, failed to recognize it by sight, spelled it out and
pronounced it. The indications were therefore for a method of
teaching that was primarily audito-kinaesthetic. By strenuous
drill method, her bad reading habits were gradually stamped out.
By resorting to oral instead of silent reading and insistence on the
use of voco-motor imagery, Delia advanced to the third reader.
She showed excellent comprehension of the content, formed excellent sentences, using the new words she had learned, and displayed a competency in this direction that was distinctly superior.
Her failure to learn to read by the visual method is readily
explained. Her visual imagery of letters is correct but of a larger
conformation like words is defective. Her imagery for words is not
only incorrect but lacking in retentivity as tested by immediate
recall. To compensate for this however, she has excellent kinaesthetic and auditory imagery and excellent retentivity in these
fields. Her progress in twelve periods of clinic teaching was so marked
that there was no hesitancy in making a favorable prognosis in her
case provided that (1) she do oral instead of silent reading and
(2) that her auditory and kinaesthetic imagery be exploited in the
learning process. When discharged from the Clinic Teaching
Department she read new material from the fourth reader accurately
though slowly, and with excellent expression.
Delia's difficulty is due to one cause and one only?a deficit in
visual memory for words. She is a clear cut case of congenital
dyslexia due probably to functional variation in the cerebral
mechanism for language. Interestingly enough she is left-handed.
Her case is similar to that of William, case #4, but in Delia's case
there were no other contributing factors except the nervousness
induced by an eager desire to overcome her difficulty and succeed
in this task as she was succeeding in all others. Delia is a strong
personality and shows a good deal of initiative and qualities of
leadership among playmates of her own age. She has artistic and
dramatic ability and intellectually she can function at a much
higher level than the grade in which she is in school now that the
barrier to academic progress has been removed.
