Two Cases of Probable Post-Encephalitis
========================================

CASE STUDIES
Never perhaps in so short a time has a disease received so much
attention as has epidemic encephalitis since its rediscovery in modern
times a little more than a decade ago. A recent report on the study
of this condition contains a bibliography of more than four thousand titles. Most of this work, of course, is written from the medical point of view.
So obscure in its initial attack, so readily masked by other
more common diseases in conjunction with which it seems at times
to occur, so multiform in its subsequent symptoms which simulate
almost any disease of the nervous system, this disease is a matter of
serious concern to both physician and clinical psychologist. Relatively a very small amount of the literature 011 this subject is devoted
to the psychological aspect of the disease. Recently in the Psychological Clinic I examined and had an opportunity to observe two
boys whose cases are of interest in this connection. This is particularly so since in the one case the diagnosis of the initial attack of
encephalitis was only probable since it occurred in conjunction with
another condition. In the other case the initial attack was never
diagnosed at all because the parents did not consider the boy ill
enough to require medical attention. I believe both these boys were
at the time of their examination suffering from the after effects of
epidemic encephalitis, and moreover, that more children are suffering from the sequela} of this disease than is commonly realized.
Because the disease is comparatively new, the differential diagnosis
extremely difficult and the initial attack often very mild in nature,
the medical history in a given case is not always accurate.
The first boy, whom we shall call John, was seven years old.
He was brought by his father to the Psychological Clinic because
of retardation in school. John had spent two terms in kindergarten
and had just been promoted to the First Grade a few days before his
coming to the Clinic. His parents and his former teacher were very
doubtful of the probability of John's progress in the First Grade.
There were three other boys in the family, all of them, according
to the report, of superior ability. John's general retardation was
expressed by the father when he said that a younger brother four
years of age was superior to John in many ways and already knew
more letters of the alphabet although he had never been taught.
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
John's birth was normal. He was walking and talking and
had become clean by two years of age. When four years old he
had an attack of acidosis which the physician thought might be
"sleeping sickness." The child slept for three days, awaking at
intervals for only a few minutes. During this period he ran a very
high fever. When John recovered from this illness he had to learn
to walk all over again. He has been much retarded since then, but
during the last six months the parents believe they notice some improvement. He is stubborn and disobedient, very difficult to control, and does not pay much attention to commands. During the
examination he was highly distractible, a condition of which his
parents complain in trying to teach him. His attention drifted
from one object in the room to another, and only with difficulty was
it brought back to the problem at hand. He fidgeted around in the
chair continuously and asked irrelevant questions. In looking
closely at anything he turned his head to one side as if he had difficulty in coordinating his eyes. His head was asymmetrical, the
left side being more fully developed than the right. His general
reactions were infantile, and his speech still shows some infantile
mutilation. John's behavior at home and the difficulty experienced
in controlling him as described by the father, and his lack of concentration and persistence in the psychological examination are of
course typical of post-encephalitis.
The results of the examination indicate very inferior competency. John's audito-vocal memory span was three which is very
poor in a seven-year-old; he was unable to read numbers for the
visual span and he did not comprehend the reverse. His Intelligence Quotient on the Stanford-Binet was 67. He failed the Witmer Cylinder Test which is completed by fifty per cent of sixyear-olds.
On the basis of this examination John would very likely be diagnosed as feebleminded. We can only say that his behavior at the
present time is that of a feebleminded boy, and perhaps he is feebleminded. He requires educational treatment of a very specialized
kind, first to develop his control and concentration of attention,
and second to increase gradually the complexity of his intellectual
organization and his efficiency of production.
He should be re-examined in a year. The parents believe he
is improving. This can be determined by another examination. If
CASE STUDIES 167
he continues to improve and receives proper educational treatment he may be restored to normal competency.
The second boy, Henry, was ten years old at the time of his
examination. In his case epidemic encephalitis was never diagnosed
and the possibility of his having had the disease is only suggested
by the history. Henry walked and talked by the age of eighteen
months; he became clean at two years. At the age of four his
parents noticed a great change in the boy. For a time he seemed
entirely lifeless. As his mother expresses it, he would sit in a chair
"just like a coat that had been thrown there." After this period
Henry never seemed to be the same. Nocturnal enuresis began and
was not stopped until eight years of age. Henry has never gotten
along well in school. Since the second grade he has had private
tutoring in addition to his regular school work. At the present time
he is in the Fourth Grade, has Second Grade proficiency in reading
and spelling, Third Grade proficiency in arithmetic. His reactions are infantile and he prefers to play with children four or five
years old.
In the psychological examination Henry does somewhat better
than John. His audito-vocal memory span is five forward and three
reverse; his Intelligence Quotient is 89. On performance tests he
does quite well. His performance on the Dearborn formboard was
superior to that of eighty per cent of Fifth Grade boys. He is
generally more proficient in mechanical efforts, likes to play with
mechanical toys and enjoys manual training.
Henry is of interest in that he shows none of the behavior problems so frequently found in post-encephalitis. He is quiet, amenable, well behaved. The prognosis for successful adjustment at
a low intellectual level and a simple occupation is favorable. If
he had epidemic encephalitis he has escaped with rather more of his
native ability than is usually the case.
Miles Murphy
