The Training of Mental Hygienists
==================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1930, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XIX, No. 5 October, 1930

By Samuel W. Ferxberger
Professor of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania and Editor of the Journal
of Experimental Psychology.
The author of this article has no personal axe to grind. He is
an experimental psychologist of the laboratory type. lie has never
been interested in the practice of clinical psychology and it is doubt-
ful if he ever will be. He thinks that he can speak on this topic,
therefore, entirely without prejudice or bias. On the other hand,
be has been in a department of psychology for over 20 years in
which a clinic plays a primary part and he has been in contact with
clinical psychology and with clinical psychologists all of this time.
The present article grows out of a request from Dr. Bronson
Crothers to express my opinion with regard to mental hygiene in
connection with the White House Conference on Child Health and
Protection.
As one surveys the field of mental hygiene today, its practice
is in the hands of a group with curiously divergent training and
most divergent interests. One finds the practice largely in the
hands of physicians?especially the pediatricians and the psychia-
trists?to which are added a sprinkling of psychologists, sociologists
and educators. Each group approaches the problems and the prac-
tice of mental hygiene from a different point of view, and in many
1 The obvious medium for the publication of this article on the training
of mental hygienists being "MENTAL HYGIENE," Dr. Fernberger first
submitted it to that journal for publication. The medical director of the
National Committee for Mental Hygiene and the editor of "MENTAL
HYGIENE," being unable to publish the article in that journal, returned the
manuscript to Dr. Fernberger. The editor of the "PSYCHOLOGICAL
CLINIC" hastens to give this article publicity, believing that Dr. Fernberger,
who is a specialist in experimental psychology, has touched upon a tender spot
in the professional equipment and training of psychiatrists, psychologists and
educators who are at present engaged in the promotion and practice of mental
hygiene. Ligiitner Witmer, Editor.
138 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
cases, each criticizes the points of view of the other groups. The
result seems to be a conflict of cross purposes which, I believe, cannot
but be harmful to this highly valuable movement. And no one, I
think, would question the value of the mental hygiene movement.
It seems worth while, therefore, to analyze this new field of
endeavor and to discover the stuff out of which it is made. As a first
principle, we can say that mental hygiene is an art or technicology
and that it is not a science. Any art employs the results, the methods
and the points of view of several sciences or of several sciences and
other arts. Thus medicine is an art which takes contributions from
the sciences of anatomy, physiology, pharmacology, toxicology and
what not besides.
The next problem, then, is to determine the minimum list of
sciences and arts necessary for the adequate accomplishment of men-
tal hygiene. On this question there will, undoubtedly, be differ-
ences of opinion. It is doubtful if this minimum list would fail to
include the following: medicine, psychology, sociology and edu-
cation. Undoubtedly some individuals would extend the list. It
is because these four sciences and arts do contribute and must con-
tribute to mental hygiene, which would seem to be the reason why
individuals with a background of any of these four systematic fields
are to be found in the movement.
But it would seem that one of the difficulties with mental
hygiene up to the present time is that most workers have had ade-
quate training in only one of these disciplines and that this train-
ing has given a one-sided emphasis to their work. Hence the physi-
cian has emphasized the medical aspects without an adequate knowl-
edge of mental and behaviorial processes, normal or abnormal. The
psychiatrist has emphasized the abnormal aspects. And neither have
the background of education or sociology. And this last is also
true of the psychologist and he is furthermore lacking in the medical
approach. The sociologist and the educator do not know enough
each of the material of the other nor that of the medical man or the
psychologist. Here, it seems to me, is the basis of conflict between
the groups, a conflict of opinion, of fact and also of point of view.
Another difficulty is the determination of the distinction be-
tween normal and abnormal. I think that I can illustrate this point
with a personal incident. Recently, while attending a psychiatric
clinic of Dr. Charles W. Burr at the University of Pennsylvania,
he remarked to me: "One trouble with psychiatry is due to you
psychologists. If you would only define the normal for us,
TRAINING OF MENTAL IIYGIENISTS 139
our job would be easy." Whereupon I told him that I was quite
willing to define the normal which I did in the following terms:
"A normal individual is one in whom you, Dr. Burr, are not pro-
fessionally interested as a psychiatrist." But this much we can
say: the normal is not to be conceived as an average individual
(I'homme may en of Quetelet) but must be conceived as a range show-
ing great individual variability within itself. And the abnormal
must be conceived as anything falling outside that range. It is
my belief that the limits of this range must always have a sociological
definition. For example, take the case of feeblemindedness. The
definition of this varies from time to time and from place to place,
hut it is always determined by whether or not the individual can
get along or make a living in his community. So an individual
might well be feebleminded in an industrial city but not feeble-
minded on a farm ten miles away. And similarly, an individual
may be a subject for the mental hygienist in the same industrial
city and not on the farm ten miles away.
But the mental hygiene movement is capable of further analy-
sis and the result of this shows that it involves at least three types
of individuals necessary for its complete formulation. These types
may be defined as follows:
1. Individuals interested in the diagnosing of normal and of
deviated individuals, who are also able to make recommendations
in those cases of deviation that may be saved for return to normal.
(Diagnostic)
2. Individuals interested in the training of deviated individ-
uals to return to normal. (Corrective)
3. Individuals interested in developing methods of education
and in disseminating knowledge which will anticipate deviation.
(Preventive )
All three of these types of workers are necessary for the com-
plete realization of the mental hygiene movement. All of them
must have fundamental training in all four of the contributing
sciences and arts;?medicine, psychology, sociology, and education.
Their fundamental training, however, must vary in emphasis for
the three different types of job. Just what proportions of each is
ideal must be eventually determined empirically. But it seems pos-
sible to indicate apriori and in general what some of these relations
may be. One thing is certain, all three groups of workers must
have enough background of sociology to guarantee a sociological ap-
proach whether they be diagnostician, corrector or disseminator. In
140 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
any phase of mental hygiene the sociological aspects must never be
lost. I am therefore assuming the sociological background for all
three groups.
For the diagnostician, the emphasis must be on the medical
and psychological aspects in relatively equal proportions and with
less emphasis on educational training. I do not conceive that this
training in medicine and psychology should be so complete that it
would lead to the medical degree nor make the individual competent
in all fields of psychology. It should be training in the points of
view, the methods of these two disciplines with special training in
those fields of medicine and psychology which have a bearing on the
work at hand.
For the corrector, the emphasis must be on education with par-
ticular regard to teaching in specialized education (not only the
training of the mentally deficient but training in corrective speech,
corrective motor control, the simpler industrial operations and what
not besides). But this individual, in order to give an intelligent re-
port back to the diagnostician, must have sufficient background of
medicine and psychology to make valid judgments in these fields.
For the disseminator, who will formulate and spread knowledge
to anticipate deviation, the essential qualification is educational, both
in training and in temperament. He must have background enough
to understand and interpret and evaluate the findings of medicine
and psychology and special education but I do not conceive of him
as an individual whose special duty is to determine the facts.
One must have, therefore, coordination between these three
different groups. The cooperation necessary between the diagnos-
tician and the corrector obviously must be in both directions for
efficient service. And the attitude of the diagnosticians and of the
special trainers should always be that of the research worker, al-
ways striving to determine new facts and new methods. The dis-
seminator, on the other hand, must have a much more philosophical
attitude of collecting, coordinating, evaluating and expressing the re-
sults handed to him by the other two groups. His research will con-
sist largely in the determination of better methods of expressing and
of disseminating his material.
It may be that there are some individuals who are already ade-
quately trained in the diversity of disciplines analyzed above and
who therefore approach the ideal of one or another of these types.
If so, the mental hygiene movement is in so far fortunate. But
certainly there are many individuals at present occupied with men-
TRAINING OF MENTAL HYGIENISTS 141
tal hygiene who are lacking in parts of this essential training. And
I know of few fields of human endeavor where success so depends
on adequate personnel.
What groups today seem most nearly to approach the ideals
for these three kinds of job in the matter of training? The con-
sideration of this point is of a certain importance inasmuch as it may
indicate on what existing groups it might be most efficient to build.
The clinical psychologist of today seems most nearly to approach
the ideal for the diagnostician with regard to training. (And here
I shall be accused of bias by some). Let me hasten to add that by
"clinical psychologist" I do not mean the "mental tester" but rather
those clinical psychologists who have maintained a true clinical and
analytically qualitative attitude toward the problem. And they are
pathetically few in number. But this group have a sociological ap-
proach with the fundamental training in normal and abnormal
mental processes and behavior and with a background, at least,
of medicine. My basis for the choice of the clinical psychologist as
approaching the ideal diagnostician rather than the physician, is
because it is my experience that the clinical psychologist most fre-
quently has a better medical background than the physician has a
background of psychology.
The special class teacher most nearly approaches the ideal for
the corrective trainer. But the usual special class teacher today does
not have the sociological approach nor the fundamental knowledge of
either medicine or psychology necessary for ultimate success.
For the disseminator, one needs the outstanding teacher?one
who by appearance and temperament, by a knowledge of the meth-
ods of education and experience with these methods, can teach
anything of which he has specialists knowledge. He exists, here and
there in the community, and his training must consist in the special
sociological, medical and psychological knowledge which he must dis-
seminate.
Summary
1. The plural?mental hygienists?in the title was used con-
sciously. By this we meant to express the idea that the mental
hygiene movement, for complete realization, must have at least
three sorts of individuals: (a) diagnosticians, whose duty is to
diagnose normal and deviated subjects and to suggest the plan of
rehabilitation for the deviates; (b) corrective rehabilitators, who
will carry through this training and (c) disseminators, who will
142 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
spread the knowledge of mental hygiene in an attempt to anticipate
deviation.
2. Mental hygiene is conceived as an art or technicology and
not a science and, as in the case of every art, it is dependent upon
the coordination of materials, methods and points of view of several
other arts and sciences. The minimum list of these fundamental
disciplines for mental hygiene are medicine, psychology, sociology
and education.
3. Although all three types of persons, defined in section 1
above, must have training in all of the fundamental sciences and
arts, the relative emphasis will be different for the different groups.
All three groups must have a sociological approach. Besides this
Group 1, the diagnosticians, should have an emphasis in training in
medicine and psychology with less of education. Group 2, the cor-
rective rehabilitators, must have an emphasis on education with
somewhat less emphasis on medicine and psychology. And Group
3, the disseminators, must emphasize education in their training with
enough medicine and psychology to be able to evaluate and clearly
express the findings of the other two groups.
4. The author fails to find, at present, any existing group
(there may be individuals of course)?physicians, pediatricians,
psychiatrists, psychologists, sociologists or educators?who have this
fundamental training in all of the necessary sciences and arts.
