Triplets
=========

By Anna Louise Butts, M.A.
Supervisor of Mental Examinations, Division of Special Education,
Philadelphia Public Schools.
The enrollment of a set of triplets in one of the Philadelphia
Public Schools in the fall of 1929 was looked upon as such an unusual
occurrence that the newspapers featured the event as "news." Keporters besieged both the home and school, with the result that the
triplets found themselves in headlines, with their pictures and history
on the front pages. In the school itself they received due recognition. Mere twins were ignored. Teachers journeyed from their
several class-rooms to gaze upon "the triplets." Little children
cried to be placed in the same room as "the triplets." The triplets themselves were sent as one unit throughout the building?presumably on errands but actually for display purposes?quite evidently enjoying their notoriety.
It so happened that a psychologist from the Division of Special
Education was in the school at the time, testing in connection with an
ability group experiment. It was her duty to make a mental
examination of each child entering the first grade, for the purpose of
dividing the entire class into ability groups, which happened to be
four in number. The triplets, therefore, came to her attention as
candidates for examination and placement. The sentimental reaction of the parents and the school at this time was that these
children be allowed to remain together, regardless of the results
of examination. The children themselves, having always been together, were at first hopelessly lost when separated even for a short
time. Gradually, however they emerged from the state of being a
single unit into three separate individuals. One began to hear talk
not of "the triplets," but of the bright one, the dull one and the
middle one; or of the oldest and the youngest. The examiner meanwhile bided her time, waiting so as to allow the classroom to develop individual characteristics, as the home had not endeavored to
do.
Finally, late in October, when the children had become individual personalities and ranked at three distinct points on an ability
scale in their common classroom, they were given a mental examination all on the same day, when they were six years and nine months
of age. The following chart aims to give a comparative analysis
of the results of examination:
TRIPLETS 267
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
Sally Irene Mary
Appearance Red hair?gol- Dark hair?dark Irene and Mary
den brown eyes brown eyes look alike but are
not identical.
Health Good?Robust Good Handicapped. Has
Energetic Average energy been sickly. Had
foot paralysis when
younger; gait still
unsteady. Less energy.
Personality Pleasant Pleasant Pleasant
Alert Alert Alert
Interested Interested Interested
Co-operative Co-operativo Co-operative
Confident Irene lias the de- Lacks confidence
sirable qualities of
Self-assured Sally in lesser de- Feeling of inferigree. Not the as- ority
surance and agSelf-reliant gression of Sally Dependent
nor the dependence
Aggressive of Mary. More pli- Submissive
able than Sally;
Poised?calm less enthusiastic Excitable; enthusithan either. Steady, astic to point of
calm and depend- losing balance.
able.
Steady and de- Erratic ? unstable,
pendable From the heights
to the depths.
Efficient Inefficient. Wastes
time and energy.
Manner mature Manner babyish.
A leader Of necessity both a A follower
leader and a follower. Runs a middle course. Held
down by Sally;
brought out by
Mary
Response Quick and to the Quick and to the Generally quick in
point. Good. point. Good. coming, but slows
up. Often irrelevant
? off the point.
Very talkative.
Much detail, but
268 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
Comprehension
Imagery
Attention
Language
Control of
Ability
Memory Spans
Sally Irene Mary
rather vague on
the whole. Doesn't
stand up well "under lire."
Good Good Rather poor in general, though in specific instances good.
Good Fair Poor
Habits good Fair Concentration and
distribution poor.
Hard to sustain.
Distractible. Plays
out.
Use good Use good Use good
Suggests better
ability than she
has. Very talkative.
Good Good Poor
5-6-2 5-6-2 5-6-0
Had to be Had to be Could not compretaught to re- taught to re- hend reversing digverse digits verse digits its after teaching.
BINET SIMON TEST
4 year level
5 year level
6 year level
7 year level
Fingers:
Pictures:
Differences:
Sally Irene Mary
Passed all Passed all Failed to copy
square?defect in
both imagery and
muscular control.
Passed all Passed all Passed all
Passed all Passed all Failed to give
omissions ? detected none.
Passed Passed Failed?counted.
Passed Passed Passed
Good descrip- Good description Good description
tion
Passed Failed Failed
Fly?Butterfly
Wood?Glass
TRIPLETS 269
BINET SIMON TEST
Diamond:
8 year level
Sally Irene Mary
Failed?drew a Failed?figure not Failed?refused to
quadrangle, but a quadrangle attempt,
not diamond
Passed all com- Failed all Failed all.
prehension questions
Vocabulary? Vocabulary?5 Vocabulary?5
6*4 words words words
gown gown gown
tap envelope envelope
puddle health rule
envelope eyelash health
rule curse curse
health
pork (%)
Basal Age
Mental Age
I.Q.
6 years 6 years 3 years
7 years 6 yrs. 6 mos. 5 yrs. 9 mos.
103.8 98.8 85.2
PERFORMANCE TESTS
Witmer Formboard
(Time Score)
min. sec.
Witmer Cylinders
(Time Score)
min. sec.
Healy A
10 second exposure
(Time Score)
min. sec.
Comprehension
Bate of Discharge
Learning
Sally Irene Mary
53"?48"?30" 1'41"?33"?27" 2'26"?2'25"?
4'42"
F?3/30" 4'21"?1'36"? F?F?3'30"
?1/29" V35"
(6 errors)
F?15"?6" 1/8"?15"?8" F?F?F
(1 min.)
Fair Good Poor
Good Fair Slow
Good Good Po?r
Examiner's 2 plus
Rating
(3 point scale)
270 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
A more general personality study follows:
These three little girls, Sally, Irene and Mary, are of Jewish
parentage; the father is of Austrian birth and the mother native
to the United States. These are intelligent, well-to-do middle class
people, who maintain a pleasant, comfortable home and show interest in the welfare of their children. Their attitude is sensible
and co-operative. The only other child is a daughter, already in
High School.
The triplets are markedly dissimilar. They did not enter
school until six and a half years of age because Mary has always
been a sickly child; some form of paralysis prevented her walking as
early as the others, and her gait is still unsteady though she gets
about all right. At the present time she is the least energetic of
the three; the other two are healthy children, of whom Sally is the
more robust.
In appearance also these children are not alike. Irene and
Mary greatly resemble each other with their dark hair and dark
brown eyes; but Sally, with her bright red hair and golden brown
eyes, is quite different. She is also a child of heavier stature and
not such fine facial features. Her excess energy and healthful
exuberance, in addition to her appearance, make her by far the most
colorful child of the three. Sally sparkles and the other two reflect
her brilliance.
It is difficult to consider one of these children without comparing her with the others. This comparison, perhaps, makes one overestimate Sally's ability. She is without question the leader and the
one who takes the initiative, mothering the other two, particularly
Mary. Sally is a child of confidence and self-assurance. She is
able to do things not only for herself but also for others. She
is aggressive, in a thoroughly pleasant and helpful fashion. She
has a great deal of poise, going at things in a calm, matter of fact
way. She is interested and alert, but always well balanced. Her
manner is that of an older child. She is quite dependable, showing
a steady consistency in her work. So far as mental equipment is
concerned, Sally does not test much above her own age level. Her
response is always quick, to the point and more than adequate; but
she shows no signs of unusual mental complexity. It is Sally's
efficient use of her ability, her self reliant manner and her charm of
personality that are her chief assets and make her outstanding in
the classroom.
TRIPLETS 271
"Where Sally leads, Mary tries to follow, though she can not
always reach the mark. Mentally as well as physically, Mary is the
weakest. She is slower in her response. She is not so quick to grasp
a new idea. She cannot think out a problem for herself so well.
She is not quite so well informed and cannot accomplish quite so
much. The child's model is her sister Sally, and she realizes that
she cannot keep up with her. Sally apparently tries to help her
along, but Irene chides her with being "dumb as a rock.'T The
result is that Mary has a very definite feeling of inferiority. She is
at present very anxious to keep pace with the others and tries hard,
but she is likely to give up in time, because she is clever enough
to realize that she cannot do so well. Every now and then Mary
appealed to the examiner with some such remark as "I'm not so
dumb, am I ?'' Clearly she is on the defensive, and she should be
encouraged as much as possible in order to give her more confidence.
Just now she hesitates to do many things because she is afraid of
making a mistake. Unlike many children who feel inferior, Mary
is interested and enthusiastic. She has a force and a desire within
her which urge her on. She has discrimination enough to realize
her own limitations, and when she is within her own powers she
gives quite good response; in the face of difficult or unfamiliar
material, however, Mary is very dependent and helpless. She seeks
constant reassurance, without which she cannot go on. A further
difficulty of Mary's is that her attention is so poor; she neither concentrates nor distributes it well. She is easily distracted and cannot
sustain her attention for long, because of fatigue. This attention
defect of course interferes with learning. Furthermore, Mary is
an excitable child, emotionally unstable. She becomes so enthusiastic over some trivial thing that she loses her balance. All this
makes for inefficiency and waste of time and energy; what limited
ability she possesses is not well controlled nor co-ordinated. While
Mary is inferior to her sisters and does not meet her own age standards, she is what can be called dull normal. Her trouble appears
to be more physical and nervous than mental, more functional than
organic. A casual observer, on meeting Mary, might consider her
quite bright because she has a gift for language which enables her
to talk well. She talks too glibly, however, without much thought
behind it, often aside from the point in question. When it comes
to a test, Mary's information is vague and her talk merely words.
Irene is the proverbial "middle child." She treads a middle
272 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
path. She has neither the confidence and assurance of Sally nor
the dependence of Mary; she lacks Sally's color and Mary's enthusiasm ; but she is a child of ordinary mental ability, responsive,
alert and confident to a reasonable degree. She is quite capable of
doing things for herself. She is steady and dependable. Yet she
is all this in a less striking and forcible way and in less degree than
in the case of Sally. The difference between Irene and Sally is more
one of energy and type of personality; in mental ability they are
quite similarly equipped. Between Irene and Mary the difference
is not so much in type of personality as it is in actual mental equipment and ability to use it.
"Why these children, born of the same parents at the same time
and reared in the same environment, are so different in physical,
mental and personality endowment, is an interesting question; but
not one for the public schools to answer. The problem of dealing
with these children is, however, a function of the school. Aside
from sentimental considerations, for the best development of these
children, it would be wise to separate them. Sally will not suffer
either way. Irene would stand a better chance of not being overshadowed by Sally. Mary would not have the unpleasant experience
of seeing her sisters surpass her; she might miss Sally's motherly
care for a while, but she would learn to depend more upon herself;
with a group of duller children she would have more chance to
excel.
For both emotional and educational reasons, therefore, it appeared best to the examiner to separate the three children. The
problem of school organization did not have to be faced since four
distinct groups were available. Of these four groups the lowest
was discarded because it was composed largely of definitely feebleminded children. In the next higher group Mary would meet her
intellectual peers. Sally, while not a child of superior mentality
when judged on an absolute scale, could easily function in the highest group. In this same group could be found children of no better
mental equipment than Irene; but in order to do nothing which
would suggest favoritism to Mary and at the same time to remove
the shadow of Sally's superiority, it was thought best that Irene
go into the middle group. This placement was, accordingly, suggested to the parents who thoroughly agreed with the theory of it.
After a day of consideration and discussion, their sentimental reTRIPLETS 273
actions were outweighed by a realization of the educational advantages of separation.
Sally, Irene and Mary were consequently separated and placed
in ability groups in the order named. Sooner or later separation
would have been inevitable, with attendant heartaches and possible
resentment. As it is, three little girls are working, each in a fairly
homogeneous group; and three little girls, each successful in her own
group, think that the only reason for their separation is the great
desire of each first grade teacher to have a triplet in her class.
