Three Behavior Problems
========================
 
By Arthur Phillips, Clinic Teacher
The Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania
Within the year three children who present a similar behavior
problem at three stages of development have been examined in the
Psychological Clinic by Dr. Miles Murphy. One is a boy; the other
two are girls. The boy, Richard, was three years old at the time he
was examined in July, 1929. The second, Marjorie, was nine years
and one month old on October 1, 1929. The third, Ellen, was
fifteen years old in April, 1929. The diagnosis in all three cases
was deferred until after a period of clinic teaching. Richard was
brought to the Clinic because of highly negativistic behavior and
lack of speech; Marjorie, because of fears, retardation and speech,
and Helen, for the same reasons as Marjorie. The symptom com-
plex of the three has these common features: fear, retardation,
speech. The cases are interesting (1) because they represent various
stages of development of a single type of behavior due to insufficient
or misguided home training; (2) because of retardation in mental
growth as a resultant of such behavior and (3) because they are all
speech cases although differing in the manifestations of their speech
behavior. Richard is a case of negativism in speech. He refused
to talk. Marjorie is a case of infantile mutilation plus a number of
peculiar speech mannerisms, while Ellen stammers and stutters.
In all three cases fear plays a part as the outcome of hysterical or-
ganisms. They might be studied from the standpoint of fear and
the consequent retardation mentally and educationally. A more or
less detailed study of each of them separately will bring out their
likenesses and differences.
Richard
Richard is the first of two children of an average American
family. The second child is a daughter of eighteen months. Neither
of the parents may be described as intellectual. When the parents
brought the child to the Clinic the father's attitude was described
by the examiner as something akin to admiration. He narrated
with some gusto the temper tantrums of his son, his defiance of
teaching, his refusal to talk, his marked non-conformity of behavior.
He was not without concern for the welfare of his child, else he
would not have brought him to the Clinic nor did he fail to realize
84 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
that Richard was a real problem both in himself and because he
was teaching the same type of behavior to his sister. But his con-
cern was colored by admiration for his unusual child. He appeared
to enjoy the fact that the boy's behavior gave some prominence to
the family in the community. The mother shared the father's ad-
miration for the child, but her point of view was slightly different.
The child was her problem from morning to night. She was ex-
hausted by her efforts to control the recalcitrant boy, albeit they
were misdirected. She was at her wits' end. She wanted expert
advice as to how to manage him.
Richard's life history of three years is briefly summed up: he
walked at thirteen months, was clean at two years and a half. He
does not talk yet; he has never been to school. His food habits
are good. What bulks largest in the history is the behavior aspect.
His parents describe him as wild; he does not obey. He wanders
away from home?has done so ever since he was able to walk. Now
that he is three his temper tantrums have grown worse. "When
Richard is cross," says his father, "he throws himself down, kicks,
bangs his head 011 the floor, spits and throws any handy objects at
me or his mother."
On the day of his appearance at the clinic he manifested all
of his repertoire of behavior tricks. lie wandered about the Clinic
rooms aimlessly and when his will was interfered with, this youngster
of three, strong and active in body, dropped to the floor and became
a mass of wriggling, kicking, squirming flesh, a beautiful illustra-
tion of the results of the "laissez faire" method of child training.
Was he deaf? No, he understood the meaning of the commands
that he received. lie was defiant and only after firm treatment
was he reduced to anything that resembled docility. It was too much
for Richard to remain long in the guise of an obedient child. Sud-
denly he brushed from the table before him the pile of blocks with
which a color test was being given. "Good," said the examiner,
"that's fine. Now push the rest 011 the floor." At this the youngster
took a block in each hand and with good aim levelled a block at the
examiner's head. Down on the floor he went, screaming, kicking
the blocks in every direction. Under the persuasion of a still firmer
hand, Richard picked up the blocks, although he yelled lustily all
the while he was doing it. In every respect his parents' reports
were confirmed. He was now dirty and sticky and was taken to the
THREE BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS 85
wash room to be cleaned lip. He retreated to a corner and cried,
'' Mama, mama.'' This call with a decided '' no " some time previous
were the only two evidences of spoken language that Richard gave.
By this time he was exhausted, too much so even for play. He
climbed up in a large chair, put his head in his arm and was very
nearly asleep when it was time for him to appear before a class in
Psychology.
His behavior before the class was somewhat more submissive
though it was still negativistic but light was beginning to dawn 011
Richard's mind. He knew that he was not at home. At home he
was perfectly adjusted because all the elements in his environment
changed according to his desire but at the Clinic the environment
was constant in one direction, at least?110 amount of yelling,
screaming, kicking sufficed to alter insistence on obedience. There
was only one thing to do and that was for him to change. The
change was not marked nor prolonged but it was sufficient to indi-
cate that with a different method of procedure than that used at
home Richard's behavior might be made to conform to what was
normally expected of a boy of three.
On account of his lack of speech and negativistic behavior it
was impossible to proceed far in a psychological examination. He
matched colors but the sounds that he made in trying to name them
could not be interpreted sufficiently well to credit him with naming
colors. On the peg board he showed good coordination and after
having completed the task he methodically put the pegs away in
the box. With the Witmer Formboard he failed on first trial but
after instruction completed the task. His performance quantita-
tively was that of the inferior one per cent of six-year-old children.
Diagnosis was deferred and Richard was referred to the Clinic
Teaching Department to complete the diagnosis.
Richard received seven hours of clinic teaching. His arrival
on the first day was heralded by screaming and yelling, '' Da, da,
"bye, bye." He clutched his father's hand and refused to be
separated from him. This child who apparently showed no fear
when he wandered away from home to a considerable distance
showed every symptom of fear toward people who were strangers
to him. It was not the fear of being left alone; it was the fear of
the little tyrant that he would lose his crown.
For the first hour it was impossible to do anything with him
86 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
because of his constant yelling. At the end of the hour he was sitting
calmly in a little chair in the corner of the room with his hands
folded in his lap. Richard had capitulated for the time being.
On each successive visit the same type of behavior was displayed
but with diminishing intensity and decreasing duration. His nega-
tivism evaporated through constant friction or contact with an en-
vironment that knew no change. By the end of his period of clinic
teaching his behavior was normal.
The only problem that remained as far as this aspect of Rich-
ard's personality was concerned was a transfer of the type of
teaching he received in clinic to his own home. It was now a ques-
tion of training the parents?converting them from a state of hope-
less despair and impossibility to one of a willingness to attempt
sane, sensible methods of teaching this boy that his happiness con-
sisted in adjusting himself to the desires and convenience of those
with whom he is to live. Learning this lesson there is every reason
to predict that Richard can go to school and profit by instruction.
The psychological tests given to him after his behavior had
been reduced to something like normality showed that he was both
trainable and educable. The Witmer Formboard upon which he
failed at the first examination in the Clinic he performed in the
first trial in 154 seconds, which by Dr. Hallowell's standard makes
him superior to eighty per cent of boys his own age, and his time
on the second trial of 95 seconds gives him the same rating. His
auditory memory span was three, which is entirely adequate as
only forty per cent of boys his age have a memory span higher
than this. He was also taught to do the Witmer Cylinders, a test
standardized at the six-year level. There is every indication, there-
fore, that this child is of normal mentality and that intellectually
he is above the median of three-year-old children and should make
normal progress through the grades provided that the parents ad-
here rigidly to the common sense program of training laid down
by Dr. Murphy which involved two very simple principles: (1)
Speak to the child as if you expect him to obey. (2) Allow no single
act of disobedience to pass unnoticed or undisciplined until the old
bad habits are stamped out and new and better habits stamped in.
The parents were advised to bring Richard back to the Clinic
for examination for his speech defect by Dr. E. B. Twitmyer after
the lapse of a year or eighteen months.
THREE BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS 87
Marjorie
Marjorie was referred to the Psychological Clinic by the Neuro-
logical Clinic of the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania as
a case of mental retardation and with the request that her mental
status be determined. She was nine years of age when she was
brought to the Clinic on October 1, 1929. She is the youngest of
five children. Between her and the fourth child in the family there
is seven years difference in age. Between luer and her oldest sister
there is nineteen years difference. Marjorie is thus a babe in a
family of adults. The father is a clerk in a railroad office. He is
an intelligent, industrious and stable character, the kind that make
up the warp and woof of our middle class American people. The
family has a keen interest in education. One of the girls is a
library assistant, a second is a high school graduate and the third
is a sophomore in the high school. The mother is of a nervous type,
has a goiter and exhibits the signs of emotional instability found in
hyperthyroidism. The history records that when the family moved
from western Pennsylvania three years ago, the mother became
homesick and has remained so ever since. There is no discounting
the effect of homesickness upon the physical and especially nervous
condition of the one suffering from it. Three years of nostalgia
have resulted in a condition approaching melancholia. Her attitude
to her youngest child has been undoubtedly conditioned by her tem-
peramental weakness.
As for Marjorie, her very appearance, her entire bearing sug-
gests fear and apprehension. She has never played with children.
She is afraid to be out of the presence of some member of her family.
In the presence of strangers, she hangs her head, mouths her fingers
and withdraws at a slight approach toward her of one whom she
does not know. She is an infant of nine years, definitely retarded
in all her social contacts. At home she refuses to go to bed until
some member of the family goes with her. In a family of adults, this
has meant that Marjorie is often up until nearly midnight, losing
that restful sleep so needful for the physical well being of a child.
When the family finally reaches the conclusion that Marjorie should
go to bed earlier, they all go to bed at the same time. This single
fact is indicative of the way in which the child is being trained.
The mother is afraid to say a single cross word to her child. Mar-
jorie is also infantile in her speech. She has a peculiar habit of
88 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tacking a short e sound on the end of every letter and word. Besides,
she has some infantile mutilations. Ecliolalia is added. A question
asked her is most certain to be repeated.
Marjorie has never been to school. She has a fear of school.
She will remain only so long as some member of the family stays
with her; becomes hysterical when they withdraw and has to be
restrained by force. All that this nine year old girl had of formal
educational achievement was the ability to print a few simple words.
Three years have come and gone and the family have not been
able to leave her in school. She is pedagogically retarded, infantile
in speech and a bundle of nervous fears. It may seem hard to lay
these things at the door of the home or of the mother, but undoubted-
ly there is where the blame belongs. Marjorie represents at a sub-
sequent state of development, the type of behavior that we saw in
Richard. She undoubtedly rules the household of which she is a
member. All its arrangements even to retiring at night are adapted
to the whim and fancy of this child. She has learned how to keep
the control of the family situation in her own hands. She has
learned fear; she has been taught it and knows how to use it most
effectively for her own purposes.
In her first examination in the Clinic, the Intelligence Quotient
obtained was 75. To the examiner it seemed a conservative esti-
mate of the subject's intellectual level. She had had no school
training and failed on such tests as she probably would have passed
if she had been exposed to school life. Her demonstrated language
ability was limited. Her forward memory span for digits was five,
her reverse was two. She gave the reverse only after instruction
as to the meaning of reverse and of the process involved. No visual
span colild be obtained because she could not read numbers. Her
work on the Witmer Formboard while qualitatively good was quanti-
tatively only fair. With the Witmer Cylinders, a test standardized
at the six-year level, her approach was entirely trial and error.
The first trial was technically a failure?the performance of a six-
year-old child below the median. The only good feature that she
showed was her trainability. On second trial, she showed marked
improvement though her performance was scarcely that of a median
nine-year-old child.
Marjorie was referred to the Clinic Teaching Department for
further study. On her first visit, October 11, 1929, her mother ac-
companied her to the class room where she was to receive individual
TIIEEE BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS 89
instruction. While working at the board with one hand, the child
clung tenaciously with the other hand to her mother who was
seated close by her and who was not permitted to move one inch.
The hour became one of study not only of the child but of the
mother. Which exceeded the other in fear it would be hard to
estimate. Which was the more difficult to handle can readily be
stated. The Clinic Teacher was persuaded after the first hour that
if firmness were used this child would not throw herself into a
paroxysm but would yield slowly, reluctantly, and yet each time
with some positive gain. The experiment could not be tried on this
first occasion, not because the child could not be separated from the
mother, but because the mother could not be separated from the
child. She positively refused to withdraw from the room upon re-
quest for fear that her child might be thrown into nervous prostra-
tion.
We arranged for an older sister to bring her the next time. She
was an intelligent young woman who was ready to cooperate. She
withdrew from the Clinic room upon request. Marjorie did throw
herself into a fit. She stamped and clutched like an animal at bay.
She screamed and yelled. It took a half hour to quiet her but Mar-
jorie never repeated the performance to the same extent. Weeks
passed and each time Marjorie's behavior showed improvement until
finally she came smilingly, willingly into the Clinic room. It looked
on the surface as if her fear had been conquered but what had really
happened was that she had adopted the teacher into the family and
now she must hold on to the teacher as she held on to her parent.
Out of this too Marjorie emerged. It is not asserted that in the
brief period of three months Marjorie's behavior has become normal
but this much has been demonstrated, that Marjorie can become
adapted to a new situation and a new environment provided that
the proper methods are used, and that no serious injury to the child
could possibly result from exacting strict obedience.
During the twenty-four hours of clinic teaching, attention was
directed to the correction of her speech defect and to instruction in
the elements of arithmetic, reading and writing as well as to the
behavior problem which the child possessed. In all three directions
she has shown improvement. Her trainability has been demon-
strated both in the correction of infantile mutilation of speech and
in the progress which she has made in learning to spell and write.
The academic instruction proved to be good mental hygiene. When
90 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
her fears were dislodged she became obedient, cooperative and eager
to learn. She learned to recognize and to write the letters of the
alphabet and passed on to the formation of simple sentences with
comparative ease. Her greatest difficulty in spelling was caused
by her defective auditory imagery. She had difficulty in associating
the sounds of certain letters with their written form. This defect
was probably due to her poor articulation. As articulation improves,
it is to be expected that her auditory imagery may be more accurate.
Another evidence of her trainability that makes the prognosis
of her scholastic improvement favorable is the increase in her In-
telligence Quotient. On January the sixth, three months after her
first examination she received an I.Q. of 84. Her Basal Age had
advanced from six to seven. Her Mental Age showed an advance
of one year and three months. Equally significant if not more so is
the fact that her reverse memory span increased one point. At her
first examination she was not able to reverse two numbers until
after detailed instruction. She can now give three readily, a score
which rates her approximately above the lowest quintile of children
her age. Any diagnosis of her mental status must be tentative but
there is every indication that her retardation is of the type that is
rapidly curable provided that the attitude which has been developed
in Marjorie in the Clinic will carry over to her work in the school
room. Changes in her behavior have been so marked that the Clinic
Teaching Department recommended that she be sent to public
school. For this step, Marjorie also appears eager.
For her speech defect, Dr. E. B. Twitmyer, after an examina-
tion conducted March 14,1930, directed that she receive correctional
work by a student in Orthogenics B, a course in which clinical in-
struction and laboratory experience in speech work is offered to
students in psychology. Marjorie was assigned a teacher and is
making rapid progress toward a permanent cure.
Ellen
Ellen is an only child. A physician who had been treating her
for anemia referred her to Dr. Murphy because she refused to go
to school. This however was not a new complaint as we shall pres-
ently see. When Ellen appeared at the Clinic in April 1929, she
was fifteen years of age, prepossessing in appearance, well developed
physically, an attractive child. Her home background is good.
Her mother is a sensible woman, her father is a local politician?
THREE BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS 91
what is ordinarily called a ward manager, easy going, more con-
cerned with the smooth running of the local political machine than
with the welfare of his daughter of whom in an unintelligent way
he is exceedingly fond.
Back of Ellen's refusal to go to school lie her fears. She is
afraid of crowds; she is afraid to ride in trolley cars. When pressed
for a reason for these fears, she gives another fear?she fears that
she will faint. She has the whole thing visualized. She faints, the
crowd gathers, the ambulance comes to take her to the hospital, her
picture is in the paper. The odd thing is she has never fainted in
her life. Nevertheless because of this fear Ellen will not go into
crowds alone or with anyone else. When she needs a new dress,
her mother must go to the shops and send home a number from
which Ellen makes her selection. The extent to which this child is
able to carry out her imperious will was strikingly illustrated when
the time came for her to enter the communicants' class of her church
and prepare for Holy Communion. Ellen refused to attend the
class and her spiritual advisor had to come to the house to give her
instruction and when the day came for her first Communion, ar-
rangements had to be made for the church edifice to be opened in the
afternoon so that Ellen might receive the sacred rite in private at-
tended only by her mother.
For the same reason her education has suffered. She has at-
tended school approximately six months in nine years. The family
was not able to provide her with a regular tutor. A tutor was
however secured eacli time when the Board of Education became
insistent upon the child's receiving some form of instruction. This
tutor came one hour a week and not regularly. At her first appear-
ance in the Clinic, Ellen was judged to be of approximately average
intellectual competency. No detailed psychological study of her
was undertaken because of her excitability and her great appre-
hension. She did not allow her mother to go out of the room. She
was afraid of the examiner, suspicious of the entire procedure.
When she was asked to read, she showed adequate reading pro-
ficiency for her age but as soon as she became excited she stam-
mered and stuttered and flopped her hands at her side like a hen
flopping her wings. She had approximately 4 B competency in
arithmetic.
Ellen came to the Clinic for clinic teaching four times. Then
she refused to come any longer. The family did not possess an
92 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
automobile. Her aunt's automobile had to be called into service
but as this aunt lived at a great distance and was unable to be at
Ellen's service as continuously as her mother, and as Ellen refused
to ride on a trolley, her teaching as far as the Clinic was concerned
was at an end. Arrangements however were made for her clinic
teacher, a senior student in Dr. Witmer's class in Orthogenic Meth-
ods, to carry on the study and instruction of Ellen at her own home.
At this time it appeared wise that Dr. Murphy should have a
straight-forward talk with the young lady and went to her home
for this purpose. Ellen had been examined by a neurologist and
no signs of neurological involvement had been discovered. She was
too old now for the application of the "hot stove treatment" which
had been applied in the case of Richard and Marjorie so an attempt
was made to reason her out of her fears by pointing out how they
were depriving her of the normal life of a young girl and would
shut her out from many of the enjoyments of life as well as from
filling a useful place in the world. Such appeals to Ellen however
failed to register. It was then pointed out to her rather severely
that her condition was that of an overgrown baby and that the
chief handicap in her case was that she was too old to be treated
any longer like a baby and given that type of discipline that proved
effective with younger children. She was also informed that the
chief reason why she could not be cured was that she did not want
to be cured?that she liked baby treatment. At this, the young
miss jumped up, stamped her foot and ran upstairs calling out on
the way, "I would rather stay as I am than be cured by you." She
entered an upstairs room and she could be heard stamping and
scolding like a termagant for ten minutes. She had good use of her
faculties?there was no stammering. It was an outburst of temper
rather than a nervous fit. To whom was she storming but to her
father, the haven of refuge to which she always fled when tilings did
not go precisely her way. Ellen is infantile because her father
wants to keep his baby girl. Indeed he was so much disinterested
in the entire effort to change his baby into a normal girl of fifteen
that he never came downstairs to interview the psychologist.
Through May and June under the direction of the Psychological
Clinic orthogenic treatment was continued. Her teacher made week-
ly visits, giving her instruction in the elementary subjects of com-
mon school education, in an effort to overcome the pedagogical
retardation which was the result of Ellen's unique behavior. She
THREE BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS 93
made excellent progress and by the end of the college year had ob-
tained a sixth grade proficiency in grammar, geography, history,
arithmetic, and spelling.
Of more interest from the point of view of this article was the
attack made on her abnormal behavior. Her teacher wisely con-
cluded that before progress could be made she had to win Ellen's
confidence. She took her for a great many walks. At first Ellen
was reluctant to go, refusing because she was afraid, then, taking
a short walk or rather a short run, for during the whole way her
one idea seemed to be to get back home. Before leaving the house,
she insisted that the vestibule door be left open, that the front door
be left closed but unlocked and that mother sit at the front window
and wait for her return. Immediately upon her return, she looked
to see that all these arrangements had been carried out in detail,
and needless to say, they had been. Slowly this was modified, the
walks became longer and partook more of the nature of an agree-
able outing. The doors were allowed to be locked and Ellen took
with her her own key to admit herself upon her return. Visits were
made to the library where in selecting and returning books she for-
got her nervousness and became absorbed in things about her. A
short while after when visiting the optician, Ellen actually spoke
to the gentleman who was a stranger to her, a thing which up to this
time she had consistently refused to do. The child became more
normal in her reaction. She renewed acquaintance with her girl
friends, they visited her at her home and she even went to the home
of one of them.
The summer months, July and August, and September, brought
a great change to this young lady and the development which had
started under the patient guidance of her orthogenic teacher bore
fruit. The family spent the summer at a small seashore resort where
the colony was small and the places of amusement and entertainment
are all more or less concentrated. Life was simple, less complex
than in the great city, all of which made for Ellen's adjustment.
She made new friends among the girls and, mirabile dictu, among
the boys. She went bathing, rowing, riding, walking, and even at-
tended a dance. She attended movies with or without a companion
without any hestitation. She served at a women's lunch at the
Yacht Club. The old fears of fainting had gone.
Upon her return to the city in the fall, however, she refused
to go to school. She has not yet been on a trolley car. In every
94 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
other respect her conduct approaches that of a normal child. She
mingles in social activities with those of her own age. She never
stammers when speaking with someone whom she does not know or
who does not know that she stammers. She speaks on the telephone,
answers the door bell without reluctance, and there is every reason
to make a favorable prognosis in her case. Owing to Ellen's re-
fusal to return to the Psychological Clinic, it was impossible to
arrange for her examination by Dr. E. B. Twitmyer. Nor was she
in condition to undertake speech training, success in which, as Dr.
Twitmyer frequently points out, is so largely dependent on "the
will to be cured.''
It is not too much to say that the picture which the psychologist
drew of the activities and enjoyments normal to her own age which
she was missing bore fruit. The patient, tactful and intelligent
treatment of her teacher whom she came to regard as a close
friend and confidant can not be emphasized too strongly as a factor
in the progress made toward normal behavior.
To sum up, these three problem cases bring to our attention a
cause of retardation that is receiving in this clinic and elsewhere
increasing emphasis. Retardation may be due to physical causes?
poor health, mal-nutrition, glandular dystrophies, defects of vision
and audition. It may also be due to an inferior intellectual endow-
ment, deficiencies in discriminability, associability, in memory and
attention. Of such cases our clinics furnish abundant examples.
The third cause of retardation is that of defective social control. It
is not implied of course that these three types of causes of retarda-
tion are mutually exclusive and independent factors. All three may
be part of the picture in any clinic case, but there are cases in which
one or the other appears to be more dominantly etiological.
It is indubitable that the social factor lies behind the intellectual
retardation of Richard, Marjorie and Ellen. The prognosis in each
case is favorable or unfavorable just in the measure in which these
three children may be brought under social control.
A study of these three cases clinically throws forward the im-
portance of training in the early years of life. It is a psychological
commonplace that youth is impressionable. That quality is attri-
buted to the plasticity of the nervous tissue. As the child lives not
only under instruction but primarily by his own efforts at adjustment
and adaptation, he forms a more or less ordered system of habits.
In the pre-scliool child, apparently it takes very little to set this
THREE BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS 95
process of habit formation going in a definite direction. The earlier
such a tendency is set up in the child's organism, the longer it has
to run, the more strength it accumulates, the more difficult it is to
stamp it out. The genetic roots of habits reach back into early in-
fancy. The child of three or four has already undergone consider-
able development. He has been taught and has taught himself many
things. The persistence of such an early acquired habit was il-
lustrated in the case of Richard as well as by the increasing diffi-
culty of handling approximately the same problem in the case of
the older children.
The supposition upon which the treatment of these three cases
was based is that the present status was the result not of inborn tend-
encies, innate characteristics, but the result of habits established
and therefore, like all habits, amenable to control. In these three
cases this supposition was empirically verified. The familiar truth
was also forcibly illustrated?the longer the life history of a habit,
the greater the difficulty in modifying it.
