News and Comments
==================

The Sixth International Psychotechnical Conference is being
held in Barcelona, Spain, on April 23-27, 1930. Papers on fatigue,
011 selection tests, on tests for the study of personality, are included
among those to be presented at this conference. In addition there
will be an opportunity for short reports by members attending the
congress. A series of visits to educational institutions and to points
of interest in and around Barcelona has been arranged. Those de-
siring to attend the conference are asked to address the Secretary of
the Sixth International Psychotechnical Conference, Urgel, 187, In-
stituto de Orientacion Profesional, Barcelona, Spain.
The First International Congress on Mental Hygiene will be
held at "Washington from May 5 to 10, 1930. President Hoover has
accepted the Honorary Presidency of this Congress. Delegates are
expected from more than thirty countries. The American Psychi-
atric Association and the American Association for the Study of
the Feebleminded will hold their 1930 annual meetings in conjunc-
tion with the Congress. Attendance is open to all who have a serious
interest in mental hygiene. The program is designed to provide for
a maximum of discussion and a minimum of formal reading of
papers. Responsibility for the arrangements for the Congress have
been assumed by the members from the United States and Canada.
Full membership in the First International Congress is open to
individuals upon payment of $5.00. Full membership entitles a
member to receive all notices, announcements and publications of
the Congress, including the proceedings as and when published.
All correspondence should be addressed to the Administrative Office,
370 Seventh Avenue, New York City.
The fifty-seventh annual meeting of the National Conference of
Social Work and Associate Groups will take place in Boston, June
G to 14. The Conference began in 1874 as an organization for the
discussion of problems common to boards of state charities, but has
since grown into a general gathering of social forces with repre-
sentatives from fields concerning family case work, health, delin-
quency, mental hygiene, etc. Information on the Conference may be
secured from the Conference office, at 277 East Long Street, Co-
lumbus, Ohio.
