Program of the Annual Meeting of the National Vocational Guidance Association
==============================================================================

NEWS AND COMMENT

The Annual Meeting of the National Vocational Guidance Association is to be held at the Hotel Chalfonte, Atlantic City, New
Jersey, on February 20, 21 and 22, 1930. The complete program is
given below. The discussion of objective methods in vocational
guidance, to which the morning and afternoon sessions of Friday,
February 21, will be devoted, should be of special interest to workers
in the field of clinical psychology.
Of additional interest is the joint meeting with the Staff of the
Vineland Training School to be held at Vineland, New Jersey, on Saturday afternoon, February 22, at 2:30 p.m. Those attending the
meeting of the International Council for the Education of Exceptional Children have been invited to attend the Saturday afternoon
meeting at Vineland, and to make the tour of the Vineland Training
School which will be one of the features of the meeting. Following
the meeting supper will be served. Those who expect to attend this
meeting and to stay for supper are asked to communicate with the
undersigned, so that the Training School may be furnished with an
approximation of the number to be expected.
The cordial hospitality characteristic of the Vineland Training
School should help make this a memorable event.
Morris S. Viteles, University of Pennsylvania.
Chairman,?Program Committee, National Vocational Guidance
Association.
PROGRAM
Annual Meeting of the National Vocational Guidance Association
February 20, 21, 22, 1930
Hotel Chalfonte Atlantic City, New Jersey
Thursday Morning, February 20, 1930
Chairman: Arthur J. Jones, University of Pennsylvania
10:00 The Role of Guidance in Public Education
Richard D. Allen, Asst. Supt. of Schools, Providence, Rhode Island
10:30 Guidance, the Basis of Effective Vocational Education and Adjustment
Edwin A. Lee, Division of Vocational Education, University of California
11:00 The Social Significance of Individual Guidance
R. W. Bruere, J. C. Penney Foundation, New York City
11:30 Discussion: Susan J. Ginn, Boston Placement Bureau, Boston
292 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
12:30 Get-Together Luncheon
Chairman: H. D. Kitson, Teachers College, Columbia University
Speaker: R. G. Reynolds, Columbia University,'' Publicity for Guidance''
Discussion Leaders:
Emma Pritchard Cooley, Director of Vocational Guidance, New
Orleans Public Schools, New Orleans, Louisiana
Robert Hoppock, Public Schools, Rahway, New Jersey
Thursday Afternoon
2:15 Round Table Sessions
Section I.?How to Organize and Administer a Vocational Guidance
Department in a Public School System.
Chairman: Mary H. S. Hayes, Bureau of Vocational Adjustment, New
York City
Discussion Leaders:
Helen Dernbach, Vocational Guidance Bureau, South Bend, Indiana
Anne S. Davis, Director of Vocational Guidance, Chicago Public
Schools, Chicago, Illinois
O. Latham Hatcher, Southern Women's Educational Alliance, Richmond, Virginia
Emma Pritchard Cooley, Director of Vocational Guidance, New
Orleans Public Schools, New Orleans, Louisiana
Edward Rynearson, Director of Vocational Guidance, Pittsburgh
Public Schools, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Discussion
Adjournment at 5:00
Section II.?Vocational Guidance by Agencies Outside of the School
Chairman: C. C. Robinson, National Council, Y.M.C.A., New York City
Discussion Leaders:
L. A. Emerson, Central Y.M.C.A., New York City
Fred C. W. Parker, Secy., International Kiwanis, Chicago, Illinois
Frances Cummings, Educational Secy., National Federation of
Business and Professional Women's Clubs, New York City
George Fisher, Boy Scouts of America, New York City
Helen Fuller, Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor
Owen Pence, National Council, Y.M.C.A., New York City
Discussion
Adjournment at 5:00
Section III.?Vocational Guidance in the Continuation School
Chairman: Franklin J. Keller, East Side Continuation School, New
York City
Discussion Leaders:
Paul L. Cressman, State Department of Public Instruction, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania
George E. Hutclierson, Supervisor of Guidance, State Department
of Education, Albany, New York
Bertha Gallup Dailey, Vocational Counselor, Bronx Continuation
School, New York City
NEWS AND COMMENT 293
Anthony J. Goldberger, Professor of Vocational Education, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Carroll W. Robinson, Principal, Continuation School, Springfield,
Massachusetts
Discussion: J. Edward Mayman, Testing Counselor, East Side Continuation School, New York City
Adjournment at 5:00
Occupational Studies Section Meeting
Chairman: Barbara H. Wright, Board of Education, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Reports on:
"Education and the World's Work," David A. Robertson, American Council on Education
"Occupational Studies as Coordinated by the National Vocational
Guidance Committee on Coordination." Mary P. Corre, Cincinnati, Ohio.
'1 The Use of Occupational Information in Secondary Schools.''
Grayson Kefauver, Teachers College, Columbia University
Adjournment at 5:00
4:30 Informal Round Table Session: "Placement Problems"
Chairman: Edith D. Gwinn, Junior Employment Service, Philadelphia.
4:30 Informal Round Table Session on Vocational Guidance of College
Students
Joint Meeting with National Association of Placement and Personnel
Officers
Thursday Evening
7:45 Business Meeting
Presiding: Richard D. Allen, Providence, Rhode Island
Address: Daniel A. Pohling, President, J. C. Penney Foundation, New
York City
1. Secretary's Report
2. Treasurer's Report
3. Reports of Committees:
Committee on Revision of the Principles
Committee on Revision of the Constitution
Committee on Securing a Grant from a Foundation
Committee on Certification of Counsellors
Legislative Committee
Committee on Guidance in Rural Schools
Publicity Committee
Nominating Committee
Friday Morning, February 21, 1930
8:00 Breakfast Conference?"State Activities in Guidance"
Chairman: Harold L. Holbrook, Department of Public Instruction,
State of Pennsylvania
8:00 Breakfast Conference?Occupational Studies Section
Chairman: Barbara H. Wright, Minneapolis, Minnesota
294 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Objective Methods in Vocational Guidance
Chairman: John M. Brewer, Harvard University
9:30 Objective Methods in the Personal Interview in Vocational Guidance
B. V. Moore, Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State College
10:00 The Measurement of Interest in Vocational Guidance
Douglas Fryer, New York University
10:30 The Measurement of Vocational Qualifications
Clark Hull, Yale University
11:00 Validation of Guidance Procedures
L. J. O'Rourke, U. S. Civil Service Commission, Washington, D.C.
Adjournment at 11:45
12:30 Luncheon
Chairman: Meyer Bloomfield, New York City
Speaker: Max Hausmann, Switzerland,'1 Guidance Activities in Europe''
Friday Afternoon
2:15 Round Table Sessions
Section A.?Objective Methods in the Personal Interview in Guidance
Chairman: B. V. Moore, Pennsylvania State College
Discussion Leaders:
Mabelle B. Blake, Personnel Director, Smith College
"Objective Facts Needed in Preparing for Guidance Interviews ''
Esther A. Gaw, Dean of Women, Ohio State University
"Analysis of Interviews as a Method of Improving Them"
Gladys C. Schwesinger, School Psychologist, Friends School,
Brooklyn, New York
"Facts Revealed by the Vocabulary of the Interviewee."
Donald Snedden, Graduate School of Education, Harvard University
"Measuring Intelligence by Interviews"
Agnes B. Leahy, Girl Scouts of America, New York City
"A Method for Classifying and Recording Facts Obtained
from Interviews"
Discussion
Adjournment at 5:00
Section B.?The Measurement of Interest in Guidance
Chairman: Douglas Fryer, New York University
Discussion Leaders:
Edward K. Strong, Jr., Professor of Psychology, Stanford University
"Making Occupational Scoring Keys for Use with the Interests Inventory in Vocational Guidance"
Frank K. Shuttleworth, Graduate School, Yale University
"Various Experiments with the Inventory in Selecting Group
Interests''
Harry D. Kitson, Professor of Education, Teachers College, Columbia University
"A Rating Scale of Interests"
NEWS AND COMMENT 295
Kathryn McHale, Professor of Education, Gouclier College, Baltimore, Maryland
'' An Information Test of Interests''
A. J. Morrow, Brooklyn, New York
"An Inventory of Universal Interests"
Karl M. Cowdery, Registrar's Office, Stanford University, California
"The Interest Inventory in College Personnel Procedures"
Discussion
Adjournment at 5:00
Section C.?The Measurement of Vocational Qualifications
Chairman: Clark Hull, Yale University
Discussion Leaders:
Don H. Taylor, New York University
"The Abilities of Printers"
Roy N. Anderson, Columbia University
"The Status of Tests for the Measurement of Clerical Aptitude ''
John H. Donnelly, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
"The Significance of Industrial Tests in Vocational Selection"
Beatrice Candee, Vocational Service for Juniors, New York City
Discussion
"The Use of Tests in the Selection of Pupils for Rapid Advancement in Junior High Schools"
Adjournment at 5:00
Section D.?Validation of Guidance Procedures
Chairman: L. J. O 'Rourke, U. S. Civil Service Commission, Washington, D.C.
Discussion Leaders:
Mildred Lincoln, Munro Junior High School, Rochester, N.Y.
Joseph V. Hanna, New York University, New York City
Joseph Miller, Director of Guidance, Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania
George F. Meyers, Professor of Vocational Education and Guidance, University of Michigan
Helen H. Ringe, Vocational Service for Juniors, New York City
Discussion
Adjournment at 5:00
Friday Evening
7:00 Annual Dinner of the National Vocational Guidance Association
Speaker:
Saturday Morning, February 22, 1930
8:00 Breakfast Conference
"College Courses for Teachers in the Field of Vocational Guidance"
(Continuation of Harvard Conference)
Chairman: Frank M. Leavitt, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
9:30 Joint Meeting of Organizations Interested in Personnel and Vocational Guidance
Subject: "Industry's Stake in Guidance"
296 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Chairman: W. V. Bingham, Personnel Research Federation, New
York City
I.?Industrial Personnel Research as an Aid in Guidance at the College Level
"Success in College and in Business," Donald S. Bridgman, American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York City
Discussion led by: W. H. Cowley, Bureau of Educational Research,
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
Grace E. Monson, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
II.?Guidance in Earlier Years
"What Organized Labor Expects of Guidance," John Edelman,
Director of Research, American Federation of Full-Fashioned
Hosiery Workers, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Discussion led by: Dorothea de Schweinitz, Industrial Research Department, University of Pennsylvania
'' Guidance and Placement Today and Tomorrow,'' Howell Cheney,
Cheney Brothers, South Manchester, Connecticut
Discussion led by: L. S. Hawkins, Vice President, Rossman Company, New York City
12:30 Joint Luncheon with Other Organizations
Saturday Afternoon
Vocational Guidance of the Mentally Defective
Joint Meeting with the Staff of the Vineland Training School, to be
held at the Vineland Training School, Vineland, New Jersey
2:15 Tour of the Vineland Training School
3:15 Meeting
Chairman: E. A. Doll, Director of Research, Vineland Training School
1. The Significance of Vocational Training in the Guidance of Mentally
Defective Children
Speaker: Emily Burr, Vocational Adjustment Bureau for Girls,
New York City
Discussion led by: Gladys G. Ide, Department of Special Education,
Philadelphia Public Schools
2. The Social and Industrial Success of Subnormals After Training
Speaker: Dr. Charles Bernstein, Rome State School, Rome, New
York
Discussion led by: Dr. George L. Wallace, Superintendent, Wrentham
State School, Wrentham, New York
3. Social and Industrial Failure of the Untrained Feeble-Minded
Speaker: Clare Harrison Town, Children's Aid Society, Buffalo,
New York
Discussion led by: William J. Ellis, Commissioner of Institutions,
State of New Jersey
4. Clinical Problems in Vocational Guidance of the Mentally Defective
Speaker: Morris S. Viteles, Department of Psychology, University
of Pennsylvania
6:00 Supper served by The Vineland Training School
