The Status of Tests for the Measurement of Clerical Aptitude
=============================================================

By Roy N. Anderson
Associate in Guidance and Personnel, Teachers College, Columbia University
The past two decades have brought forth considerable activity
in the measurement or testing of a variety of supposed personal
traits and, from the results of these tests, predictions are being made
regarding the possible achievements of the individuals tested.
Among the proposed tests a considerable number have been
devised for the detection of "clerical aptitude". In combing the
literature over sixty articles on such tests have been found. The
length and content of the articles range from a few pages of general
information with a title "Empty Heads Make Poor Clerks" to a
volume entitled "A Diagnostic Test of Aptitude for Clerical Office
Work." Of the articles in this group only fourteen present data rela-
tive to the specific testing procedures involved in the measurement
of clerical aptitude.2
Just because a test is called a test of clerical aptitude is no
guarantee that it measures such aptitude. No matter how interest-
ing the title of the test sounds, we must critically examine its funda-
mental concepts and structure. We must insist that it conform to
the requirements that embrace scientific procedure. Fortunately
these scientific principles are rather clearly defined. Let us enumer-
ate them and see how this group of so-called tests of" clerical apti-
tude" meet their requirements.
It is generally agreed that before a test can be shown to measure
a given aptitude, it must be given to persons known to possess that
aptitude, and their standings in the test must correspond with
their working proficiency. The question that always perplexes the
investigator is: What shall I use an an index of their proficiency?
In technical terms, what shall be the criterion?
The criterion, according to Burtt, "is an index of occupational
proficiency which is used in evaluating the tests designed to predict
that proficiency."3 If the criterion is inadequate then the test can
1 An address given at the meeting of the National Vocational Guidance
Association, Feb. 21, 1930, Atlantic City, N.J.
2 For full description of tests see Anderson, Roy N. Measurement of
Clerical Ability?The Personnel Journal, Vol. VIII, No. 4, Dec. 1929.
3 Burtt, Harold E., Employment Psychology, Houghton Mifflin Com-
pany, New York, 1926, p. 169.
TESTS OF CLINICAL APTITUDE 215
have no proven validity. A valid criterion is admittedly hard to
obtain. What should one use as a measure of the proficiency of a
clerical worker? When we attempt to define clerical work we are
amazed at its ramifications, ranging from the activities performed
by the humble file clerk to the duties performed by the expert secre-
tary. One investigator found thirty different titles assigned to clerks.
With such a diversity of activities and unstandardized pro-
cedures it is extremely difficult to secure measures of proficiency.
Hull lists three types of aptitude criteria4: 1. Product; for example,
the number of entries made in a ledger. 2. Action; for example, the
time required to file a given number of cards. 3. Subjective impres-
sion. This is generally obtained by having the workers rated by one
or more superiors.
Let us examine the so-called tests of "clerical aptitude" and
see whether they fulfil the demands of scientific procedure. Though
there were in the literature examined fourteen tests, four of this
number did not publish information concerning their criteria of
vocational success. Of the remaining ten, one test utilized a criterion
consisting of production: efficiency was determined in terms of
speed and accuracy. Eight tests used criteria which Hull would call
subjective impressions, the ratings being made in most cases by
department heads or supervisors. One test utilized scores on other
performance tests.
The second respect in which we should examine these tests is
in regard to their reliability. That is, does an experimenter obtain
the same results every time he administers the test? Since a test is
at best only a sample of the aptitude which is being measured, this
sample should be as representative as possible. The measure of reli-
ability is generally given in terms of a coefficient of correlation. The
correlation coefficient should be .90 or above. Only two of the four-
teen investigators whose tests were examined reported an index of
reliability. In one case it was .82 + .02 and in the other investiga-
tion reliabilities of .49 (one test) and .26 (in another) were reported.
It is inconceivable that this fundamental procedure was not fol-
lowed out in the construction of the other twelve tests.
The third fundamental requirement in scientific method is to
ascertain the validity of the test. This is determined by comparing
the scores received on the test with the scores received on the criter-
ion. One must prove that the persons who stand high in the test
4 Hull, Clark L., Aptitude Testing, World Book Company, Yonkers,
New York, 1928, pp. 375-376.
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
stand high on the criterion, which is supposed to be a measure of
occupational proficiency, and that those who stand low in the test
stand low on the criterion. The method usually employed is to com-
pute some index of correlation. It is generally expressed by the
Pearson r, but this measure is valid only if the relationship is recti-
linear. With a curved regression line the correlation ratio or eta
is the preferable method.
There is a misunderstanding as to how high the correlation
coefficient should be in order to be "significant." Some investigators
point to a correlation coefficient of .50 as "high" where as it may be
really only "significant." Statisticians generally require a correla-
tion of .70 or more to indicate a high degree of relationship. Table
I shows the size of the various correlations reported:
Table I
5 tests had correlations between 30-40
6 tests had correlations between 40-50
1 test had correlations between 50-60
5 tests had correlations between 60-70
2 tests had correlations between 70-80
1 test had correlations between 80-90
Here we see that only three of the correlation coefficients are
above the minimum generally required.
The validity of a test is dependent not only on the size of the
correlation coefficient, but also upon the reliability of the coefficient.
This in turn depends on the number of cases used. Some of the in-
vestigators do not even report the number of cases on which they
standardized the test. Of those listed, the number of cases are 43,
50, 55, 90, 100, 188, 200. The number in some of the investigations
is probably so small as not to constitute an adequate sampling.
Statisticians say that an investigator should furnish figures re-
garding the "probable error" of his data in order to permit others to
check and verify the findings, and also to enable other investigators
to determine what the chances are that any other sample taken at
random will fall within the proper limits. In order that we may be
sure there is some correlation present, the coefficient of correlation
should be at least four times its probable error. Only four of the
studies listed "probable errors" with their findings.
In discussing the use of correlations in examining the validity
of a test, we might call attention to a misunderstanding many peo-
ple seem to have regarding a high correlation. They assume that it
is indicative of causal relationship supposing, that because two things
TESTS OF CLINICAL APTITUDE 217
show a high correlation, one is the cause of the other. Such a
dependence does not necessarily hold true. Granting that there is
dependence, there is always the possibility that there is a third fac-
tor on which both depend and hence even with a high correlation,
we dare not assert that a test really measures the aptitude for which
we are searching.
Summary
After this careful scrutiny of the clerical tests which have been
recommended for use, one is impressed with the valiant attempts
that have been made, but one is obliged to admit that most of them
have failed to produce tests which are scientifically defensible.
The vocational counselor who desires to use these tests will
find them of little or no value. We should, however, distinguish be-
tween tests for the measurements of "aptitude for clerical work
and tests for the measurement of proficiency in clerical work. "An
aptitude test is a test designed to discover what potentially a given
person has for learning some particular vocation or acquiring some
particular skill." (Hull)5 AVhile not one of these tests can lay clear
claim to be an aptitude test, some of them, which may have been
designed to measure acquired skill, may perhaps be legitimately
classed as proficiency tests.
A further distinction should be drawn between the value of
tests in vocational guidance?helping a person to choose a vocation,
and vocational selection?selecting a worker for a job. A few of
these tests may be useful in vocational selection (probably because
they measure learned skills), but that does not render them equally
valuable in vocational guidance and it does not prove that they de-
tect "clerical aptitude."
6 Clark L. Hull, op. cit., p. 50.
