Two Cases of Retardation due to Educational Deprivation
========================================================

By Lorraine L. McNally, M.A.
Chief Social Worker, The Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania
I
Walter was brought to the Psychological Clinic by a social
worker because of school retardation and a speech defect. He was
a husky, well built lad of just ten years. He had a clear complexion,
artistically touched by nature's own rouge, and big blue eyes, deeply
set, twinkling out glowing sparks of happiness. His large mouth
and broad winning smile were indicative of his affable disposition.
Walter had been promoted to the Third Grade but he was not ac-
tually ready to do the work required there. The examination in the
Clinic showed that he did not have Second Grade proficiency in any
school subject. He had entered school at eight years of age, and
failed to make normal progress, having repeated the second grade.
Walter's parents died of tuberculosis when he was quite young.
There was no immediate person interested or willing to care for
him so that it was necessary for a social agency to take the matter
in hand. His half brother, an epileptic, was in the Pennhurst Insti-
tution, his half sister worked out in a family. Walter's home and
school had been changed several times and the various changes
did not have an encouraging effect on his educational progress.
The social agency wished to have the examination made primarily
to find out whether it was worth while to have Walter placed in a
private home in the city in order that he might receive orthogenic
teaching at the Clinic during the summer session. The speech defect
was of minor significance.
Walter was given a psychological examination on July 14,
1924. His work on the performance tests was good. He completed
the Witmer Cylinders, a test at the six year level and the Dearborn
Formboard a test at the ten year level. On the latter test, his per-
formance placed him in a group of ten per cent superior to sixty
per cent and inferior to thirty per cent of ten year old boys. His rate
of discharge was rapid. He had a tendency to over speed, which
caused careless errors. The second performance showed a decrease
in time and a qualitatively better performance, demonstrating train-
ability. An Intelligence Quotient was not obtained. His school
proficiency was definitely not Second Grade. In fact his reading
EDUCATIONAL DEPRIVATION 275
was very poor and barely of First Grade proficiency. His diction
was poor and his speech was marred by a slight defect in the form
of a lisp. He had possibly First Grade proficiency in arithmetic.
As a result of the examination the diagnosis was deferred and it
was recommended that Walter return to the Clinic for diagnostic
teaching.
The diagnostic teaching was begun the next day. Walter at-
tended the Clinic from July 15 until August 14, receiving one hour
of individual instruction daily for five days a week. At the first
contact, upon asking Walter what book he was able to read from,
he immediately stated that it was a Second Grade reader. A try-
out demonstrated that he knew only a few words and that he did not
have the least idea how to pronounce a new word for himself. A
First Grade reader was placed in his hands and the results were
no better. It was evident that the foundation for reading had not
as yet been established; he had no knowledge of phonic analysis.
He wTould pronounce repeatedly the first letter of a word but could
go no further. With his active imagination and a picture accom-
panying the story it was not difficult for him to make believe that
he was reading. This was not long tolerated. A daily drill on
phonic analysis was begun. The phonogram cards which supple-
ment the Winston Primer and First Grade Books were used. The
words which Walter recognized immediately, he practiced dividing
into their syllables. Within a few days Walter had learned all the
words on the phonogram cards for the Winston Primer, First Grade
Reader and in addition the cards for the Second Grade Reader. The
Third Grade Reader cards were studied in time and it was at this
point that Walter met wTords that he had never seen before; they
were considerably more difficult. He would analyze the words and
give the correct pronunciation without help. Along with the analy-
sis of words Walter had a daily reading lesson. The Winston First
Year Reader wTas used. There were many new words that he did
not know but made an attempt to analyze. He was more than
anxious to wTork and put forth a great deal of effort. He recognized
in his reading lesson the words that he had learned to pronounce
on the phonogram cards. After six days of instruction there was
a decided improvement. It was not long before he had completed
the First Grade reader and was transferred to the Winston Second
Grade Reader. Each reading lesson consisted of a review of the
previous day's work along with a new selection. He generally did
276 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
very well in his review lessons, probably failing to pronounce cor-
rectly only two or three words. After spending eight hours on this
reader it was decided to try him on a Third Grade reader, The
Progressive Road to Reading. He read this practically as well as
the second book. Success brought him so much pleasure that he
pushed right along, full of energy and initiative. At the end of the
period of diagnostic teaching he read with ease from the Third
Grade reader. In this brief period of time he had learned the basic
principles of reading and was well on the way to make normal prog-
ress. There was no question that he could go along with Third
Grade reading when he returned to school.
Along with his reading and phonic analysis Walter received
instruction in speech. The letters, th, f, I, s and r, gave him diffi-
culty. His th's were generally pronounced as f's and vice versa.
He made every effort to correct his speech after he was once shown.
In reading he pronounced the words more distinctly than in his
ordinary conversation. This was to be expected since he had the
visual stimulus present. He had difficulty in pronouncing words
containing a combination of the letters oi. With particular drill
on this sound he improved. A daily spelling lesson supplemented
both his reading and speech work. In either subject the words that
gave him difficulty were used provided they were not too difficult.
Walter also received training in arithmetic. Less time was
devoted to this than to the other subjects. He was most interested
in arithmetic probably because it gave him less trouble. A definite
proficiency according to grade was hard to establish. He had the
plus and minus combinations but much too often he resorted to
counting on his fingers. By his own method he was able to add a
single column of three or four digits. He had never learned to
"carry" and in subtraction he had never learned to "borrow." In
multiplication he had been taught the first six tables but his results
gave evidence that he needed a decided brushing up.
With a sufficient understanding of the work he was supposed
to have covered, he was given a thorough review of the plus and
minus combinations and the multiplication tables that he had had.
There soon was a decided improvement. In addition he was taught
to "carry." At the end of his training he was able to do correctly
a problem containing four columns of at least five digits in each.
He would use the combinations and rarely resort to counting on his
fingers. In subtraction he learned to "borrow" and soon picked
up the method of proving the problem. In multiplication he learned
EDUCATIONAL DEPRIVATION 277
five additional multiplication tables. He did exceptionally well in
using the tables to work problems. He would continually ask for
homework and never failed to bring it in the next day.
One of Walter's most outstanding defects was his poor concen-
tration of attention. During the first contacts with the Clinic he
was never satisfied to sit still and work. Each object in the room
caught his attention or in an excited way he would continually want
to relate what happened the night before. With difficulty the lesson
proceeded. A week or more of this conduct was sufficient to under-
stand him. His reading lessons were selected with care so that the
story would be most interesting to him and hold his attention. He
had a great deal of surplus energy that needed to be guided. A
daily review lesson established in him an assurance that he was able
to read. He was goaded on and he made every effort to do well.
As time went on he was able to concentrate for longer periods of
time. He was interested in his work and liked to come to the Clinic.
Considering the progress that Walter made in the short time
that he attended the Clinic it seemed almost certain that with a
favorable home environment and regular attendance at school he
would be able to do the work of the Third Grade. His interest had
been stimulated; his orientation shifted.
As a result of the diagnostic teaching the report went back to
the Social Agency that Walter was a boy of normal mentality. The
pedagogical retardation was due to educational deprivation. It
was recommended that he attend school regularly and an effort
be made to have him placed permanently so that he would not be
moved from one school to another.
Five years after Walter's last contact with the Clinic an inves-
tigation was made to find out what progress he had made. A reply
from the social agency stated that he was still under their super-
vision. He has had in the meantime a number of psychological
tests and each time was placed in the dull normal group. He has
recently become a much better adjusted child and is doing excellent
school work. For a time he had shown some resentment toward
school, masturbated excessively and showed keen sex interest. Since
1928, he has been improving steadily. For a year and a half he
was in a home where there were three or four boys. There were
social contacts in the neighborhood in which he took part. His be-
havior was that of a normal boy and he was rather a leader in the
group.
278 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Walter is now past fifteen years of age and has about decided
that he wants to be a farmer. Some years ago he had experience
in this work and showed a liking for it. When the home in which
he was living had to be closed this fall he was placed on a farm
with a young couple who have a simple home life. They will teach
him good habits and will be willing to pay him wages when he be-
comes sixteen. lie has not been there long enough to decide defi-
nitely whether or not this would be the best work for him to take
up after he finishes school. At the present time he is attending a
one room country school; is in Eighth Grade doing good work.
II
In desperation Samuel was brought to the Psychological Clinic
of the University of Pennsylvania on November 22, 1928, by his
mother and a friend, a medical student who had become interested
in the boy. At school Samuel had established for himself the repu-
tation of being backward. From the progress ho had made the
reputation was justifiable but from his appearance of alertness, his
general comprehension and orientation there remained a question
as to just why he was considered backward. The facts were that
he was past ten years of age, had not learned to read and was very
much retarded in school. He had attended kindergarten for two
years and then entered First Grade at the age of six. At the close
of one year in First Grade he was transferred to an Orthogenic
Backward class. At the time of the psychological examination at
the Clinic, Samuel was ten years, eight months of age, still in the
O.B. class, and reported to be doing high third grade work. In
reality his school proficiency as tested in the Clinic varied consid-
erably. In arithmetic he had 3 A proficiency; in reading, 1 B. The
difficulty which he had in learning to read was disturbing the mem-
bers of his family and also his friends.
The parents, who were foreign-born Eussian Jews, were pros-
perous business people. Samuel was the sixth of nine children
ranging in age from twenty to four years. The oldest, a girl, had
graduated from high school and was employed as a stenographer;
the second child, a boy, was attending college; two other children
were in high school; a girl twelve years of age was in Eighth Grade ;
another girl eight years old was in Third Grade; and a girl six
years of age was in First Grade; the youngest, a boy, was not in
school. There was apparently nothing significant in Samuel's medi-
EDUCATIONAL DEPRIVATION 279
cal history to account for his deficiency, his general health had
always been good. In order to make sure of a clean bill of health,
through the efforts of the medical student Samuel had been given
a complete physical examination by one of the physicians at the
University Hospital. The examination showed no evidence of or-
ganic disease. The physician considered Samuel high strung and
nervous but added the note "a characteristic of his race." In view
of the results of the examination the physician recommended a
psychological examination in order to determine whether there was
any mental retardation or whether the methods of teaching had been
incorrect.
As part of the psychological examination, Samuel was given
the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Test. His Intelligence
Quotient was 87. His audito-vocal span for digits was five; the
reverse span was three, both of which are below the average for
boys of his age. His work on performance tests such as the Witmer
Formboard, Cylinders, and Dearborn Formboard was slightly be-
low average. On general competency he was rated as being inferior
to seventy per cent and superior to twenty per cent of ten year old
boys. The diagnosis was normal mentality. The examination did
not disclose why Samuel had not learned to read. It was recom-
mended that the Clinic Social Worker investigate the school which
he attended and that Samuel return to the Clinic for diagnostic
teaching.
The school visit was very significant and revealed important
information. During the time Samuel attended the Orthogenic
Backward Class it was known that the teacher was advanced in
years, unprogressive and did practically nothing with the class.
Six months prior to Samuel's examination at the Clinic this particu-
lar teacher had been changed. The new teacher spent several
months reorganizing the class. The results were surprising as chil-
dren were found in the class who had been there one and two years
and had not learned to read but did not seem to be lacking in mental
ability in other respects. Samuel was one of this group. The
teacher, realizing the situation, made every effort to give these child-
ren additional help. Samuel made a steady improvement not only in
his work but in his general attitude. He was anxious to read. It was
the teacher's hope to prepare him for the regular Fourth Grade
just as soon as possible. She felt certain that once he was caught
up in reading he could go along in the regular grade.
280 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The recommendation to return to the Clinic was carried out
and with the splendid cooperation of the school the outlook was very
hopeful. Samuel reported to the Clinic twice a week, receiving
an hour of individual instruction each time. In all there were
twenty-two hours of instruction which extended from November to
June.
It has always been the opinion of Dr. Witmer that only the
best children in a group learn to read by the word and sentence
method. These children of their own accord are breaking up the
words into their different parts and realize, for example, that the
word cat is made up of three different letters each with a different
sound. The child who is unable to make this analysis without help
in many cases has difficulty in learning to read. In view of the fact
that Samuel, according to the general rating of his competency, was
inferior to seventy per cent of children his age it was decided to
abandon the word and sentence method and teach him to read by
phonic analysis.
During the first hour of instruction at the Clinic it was evident
that Samuel had never been taught phonic analysis in learning to
read and also that he had gained very little from the word and sen-
tence method. He recognized all the written and printed letters of
the alphabet but was unaware of the various combinations of sounds
made from them. At times he was able to recognize at sight a few
words from his lesson in the primer. In a vain effort, possibly to
cover up his inability to read, he would make an attempt to pro-
nounce a new word. He would dwell on the first letter trying hard
to sound it and then finally end up with an impossible explosion.
His reading was so unevenly developed that it was necessary to estab-
lish a firm foundation in the mechanics of reading.
The word-building cards were used to teach Samuel the different
families of words. Not only did he learn to recognize these on the
cards but he showed a great deal of initiative in making up additional
words that fitted the family. This method was quite satisfactory.
He was anxious to learn to read and showed great pride when he was
able to analyze a word for himself. In the third hour of instruction
he was allowed to read from a Winston First Grade Reader. All
unfamiliar words he attempted to analyze with surprising results.
His teacher, a student in Psychology 33?Orthogenic Methods, di-
rected by Dr. Witmer?noted at this time that she did not believe
Samuel's lack of progress was entirely due to inability on his part.
EDUCATIONAL DEPRIVATION 281
He was willing, reasonably conscientious and ambitious to clear up
his difficulties in reading. He showed less confusion and guessing
when he came to a new word. If he was unable to pronounce the
word himself, it was placed on the blackboard and divided into syl-
lables. At the end of each lesson he would have several words to take
home to study.
Samuel's teacher found that he learned quickly but had a ten-
dency to forget just as quickly. This may have been due to the
fact that he reported to the Clinic but twice a week and the time
intervening between each lesson was a little too long, and then too
it must be remembered that Samuel was inferior to seventy per cent.
The boy had many good qualities. His comprehension was good, he
had persistent concentration of attention and he was not inclined
to fatigue easily.
Samuel made steady progress. He completed most of the Win-
ston First Reader, read part of Book Two and finally was reading
from the Winston Third Grade Reader. Although advanced quickly
he was able to handle the work. He comprehended the stories and
read with facility. The foundation for reading had been estab-
lished. It was only occasionally that he was unable to pronounce a
word for himself. He was encouraged to do outside reading. Not
long after this suggestion he came for his lesson one day and stated
that he had become a member of the Public Library. Under his arm
he carried "Alice in Wonderland." He was interested in the story
and had brought it along to show his teacher how well he could read
it. As part of his lesson he was allowed to use this as a text two or
three times. He had very little difficulty in mastering the new words.
Just before he was dismissed from the Clinic in June, Samuel was
reading from the Winston Fourth Grade Reader. When he first
came in the previous November he could not read from a Primer.
The following fall he was admitted to regular Fourth Grade.
In January of 1930 a telephone conversation with the mother re-
vealed that Samuel was doing well in his school work. She was so
anxious that he keep up in his work, however, that she had provided
a private tutor to help Samuel with his lessons twice a week.
