Investigation of Vocational Interest Among Workers
====================================================

By Harry Dexter Kitson
Professor of Education, Teachers' College, Columbia University
Most of the investigations in the field of vocational interest have
been directed toward the development of means for the detection
of vocational interests in young people before
they choose a vocation.
The author has been working 011 another
approach, that of studying the interest which
people already at work have in their occu-
pations. We know almost nothing about vo-
cational interests, and it would seem reasonable,
before we search for them in immature and inex-
perienced persons, to discover something about
their nature. Perhaps we shall then change our
methods of vocational guidance, at least with re-
spect to interest.
Among the phases of interest which can be
examined among workers are the following: (a)
changes of occupational interest within the indi-
vidual ; (b) age when the interest first arose; (c)
length of time it has endured; (d) the extent to
which the individual is interested in his work.
In years past the author has investigated the
first of these questions.2 More recently the others
have been subjected to study.
1 Address delivered at the meeting of the National Vocational Guidance
Association, Atlantic City, February 20-22, 19.'0.
2 II. D. Kitson and Louise Culbertson, The Vocational Changes of One
Thousand Eminent Americans?Vocational Guidance Magazine, I, March,
1923, pp. 128-130. II. D. Kitson and Lucille Kihtley, The Vocational
Changes of One Thousand Eminent American Women?School and Society,
XIX, No. 474, Jan. 2G, 1924, pp. 1-3. H. D. Kitson, Psychology, of Vocational
Adjustment, Philadelphia. J. B. Lippiucott, 1925, Chapter VIII and pp. 46-50.
100
90
80.
70
to ?
SO
40
30 ?
20.
icy >
Fig. 1
Occupational Inter-
est Scale
VOCATIONAL INTEREST 49
Table I
Showing number of teachers and nurses at each of the decile points on
the occupational interest scale.
Teachers Nurses
No. % No. %
100   42 17 46 33
90   96 39 46 33
80   64 26 29 21
70   21 9 7 5
60   7 3 0 0
50   5 2 9 6.5
40   3 1 0 0
30   3 1 1 .5
20   0 0 0 0
10   0 0 1 .5
0   3 1 1 .5
Below 0  3 1 0 0
247 100 140 100
Investigating the Depth of Vocational Interest
For use in the investigation of the extent or depth of interest an
Occupational Interest Scale has been developed. (See Figure 1.)
This is a vertical scale covering 100 degrees, divided into ten steps.
The worker is given the following instructions: "Please indicate,
by making a check on this scale, the degree of interest you have
in your occupation (not your present job, but the occupation it-
self)." Since this point can be only subjectively determined, the
attempt is made to define the top limit (100 degrees) in some ab-
solute terms. Accordingly, the individual is given the further in-
struction: "As the 100 degree point, think of that activity in which
you would spend the major portion of your time if you had a million
dollars and were not obliged to work. Then check the point on
the scale which denotes your interest in your present occupation."
An honest estimate is facilitated by requesting the subject not to
sign his name.
Though the scale has been used on hundreds of workers in a
number of occupations, results will be reported with reference to
only two groups?247 high school teachers and 140 graduate
nurses.2 The per cent who placed their interest at each of the decile
2 See II. D. Kitson, Measuring the Interest of Teachers in Their Work,
Teachers College Record, October, 1928, Volume XXX, pp. 28-33; also At
What Age Do Nurses Choose Their Profession, American Journal of Nursing,
June, 1929, pp. 649-651.
50 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
points on the scale is shown in Table I. In both these groups there
were a considerable number who claimed an interest of 100 degrees
in their occupation?nurses, 33 per cent; teachers, 17 per cent. The
most significant phase of the results is the revelation of the very
considerable number who do not like their work. The number at or
below 70 is, in the case of teachers, 18 per cent; in the case of
nurses, 13 per cent. Several of them stated bluntly that their in-
terest was at the zero point. Surely such workers are in a most
unhappy plight, and constitute a serious menace to the effectiveness
of their professional group.
Significance of Age in Vocational Interest
Another question regarding vocational interest, to which at-
tention has been devoted is the age at which workers decided to
enter their vocation. Figures for two groups?130 nurses and 28
policemen are shown in Figure 2. The median age at which the
nurses decided on this occupation is 18. It is interesting to note
that this is the age at which girls are accepted in a nurses' training
school. The median age at which the policemen decided is 21.
Again it will be observed that this is the age at which one is
legally eligible to appointment in this occupation.
Of even greater significance, however, are the extremes. One
woman decided to become a nurse at the age of three, one at six;
about twelve per cent of the entire number decided at or before
the age of twelve.
A number of the policemen also decided during their tender
years?one at four, one at five; about fourteen per cent at or be-
fore the age of 12. In both groups some individuals did not make
the decision until they were in their thirties.
These figures show clearly that if interest was one of the im-
portant factors in leading these workers to enter the occupation
they chose, the interest appeared at various ages, ranging from three
years to thirty-four years.
The length of time these workers have been interested in their
occupations may be estimated partly by finding the difference be-
tween the age at which they first noted the interest and their present
age. This could not be done, because data on the ages of the
workers were not available. A second measure, however, is the
length of time they have been in the occupation. The medians are as
VOCATIONAL INTEREST 51
follows: High school teachers, 10 years; nurses, 5 years; policemen,
10 years.
An attempt was made to discover if any relation exists between
length of service in the occupation and degree of interest. This
was difficult, in as much as the number of steps on the interest scale
was so small. Only in a group of 67 elementary school teachers
was a notably close relationship found. Those who had taught
.sixteen years or longer had an average degree of interest repre-
sented by 92, while those who had taught ten years or less had an
average of only 75 degrees.
Only a few of the problems in the field of vocational interest
which ought to be investigated have been treated in this report. But
there are numerous facts which we can discover if we will go di-
rectly to workers who have already developed a vocational interest.
By studying their histories we shall secure information that can
AJURSZS
PQUCmZN ?
*Kt z-ic 7-10 11-11 /5-I8 H-21 25 2L 27-30 3/-34
Figure 2
Ages at which 130 nurses and 28 policemen decided to enter their vocation.
52 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
be obtained in no other way. This seems to be a more fruitful ap-
proach than the more common method of searching for "poten-
tial" vocational interests among boys and girls who have had no
contact with occupational life. Such investigations have given
results which are at best ambiguous. The reason is that the "thing"
we have been searching for does not exist. Most boys and girls
have no vocational interests. We should not expect most immature
persons to have an interest in any particular vocation. The psy-
chologists who have written extensively on interest agree that it is
a product of experience. A practical deduction is that the voca-
tional counselor should not waste his time searching for a mythical
vocational interest within the person he is advising, but should help
the individual to develop an interest in a suitable vocation. And
the best way to discover how to do this is to study persons who
have already developed a vocational interest and to learn how they
did it.
