News and Comments
=================

Truman Lee Kelley, Professor of Education and Psychology at Stanford
University since 1926, has accepted an appointment as Professor of Education
in the Graduate School of Education, Harvard University.

Dr Kelley has taught successively at the Georgia Institute of Technology,
University of Illinois, University of Texas, Teachers College, Columbia University and Stanford University. He is widely recognized as one of the most
distinguished living scholars in the field of statistical and experimental study
in Education.

Professor Kelley will offer at Harvard courses in Advanced Statistical
Method and a Seminary in Psychometrics. His special research interest lies in
the analysis of mental structure. By the experimental use of tests and
statistical procedures he is seeking to isolate and study the basic traits, powers,
or abilities, that enter as unitary components into the complex processes of
learning and conduct. Kelley's work is related to that of Dearborn at Harvard,
Thorndike and Wood at Columbia, Thurstone at Chicago, and Spearman at
London.

The Administrative Board of the Wayne County Training School announces the appointment of T. G. Hegge, Ph.D. as Director of Research. Dr.
Hegge for ten years was Associate Professor of Psychology in the Royal
University of Norway and has spent the last two years in this country under
a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation centering his work at the University of Michigan. He spent four years with G. E. Muller in the psychological laboratory at the University of Gottingen, Germany and other extended
periods with Lehman at Copenhagen, Denmark and Jaensch at Marburg,
Germany.

Dr Hegge has been appointed special lecturer in the Department of
Psychology at the University of Michigan and is holding seminar courses there
for graduate students.

A limited number of openings for resident fellows will be available at
the Training School for suitable applicants who are qualified to carry on
original work leading to a Doctor's degree. Course credit toward the degree
for accepted work done under Dr Hegge at the Training School will be
granted by the University of Michigan to properly registered students.
Any person desirous of being considered for such a fellowship should
address Dr Hegge at the Wayne County Training School, Northville, Michigan.
