Experiments with Handwriting
=============================

REVIEWS 259
Reviews

By Robert Saudek. New York:
William Morrow and Company. 1929. lxiii-392 pp.
This work has been published in Great Britain, Germany, Holland and
Czechoslovakia, as well as in America. Interestingly the English and American
editions appear under the foregoing title, the other editions under the title
Experiviental Graphology.
The author rests his work throughout upon an experimental basis, not
only his own experiments but those of students of handwriting in all countries
including the work of the well known American investigators, Judd and
Freeman, are cited. Graphology is reduced from an "art" to an experimental
science. The author is equally critical of the drawing room, dilettante type of
graphology on the one hand and the metaphysical school on the other. There
are numerous experiments suggested which the reader can make for himself, but
in addition there is an appendix containing more than ninety facsimiles of
handwriting to which frequent reference is made throughout the text. This
appendix indeed is one of the most valuable features of the book. The author's
treatment of the problem of honesty and dishonesty will illustrate his method.
After formulating certain theories he examined the manuscrips of 141 persons
convicted of dishonesty in the law courts. In every case the signs of dis-
honesty previously formulated were present in the writing. The experiment
was checked by the examination of the writing of 73 employees of industrial
firms.
This is the result of many years' work and as is usual in such cases
contains some things that are irrelevant but to which the author has become
attached. Occasionally he may appear naive in his psychological treatment,
but psychologists should not ignore this book just because the terminology
is not always conventional.
Particularly interesting to the clinical psychologist is the chapter on
the development of what the author calls the "graphic faculty." This de-
velopment depends upon the visual memory, powers of graphic expression and
manual dexterity. In learning to write all children have to suppress left hand
movements just as in walking they must inhibit the simultaneous movement
of both feet. We all learn to write by "drawing," that is the writing is not
automatic and does not become so until the attention is directed entirely to
the content and the writer is acting under the sentence impulse. Only then
is the writing free from the delineative elements. The reading of such writing
is partly reading and partly guessing, and the writing of a person graphi-
cally mature can be read only by one completely familiar with the language.
The illuminated manuscripts of the Middle Ages and the forgeries of today
are similar in that both are the products of graphic immaturity, the delineative
rather than the automatic element predominates. The science of paleography
has no need of psychology because the copyists did not conceive the text.
The relation of the central nervous system to the act of writing is shown
particularly well in the facsimiles. After the loss of his right arm Horatio
Nelson wrote with the left arm and the writing in both cases was so similar
as to leave no doubt of its identity. The same principle is shown in the writing
260 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of a man who was born without arms and who wrote both with his foot and
his mouth. The foot and mouth writing were remarkably similar. After
twenty-seven years of blindness the handwriting can be easily identified with
that written just before the blindness developed because the graphic forms
are derived solely from memory images. Facsimiles are given to show each
of these points. The alteration in writing is very great when a disability first
appears but as the performance is learned this alteration is lost. In the nor-
mal individual there are changes in writing through the years due to changes
of character and the imitation of alien models, indeed only the blind are free
from the latter influence.
The forensic application of graphology is of course discussed, but the
author does not confine himself to this. The detection of spurious expression,
the signs of honesty and dishonesty and general characterological analysis are
discussed. The symptomatic features in handwriting are adjustment, speed,
letter formation, pressure, size, angle, spacing connections. The author dis-
cusses the relative ease with which they can be altered. The features which
can be analyzed in handwriting are so numerous that it is impossible to alter
them all at the same time and attention upon releases it from others and they
are executed according to the individual's automatic writing.
The last chapter illustrates the principles developed in the book by a
characterological analysis of the handwriting of Otto Weininger, the author
of Sex and Character, Mussolini and Sir Edward Grey on the basis of facsimiles
of their handwriting given in the appendix.
This is no series of easy lessons in character reading by the analysis
of handwriting. Unless one is willing to perform experiments, refer continu-
ally to an appendix, and in short work he is not likely to find the book of in-
terest or value. Mr. Saudek is one of the three living authorities on his subject
and his work is significant as a scientific contribution to the study of an item
of human behavior which is rapidly becoming universal in civilized countries.
