The Significance of Vocabulary in the Interview
================================================

:Author: Gladys C. Schwesinger

There are but few objective facts to offer relative to the vocabulary of the interviewee. With the exception of studies on the very
young child, whose knowledge and use of words could not be measured through any other medium than that of oral speech, and with
the exception also of Snedden's2 work on adolescents, there are no
outstanding researches on oral vocabularies. Most of the studies
have been conducted by the written, pencil-and-paper, formal testing method, and conducted largely on groups of people at a sitting.
The vocabulary of the interviewee, that is, his use and knowledge
of the spoken word, has not received its fair share of attention,
doubtless because of inherent difficulties involved in such.studies.

The best justification for reporting on what vocabularies may
be expected to indicate is the available evidence 011 the significance
of vocabulary. Studies have been carried out from time to time
relating language growth to age, to grade reached in school, to the
type of school attended, to studies of major interest followed in
school or college, to place of residence, and to other environmental
factors, such as extent of travel, contact with delinquency and the
like. General vocabulary strength has been studied in relation to
general knowledge, and special vocabulary strength in relation to
special knowledge in any particular field. Experiments have been
carried 011 to see how far vocabulary may be indicative of social
background and the general cultural level of the home. In addition,
the close parallelism between knowledge of words and general intelligence has been reported upon by several investigators.
These various explorations of the field of word knowledge have
not been formulated with the same objectives. I11 some instances,
attention has been centered on discovering the size and range of
a person's word equipment; at least insofar as it concerned his
knowledge of what words mean. In other cases, the investigator has
studied the range of words actually used by the subject, or the
quality of the words chosen by the subject. For instance, does
1 Read at the annual meeting of the National Vocational Guidance Association, Atlantic City, Feb. 21, 1930.
2 Snedden, D. S. A study in disguised intelligence tests. T. C. Contrib.
Educ. No. 291, 1927.

he tend to express himself in slang or in good English? Is he inclined to use a "high-brow" or a "low-brow" word in a given situation? His pronunciation, articulation, inflection and other speech
factors have also been observed and related to personality.
The methods employed for measuring and weighing the use and
understanding of words vary with the objective of the particular
research. Even when pursuing one objective, for example, in
the effort to compute the size of a person's vocabulary, there is 110
one standard method. With very young children, it consists in
counting the words actually used by the child. This means that for
a representative period in a little child's life, a few days, a few
hours each day, perhaps for a few weeks, a watchful adult, who
has cultivated an unobtrusive manner, must hover near the youngster to gather the pearls as they fall from his lips, and store them
up in a list to be counted latex*. This technique has been called by
Rugg,2 that of "the eye-witness analyst." With older children who
can read, and with adults, the method undergoes a change. Now
the examiner is concerned not so much with the words actually used
as with the words which are understood by the subject. Here the
method is to apply a formal test, consisting usually of a certain
number of words chosen from a dictionary. The score consists of
the number of words whose meanings are known. This number is
then multiplied by a constant (depending 011 the proportion of the
number of words selected to the total number in the dictionary).
In this way, the subject's total range of vocabulary is estimated.
To indicate that he knows a word, the subject is usually required
to give a verbal explanation of its meaning, or in other words, a definition. Or he may be supplied with "multiple choice" answers,
from which he is required to indicate the one word which in his
judgment best explains the meaning of the stimulus word. Other
experimenters present the stimulus word set in a sentence. The
subject's understanding of the word is shown by the appropriateness of his answer to the question.
This last method of measuring word knowledge lends itself admirably to adaptation for use in the interview. It is the method
which Sneddon employed in his disguised intelligence tests. It has
its difficulties and complications, but its diagnostic possibilities are
promising.

2 Rugg, H., Krueger, L., and Sondergaard, A. Study of the language of
kindergarten children. J. Educ. Psychol., 1929, 20, 1-18.

The nature of the data accumulated in the various researches
to which reference has been made may be briefly presented. The
first point for consideration is the matter of sex differences. Up
to the age of four or five, girls have a larger vocabulary than have
boys; after this age, the boys outstrip the girls. This is explained
by the fact that boys come earlier in contact with a wider environment, while girls stay more within the shelter of the home. This is
mentioned, in passing as an early and interesting indication of
the dependence of verbal ability upon environmental influence.
Other facts collected about the speech of the pre-school child, need
not be discussed as they are not immediately relevant. It is desirable, however, again to call attention to the method used, namely
that of actually noting and counting the words employed by the
subject during a given period of time. This method, with modifications, might advantageously be applied to a study of the words
employed by the interviewee. In a set interview, standardized and
controlled, more or less the same subject matter will always be covered. The language in which this material is couched will vary
with the intelligence and training of the adult individual, perhaps
as much as it does with the age and intelligence of the pre-school
child. Further research work might well be done along this line.
By way of illustration, reference may be made to cases encountered in a public employment bureau which is usually patronized by people of the lower social and intellectual levels. From
among these can be selected two applicants; both women were just
as dowdy and as untidy as any in the room; both were raggedly
dressed, both more or less unkempt as to hair, nails, shoe laces, and
the like; both decidedly restricted as to early schooling and later
bookish interests, and so on. The first impression was, in each case,
that they were little, if at all, above moron intelligence; but after
talking with each woman, it was necessary to reverse this estimate.
One, it was discovered, used fairly hard words rather easily; the
other, although not inclined to express herself in speech, followed
the use of the upper range words, quite understandingly. These
observations led to a change in the rating of their intelligence and
to crediting them with at least average mental ability. The conversation in each case was never allowed to stray beyond the limits
set by the standardized interview. The sole reason for the shift
in the estimate of their mental ability was the word knowledge indicated by the women.

From, many different studies we have evidence to show that
vocabulary grows as knowledge grows. There is a progressive increase in growth of language ability from grade to grade. There
is a definite and positive correlation between one's score on a general vocabulary test and a general knowledge test. This correlation
is so large that, to save time, a vocabulary test can be given in
place of a general information test. The same holds true for measuring knowledge within a special field. One investigator, Babbitt,3
as far back as 1907, found that he could use a vocabulary test to
classify students in a German class. Later he found that this held
also for English. Kennon4 has offered a vocabulary test for teachers
of high school English which in itself provided the best single measure for predicting success within the field of teaching English literature. Whipple5 has devised a word list to measure specific knowledge of any one of several fields. Familiarity with American history, for instance, will be tapped by the subject's knowledge of
"Anthony Wayne"; or of French by " aujourdhui"; of social
usage by "R.S.V.P."; of golf by "midiron," and so on.

Again to illustrate the significance of this for the interviewer,
consider the case of the student who presented herself as an applicant for training in the psychological clinic of a hospital. Ker only
groundwork was a half course in the elements of psychology, and a
most old-fashioned brand of psychology at that. The psychiatrist
Avho interviewed her used technical words of which she had never
heard, such as "reactions," "orientations," "I.Q.," and the like.
Needless to say her ignorance of the fundamental terminology of the
profession convinced her that she was not ready for the practical
training which she sought, and she was glad to return to the college classroom to learn some modem psychology. The psychiatrist's
discovery of her inadequate preparation was doubtless based on her
own frank admissions, but if she had chosen to obscure this lack of
background, he could easily have found her out by this other
method?that of using technical words and gauging her reactions,
to note whether they indicated professional comprehension or lack
of it.

a Babbitt, E. II., A vocabulary test. Pop. Sc. Mo. 1907, 70, 378.
* Kennon, L. II., Tests of literary vocabulary for teachers of English.
T. C. Contrib. Educ. No. 223, 1926.
5 Whipple, G. M., Manual of mental and physical tests. Part II. Baltimore, Md.: Warwick and York, 1915. (Pp. 308-332, 674-688.)

A fourth general line of evidence on factors behind vocabulary
comes from research studies which attempt to relate vocabulary to
social and cultural background. There is a definite and fairly high
correlation between knowledge and use of words and the family
social and cultural level. Investigators recognize that good social
upbringing is associated with good general intelligence and that
good intelligence is associated with good vocabulary. However, the
relationship between social background and vocabulary is not entirely accounted for by the factor of general intelligence, inasmuch
as when intelligence is held constant by the partial correlation technique, the correlation is still significantly high (.54) .6 This indicates
the presence of something else, presumably home training, which
accounts for the vocabulary development. Van Alystine7 found that
the vocabulary of three-year-old children is slightly more related
to a composite of environmental factors (.70) than it is to intelligence score (.61). The difference is not large but is better than
chance. Burks,8 in California, studying foster and own children of
an older age suggests that vocabulary may be more closely related
to environment than intelligence is. The writer,6 in testing grade
and high school children, found that the relation between vocabulary and social background, measured by two different scales, was
.54 and .72 respectively.

To illustrate the powerful force of home training on vocabulary development, an extreme case may be cited. This young man
of twenty comes from an unusually cultured home. His father is
an author of international fame; the other members of the family
are consistently superior intellectually and vocationally, but this
boy's intelligence, according to the Stanford-Binet, is about on a
moron level. In appearance, he somewhat resembles the Mongoloid type. His grasp of school subject matter such as arithmetic,
spelling, even writing, is on a third to fourth grade level, but his
word knowledge and general command of language is at least ninth
or tenth grade. He has been well-brought up, is well mannered,
6 Schwesinger, G. C., The social-ethical significance of vocabulary. T. C.
Contrib. Educ. No. 211, 1926.

7 Van Alystine, D., The environment of three-year-old children. Factors
related to intelligence and vocabulary tests. T. C. Contrib. Educ. No. 3G6, 1929.
8 Burks, B. S., The relative influence of nature and nurture upon mental
development. Twenty-seventh yearbook, Nat. Soc. Study Educ. Part I, 1928,
(pp. 219-31G).

well-spoken, and unless one penetrates into any special subject of
conversation, one would not discover his intellectual limitations.
The discrepancy between his attainments and his verbal ability can
be accounted for almost entirely by his superior home environment,
where rich and wide vocabularies have always been in daily usage.
If a group of such subjects could be gathered from feebleminded institutions and elsewhere, that is, a group of people whose
language responses are considerably superior or considerably inferior to their general intelligence level, and if the relationship of
social background and vocabulary in this group could be studied,
it would doubtless throw more light on the degree of dependence of
language growth on environmental supplies.

This inter-relation of word knowledge and social background
has been studied from still a different angle. Here the quality rather
than the extent of one's vocabulary has been considered. For example, Wyman9 in California studied whether children were
socially, intellectually or actively interested by their response words
to her free association test. The writer10 once undertook to look for
possible group differences in knowledge and use of slang and "underworld" language. The tests were applied to two groups, equated
for social and intellectual traits, but differing only for the factor of
delinquency, the one group being in a state reformatory, the other
at large. The experiment was repeated on two other groups, also
equated for background and intelligence, but not so widely separated
from the standpoint of conduct. In the second experiment, the
differences proved to be not so marked as in the first group. If
this same experiment could be tried on different cultural levels,
the results might be illuminating.

This same tendency can be noted in children's responses to the
word "curse" in the Stanford-Binet vocabulary. Young children
from the lower socio-economic groups almost invariably, whatever
their other limitations, know the meaning of this word. Children
of the same, and older ages, in a high grade private school, representing a high socio-economic level, whatever their intellectual attainments, almost invariably fail on this word.
"Wyman, J. B., Interest tests of a group of gifted children. Terman's
Genetic studies of genius, Vol. 1, Stanford Univ., Calif.: Stanford Univ. Press,
1925. (Pp. 455-483.)
10 Schwesinger, G. C. Slang as a factor in character. J. Appl. Psychol.
1926, 10, 245-263.

A fifth, and more fruitful line of evidence on factors back of
word knowledge, comes from the data gathered on the relation of
general intelligence to language. This relation is so well supported
by experimental findings that it need not be discussed at length.
Terman11 states that his vocabulary test is the best single measure
of whatever the whole Stanford-Binet test measures, and claims
that, in a large majority of cases, the vocabulary test alone would
give an I.Q. within 10 per cent of that secured by the entire test.
Other psychologists have added more evidence to this. Still others
have pointed out that this high relationship is due to a spurious
factor, because intelligence tests are heavily loaded with vocabulary
elements. But even so, the fact remains that a vocabulary test measures whatever a general intelligence test measures, and makes that
measurement with almost equal effectiveness.

Hence, if it is possible in the course of an interview to get an
estimate of,the vocabulary of the interviewee, one will, at the same
time, have secured a fairly reliable guage of his general intelligence. People will often consent to taking a "vocabulary" test,
who would balk at an "intelligence" test. Van Alystine resorted
to this device most effectively when she had mother and child each
taking a "vocabulary" test. In her experiment it was possible
to use the pencil and paper method. But in an oral interview, when
interviewer and interviewee meet for perhaps the only contact which
they may ever have, the technique devised by Sneddon is suggested,
llere words of graded difficulty are introduced in simple sentences
in such a way, that if the interviewee understands the meaning
of the key word, his knowledge will be revealed by his answer. He
can then be led through a scale of words which become harder and
harder until the subject's limit is reached.

The chief defect of this method is that the interviewer must
be sure that the interviewee actually knows the meaning of the
word; or that, in other words, he is not "bluffing." Questions
which might be answered by "yes" and "no" are to be avoided.
These and other complications render the "disguised" method of
testing intelligence somewhat impracticable, but with further experience, the difficulties should be overcome.
11 Terman, L. M., Measurement of intelligence. Boston: Houghton, Miflin,
191G (p. 230.)

Summary
--------

With the exception of the work on pre-school children very
little has been done on the oral vocabularies of children or adults.

The importance of pursuing such research is indicated by the significant results obtained from studies on groups or individuals to
whom formal vocabulary tests have been applied.

Methods have varied from that of counting the words actually
used in a given time, to formal definition requirements, and more
recently to presenting the test word in a sentence and requiring
an understanding answer. This last method, which has most promise
for the interview, has not yet been perfected.

The influences at work in determining the quality and extent
of a person's vocabulary are: general intelligence; chronological
age up to adult mental levels; environment, consisting of such determiners as education, general knowledge, social and cultural background, special interests, and special experiences.
Knowledge of what good and poor vocabularies signify may
guide the observation of the interviewer in regard to these factors.

Much more research is needed before these factors can be designated as facts.
