William Dove
=============

Art. VI.
The much-agitated question respecting this man's moral and
legal responsibility has been determinately and irrevocabty
settled by the public executioner! William Dove was hanged
on the 8th of August. On the evening of the 1st of August
the editor of this journal had a lengthened interview with Mr.
Barret, Dove s solicitor, and Mr. Morley, one of the witnesses
for the Crown. Mr. Morley was only called upon at the trial to
depose to the fact of Mrs. Dove's death being caused by strych-
nine. No question was put to this witness respecting the pri-
soner's state of mind. Mr. Morley, however, entertaining a
strong conviction of Dove's irresponsibility, considered it to be
his duty, after his conviction, to cooperate with Mr. Barret and
others in making strenuous efforts to save him from the gallows.
With this humane object Mr. Morley, accompanied by Mr.
Barret, came to London; and it was at this time that the dis-
cussion referred to in the subjoined letter took place. The letter
explains itself.

23, Cavendish-square, Aug. 1st, 1856.
Ml dear Sir,?Since my interview with you and Mr. Morley, late
on Friday night, I have given the subject of our earnest conversation
and long discussion, much anxious thought and consideration.
You will recollect that at that interview I had no hesitation in
expressing to you and Mr. Morley my decided and unqualified opinion
respecting Dove's legal criminality. I have felt since his trial and
conviction no sympathy for him, being strongly impressed with a
notion that, if the punishment of death were under any circumstances
justifiable, it should be carried into effect in Dove's case. I am bound,
however, to confess, that after carefully and dispassionately weighing the
additional facts laid before me by Mr. Morley and yourself illustrative
of Dove's mental history, I have been induced somewhat to modify my
opinion of the case. The words " defective intellect," embodied by
the jury in their verdict, as justifying their recommendation of Dove
to mercy, are not, according to my apprehension, accurately descriptive
or expressive of Dove's mental condition.

His case is one of imbecility. If Dove's intellect were only " defec-
tive " or weak in the popular signification of these terms, he ought to
be viewed as a responsible person. It would be fatal to the best
interests of society if mere " defect of intellect " were considered in
our courts of law as a valid excuse or plea in criminal cases. God
forbid that so dangerous a doctrine should ever be propounded by those
usually called upon to aid, by their scientific testimony, the administra-
tion of justice. If this doctrine be advanced, by what means are we to
gauge the strength of the human intellect ? Who is to decide upon
the psychological test or standard of mental or legal responsibility in
such cases ? The great mass of criminals have admitted weak intel-
lects, defective understandings, perverted moral sense, and no just
recognition of the difference between meum and tuum. Such persons
are, nevertheless, rightly considered as responsible for their actions,
and are justly punished when they violate the law.

I think, however, the case of Dove may safely be removed from the
category of healthy, sane, or even " weak"-minded men. -
His conduct through life has been remarkably characteristic of
imbecility or idiocy. It appears that his mental infirmity manifested
itself in early life, and that those who were engaged in his educational
training perceived a remarkable and obvious natural defect in the con-
stitution of his intellect. His actions were not merely those ot a
wicked, vicious, or eccentric man, but they evidently sprung out of a
stunted, irregularly developed, congenitally defective, and badly or-
ganized brain and mind.

If Dove had been made, a short period before murdering his wife,
the subject of a commission of lunacy, the question at issue being his
competency to manage his ?property, what, I ask, would have been the
verdict of the jury ? If the fact of his writing letters in blood to the
devil, his faith in the supernatural power and predictions of Harrison,
the wizard; the tremendous influence which this "weird" person
obtained over him; his cruelties to animals ; his having threatened to
shoot his father, and afterwards himself; his cutting down his corn
when quite green simply because his neighbour had cut his down when
ripe ; his recklessness of conduct, want of moral perception, his in-
ability in early life to acquire ordinary knowledge, and other facts
sworn to in evidence as illustrative of his sad mental state, were laid
before an intelligent jury empannelled to try the question of Dove's
mental soundness and ability to manage himself and his affairs, can
any reasonable doubt be entertained as to the result of the inquiry'?
Upon evidence considerably less satisfactory and convincing than that
adduced in Dove's case, I have seen juries unanimously decide as to
the mental unsoundness of individuals. Consider, for example, the
celebrated case of Mrs. Cumming. This lady was pronounced insane
by a jury, among whom were several county magistrates, simply because
she was fond of the society of a few favourite cats, had an impaired
memory (no wonderful fact, considering her bodily indisposition and
advanced age), and was alleged to entertain a strong aversion to some
members of her family who had by force dragged her out of her own
house, and confined her in a lunatic asylum. From my knowledge of
the conduct of juries, I feel convinced that Dove never would have
escaped the verdict of insanity if the question for their consideration
had been of a civil, and not of a criminal, character?one of property,
not of life.

If Dove's mind was so unsound as to render him manifestly incom-
petent to manage himself or his affairs, ought he to be viewed as alto-
gether responsible for any criminal act he might be guilty of? I use
the word " altogether" advisedly; for although I am willing to acqui-
esce in the wishes expressed by yourself, Mr. Morley, and others, to
state in writing an opinion adverse to carrying into effect the extreme
penalty of the law in Dove's case, I am bound to say that I shall deeply
regret if he ivere in consequence of his alleged "defect of intellect" to
be exempt from punishment or penal servitude for the remainder of his
life. I have no hesitation, however, in asserting that it would be a
great and fatal mistake and a grave fact of inhumanity to hang this
wretched man. Considering the conclusive evidence of Dove's mental
imbecility, his life, 1 think, ought not to be forfeited on the gallows.
The absence of all symptoms of delusion or hallucination renders the
case different from those of ordinary insanity with which our Courts
of law have to deal, and consequently to those not practically cognizant
with the insane, the somewhat anomalous case of Dove appears one
most difficult of comprehension. Hie eye of the practical psycho-
logical physician views in this case one ol modified responsibility. As
in many instances of indictment for capital crimes, the jury records,
with the view of saving life, the merciful verdict of, " manslaughter,"
instead of " murder," in consequence of the criminal having been
impelled to the commission of the crime by great provocation, or been
led to imbue his hands in the blood of a fellow-creature, during a
moment of intense and uncontrollable mental irritation; so what is
designated by lawyers as "partial" insanity, mental imbecility, or
idiocy, when clearly and conclusively established, should invax-iably be
considered as greatly extenuating circumstances, or conditions of mind
which 'should, in every case, absolve those so aj/licted from the extreme
penalty of the law. I hope I have succeeded in clearly conveying to
you and Mr. Morley my opinion of this deeply important case. If
Dove were positively insane and quite incapable of distinguishing
between right and wrong, I would send him to a lunatic asylum for
the rest of his days, instead of to the hulks or to a penal settlement,
but recognising in h is case a partial degree of responsibility, co-existing-
with much mental disorder, evidently interfering with the healthy exer-
cise of thought, judgment, and volition, it would be unjustifiable and
cruel to treat him like a perfectly sane man, or as an ordinary and
responsible criminal, and consign him to the hands of the public exe-
cutioner.

I pray to God that so revolting an exhibition may not be witnessed,
and that your humane and praiseworthy exertions to save this man's
life may be crowned with success.
I remain, yours faithfully,
Fokbes Winslow, M.D.

In justice to Mr. Morley, we append a copy of a letter in
relation to W. Dove's state of mind, which he addressed to Mr.
Baron Bramwell, the presiding judge.
Leeds, July 24, 1856.

My Lord,?The position in which I am placed in reference to the
unfortunate man now under sentence of death, seems to make it my
duty to address your lordship, although in so doing I feel that I must
apologise.

The counsel for the crown, in his reply, commented on the fact,
that I was not asked, by the defence, my opinion as to Dove's mental
condition, and he argued from that omission that I, his medical
attendant, must be of opinion that he was of perfectly sound mind.
In disclaiming the opinion thus attributed to me, I beg leave to
submit to your lordship the view I really hold, and which,before the trial,
I frankly expressed, to those engaged both for prosecution and defence.
The opinion I gave was to this effect?

1. That Dove possessed some knowledge of right and wrong, and
was free from any dominant delusion which bore upon his crime, and
that, therefore, he was not, in strict and legal sense, of insane mind.
2. That, nevertheless, his mind is so weak and disordered and
morally helpless, as to give him only a minimum of self-control, leaving
him powerless against evil influences and bad passions ; and since
diminished moral power must imply diminished responsibility, that his
case is one requiring merciful consideration as to degree of punish-
ment.

1 do not attribute tlie weak and disordered state of Dove's mind
merely to drunkenness, had habits, or indulgence in vicious propen-
sities. His mental peculiarities were evident long before these causes
could he in operation. In his earliest infancy they were manifest.
His mind had congenital defects, so that, as I believe, he never had the
power which sane men possess to keep himself in a moral course of
conduct.

This explains the fact that although bred in a family remarkable for
goodness in its most pure and gentle forms, he alone, unlike every one
else of the family, was a wicked, silly, and cruel child. It also explains
the fact that although surrounded by the best examples, and supplied
with every incentive to good, and placed under the care of excellent
instructors, who tried every likely method of training, all these
influences, contrary to ordinary experience, entirely failed, and left him
as a man with the same mental weakness and disorder that had marked
him when a child.

A principal defect in his mind appears to me to be its utter lack of
moral sensibility ; when he uses terms expressive.of ideas of right and
wrong, he has no corresponding feeling of their force and meaning, nor
do such terms excite in his mind those emotions of a moral nature
which they produce in a sound mind, and without which an intellect
far higher than his would be powerless for good.

I can assure your lordship that this view of Dove's mental character
is not set forth now for the first time, in order just to save his life.
In one degree or another, it has always been the expressed opinion of
those who knew him. He was from boyhood classed with those of
weak and disordered mind. As proof that this is not an invention of
the day, but an old and sincere opinion, I may state that I learn from
intimate friends of the family, that his late father took him many
years ago to persons familiar with the insane, for consultation as
to the proper mode of treatment, and as to the propriety of re-
straint.

I enclose a copy of a letter alluded to on the' trial, which was
addressed to me during the inquest by a gentleman very competent to
form an opinion, and of the highest integrity, but who, unfortunately,
is just now in such an excitable state of mind, that it was not deemed
sale to himself to subject him to the excitement of the witness-box.
I beg to apologise for the intrusion upon your lordship's attention,
And remain, my Lord,
\our Lordship's most obedient servant,
GrEOKGE Moeley.

From earliest childhood to his committal to prison he was
proved to have entertained one unbroken series of the wildest
fancies that could have entered the mind of a person out-
side the walls of Bethlem, and to have been guilty, as a child,
of extravagant, unnatural, and unaccountable conduct?such
as chasing his sisters with a hot poker, setting fire to the
curtains of his bedroom, locking up lighted candles in closets,
tormenting cats and kittens; as a schoolboy, buying a pistol
at twelve years old to shoot his lather and schoolmaster, and
convincing successive teachers at successive institutions of the
perverse and irrational character of his mind, and of the im-
possibility of acting upon it by the ordinary means of educa-
tional treatment. His parents, in despair, tried the influences of
agricultural teaching and employment. As a farmer's assistant
lie attempts to poison his master's horses?pours vitriol on his
master's cows and calves. He hoists up the hinder parts of the
cattle by ropes, threatens to murder his master, loads the musket
of a fellow-servant till it bursts, delights in burning his master's
hedges and cart-covers ? he is never able to raise himself abover
the society of the farming boys, and at the end of five years is
almost as ignorant of the science of husbandry as he was when
he began. The effect of foreign travel is then tried. He is sent
to Canada, not, as was suggested, as a sound man, able to take
care of himself, but committed to the anxious care of friends in
that country. He returns, and tells incredible stories of wild
and imaginary adventures which he represents to have had with
the American Indians. A small farm is then taken for him in
his father's name, and shortly afterwards he marries. As a
farmer and master of a family, he is continually setting fire to
his housekeeper's cap, throwing water over her whilst ironing,
recounting imaginary conflicts with robbers, patrolling the fields
by night with fire-arms to meet imaginary assailants, leaping the
hedges like a wild animal, riding and driving furiously, maltreat-
ing horses, killing trees by fantastical treatment, cutting his
corn crops green, to be before his neighbours; attempting to
fatten cows in a single night; incessantly playing with guns,
pistols, and gunpowder, under the most dangerous circumstances,
threatening the life of every one around him?his father, his
mother-in-law, his wife, and himself; alternately quarrelling and
gambolling with his wife, carrying her on liisback,on his shoulders,
in his arms and under his arm, amid the shouts of spectators;
dealing with a wizard, sometimes for a spell upon the steward,
sometimes for a spirit to torment his wife back to his bed. He
fancies himself sold to the Devil, and his house haunted with
strange noises. At Normanton, and afterwards at Leeds, he
displays the same extravagance of conduct and delusion, and the
circumstances of the crime itself, which are dwelt upon as proof
of deliberate design, are pregnant with evidence of defective
organization or permanent disease of the brain. He is actuated
by a faith amounting to fanaticism in the predictions whicli he
had received, or fancied he had received from the astrologer as
to the term of his wife's existence.

He first asks the wizard for strychnine, then procures it in
large quantities from the surgery of the very medical man who
was attending his wife, and with the knowledge of at least two
of the assistants!

He mentions the poison to his wife, his servant, and his
neighbours. He summons old friends and new ones to the
scene. He calls in his mother and sister, and writes for the
mother and sister of his wife. On the first attack he runs for
the surgeon's assistant, and betrays himself by asking whether
there will be an examination of the body after death, and by protest-
ing against it. He tells Mr. Morley, in his wife's presence, that
she will die; and in defiance of assurances of her improvement,
he insists to all comers on the certainty of her death ; and shows
his own sense of the fatality attached to the ] st of March by
proclaiming, that if she gets over that day she will soon be well.
When she is in her last struggles he runs for the surgeon and
physician, and again objects on the road to a post mortem
examination. Immediately after her death, he approaches the
corpse of his wife, kisses it, exclaiming, " So, Lord, teacli us
to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom." During the inquest, he tells the astrologer in a
public-house, overheard by several persons, that he had been
dealing in strychnine, and in a second public-house shows how
much strychnine would kill a person. Before and immediately
after the death, he is constantly talking about marrying again,
not merely to neighbours, servants, and absolute strangers, but
to his deceased wife's own mother. It is suggested that his
object was to marry Mrs. Whitham, a lady of irreproachable
character and manners, who lived next door to him, and used to
come into his house when summoned by rapping at the wall.
Such being his presumed object, he invites a stranger, whom he
had never seen in his life before, to come up with some boon
companions, when he should see the wife's death announced in
the newspapers, and have a regular jollification.

Dove's father, a man of exemplary excellence, entertain-
ing strong suspicions of his insanity, consulted the governor of
the county lunatic asylum as to the educational treatment
proper to be adopted in ^ his case. He accordingly applied
every variety of means which science or experience could sug-
gest for his mental treatment, short of confining him in a lunatic
asylum. Recognising his state of mind, he cautioned the family
of the deceased when his son had made proposals of marriage;
and finally, by his last will, instead of providing for him as he
did for his other children, lie did so only by means of the trusts
which it is usual to create for the protection of persons who are
notoriously unable, in consequence of some mental unsoundness,
to take care of themselves and property.

Such are the salient points with regard to Dove's mental con-
dition, which we gather from the facts deposed to in his favour
at the trial, as well as from Mr. Barret's able resume of the case
in his memorial to the Secretary of State and crown. We again
repeat, that this man ought not to have been hanged. As a
grave question had been raised as to his mental soundness and
responsibility, and as the facts deposed to certainly established,
at the least, a strong prima facie case in the prisoner's favour,
according to the first principles of our criminal code he ought to
have had the benefit of this doubt, and to have been exempt
from the extreme punishment awarded for his crime. We asked
only that his life should be saved. Had we pleaded for his
exemption from all punishment, we should have violated our
own sense of public justice. In another part of the journal will be
found Dove's final confession. This should be carefully read by
all interested in his case. It throws great light upon his state
of mind, and we think conclusively establishes the justice of the
line of defence adopted at the trial. Dove was not a lunatic
or an insane person, in the scientific signification of these terms;
but there was just enough of congenital imbecility and defective
intelligence in connexion with his state of mind as to justify the
merciful recommendation of the jury in favour of a modification
of punishment. If the Secretary of State, in deference to the
advice of high legal authorities, considers that any good can re-
sult from hanging men like Dove, he will find, when it is too late,
that he has committed an egregious blunder. Undue severity
? of punishment has no deterring or beneficial influence upon the
criminal portion of the population. No fact in history is more
conclusively established than this, that severity of punishment
invariably increases crime. It is not our intention to dis-
cuss at any length the legal dicta of Mr. Baron Bramwell,
as expounded in his charge to the jury. A few words will suf-
fice for this part of the subject. Mr. Baron Bramwell declares
that every man was presumed to be sane, until the contrary was
proved to the satisfaction of the jury. "To establish a defence
on the ground of insanity, it must be proved that he was, at the
time he committed the offence, labouring under such defect of
reason, and such a disease of the mind, as not to know the
nature of the act; or if he knew it, then that he did not know
that what he was doing was wrong. If he did an act knowing
it to be wrong, or contrary to the law of the land, he would be
punishable. If he laboured under a partial delusion?if he
was under the delusion that the deceased had inflicted some
injury upon him, and murdered lier while under that delu-
sion, he would be none the less amenable to punishment.
Therefore, according to the law as laid down by the highest
authorities, to exempt a man from the penal consequences of his
actions?those actions being contrary to law?the jury must be
of opinion that at the time he did the act, he was not conscious
that the act was one he ought not to commit. Of course that
also meant that it was an act prohibited by law; because a man
might imagine that there were some things perfectly right which
were yet prohibited by law. For example, some persons might
think it perfectly right to rob the rich to give to the poor; but
if a person with such an opinion were to commit a theft, he would
nevertheless be liable to the penal consequences of his acts. But
if he not only thought it would be right so to do, but that he
was not doing anything wrong or liable to punishment for it,
then they should acquit him on the ground of insanity. Sup-
pose a man imagined that another had done him an injury, and
waylaid and murdered him, that imaginary injury would not be
an excuse for the crime. But supposing the injury were real,
and not imaginary, that would not justify.him in taking away
life; if he did so, he must suffer for it. Punishment was not
merely administered in reference to an act done, but a criminal
was punished to correct him and to hold out an example to
others. If they punished a man who did not know he had done
wrong, what example would that be to the world ? People would
say they had punished a man who was unconscious of wrong.

But if they punished a man who possessed evil propensities and
gratified them, they would deter him for the future, and also
hold out a warning to others not to follow his example. If they
let it go forth to the world that they would not punish a man ?
who had a propensity or desire to do wrong, they would take
away from persons in that position one of the things that would
have prevented them from indulging in that propensity. Hence,
to a man of weak mind and strong animal propensities, the
knowledge that the law would not punish him would be to take
from him one of the first and most powerful reasons for not re-
peating his crime.

According to the dicta of this Judge, no man is legally irre-
sponsible unless he is in a state of absolute dementia, or, in other
words, to use the language of Mr. Baron Bramwell, he labours
" under such a defect of reason, and such a disease of the
mind, as not to know the nature of the act." In order to esta-
blish a valid plea of insanity in criminal cases, if this doctrine is
to be held as orthodox, a man must be "proved to be idiotic or
demented. The great majority, or at least one-third of the
insane actually in confinement at this moment, are, according to
Mr. Justice Bramwell's exposition of the law, legally responsible
for their actions, for they are clearly conscious of the " nature
of their acts." It is a great mistake to imagine that persons de-
cidedly insane, and undoubtedly irresponsible, have no knowledge
of the " nature of their acts," and are not also fully cognisant
that what they often do is both morally and legally " wrong."
We solemnly enter our protest against the doctrine that per-
sons " partially insane," are to be viewed and treated as respon-
sible beings ! Science, justice, and humanity, cry out loudly
against so fatal and monstrous a dogma. " Suppose," says Baron
Bramwell, " a man imagined that another had done him an
injury, and waylaid and murdered him, that imaginary injury
would not be an excuse for the crime."

We maintain, in the face of the world, and in the teeth of
men of science practically acquainted with the phenomena of
insanity, that it would be an iniquitous, unjustifiable, and an
indefensible act to hang a man who committed murder under a
delusion that the victim had " done him an imaginary injury."
This was the character of M'Naughten's insanity: he shot Mr.
Drummond under the influence of a delusion of this kind, and he
was properly acquitted on the ground of insanity. Westron shot
Mr. Waugh under somewhat similar circumstances, and his life
was spared. In Westron's case there was some semblance of
foundation for his impression relative to Mr. Waugh, although,
not according to our judgment sufficient to justify his acquittal.

The jury, however, recommended Westron to mercy on account
of his " predisposition to insanity," and he escaped from the
gallows. We presume that the insanity of this man is now
an acknoidedged fact, for we saw him not many days back,
herding with some thirty or forty murderers in the criminal den
of Bethlem Hospital ! We feel that we are exposing ourselves to
much obloquy, abuse, and animadversion for venturing to breathe
a word against the strictly legal view of the question under con-
sideration, raising a voice in favour of the criminal " partially
insane," and going counter to popular clamour and prejudice. But
we must not be deterred from an exposition of what we consider
to be agreeable to the principles of science, and in unison with
the sacred cause of TRUTH, by any apprehensions like those referred
to. All feelings of a personal character dwindle into utter nothing-
ness when placed in juxtaposition with the great and eternal
principles of justice and humanity. It is our duty, as public
journalists, to expound what we conceive to be the right, philo-
sophical, scientific, and practical view of the question of insanity
in relation to jurisprudence, with the hope that the day is not
far distant when men of great legal eminence will not only
acknowledge the truth of our views, but act upon them when
enquired in the solemn administration of the law.
