On Somnambulism
================

Art. II

In common with all animals which possess well-defined sensuous
relations with the external world, man exists in two distinct, and,
so far as the organs of these relations are involved, opposed con-
ditions?one of waking and one of sleep, labour and repose alter-
nating. Under certain limitations, this alternation appears to be
a general law of organization, more or less modified according to
the varying complexity of the functions of life. It is true that
in sleep only the animal or relational functions are at rest; the
repose of the tissues concerned in vegetative life is of much
shorter duration, action and rest recurring every instant. It is
in accordance with the same principles that we find the amount
and regularity of sleep in great measure proportionate to the
development of relational life. In the higher carnivorous verte-
brata, where the muscu]ar and nervous tissues are at the maximum
development, sleep is much more required than in those of lower
type where the nutritive functions appear predominant; and in
those lowest forms of organic existence which still appear to have
some trace of animal nature, but whose chief and entire function
appears to be assimilative, we have no evidence of the occurrence
of the phenomenon at all. As might be expected, it is in man,
where the balance of the two classes of functions is most evident,
and where the operations are still more complicated by the super-
addition of an intellectual nature, that the periodical recurrence
of repose is most marked, and its regularity most essential to the
well-being of the individual.

It will materially assist our investigation into some of the in-
teresting phenomena involved in our subject, if we briefly examine
the points of contrast between these two opposed conditions, as
well as the points of resemblance, and those states in which they
appear to trespass upon each other's domains.

What are the characteristics of a healthy waking man, mens
sana in corpore sano> ??As the basis of all his knowledge, and of
all his actions, there is a profound conviction and consciousness of
distinct existence and personality, a strong intuitive and unde-
finable, yet irrefragable, sense of the unchanging "I" (It is
necessary to mention this fundamental truth, because in dream-
ing, and certain forms of insanity, it is very frequently utterly
lost from the mind.) This consciousness is modified and inten-
sified by the evidence of the senses?these respond instantane-
ously and accurately to their own appropriate stimuli, the eye to
the undulations of light, the ear to the vibrations of sound, and
so on with the other senses, none of which can supply the place
of another; nor is the general sense of touch ever capable of being
exalted to the condition of a special sense. But not only do these
organs take cognizance of the external world and its phenomena,
but the mind receives the impressions from them, and is prepared
at once to exercise upon them its various functions; memory,
imagination, fancy, comparison, judgment, calculation, all these,
and all other faculties into which metaphysicians have dissected
the Divine spark, are either in activity, or ready to be so, at the
command of the will. Finally, the muscular system obeys
accurately the mandates of the will.

So far as to the positive phenomena?but the negative indica-
tions of health and wakefulness are not less important for our
purposes. These may be briefly summed up in a few words?
complete unconsciousness of all organic or vegetative processes.
And daring this time a waste, both of substance and of vital
energy is going on, which requires the periodical return of sleep
for its repair, the phenomena of which condition we have now to
notice.
" Somne, quies rerum, plaeidissime, Somne, Deorum,
Pax animi, quern cura fugit?"

Thus by negations is sleep invoked by the ancient poet; and
certainly sleep in its perfect form is only to be described by nega-
tions, with the exception of the continuance of the organic func-
tions, which remain nearly unaffected, or in some cases increased
in intensity, as Hippocrates justly observed, somnus labor visce-
ribus. Perfect sleep is characterized by a complete and profound
unconsciousness of everything, even of existence?the senses are
closed against all impressions, the limbs have become relaxed
and inactive, even volition, in common with every other faculty
of the mind, is in abeyance?phenomena well and elegantly
portrayed by Lucretius?

? ? ubi est distracta per artus
Vis animai?

Debile fit corpus, languescunt omnia membra,
Brachia, palpebrseque cadunt, poplitesque procumbunt."
Many extraordinary histories are related in illustration of the
extent to which insensibility to outward impressions may be
carried; one will suffice, as an extreme case. It is quoted by
Dr Carpenter, with tokens of credence from Mr. It. Smith, late
senior surgeon to the Bristol Infirmary, under whose observation
it occurred. " A travelling man, one winter's evening, laid him-
self down upon the platform of a lime-kiln, placing his feet, pro-
bably numbed with cold, upon the heap of stones, newly put on
to burn through the night. Sleep overcame him in this situation;
the fire gradually rising and increasing until it ignited the stones
upon which his feet were placed. Lulled by the warmth, the
man slept on; the fire increased until it burned one foot (which
probably was extended over a vent-hole) and part of the leg
above the ankle entirely off, consuming that part so effectually
that a cinder-like fragment was alone remaining, and still the
poor wretch slept on ; and in this state was found by the kiln-
man in the morning." He experienced no pain when he awoke,
but he died in hospital about a fortnight afterwards. It appears
probable, however, that the atmosphere in this case was charged
with carbonic acid, and that the sleep was nearly approaching to,
if not altogether identical with, coma.

Sleep is not always, nor even commonly, thus profound ; yet,
even under its ordinary aspects, it presents such a picture of in-
activity as to have been considered by many, both poets and
philosophers, as nearly related to death. " Sleep," says Macnish,
" is the intermediate state between wakefulness and death."
Diogenes is said to have spoken, in his last moments, of death
and sleep as brother and sister. Cicero speaks thus of the
affinity?nihil videmus morti tarn simile quam somnum;
and Ovid in like manner asks?

" Quid est somnus, gelida; nisi mortis imago ?"
Yet the analogy is much more poetical than true; sleep is as
far removed from death as muscular repose is from paralysis. It
is probably the normal state of foetal existence, and throughout
life it is the great agent in repairing the ravages of constant
molecular changes, and averting the ever-threatening somatic
death.

The most usual form of sleep is by no means so profound as
that which we have described; some of the functions both animal
and intellectual are often at work, and dreaming, with or with-
out accompanying action, is the result. In such a case, a kind of
consciousness is restored, yet often with peculiar modifications,
one of the most remarkable being the loss of that distinct sense
of individuality by which the waking man has been said to be
characterized. Imagination and memory are both awake, at
times more active than in true wakefulness; but they play
strange tricks with each other and with their possessor. He can
contemplate his own murder, or attend his own funeral, without
any feeling of surprise or awe; he can commit the most fearful
crimes without any horror; he sees the most tremendous con-
vulsions of nature and the utter subversion of her ordinary laws
without astonishment; he converses with the dead, yet asks not
how they have escaped their prison-house ; and with the living,
whom he knows to be separated from him by seas and continents;
and all seems natural and a matter of course. Truly has sleep
a thousand sons (natorum mille suorum, Ovid).

Such are the ordinary and typical forms of man's two lives?
the waking and the sleeping life; yet in this, as in all other in-
stances, nature does nothing by sudden leaps (nihil per saltum).
As night and day are united by twilight?as the two great
divisions of organic existences merge into each other through the
scarce distinguishable classes of phytozoa and zoophyta?as the
various genera of both sub-kingdoms are united by links very
nearly allied to both the neighbours?so waking allies itself to
sleep by abstraction and reverie?so sleep allies itself to waking
by dreaming, by sleep-talking, and by the sleep-vigil, commonly
called somnambulism. So closely allied are the extreme forms
of reverie and of somnambulism?so difficult in some cases is it
to state the precise diagnostic marks?that a few remarks on the
former will properly precede and illustrate our more especial
theme. Reverie is a state of the mind in which it wanders to a
thousand different subjects independent of volition?the atten-
tion cannot be directed to any one point; on the other hand,
abstraction is characterized by the total absorption of the mind
in one subject, the senses taking cognizance only of such matters
as are connected with the subject under examination. Distinct
as are these two conditions in their origin, they are often con-
founded together; and, indeed, the external phenomena are
similar, being summed up in a more or less complete insensi-
bility of surrounding objects or influences. Great students,
especially those of the mathematical or physical sciences, are
very prone to falling into this state. Sir Isaac Newton is said
to have committed many absurdities when thus absorbed ; such
as taking a lady's finger for a tobacco-stopper. Archimedes,
during the siege of Syracuse, was either totally insensible to or
regardless of the noisy operations around, and was insisting on
finishing the problem on which he was engaged, when he re-
ceived his death-blow. The mind appears to be in a state of
polarity with regard to its subject, and only responds to the
allied influences. Of its sensibility to questions and remarks on
the one subject and no other, advantage may occasionally be
taken, botli in the waking dream and the dream vigil, to attract
the attention and gradually to dissipate the absorbed condition.
An amusing instance is given by Sir Walter Scott, which,
though in a romance, is such a life picture, and so perfect an
illustration of these remarks, that we may be pardoned for in-
troducing it here. In " St. Ronan's Well," Mr. Touchwood pays
a visit to an abstracted clergyman, Mr. Cargill, whom he finds
lost in Palestine, and whom he cannot recal by any direct ad-
dress. At length the student raised his head, and spoke as if in
soliloquy, " From Aeon, Accor, or St. John d'Acre, to Jerusalem,
how far ?" " Twenty-three miles N.N.W./' answered his visitor,
without hesitation. Mr. Cargill expressed no surprise at a
question put to himself being answered by the voice of another?
it was the tenor of the answer alone which he attended to in his
reply. " Ingulphus and Jeffrey Winesauf do not agree in this."
The opening for conversation having thus been made, he is gra-
dually led away to other matters.

For further illustrations of this subject, we refer our readers
to the seventeenth chapter of " The Philosophy of Sleep," where
many amusing and almost incredible accounts are given of ex-
treme abstraction. We should not have dwelt so long on these
preliminary topics, but for the light which they seem calculated to
throw upon the connexions of the sleep-vigil?a term which we
prefer to somnambulism, inasmuch as this latter expresses only
the activity of one function?locomotion?which is by no means
the most remarkable of the phenomena.

From the state of profound unconsciousness above described,
to a condition with difficulty distinguished from waking, Ave
meet with every possible gradation. The faculties one after
another awake, till in some cases we meet with perfectly lucid
somnambulism. The first step to this is dreaming. Dreams for
the most part are incoherent, shadowy resemblances of scenes
and ideas before experienced, most frequently in new and gro-
tesque combinations. The reason and judgment are in abeyance,
?we reason, and feel satisfied with the justice and propriety of
our conclusions; we compose verses which charm us with their
elegant cadence, yet if we can recal these processes when we
awake, our arguments are nonsense and our lines doggrel. Much
more rarely, the dream is not a repetition "merely of past
thoughts, but is supplementary to the day's exercises,?what
has been left undone in waking moments is finished?and well
finished?in sleep ;* compositions which have overtasked the
waking mind have been known to be dreamed out, and accu-
rately remembered afterwards ; new ideas are likewise originated,
as was Coleridge's "Kubla Khan," during sleep. Further ill us-
* See " Cyc. of Anat. and Physiology"?Art. Sleep. By Dr Carpenter.
trations may be found in Dr Good's " Book of Nature/' and in
" The Philosophy of Sleep," already quoted.

But the dream is occasionally so vivid as to awaken the power
of voluntary motion, and the dreamer enacts or speaks his dream.
Hence arise gestures, muttering, talking, walking, and the per-
formance of the most complex operations in sleep. It very
frequently happens that the dream having been spoken or acted
out, the polarity of the mind with relation to that subject is ex-
hausted, and the dream is forgotten, so that the sleep-walker is
in general quite unconscious not only of the act itself, but of
the train of thought which excited or attended it.

Having thus traced the condition of the mind through its
successive stages of complete wakefulness, reverie, abstraction,
sleep, and dreaming, to a pseudo-waking and active state again,
we shall now give a few illustrations of the phenomena of sleep-
vigil, beginning with the simplest forms,?viz., where the
sleejDing acts are mere mechanical repetitions of daily perform-
ances ; and advancing to those of great intellectual complication,
that we may be better prepared by a collection of facts, induc-
tively to ascertain the true and essential nature of the phe-
nomena.

It is those acts which are most habitual by day, that are most
frequently re-enacted by night, and these are sometimes of an
extraordinary nature. The simplest are those connected with
visiting the various scenes of labour. A young man being asleep
in the pmnp-house of the mine in which he worked, rose and
walked to the door, against which he leaned some time ; then
he walked to the engine shaft, and safely descended twenty
fathoms, where he was found with his back resting on the ladder.
When he had been with difficulty awoke, he was quite at a loss
to account for his being there.

Those who ride much on horseback will either do so in their
sleep, or will imitate the action, as in a case related by Petrus
Diversus, where a young man climbed up, and mounted across
the battlements, where he spurred vigorously, and was much
alarmed on awaking at the risk he had run.

Others will even swim for a considerable time without awaking,
of which there are many instances on record. Dr Franklin
relates that he Rimself fell asleep whilst floating on his back, and
slept for an hour.

In a case related by Macnish, occurring on the coast of Ireland,
the sleeper walked through a difficult and dangerous road, nearly
two miles, and plunging into the water, had swam a mile and a
half, when he was discovered, still fast asleep.

Martinet mentions a case of a watchmaker's assistant who had
an attack of somnambulism every fortnight, and in that state,
was accustomed to arise and do his usual work with as much
accuracy as when awake. Dr Gall mentions a miller, who every
night arose and set his mill working, recollecting nothing of
what had passed in the morning. Instances are innumerable of
these mechanical employments being carried on in sleep,?it is
needless to multiply them?we pass on to cases of a more
complex character. In somnambulism the eyes are often shut,
and if open, they are evidently not in a state adapted to ordi-
nary vision, as will be described afterwards; yet feats can be
performed with safety and accuracy, which the individual would
never dare to attempt when awake. An account in illustration
we extract from the " Philosophy of Sleep ?" A story is told
of a boy, who dreamed that he got out of bed, and ascended to
the summit of an enormous rock, where he found an eagle's
nest, which he brought away with him, and placed under his
bed. Now the whole of these events actually took place; and
what he conceived on waking to be a mere vision, was proved to
have had an actual existence, by the nest being found in the
precise spot where he imagined he had put it, and by the
evidence of spectators, who beheld his perilous adventure. The
precipice which he ascended, was of a nature that must have
baffled the most expert mountaineer, and such as, at other times,
he could never have scaled."

These adventures are not always unattended by danger. Schen-
kins relates an instance where the somnambulist, in attempt-
ing to get out of a window, fell and broke his thigh. A similar
accident happened to a Mr. Dubrie, a musician in Bath.

But the phenomena of somnambulism become much more
interesting and pregnant with meaning, when the manifestations
of activity are more specifically intellectual, and where at the
same time the state of the special senses can be made the subject
of observation. The senses and the intelligence appear to be
closed to ordinary influences, yet susceptible to those connected
with the dominant train of thought, sometimes to an almost
preternatural extent. We will, however, for the present, proceed
with the enumeration of facts, as related by credible writers,
leaving our analysis of them to a later period.

Henricus ab Heers relates an instance of a friend of his own,
who having been unable to finish some verses to his satisfaction
by da}'', arose in his sleep, finished them, sought out his friends,
read the verses to them, and retired to rest again. It was with
difficulty that he could be made to believe all that had occurred
on the morrow.

A very interesting account of Sign or Augustin Forari, a
notable somnambulist, is extracted from Muratori, by Dr.
Pritchard ("Treatise on Insanity," p. 435), from whom we will
borrow some details. ^ The speaker is an eye-witness, Vigneul
Marvil . Whilst still asleep," he says, " I examined him with
a candle in my hand. He was lying upon his back, and sleep-
rag with open, staring unmoved eyes. We were told that this
was a sure sign that he would walk in his sleep. I felt his
hands, and found them extremely cold, and his pulse beat so
slowly, that his blood appeared not to circulate. About mid-
night, Signer August? arose, drew aside the bed-clothes with
violence and put on his clothes. I went up to him, and held
the light under his eyes. He took no notice of it, i,houKh his
eyes were open and staring In this condition he Vent in and
out of several rooms, sought and found different objects, seemed
to hear some noises went to the stable, put the bridk on his
horse, but could not find the saddle, mounted, and walloped to
the house-door. After performing some other incoherent acts
he went into the billiard-room, and " acted the motions of a
player. He then went to a harpsichord, and played a few
irregular airs." In about two hours, he went, clothed as he was
threw himself on the bed, and slept many hours.

Louyer-Willermayinthe "Diet, des Sciences Mddicales," gives a
short account of a young man named Negretti, likewise mentioned
more at length by Dr Pritchard. It was first given by an eye-
witness, Dr Pigatti, in the "Journal Etranger," March, ] 756. He
was a servant, and had walked in his sleep from his eleventh
year. He would often repeat in his sleep his accustomed duties
of the day, and would carry trays and glasses about, and spread
the table for dinner with great accuracy, though Rio-hellini
another eye-witness, asserts that his eyes were always^ firmly'
closed. He sometimes carried about a candle but if a bottl
were substituted, it appeared to satisfy him equally well Hp
sometimes stumbled and struck himself against objects in strand
places His sense of taste appeared to be imperfect as he
would eat cabbage instead of salad, drink water for wine a d
having asked for snuff, would take coffee instead
In other instances, more of the faculties seem to have been
awake. Castell. whose case is related by an Italian physidan
was found translating Italian into French in his sleen ,1
looking for the words in a dictionary. When his caS was
extinguished, he could not proceed till he had relighted it When
he was addressed on any subject on which he was occupied he
Answered rationally, but heard nothing which was not in con
formity with that train of thought. The sense of sight appeared
similarly affected. For further details and comments upon these
cases, we refer the reader to the work by M. Bertrand which '
mentioned at the head of this paper.

The next class of cases will indicate a still more singular st t
of mind and body. For illustration we select two,?the first
related by the Archbishop of Bordeaux, concerning a young priest
in a catholic seminary. He would rise from his bed, compose,
write, and correct sermons. On one occasion, having written the
words, ce divin enfant, he had effaced the word divin, substitut-
ing adorable; but on re-reading the composition, he found that
ce would not do to stand before adorable, and inserted a t, so as
to make the word cet! Yet, extraordinary to relate, when a
card was held between his eyes and the paper, he continued his
writing and his corrections as before. He wrote music, too, with
exactness; yet all this time, if a piece of paper exactly the same
size were substituted for that in use, he would go 011 from the
same place, and put his corrections, if required, in the place cor-
responding to the error in the first paper. If the size varied, he
detected the substitution. He asked for certain things, and saw
and heard such things, but only such things, as bore directly
upon the subject of his thoughts. He detected the deceit when
water was given to him instead of brandy, which he had asked
for. Finally, he knew nothing of all that had transpired when
he awoke, but in his next paroxysm he remembered all accu-
rately, and so lived a sort of double life; a phenomenon which
we shall find more fully illustrated in other cases, and which we
believe to be universal in all the more exalted cases of ecstatic
somnambulism.

The next case is extracted from a report made to the Physical
Society of Lausanne, by a committee of gentlemen appointed to
examine a young man who was accustomed to walk in his sleep.
The subject of it was a lad about fourteen years old, of strong
constitution, but of great sensibility and irritability. The facts
observed were very similar to those just related; the same
doubtful indications of the state of the senses?the same con-
sciousness with regard to the objects upon which his thoughts
were fixed?and the same insensibility to almost all others. His
eyes were for the most part shut, and when writing he continued
to do so with the same accuracy, though a piece of thick paper
was held between his eyes and the book,?only feeling some
little inconvenience from the paper being so near the nose, and
probably impeding free respiration. He also forgot everything
that had passed during the paroxysm after he awoke, but remem-
bered it all during the next attack. We do not quote the com-
ments of the committee upon this case, as they are of less im-
portance than the facts, for which they seem hardly to account
with any probability.

We have now to notice a class of cases which, presenting fewer
anomalies in the activity of the organs of sense, are yet more
remarkable than the preceding ones, considered as phenomena
of sleep, inasmuch as there is very considerable freedom of inter-
course with those around ; and the condition might naturally he
considered as one of perfect wakefulness, but that everything
which then happens is forgotten, and only remembered during
the next paroxysm.

One of the most remarkable instances of this form of som-
nambulism is that recorded by Dr Dyce, of Aberdeen, and
quoted by both Dr Pritchard and Macnish. "The subject of
the relation was a girl of sixteen : the first symptom was a pro-
pensity to fall asleep in the evening; this was followed by the
habit of talking on these occasions, but not incoherently, as
sleep-talkers are w ont to do. She repeated the occurrences of
the day, and sang musical airs, both sacred and profane. After-
wards she became able to answer questions put to her in this
state, without being awakened. She dressed the children of the
family, still ' dead asleep/ as her mistress termed her state, and
once set in order a breakfast-table with her eyes shut.'" She
was taken to church, and appeared much affected by the sermon ;
but on being questioned, alter the fit was over, she denied ever
having been to church, but in a subsequent attack, repeated the
text and substance of the sermon. Having, by the connivance of
a depraved fellow-servant, been ill-treated during one paroxysm,
she forgot all about it when awake; but during the next attack,
told it to her mother.

A singular and interesting account of a case of spontaneous
somnambulism is graphically related by Dr Carpenter (under
whose care the patient was), in the " Cyc. of Anat. and Phys."
Art. 4 Sleep/ The peculiarity of the case was, the young lady
passed into the sleep-walking and talking condition, not as is
usual from the sleeping, but from the waking state. She could
converse rationally, with one fundamental error or delusion; but
she only saw, heard, or understood those objects or ideas which
were related to her train of thought; on awaking, all was for-
gotten, but the same ideas revived and were continued regularly
in the next attack For the very remarkable details, we refer
to the article mentioned.

These cases, singular and interesting in themselves, are perhaps
still more so, as forming a natural transition and bond of relation
between true somnambulism and what has been called double
consciousness, a peculiar diplopsychical condition, upon the nature
of which little light has hitherto been thrown by either meta-
physician or physiologist.

In illustration of this peculiar affection, we shall mention three
cases: the first two related by Prof. Silliman, in the "American
Journal of Science;" the third, from the "Medical Repository,"
by Dr Mitchell.

The subject of the first case was a lady of New England, who
became subject to what is called in the report delirium?coming
on suddenly, and going off again in the same manner, and
leaving the mind quite sound. When in conversation, she would
break off in the midst, and begin talking on some subject quite
unconnected with the previous one, to which she would not again
refer during the continuance of the delirium. " When she be-
came natural again, she would pursue the same conversation in
which she had been engaged during the lucid interval, beginning
where she had left off?sometimes completing an unfinished
story or sentence, or even an unfinished word. When the next
delirious paroxysm came on, she would continue the same conver-
sation which she had been pursuing in the preceding paroxysm;
so that she appeared as a person might be supposed to do who
had two souls, each occasionally dormant and occasionally active,
and utterly ignorant of what the other was doing."

In quoting this case, Dr Pritchard very properly remarks :?
" It is evident that, although this affection is termed delirium, it
was neither that state in the ordinary acceptation of terms, nor
any form of madness, but one of coherent reverie/'
The second case is thus quoted by Dr Pritchard, from the
same source :?" An intelligent lady, in the State of New York,
undertook a piece of fine needlework, to which she devoted her
time almost constantly for many days. Before its completion
she became suddenly delirious, (?) and she continued in that state
about seven years. She said not a word during this time about
her needlework, but on recovering suddenly from the affection
immediately inquired respecting it."

Our next case is so singular and anomalous in its details, that
we might hesitate to classify it as one of somnambulism ; but we
have as yet found no break in our series of phenomena, however
strange, arising out of sleep, and the present instance seems so
closely allied to those already related that we give it to complete
the series. The subject was a young lady, of a good constitu-
tion, excellent capacity, and well educated. " Her memory was
capacious, and well stored with a copious stock of ideas. Un-
expectedly and without any forewarning, she fell into a profound
sleep, which continued several hours beyond the ordinary term.
On waking, she was discovered to have lost every vestige of ac-
quired knowledge. Her memory was tabula rasa?words and
things were obliterated and gone. It was found necessary for
her to learn everything again. She even acquired, by new efforts,
the art of spelling, reading, writing and calculating, and gradually
became acquainted with the persons and objects around, like a
being for the first time brought into the world. In these exer-
cises she made considerable proficiency. But after a few months
another fit of somnolency invaded her. On rousing from it, she
found herself restored to the state she was in before the first
paroxj'sm, but was wholly ignorant of every event and occurrence
that had befallen her afterwards. The former condition of exist-
ence she now calls the Old state, and the latter the New state;
and she is as unconscious of her double character as two distinct
persons are of their respective natures. For example: in her old
state, she possesses all the original knowledge ; in her new state,
only what she acquired since. -If a lady or?gentleman be intro-
duced to her in the old state, and vice versa (and so of all other
matters), to know them satisfactorily, she must learn them in
both states. In the old state, she possesses fine powers of pen-
manship ; while, in the new, she writes a poor awkward hand,
having not had time or means to become expert.

During four years and upwards, she has had periodical transi-
tions from one of these states to the other. The alterations are
always consequent upon a long and sound sleep. Both the lady
and her family are now capable of conducting the affair without
embarrassment. By simply knowing whether she is in the old
or new state, they regulate the intercourse, and govern them-
selves accordingly."?(" Philosophy of Sleep, note, p. 187.)
All the phenomena occurring in such cases as those already
related, appear to be compatible with, at least apparently perfect
health. But sleep-walking and sleep-talking occasionally form a
part of, or are engrafted upon, hysterical and cataleptic affections
?and then we see the proteiform symptoms of hysteria, and the
muscular and sensitive derangements of catalepsy added to the
sufficiently singular conditions before enumerated. In catalepsy
so complicated (and hysteria strongly simulates it frequently),
it is usual to see the patient commence and end the paroxysm
with the insensible symptoms proper to the disease ; whilst the
middle part (called the " live fit," in contradistinction to the be-
ginning and end, which are called the "dead fit," in common
phrase) is characterized by talking and various actions, evincing
a peculiar kind of consciousness and sensibility to certain real
or imaginary beings or objects; whilst there is the most pro-
found insensibility to all influences from without. Thus a con-
versation may be carried on with some imaginary interlocutor,
with proper pauses for reply and rejoinder; and with one funda-
mental error, that conversation may be coherent?yet the
sufferer may be pricked or cut without evincing any conscious-
ness ; or the most pungent stimuli may be applied to the mouth,
nose, or conjunctiva, with the same absence of result. The
pages of medical history abound with records of such cases, but
we forbear to quote, as we are at present more concerned with
NO. I.?NEW SERIES. D
somnambulism in its physiological and psychical, rather than its
pathological relations.

It will be useful to review briefly the various forms of sleep-
vigil found in the foregoing cases, so as to present an analysis of
the phenomena. We have met with?
1. Profound sleep.?Unconsciousness.
2. Dreaming.?Consciousness, memory, fancy, imagination?
more rarely judgment and comparison.
3. Acted dreams.?All the former faculties enjoying a sort of
wakefulness, and at the same time, volition. This class is
only intended to include gestures, &c.
4. True somnambulism.?Rising from bed, visiting accus-
tomed or unaccustomed scenes, and performing various
mechanical acts. Under this head we have seen the indi-
vidual performing the most dangerous feats, and the com-
mand of the muscular system brought to the greatest
perfection.

5. True sleep-vigil. ? Here, in addition to the foregoing
phenomena, many acts of the mind are performed, as judg-
ment, synthesis, analysis, &c.; and the senses, though
closed to ordinary influences, seem to be brought into some
kind of activity. Here begins also double consciousness, as
yet extending only to the sleeping state,? that is, the
patient knows nothing of the sleeping acts when awake,
though he acts when asleep as if upon a consciousness of
what has passed when awake, repeating or completing the
acts of that condition. But the various paroxysms of sleep-
. vigil are attended by a continuity of consciousness,?that
is, the acts of one are remembered in the next.

6. Complete double consciousness, or double life.?A new life,
commencing and ending with deep sleep; utter oblivion of
everything before passed; this condition alternating with
the old life at uncertain intervals, and the paroxysms of
indefinite length. This can scarcely be termed somnam-
bulism, but is noticed as being so closely allied by many
of its phenomena to that condition.

It will be evident from a careful consideration of these succes-
sive conditions, that somnambulism is not, as M. Willermay and
many others consider it, an intermediate state between sleep and
waking, (un etat intermediate entre la veille et le sommeil.)*
That in the slighter forms of the affection many of the faculties
enjoy a sort of activity, is clear; that in the higher forms of
somno-vigil all, or nearly all, are in such a state that it is diffi-
* "Diet, des Sciences Mddicales." Art. Somnambulism.

cult to distinguish between these and their waking manifesta-
tions, is also evident; but inasmuch as the sleep appears to be
more sound than ordinary; as the somnambulist niver passes
naturally from that condition to one of waking ? as there is some
danger attendant upon the interruption of "that state - and as
the mental and bodily activity fo/the most partt dir cted
only to one class of subjects; it is plain from a l this that tlds
can be no transition stage to the natural waking activity of the
functions; m its higher forms also, we are compelled to conside?
it ^something more than the enacting of a dream, however rivid
^ What is the condition of the various functions in the somno-
Noticing first the most obvious, we see thp i
perfectly under the command of the will often mn ^ ^
and accurate in its movements than at other times ^lie^^d
tion of the senses is subject to great variety. 1st The'sVl t"
The eyes are sometimes closed, sometimes widely staring and
fixed, sometimes agitated by a convulsive movement the n '1
widely dilated or extremely contracted, but in all' conditions
evidently unfit for ordinary vision, and almost always insensible
to any light experimentally thrown upon them. Yet there are
often unmistakeable evidences of the recognition of objects tliev
are often sought for, and found; sometimes with a li?ht some-
times without; generally the somnambulist finds his way per-
fectly in the dark, though some will be at great pains to <ret a
light; he will continue to write with the same accuracy as before
when an opaque object is held between his eyes and the paper
Dr Carpenter states that he has seen this in the artificial som'
nambulism produced by Mr. Braid's hypnotic process What is
the nature of this vision? Can the general sensibility of'the
surface be in such manner modified as to serve the purposes of
sight ? It is very improbable, yet such is said to be the case bv
many of those who practise the various forms of artificial
hypnotism. The solitary instance with which we have met
of any somnambulist remembering and relating the phenomena
of vision, is to be foundlin the ? Diet des Sciences i^dicales "
sub voce. The writer, M. Willermay, speaks thus" J'ai moi
meme, <<tant ties jemie, eproimi quelques acc6s l^ers de ?om-
nambulisme, et ll me semble que je voyais en dedans de ma
tete ce que je voulais denre sans le secours des yeux."
2. The sense of hearing is also found in very different condi-
tions. Si0nor raran hea d t slightest noise near him, but ap-
parently misinterpreted it; others are insensible to the loudest
noises, but will hold conversations on subjects immediately con
nected with their specific train of thought.

3 and 4. The smell and the taste present similar contrarieties,
sometimes being more sensitive than natural, sometimes less so,
and sometimes perverted.

5. The touch is the most active of all the senses, being as
much increased in sensibility and accuracy as is the energy of the
muscular system; probably much of the information usually ob-
tained by the special senses is acquired through the increased
energy of this, or some modification of it.

But what is the proximate cause of all these phenomena, of all
this mimicry of waking life ? What is the condition of the brain
and mind during this state? We have but little knowledge of
the physical differences between the brain active and the brain
at rest; but Ave know that a difference does potentially exist, and
that whilst the brain at rest is in a state of indifference to stimuli,
the brain active is in a condition which may not unaptly be
called polarity. By polarity in general is understood a state of
preparedness to respond to special and specific stimuli, and one
of indifference to all objects not coming under this category; thus
the magnet is polar and responds to steel, at the same time being
indifferent to other substances; the charged conductor of an
electric machine is polar, and responds to the class of bodies
called electric conductors, being indifferent to all others; in all
these cases, when the elements of this polarity are brought into
relation, the specific phenomena are evolved, and the polarity
resolved for the moment. Yery analogous are the phenomena of
the nervous system, each department of which, when active, is in
a state of polarity, evincing certain definite and specific acts or
feelings when exposed to certain influences. The optic nerve is
polar with regard to light, but takes no cognizance of any other
agent, and so in great measure with the ear, the taste, and the
smell. The sense of touch is polar with regard to objects with
which it comes in contact, but takes no impression (or only those
of the most obscure character) from those influences which are
so powerful upon the other senses. This, then, is a true polarity
of the nervous system; and when we consider how analogous
the nervous influence is to the electric, in its mode of propaga-
tion, and in many of its manifestations (muscular contraction to
wit), we cannot be surprised to meet with further analogies in
some of the irregularities of polar tension. For instance, an
electric jar may be discharged perfectly by the appropriate appa-
ratus, and brought into a state of equilibrium or indifference;
yet very shortly, without any recharge, it will be found to be in
a partly charged state, and it requires repeated processes ere it
is brought finally into a state of rest. The brain, when active,
is in a state of tension or polarity; when at rest, as in sound
sleep, it is in a state of entire indifference; but in this case, we
have the organic processes perpetually continued; and what
wonder that the tension of the brain should thereby be often
renewed, so as to awake it to some amount of activity ; hence all
the phenomena of dreaming.

But why is the dream acted ?

In the perfectly waking state, any emotion of the mind pro-
duces generally some corresponding action of the body, though
perhaps slight; in individuals of irritable fibre this is invariable,
except it be modified by education. But in a powerfully ab-
stracted state of the mind, when all external influences, except
those upon which the mind is employed, are cut off, the body acts
the thought of the mind with a certainty and precision which
frequently enables the bystander to read the train of ideas accu-
rately. In dreaming, where the mind is absorbed utterly in one
train of thought, it is but what we might expect, to find the
limbs dramatising the pictures presented to the mind ; hence the
state described in our fourth division, true somnambulism.
But again, why in the higher forms of somno-vigil are the
senses in such a peculiar condition V?why so acute with regard
to some objects, so dead to others? 

We have seen how, in abstraction, the mind gradually ex-
cludes all impressions, save those connected with one special
train of thought; the student is absorbed in his problem, and
hears nothing of the thunder, sees none of the lightning which
plays round him,?the most familiar voice or the most unearthly
sounds fall alike dead upon his ear. No doubt these sights and
sounds produce their proper physical impression upon the organs
of sense, but the brain is no longer in a condition to receive
them ; it is not in a state of polarity to ordinary influences ; all
its tension has been withdrawn from without, and fixed upon
one class of ideas; impressions therefore fall as ineffectively upon
it as light might upon the ear, or sound upon the eye. But in
sleep and dreaming, there is no necessity to withdraw the atten-
tion from one class of ideas to fix them on another; the tension
or polarity of the brain is instituted only with reference to that
particular class which forms the subject of the dream ; the senses
may be physically impressed by. but the mind does not recognise,
any other object, and hence it is not difficult to understand all
the apparently anomalous instances of contradictory perception
and unconsciousness; the individual is abstracted, but still more
completely, for obvious reasons, than in his waking moments.
That the mind should, in certain aspects, be even more acute
and vigorous than when awake?-that tasks should be completed
of the most abstruse character, which had baffled the waking
energies?all this, received in the light above suggested, will not
appear miraculous; all distracting thoughts, all extraneous
sources of error, are withdrawn; and the mind, fully awake to
this subject, is enabled to devote its concentrated energies to the
task.

One mysterious question remains to be asked?What is the
nature of the vision which the somnambulist appears to possess ?
seeing that frequently the eyes are quite closed; and even when
not so, they are unadapted to the ordinary mode of receiving
visual impressions. Is there a transference of special sensation ?
is some part of the surface endowed with something analogous
to visual faculties ? The records of the various forms of hypno-
tism, vouched for by men of no mean standing or credibility,
would appear to favour such a hypothesis ; but, in the present
stage of our investigation, we feel unprepared to pass a judgment
on so vexed a question. On the phenomena of double conscious-
ness we offer no comments, feeling assured tliat3 as yet, our
opportunities of observation have been too few and limited to
permit of any satisfactory or efficient generalization.
Our subject would be incomplete without some brief notice of
artificial somnambulism?called, by various authorities, Hypno-
tism, Mesmerism, Animal Magnetism, &c. &c.

By certain manipulations, or demands upon the attention in
various forms, or many other means practised upon individuals
of very mobile, irritable, imaginative, or otherwise excitable
temperaments, certain results are produced more or less analogous
to the phenomena of somnambulism ; but, if any credit be to be
attached to the reports, with many of a more wonderful character
superadded. The phenomena said to be produced by the mag-
netizers are as follow :?

1. "A sense of perflation" all over the system, increase of
temperature, and what may be termed hyperconsciousness.
2. A state of drowsiness, and partial excitements of the senses.
3. Complete sleep, insensibility to all stimuli?the patient
hears and sees nothing, feels no wound or injury to the person?
catalepsy.

4. Somnambulism.?In this condition, it is averred the
patient can barely distinguish by the sight light from darkness,
but "the sense of feeling is metamorphosed into something
equivalent to sight"?so that colours of objects, and positions of
minute bodies are recognised?and reading is accomplished
without aid from the eyes. The seat of this supplementary
sense is in the epigastrium, the top of the head, and the finger-
ends. The patient can see through opaque media, and the sense
of hearing becomes preternaturally acute.

Of these phenomena, those included under the first three
heads are doubtless to be produced on subjects properly adapted
for such production; those of the fourth class, together with
numerous others still more wonderful, asserted by the advocates
of this system, are properly regarded as fables. The French
commission appointed towards the close of the last century to
investigate the claims of the mesmerists, which included the
celebrated names of Franklin, Bailly, Lavoisier, Jussieu, and
many others of equal eminence, reported strongly-against them ;
admitting certain results, but denying the existence of any
" magnetic fluid asserting that the phenomena were the
result of the imagination powerfully influenced?and, finally,
that the effects produced might be dangerous, but never useful.
As this subject throws no new light upon the phenomena, or
relations of natural somnambulism, it is unnecessary to pursue
it further.

