Ethnological Psychology
========================

Art. II.?

Ancient tradition lias proceeded from the East, and travelled
from the rising to the setting sun. Asia was the cradle of pro-
phecy, the nursery of wisdom, and the garden of fable, parable,
and supernatural inspiration. From thence issued the most
venerable writings extant, whether they be the Bible on the one
hand, or Homer on the other,?the Hindoo Vedas, the Persian
Zendavest, or the maxims of Confucius. Learning and fiction,
divine revelation and human invention, appeared together, and
flowed in a mingled, if not a turbid stream, from the Altai and
Himalaya mountains, the plains of Mesopotamia, the forests of
Lebanon, the banks of the Jordan, the Lake of Gennesaret, and
the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. The infancy of the world was the
age of proverbs, and the spiritual apothegms of the post-diluvian
epochs are now the handmaidens that wait upon the wonders of
modern science. For the west and the east are two different worlds,
in direct contrast to each other. Their respective voices echo and
re-echo from their opposite shores, without ever blending into
harmony, or even so much as becoming confused. The intelli-
gence of the West disturbs the apathy and stolid repose of the
East. The Sphynx in the sands of Egypt, and the ponderous
palaces of Sennacherib at Mosul, are emblems of the mind of the
people that built and beheld them. Their silence, magnitude,
and monotony, smile with an air of sublimity on the fleeting genera-
tions of man and the inexorable lapse of centuries. No accord-
ance subsists between the Asiatic and the European, no sym-
pathy unites the energy of the one with the lethargy of the other,
neither skill nor artifice can ever combine the march of intellect
with the perpetual stagnation of ideas.

The notion of the three races of mankind is met with in the
traditions of every people, not even excepting that of the Negroes.
The first family, they say, was composed of three brothers, one
of whom was black, and the other two were white. The white
brothers robbed the black one of all that he possessed, and left
him nothing but a little gold-dust and a few elephants" tusks.
Under the names of Shem, Ham, and Japhet, the Bible re-
hearses the more authentic account of the three primitive
stocks, and ethnology confirms the succinct narrative of the
scriptures.

The Hindoos and the Persians are the twin nations that first
attract our notice. Like migratory birds, fresh fledged from the
tree of life, they quit their nests and fly to fairer lands that offer
them a more tempting and agreeable resting-place. Thus, the
Hindoo wanders along the winding beds of the Indus and Ganges,
leaves the lofty mountains that hide their sources, and seeks be-
neath the burning sun of India those local fastnesses where he
may securely indulge his love of contemplation, alone and at his
ease. Listening to the rushing waters of the Ganges, Brahma
ruminated in the midst of the jungles through which that river
flows. But, on the contrary, the Medes and Persians flung
themselves headlong down the precipitous heights of the Taurus,
seized the territories where they first alighted, and made them
their own. The land grew beneath their martial footsteps, the
horizon enlarged in proportion to their bold advances. It was
against Ahriman, the eternal enemy of their god, that they drew
their swords and conquered; and, as they marched along the
highways, the women quenched their thirst with a quaff from the
waters of immortality. From the Persian Gulf to Armenia, and
thence to the Halys, they spread themselves in battle array.
Bactriana, Susa, and Persepolis, are the milestones of their
journeys. Arrived at the Caucasus, they pushed onwards, until
at length, under new names, but with the same spirit, they de-
scended upon Europe. Behold the race of Japhet, as various in
sentiment as in affection; armed against its own children as
often as against those of others; exploring each place and thing
with the strictest scrutiny, and threatening to occupy the whole
globe under the well-known titles of Celts and Germans, the two-
fold genius of the West!

Close by the side of the Persians and Hindoos, but almost
entirely unknown to either of them, dwelt Shem in the
mountainous regions around the Tigns and Euphrates. No
nation ever conjoined the spirit of religion with that of industry
LTrem^kable a degree as the Shemites. The Chaldees, the
Phenicians, the Carthaginians, and the Arabians, are of this
stock as well as the Hebrews, the peculiar people of Jehovah ;
and Babylon, " the Lady of Kingdoms," was the heart of the
vast body of which all these several tribes were the members.
The sandy desert and the ocean, the simple tent of Abraham and
the ships of Tarshish, belong exclusively to this illustrious pro-
geny, from whose sanctuary went forth in the fulness of time the
gracious or appalling vocation of the ospe ? . . 

More to the South, we perceive the race of Ham, with their
black skin, curly hair, squab features, ami filthy habits. They
dwelt towards the centre of Africa, in those remote confines of
earth where the men were said to have dogs heads, monkeys
Ices, and the ferocity of the wolf. Their spirit was as abject as
their bodies They worshipped the lion or the seipent tor their
tod Their' social deformity shut them out from the great family
Sf the world. Outcasts and aliens, they stretched their wigwam
on the arid plains or the pestilential swamps, beneath the
scorching rays of the tropics. It is supposed, that a sacerdotal
mission of Hindoos brought to these wretched bemgs some proper
notions of life and happiness; that they emigrated from Ethiopia,
descended from Meroe to Thebes, and from Thebes to Memphis;
that reinforced from Arabia and Nubia, they proceeded forwards
till they reached the Mediterranean Sea, and that there the
superstitions, the laws, and the gods of Egypt arose and multi-
plied on the mud that formed the delta of the Nile.

These are the three actors that open the scene. The history of
Asia is nothing more than the battle of races?Assyria, Persia,
and E?vpt contending for the prize. Their symbols are sculp-
tured fn relief upon the walls of Persepolis or those of Nineveh,
in the forms of winged bulls with men's heads, or griffins crouch-
ill" to pounce upon their prey. But the conquerors did not so
much establish themselves among the vanquished, as they trod
them down till they in their turn were trodden down by the
vanquished,'who sooner or later rose up against them. A new
feature was thus produced by these revolutions and counter-
revolutions, namely, that of castes, which is the earliest sign of
social inequality among men.

Another epoch of mental development occurred. Asia, teem-
ing with her excess of population, sent forth the shepherd kings
to seize upon Egypt and hold it under her sway. They modified
the barbarity of the first Ethiopian colonists for awhile, but
were soon expelled, and forced to seek their fortune anew else-
where. They quitted the desert for the sea, and founded Tyre.
Another emigration still more important ensued?the exodus of
Israel from Egypt. Every one knows how Moses led them
through stony Arabia into Palestine. The overthrow of the
horse and his rider in the Red Sea was the song of triumph that
still commemorates the emancipation of the soul from the
thraldom of sin, and its glorious entrance into the Land of Pi'o-
mise. The Passover is the leading idea of the Jewish mind: it
penetrates all their schemes, and peculiarizes their institutions,
their habits of life, and their modes of thought. They are to
this day engaged in celebrating this sublime feast, with their
heads covered, their loins girded, and their staves in their hands,
eating in haste, and ready to start on their mystical journey.

This sentiment of transition or progression becomes a motive of
action apart from the rest of mankind. They are sedate, though
vagrant; a definite community, though without a settlement;
merchants of wealth and credit, though destitute of a policy or
emporium of their own. Of old, they were shepherds and agri-
culturists at one and the same time. They encamped in the
wilderness; they dwelt in cities; they pitched their tabernacle
in Mount Moriah, where Solomon afterwards raised the
Temple, and thus rendered the worship of Jehovah no longer
erratic, but fixed and concentrated in the heart of Jerusalem.
In that centre were deposited the Tables of the Law, and close
beside it was enacted the condign tragedy of Calvary, which
sealed the fate of the Jews, and from thenceforth became the
turning-point of the world. These singularities render them
the most remarkable people on the face of the earth, and account
for the perpetual identity of their features, their manners, and
their minds.

At the same time with the exodus from Egypt took place the
invasion of Greece, which was overrun by a powerful emigration
from the east. It was the race of Japhet, to whom had been
promised the isles of the Gentiles, as the tent and the desert
had been given to Shem. The Phenicians landed in Attica, and
some Egyptian adventurers crossed over to Argolis. The mysteries
of Eleusisand the superstitions of Memphis lodged themselves in
Parnassus. It reminds us of the Spaniards landing in Peru, or
the Romans scaling the heights of Dover ; only the Romans and
the Spaniards were military oppressors, whereas the early Greeks
were the professed friends of all they met with. They peace-
ably surrounded themselves with their Cyclopean walls, and
marked out the site of the future city of Minerva. These marine
settlers were quickly followed by others on land?a promiscuous
troop that arrived at the threshold of Europe from the Taurus.
But the Caucasus was the beaten path by which the main body
advanced; and Prometheus is represented as being perched on
the top of one of its highest peaks, and holding the east and west
in either of his outstretched hands. The Danube was then, as
in later times, their line of march ; although, like the Goths, the
greater number preferred the cheerful skies of Attica to the
dreary wastes of the North. The gravest, the strongest, and the
noblest of them all, were the Dorians, who debouched between
(Eta and Olympus, forced the isthmus of Corinth, and possessed
themselves of the Peloponnesus. They drove the aborigines for
shelter to the adjoining archipelago, while they strenuously
closed the entrance against any further inioads on themselves.

But there was this difference between the Greeks and the
J6\vs?viz., that the Hebrews shut themselves up within the
enclosure of the Holy Land, from which they .were carried off
by the terrible Assyrians; and that the Greeks, after affiliating
themselves with everything around them, shouted aloud, like
Achilles goin?* to battle, and aspired to the conquest of the
earth. They foved the world, and the things of the world ; the
beautiful and the sublime were the fruits of their own genius;
and they claimed glory for their own share, without a partner or
a peer. Opposite as the fortunes of Shem and Japhet have been
in their posterity, it is difficult to decide which of the two has
produced the more lasting effects on the temporal destiny of
mankind. For a time the drunken festivals of the Olympic
games carried the day in a rhapsody of success, while Judah,
with his hands tied behind his back, stalked as a slave in front
of Nebuchadnezzar on his return to Babylon. Nevertheless, at
this moment, Greece with its idols lies level with the dust; its
language alone remains to attest the perfection of its intellect;
and its philosophy has retired from the sight of all except a
learned few. But the wisdom of captive Israel survives the
wreck of time, and lives^ in the spirit of one who has imparted
his ineffable name and title to the greater portion of the living
world.

It is worthy of notice, how little Egypt either advanced or re-
tarded the progress of affairs. With a mind cast in a particular
mould of its own, it began and ended in itself. Sesostns, the
Pharaohs, and the Ptolemies or Lagidse, reflected a passing ray
of light on its immutable grandeur, and the victories of Cam-
by ses ruffled for a moment its phlegmatic calm. But nothing
disturbed its mental and physical stillness. Originating in Ham,
or Amnion, it ceased with Cleopatra, and was silently merged
into a valuable proconsulate of the Roman Empire.

The affinities of nations may be traced in their traditions and
languages, but the most striking instances are those presented
by their religions. Each people alters its god to suit itself. The
lusty Dorians invoked Hercules for theirs, and the Doric alliance
with Etolia was the marriage of Hercules with Dejanira. If
Thrace civilized Lesbos, it was to the sound of Orpheus' lyre.
The colonization of Cyrene was typified by Apollo's leading a
damsel in a car drawn by swans to the barren coasts of Libya.
The adventures of the gods increased with the increase of popu-
lar incidents ; and the Amnion, Osiris, Phtha, and Isis of Egypt
became the Jupiter, Bacchus, Vulcan, and Ceres of the Greeks.
The celestial staff was a small one; but its titles were numerous,
and its offices unlimited. The Ionians adopted Neptune, the
god of the sea, and the vagabond Pelasgi left nothing behind
them but sacred blocks of unhewn stone to mark their itinerary.
The Persian fire-worship was rekindled in the adoration of Apollo,
the ruler of the sun; the sombre credulities of Egypt were re-
sumed in the revels of the Dionysia; and the sensual mysteries
of Phenicia were fostered anew in the more elegant and still more
dissolute rites of Aphrodite. The genius of Asia revived in
Greece ; oriental dogmas, embellished and refined, sprung up in
the west, and flourished in fashions as various as the dialects,
the customs, and the districts they formed or found. The varia-
tions of Paganism were the tests of its falsity; but the uncom-
pliant worship of Jehovah by the Jews was the stubborn demon-
stration of the truth of the Mosaic dispensation.

The Greek populations were complete. Let us pass over to
Tuscany, whither the tide- of emigration next rolled. That
country was even then inhabited by the Umbrians, a Celtic
people, who had descended from the north by the way of the
Alps ; and some Caucasians also had already arrived at the top
of the Adriatic, from Illyria, and proceeded along the valley of
the Eridanus or Po. The Etruscans, chisel in hand, took the
same route. Half Asiatic, they sculptured the forms of birds,
trees, vases, and utensils, till then unknown in Europe, and sat
themselves down between the Arno, the Apennines, and the
Tiber. The Sabines, the (Enotrians, and the Ochri, knew nothing
of their own origin; the Dorians and Ionians never went further
than the coasts ; so that Italy preserved its purity of blood from
the first. The East and the West met each other in the streets
of Rome. The Pantheon contained the gods of every nation;
and profane antiquity, which had entered within its precincts
and closed its portals on itself, was transmuted into a petrifac-
tion beneath its capacious dome.

On returning to tlie present state of the world, we behold
three distinct races of men ? the white, the tawny, and the
black?as different from each other in the character of their
minds as they are in the colour of their faces. Of these three,
the black and the tawny are governed by the white ; and of the
white, the Saxons and Anglo-Normans reign supreme.
In their wild and primitive condition, the Negroes have always
been an inferior order of mankind. \\ hen allowed to indulge
their natural propensities, they are filthy and naked, painted or
smeared with grease, dirty and lazy, treacherous and cruel. Some
of them are cannibals, all of them heathens, and none of them
trustworthy. The Papuans, tawny rather than black, are the
highest in the moral scale among them, and yet the Papuans
cannot but be classed with the savages. Nor is this lack of civi-
lization owing to fortuitous circumstances, for it is their innate
lot. They have always been savages m all ages; and the wild
Negro of Africa and South America is the same now as he has
always been. They hold no position whatevei in universal his-
tory : the curse of Canaan has not yet been remitted?" the
servant of servants thou shalt be unto thy biethren. The de-
voted nations of the promised land were descended from Canaan,
and so were the Phoenicians and Carthaginians, who were so
ruthlessly destroyed by the Greeks and^ Romans; and the
Africans, who have been bought and sold like beasts, were also
his jDostenty. The finger that wiote upon the wall al Belsliaz-
zar's feast points out the doom of Ham.

The blacks have, indeed, their redeeming qualities, in the pos-
session of physical if not national virtues. Their sight, their
senses of smell and hearing, their touch, their fleetness of foot,
their dexterity in handling the bow and lance, their sagacity in
hunting their prey, and their craftiness in catching it, are bodily
endowments far more acute and perfect than are ever met with
among the white or even the tawny races. They are gay and
cheerful towards those who show them kindness,?gloomy and
revengeful towards their real or supposed enemies; and their
filial and parental instincts are both strong and exemplary. But,
for all this, the negro, the native negro, is decidedly inferior
to the European in body as well as in mind. The natives of
Van Diemen's Land are absolutely unreclaimable; the Bosjes-
mans are dwarfish ; the pigmies of Africa are as old as Homer.
Pliny mentions their battles with the cranes for the sake of their
ecrreg ? g,nd Strabo ironically says they built their cabins with the
eoTrShells. At one time, 60,000 blacks were annually exported
from the coast of Guinea, never more to return to their native
land ; and had they but had a spark of the spirit of the whites
within their servile breasts, so vast a number might, in the
course of two centuries, have successfully revolted, and in their
turn have overrun and disputed the whole of Europe, or at least
a very large and valuable proportion of the European colonies.
But Time, which in most instances is but a sorry artist, " who
makes whate'er he handles worse," has done much in ameliorat-
ing the forlorn fortunes of this despised and neglected portion of
the human family. Christianity, also, that subtle principle that
leavens the mass of human corruption, is slowly penetrating the
mind and senses of the blacks. Instances are being quoted of
their improved intelligence, manifest piety, and the increasing
aptitude of their talents for the finer arts, such as music, painting,
and poetry, as well as for the more exact sciences, such as arith-
metic and mathematics. The social virtues of order, regularity,
and cleanliness are reported of those who have been trained by
the labours of the various missionaries to adopt the manners and
customs of civilized life. And, although many of these instances
are particularized as the special gifts of individuals rather than
the privileges of the tribe to which they belong, yet, upon mature
reflection, we are led to conclude that their moral and intellec-
tual welfare have changed for the better, and that the prospect
of their being still more greatly improved as they continue to be
more intimately mixed with the white populations is as certain
as it is encouraging. Their emancipation must to some extent
have operated most favourably on their instincts and habits, in
the common course of events ; and their proximity to or affinity
with those who were once their taskmasters or tyrants, must tend
to transform the wild man of the woods, the prairies, or llanos,
into-a human being of some pretensions to propriety and decorum.
But the process is a slow one. European vices retard the noble
undertaking. Ardent spirits have destroyed their tens of thou-
sands in soul and body; and so cruel has been, on many occa-
sions, the conduct of the whites towards the blacks, that the
Negro implicitly regards the white Christian as his bitterest
enemy?a murderer and a robber. These moral difficulties which
are of our own creation, embarrass the hand of charity and
mar the countenance of truth. The liberation and recovery of
the negro-slave is one of the most interesting questions of the
present day. We cannot suppose that so intelligent a people as
those of the United States of America should persist in the use
of slavery in opposition to the voice of the world against its
practice, except from some very serious necessity, social or poli-
tical, which they cannot overrule; and we await with confidence
the happy moment when they shall feel themselves capable of
obeying the dictates of humanity, and of proclaiming the freedom
of those whom it would, if possible, have been much more prudent
never to have enslaved.

The tawny races which cover more than half the globe, and
are characterized by their broad shoulders, large heads, high
cheek-bones, flat noses, long arms, and thin hair, constitute the
Mongolian variety, that has figured so largely in the history of
nations. Zenghis Khan, Tamerlane, Attila, and the Tartars,
belong to this division. The conquest of China by the Moguls
took place at the same time with their expeditions to the oppo-
site quarter of the globe, which spread terror and desolation over
Russia and Poland. The fierce Zenghis, the so-called lord of
the nations, had been predicted, and was sent upon his dreaded
mission of destruction, by the tutelar genius of his race. He
traversed the world with his countless hosts. China, Thibet,
Japan, the Mussulman empire of Carizme, fell beneath his ex-
terminating sword, which was stretched as far as the Caspian
Sea. For several centuries Russia was incorporated with the
government of Zipzak, Hungary was.conquered, Silesia ravaged.
Each of these countries still betrays its Mongolian cross-breed ;
but Russia, in her rapacious policy, exhibits the strongest tinge
of her tawny blood. After these barbarous hordes had spared
the rest of Europe, they returned upon Asia, and put an end to
the Arabian Caliphate at Bagdad. The Saracens, imbued with
a tawny taint, alarmed Europe from the South, and the Western
powers have always watched, with the most vigilant jealousy, the
restless temper of their tawny neighbours.

Their psychological character is that of unrelenting and indis-
criminate bloodshed?unmitigated by any political changes or
popular institutions beneficial to the human race, unmingled
with any acts of generosity or kindness to the vanquished, and
destitute of the slightest feelings of regard for the rights and
liberties of mankind. Inflexible cruelty, selfishness, a disposi-
tion to cheat, and an absence of the tender affections, have every-
where marked their progress, and left an indelible blot upon
their name in all ages, lhe Malays, and the greater number of
the natives of the Indian Archipelago, are instances in point at
this very hour. Barbarity, brutality, and even cannibalism, are
their well-known qualities?the internal instincts of their un-
tamed nature. Their intelligence is greater than that of the
blacks ; but their morals are worse, and their disposition equally
savage. The empires, indeed, of China and Japan prove them
to be susceptible of a high degree of civilization, and even of
pre-eminence in the useful and elegant arts of life; but their
political and social institutions, already between 2000 and 3000
years old, remain stationary, and incapable of exercising any act
of internal improvement and growth, or of external progress and
aggrandizement of their own. Such as they were originated, so
they remain: history informs us that Japan and China are the
same now as they were at first. Their bloody commotions with-
in, and their obtuse behaviour beyond, the limits' of their
empires, are proverbially unaltered and unalterable. They are
obstinately opposed to 'the spirit and teaching of Christianity;
and they are puzzled, as much as they are conquered, by the
learning and science, the arts and arms of the whites.
The American Indians, however, show some qualities of much
higher merit than their opprobrious colour might seem to claim
for them; their industry, endurance, and fidelity are noble
virtues; and the natives of Mexico and Peru appear to have
been a people capable of fulfilling a higher destiny than that
assigned to them in history. But it is incontestable, that neither
the Peruvians nor the Red Indians equal the Europeans, under
whose sway they invariably diminish or disappear. The Osmanli
Turks, the mixture if not the source of whose blood is Circassian,
possess far higher mental endowments than their inveterate foes
the Russians; but the fatal creed of Mahomet chills their
manners, congeals the noblest impulses of their souls, and is in-
compatible with freedom of thought and action.

The whites, with their oval faces and aquiline noses, ruddy
complexions and fair hair, well-turned limbs and handsome de-
meanour, have hitherto governed the world. They are the
descendants of those who entered Europe by the way of the
Caucasus; the Circassians and the Georgians are esteemed, their
most beautiful specimens; and their attributes are typified in the
statues of Apollo, Theseus, and Hercules. The colour of their
skin discriminates them from the tawny or the black not more
effectually than the pre-eminence of their moral feelings and in-
tellectual capacity. The negroes and the Tartars may evince
frankness, generosity, and hospitality, at times, in the highest
degree ; but in their general powers of knowledge, reflection, and
understanding, they fall miserably below the whites. No
European people has ever been in a condition similar to that of'
the present dark races, within the reach of any history or tra-
dition. The whites may have degenerated, as in the cases of the
Greeks and Romans; but they have always]recovered themselves
from their occasional failures or relapse, and their transcendent
qualities have at no time been extinguished. Their natural pre-
rogatives may be discerned in their least advanced states of
civilization. The Germans of Tacitus and Caesar were in no wise
like the modern Hottentot^ or Red Indian; neither were the
ancient Spaniard or Caledonian ever the same as the aboriginal
African, American, or Mongolian tribes. The whites possess in
the names of Scipio, Brutus, Virgil, Cicero, Horace, Livy, and
many other equally great and gifted individuals, a galaxy of
talent, not only unrivalled by the black or tawny races at their
best estate, but also the representatives of their own lofty preten-
sions throughout all generations; and Theodosius or Charle-
magne, Dante or Galileo, Torricelli or Raphael, Alfred the Great
or Sir Isaac Newton, transmit the same intrinsic superiority of the
race which they adorn, from one generation to another. To the
Caucasians and. their posterity alone belong nearly all the arts
and sciences, or at least the most skilful application of them to
1^2o necessities of life. The treasures of literature and knowledge,
civilization in its best and widest sense, politics and government,
architecture and music, painting and sculpture, trade, manufac-
tures, military tactics, diplomacy, steam navigation, the electric
wire/ the freedom of the press, the rights and liberties of man,
and,'above all, the Christian religion, are peculiarly and exclu-
sively theirs. Europe has been their theatre of action from the
first; and thence they have branched out and planted themselves
all over the world. Wherever they have touched, there they
have taken root. A new nation has grown up, endowed with the
social and political virtues proper to its parent stock. They
have never failed to live and flourish. Iheir ascendency is
acknowledged paramount and supreme. Iheir prospects are
unlimited, their hopes magnificent, their final object grand and
praiseworthy. The world is theirs, and their own life, as well as
the lives of others, are made over to their safe keeping, as a prey
within their grasp.

The Greenlander, Laplander, and Samoiede prove by their
habits and features that they do not belong to the great Euro-
pean family. They owe their origin to the Mongols, and retain
in the north the marks of their extraction, which we find so
strongly expressed in the Chinese and the widely-different lati-
tudes' of the south. At the same time, the parent tribes are
livino- in Central Asia, equally removed from both their offspring.
We have alreaded alluded to the Russian mind, marked off,
both historically and socially, from the rest of Europe by its
strong Mongolian taint, acquired so far back as the age of Zenghis
Khan.

It has been supposed that climate has modified, discoloured,
or transformed, the original type of man. This theory is no-
where countenanced either by present facts or historical evidence.
On the contrary, the tanned or sunburnt European is not the
same as the African negro of the tropics ; their natures are as
distinct as their colours, with which climate has nothing to do ;
for blacks with blacks beget blacks, and whites from whites give
birth to whites, under every climate and on every soil. The
individual is modified for a time by the extremes of heat and
cold by intermarriage, social connexions, and local influences;
but the race, and the germs of the race from which he sprang,
remain intact, and reappear, the same as ever, as soon as the
disturbing force is withdrawn or the primitive condition restored.
The acorn never produces a willow, nor the lion a colt. The
breed may be crossed, or the stock grafted afresh, from
stronger or weaker species of the same kind, and the offset or
progeny may be disfigured or apparently changed; but nature
returns to her original type; the modifications are limited to
the species alone or to the individual itself; the admixture of
different kinds is resented with inherent pertinacity; the mule is
born sterile, and without the continual intervention of an un-
natural artifice the hybrid ceases to exist.

The differences of language are at first sight not less perplex-
ing than those of colour; for if the colours of the skin be only
three, the varieties of language seem all but infinite. We are
living in the midst of the ruins of the primitive tongue. There
is no longer a pure and grammatical language spoken or written
by any nation at present. When the Teutonic, in the eighth
century, superseded the Latin, it rendered the reconstruction of
a perfect language utterly hopeless; for it upset every rule of
grammar then in vogue. First of all, it struck out the middle
verbs and dual number, so characteristic of the Greek: it then
introduced the constant use of auxiliary verbs and indeclinable
moods and tenses, extracted the particle from the tenses and
moods, and reduced the number of cases from five to three. The
verb no longer selected its own place in the sentence, governing
and governed by its noun, but was left to take care of itself by
immediately following its nominative and going before its ob-
jective. The pronoun, participle, and adjective no longer agreed
with the noun in number, case, and gender, known by their
terminations, apposition, and agreement; and the pronoun,
which had hitherto been expressed by the final syllable of the
verb, escaped from its entanglement, and stood alone. The noun
and the pronoun became the leading words of the sentence; and
the Runic or Gothic mind gave vent to its barbarity by a gram-
matical solecism or egotism. The indicative mood was preferred
to the potential; and it is difficult to write or speak continuously
in the subjunctive or optative in any of the modern languages.
It erased all those delicate inflections of the future and con-
ditional tenses, so accurate in the Latin, so multiform in the
Greek; and it abolished, at a breath, the numberless expletives
with which the Greek abounds to the torment of the critic, but
which rendered so rich, redundant, precise, and explicit the
language that employed them so correctly and fluently. The
stubborn nature of the modern, particularly of the English, idiom
is almost unequal to the effort of giving utterance to rhetoric or
poetry, declamation or prose, in the same lofty style as that
?which once charmed or controlled the fierce democracies of
Greece or Rome.

It would be carrying the object of this article too far, were we
to follow up our analysis by showing that the original tongues
are, like the original races, only three?the Indo-Germanic, the
Malayan, and the Trans-gangetic. To these three belong all the
languages now spoken by man. The European is the Indo-Ger-
manic, the most comprehensive and complete of them all. It
includes Noah and Abraham, the Pharaohs, the Chaldees, the
Greeks, the Romans, and the Sanskrit. But we must come to a
close; and our task will have been accomplished, and its end
attained, if we have been able to show that the psychology of
nations is as demonstrable and conclusive as the colour of their
skins, the history of their progress, and the evidences of their
relative excellence and ascendency in literature, arts, arms, and
religion.
