Foreign Psychological Literature
=================================

Medico-Legal Consultation on a Case of Monomania.
By M. Baillakgeb.
The parents of M. M?, who died in tlie Charenton, 10th Jan. 1851
consulted M. Dubois as to whether deceased was in a sound state of
mind at the time of making his will, in June, 1848. The confinement
in Charenton dated from Nov. 1850, when he was in a state of de
mentia and general paralysis. The question to be determined was'
whether the mental affection was of recent origin in 1848, or was the'
last stage of a much older affection existing at the time of the esecu-
tion of the testament. 1 his was to he answered-lst, by certain
ItS?,SSa"d2l%'by the statem0"ts
In July, 181G, M M? addressed a letter to the " Constitutionnel "
giving notice that the police had directions to check the machinations
of his enemies. In 1847 he also complained to the procureur du roi
that he was annoyed by anonymous letters, and by the culpable designs
of certain persons to terrify him, and alterer son intelligence. A note
was also found, written by himself five days before the will was made
and which purported to contain a receipt for an antidote to poison, that
had been, it stated, administered to him by a garde mobile. The anti-
dote consisted of vanille and milk.
Among the papers belonging to deceased was a list of his enemies
written by himself.
102 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
The medical attendant of the deceased, Dr Delente, stated that M.
M? had suffered an attack of apoplexy in 1841, the traces of which
were visible after death. Dr Delente had regarded M. M? as a mo-
nomaniac, being under the impression that his heirs had conspired to
poison him.
From these and other circumstances, M. Dubois gave it as his
opinion that the deceased was a monomaniac in 184G ; that the mental
affection continued ; and, that at the date of the execution of the will
he was not in a sound state of mind.?" Annales Medico-Psycholo-
giques." Juillet.
On the Identity of Dreaming with Insanity. By M. Moreau, of
Tours.
M. Moreau holds, as a fundamental point in the explanation of the
phenomena of insanity, the essential identity of the state of dreaming
with insanity. This proposition lie regards as the corner-stone of the
edifice of the science of psychology. This conviction M. Moreau has
arrived at from researches long conducted by himself, and from the
study of other writers upon psychology.
The following extracts will illustrate the principal arguments of M.
Moreau on this question.
In refuting certain objections taken by M. Delasiauve, M. Moreau
observes?
"No dream can be called spontaneous, we do not of our own accord, and
according to our own good pleasure, plunge into the state of dreaming; we
may prepare all the conditions, we may drive away all the obstacles to sleep,
but we cannot dream voluntarily; that is altogether another matter. At the
very moment that these conditions for which we have arranged promise the
desired result, at that instant we cease to be ourselves; with the inner con-
sciousness our spontaneity of action is lost, the ego is transformed; another
individuality, that of the dreamer, takes the place of the awake. We see then
here .that nothing takes place but that which occurs in delirium, in a dream?
one is delirious. In the former it is so in obedience to a physiological cause
unknown; in the second, in obedience to an unknown pathological cause in
spontaneous insanity), or well known (in the madness of intoxication). The
result in both cases being the extinction, the slow or sudden annihilation of
intellectual spontaneity?a metamorphosis of the ego?a dream.
"The state of dreaming has in all ages attracted the attention of physiolo-
gists, but has it been sufficiently studied in itself, independently of the organic
conditions in which it is produced ? Are we not too much accustomed to regard
these conditions as indispensable to its development ? Has it been ascertained
whether it may not be met with in very different pathological and physiological
conditions ? In other words, must we recognise in the dream a particular mani-
festation of the thinking faculty, determinable by essentially different causes ?
"a. We have elsewhere said, that what we call absence of mind, is in reality
but incomplete dreaming, an intermediate state between waking and sleeping,
and received more with reterence to the intellectual than to the properly organic
conditions of sleep. We speak indifferently of reverie and absence ot' mind as
an intense mental pre-occupation, which absorbs our attention to things around
us. Here, then, common language bears us out in our views.
" It may be said that, in this case, the phenomena of dreaming are produced
under normal conditions, the intellect not being vitiated by any morbid inllu-
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 103
ence, which does not in the least reveal the presence of a germ that the slightest
canse may snffice to germinate.
" There is a physiological axiom?no sensation, no perception of sensation,
without attention. Where then, from any cause whatever, internal impres-
sions absorb the attention, internal impressions are necessarily unheeded, and
are as if they were not. The individual is entirely delivered over to his inter-
nal reflections, to his meditations; he has broken with the outer world, so far,
at least, as regards his thoughts. He is in a veritable dream, always within
the limits of the same thoughts.
" b. The state of dreaming maybe exhibited in its highest degree of develop-
ment, even where the most important elements of sleep are wanting, for instance,
in somnambulists.
" c. By the word sleep we understand that particular state which we can
only comprehend by, so to say, decomposing and separating the physical from
the psychical elements thereof."
Sleep, the author observes, is but a state of suspension, or tempo-
rary annihilation, of the thinking faculty, and between this and the
state of stupor, whether produced by congestion of the brain or by the
poisonous action of opium, hachisch, alcohol, or the inspiration of ether,
&e., despite the differences of cause, there is absolute identity of phy-
siological conditions. The objections urged against the identity of
dreaming and delirium, ]VX. [Moreau attributes to the confusion of two
essentially distinct points, the form and the basis (fond\ the latter
remaining uniform, however the former may vary. Apparently, the
characters which most differ are, on the one hand, the duration of
physiological sleep and its attendant dreams, the great number and
variety of objects which constitute the latter ; and on the other hand,
the intermittence of phenomena of delirium proper, with the restricted
limits within which, in ordinary cases, they are confined.
"But these differences are after all (M. Moreau remarks) but differences of
form, which, considerable as they may be, do not destroy the identity of the
nature of the phenomena themselves.
" So true is this, that one sees these very differences disappear in many acute
cases of delirium, in all those caused by alcohol, opiates, &c., and in stupidity,
in which the recent researches of M. Baillarger have shown that the play of tlie
imagination is no less capricious, or less extensive, than in ordinary sleep. In
many instances, indeed, it would be correct to say that physiological dreams
are even more limited and restricted in their conceptions than those to which
the name of delirium or insanity is exclusively applied.
" It would be sufficient to infer a greater tenacity and persistence, and the
individual would be then positively and absolutely mad.
" This supposition, moreover, is borne out by more facts than generally sup-
posed ; thus there arc many insane persons who trace their delirious ideas, or
convictions, or hallucinations, to a dream. With many, insanity is in reality
but the continuation of the dream.
" In confirmed insanity the dreams have effected such profound impressions
upon the organism, that they cannot be effaced by the waking condition."
The impressions of dreams are sometimes so vivid that it is difficult
to divest oneself of the idea ol their reality.
" This is certainly a moment of insanity (observes M. Moreau, who adds)
In order that the insanity shall continue, we have only to imagine that the
fibres of the brain have suffered too violent a shock to have recovered them-
selves. The same thing may occur more slowly."
104 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
M. Moreau supports his own views by quotations from Condillac,
Sauvages, Virey, Spinoza, Van Helmont, and other writers.
" Insanity (the author proceeds to observe) implies a real transformation of
personality. There are cases in which this transformation is so evident that
the line of demarcation between the wakeful and the dreaming states could not
be more clear and precise. There are among the insane, for instance, persons
whose whole life previously to the delirium offers not a trace of its exist-
ence.
" Every act of the thinking faculty, performed without our free and volun-
tary assent, appertains to the state of dreaming.
" The mind cannot quit its ordinary wakeful condition without passing into
that of dreaming; in any other state its actions nrast be destroyed or suspended,
as in profound sleep or coma.
" Sleep may be compared to the repose of a pendulum, which is still suscep-
tible of new oscillations under the slightest impulse, so long as the machinery
by which it is set in motion retains its integrity. Death may be closely repre-
sented by this same pendulum, when the destruction of its wheels has put it
for ever beyond the possibility of moving. Time exists only in relation to the
succession of our thoughts.
" It follows from what has been said, that the impression made upon the
thinking faculty by loss of consciousness is the same, whatever may be its
duration. Every person can recal that of which he is sensible at the moment
of waking; whatever may be the length of time that has lapsed during sleep,
the state of the mind is the same; there is a feeling of a new existence, the
primary elements of which are supplied by the memory. It is perfectly true
that in this state there is no difference between a moment and an age, so that
if an individual were to wake at the end of many thousand years, his first im-
pressions would not differ from what he would have experienced had he slept
only a few hours.
" What occurs when an individual who has been transformed by delirium,
and coming to himself with his inner consciousness annihilated, recovers his
reason after ten, fifteen, or thirty years of mental disease ? Exactly what
would have occurred had he woke from several hours' sleep. He is surprised
that he does not find everything in the same state as at the moment that he
was struck by insanity. Ilis eyes seek the old objects, his affections look for
the same persons; every person and object around him, and among which he
has passed so many years, he sees now for the first time, or has but a
confused recollection of having seen them. He cannot recognise in the
grown-up persons around him his own children; he is not sure of his own
identity,?whence these wrinkles, these grey hairs, these indications of ad-
vanced age ?"
M. Moreau concludes his paper in the following' resume:?
" It is not easy to allow that a body can be propelled simultaneously in two
opposite directions.^
"Morally, likewise, whether it affirm or deny, the mind is in either the
affirmation or negation entirely one and the same, successively or alternately?
but never simultaneously. _
" Now, that which the delirious individual denies, he would in the normal
state have affirmed. Moreover, since delirium, as we have described it, does
not affect the essence of the intellectual powers, or if one may so speak, the
internal economy of those faculties, but with an uniform relation to certain
objects on which their action is directed, these faculties remain intact, even
amidst their false and extravagant perceptions ; so that we may say, without
transgressing psychological truth, that the insane are such as they are according
to the point of view from which they are regarded. It follows that not to
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 105
admit the absolute transformation of the ego in the state of delirium, is to de-
clare that the soul may deny without ceasing to affirm, or in other words, may
simultaneously undergo two modifications ? two modes of existence which
destroy one another."
As naturally connected with the preceding notice of M. Moreau's
paper in the " Annales Psychologiques," we append an abstract of the
Report of the Commission of the Imperial Academy of Medicine, by
INI. Bousquet, May 1855, upon a memoir of M. Moreau, on the patholo-
gical anatomy of delirium ; and a brief notice of the discussion thereon.
The Report takes exception to the views of M. Moreau, who, it ob-
serves, regards insanity, like other diseases, as an organic disease. The
reporter charges M. Moreau with having confusedly used the words
delirium and insanity, not regarding the distinction between the two :
the one being a temporary condition, they remark, the other more
durable, often lasting for life, and transmitted hereditarily; the one
generally combined with fever and constitutional disturbance,'the other
compatible with perfect bodily health. M. Moreau, remarks' M. Bous-
quet, considers that insanity has been viewed too much as independent
of organization, and the dominant idea of his memoir is to restore it to
its proper place. The reporter, as opposed to M. Moreau, holds that
that source of the mental disorder is to be sought sometimes in the
brain, sometimes elsewhere. The exclusive theory of either one or
the other opinion they look upon as erroneous. The most opposite
condition of the nervous centres may influence and implicate the brain;
in these cases, insanity may be an eventual contingent effect. Reason-
ing from physiological analogy, it is urged that as impressions are
conveyed from the periphery to the nervous centres, and vice versa
so a similar relation of causation may occur in insanity. Besides which
those who attribute mental disease in all cases to structural change in
the brain, contravene their own fundamental doctrine, which is not to
admit anything of which they have not the evidence of their senses
The reporter further urges the difference between the temporarv con'
dition of the brain during sleep, and the permanent state of insanity
transmissible hereditarily. The views of M. Moreau they consider
to be the misapprehension of resemblance for identity
M. Baillarger criticised and opposed the Report, which, he observed
contained only negative proportions; the general conclusion of which
was to the effect, that as we are not able to nnravel the mysteries of
the subject, we should therefore expose all our doubts and conceal our
hopes. The study of mental diseases, observed M. Baillarger, would
not present the attractions it does, or be followed with so much ardour
if it were as fruitless as indicated in the Report. M. Baillarger de-
fended M. Moreau, on the ground that his object was not to affirm
the exclusively material nature of insanity, but to endeavour to counter-
act extreme spiritualistic notions, which to a too great extent influence
practice. M. Baillarger further urged in defence of M. Moreau's
opinions, that the author had enforced only a strong analogy between
insanity and sleep.
M. Londe drew a distinction between delirium and insanity ; in the
former, he recognised only a disorder of the intellect; ip the latter
106 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
other functions also are deranged. M. Londe objected to the strictly
physiological view of the opinion that insanity cannot exist with-
out organic disease. M. Londe further criticised the objection of
M. Bousquet, that if insanity be analogous with dreaming, then do
we lose our reason nightly, and recover it in the morning. This view,
said M. Londe, is too spiritual, for that natural sleep does not overtake
us without our having some idea of its approach ; but if before sleep-
ing the brain be excited by drinking, or by emotions, or by work, it is
attended with dreams more or less fatiguing. With reference to the
failure of pathologists to detect any certain alteration of the brain
in insanity, M. Londe observed that similar failure had occurred in
other diseases. M. Londe, in concluding, stated his opinion to be
that, in recent and curable cases of insanity, the causes, chagrin, &c.,
have acted upon only a portion of the brain; while in more serious
forms of the affection?e. y., following violent disturbance, febrile
delirium, &c.?the lesion has been general, or has become so, whence
not only the intellect, but also other cerebral functions, are injured.
M. Ferrus opposed the Report, which he characterized as having
for its object to exhume and diffuse exclusive doctrines.
M. Piorry combated the arguments of M. Bousquet from the differ-
ence in the permanency of insanity as compared with that of delirium.
This, observed M. Piorry, cannot be regarded as a ground of dis-
tinction, since cases of delirium with fever are met with lasting ten,
fifteen, twenty days, or even longer; while there are cases of delirium
without fever which should be regarded as insanity, passing off within
a week: the absence of fever, according to M. Bousquet, distinguishes
insanity from delirium. Insanity, again, does not always develop
itself slowly, but often breaks out as suddenly as delirium.
In answer to the objection urged by M.Bousquet against the analogy
drawn by M. Moreau between insanity and dreaming, M. Piorry
observed, that it is by such physiological studies that psychological
science is to be advanced.
With reference to the statements of M. Bousquet that morbid
anatomy has thrown but little light upon the nature and cause of
insanity, M. Piorry urged that it does not follow, that because in so
delicate and complex an organ as the brain many instances occur in
which nothing of value has been found, therefore that those numerous
instances should be lost sight of in which sufficient has been found to
account for the perversion of the thinking faculties.
The lieport of the discussion upon this, M.Bousquet's paper, occupies
eighty-two pages. We cannot afford space for its reproduction. It
may suffice to say that it was severely criticised, and its principal
positions refuted by various speakers.
Pathological Condition of the Brain in Epileptics.
At the Societe Medico-psychologique, January 19, 1855, M. Dela-
siauve observed how frequently no appreciable alteration of structure
can be detected after death in epileptics; while on the other hand,
the most varied post-mortem appearances are sometimes met with, in
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 107
which the etiological relationship is not traceable. He had recently
met with a case in which a large osseous plate, from three to four
centimetres in extent (=1.181 to 1.574 English inches), was placed
m the form of an arc between the two hemispheres of the brain, and
appeared as if a portion of the falx were ossified. Was this growth
asked M. Delasiauve, the cause of the convulsions ? It would not
seem from its position, that it could have much interfered with the
functions of the brain. The symptoms, moreover, seem to have coincided
with an apoplectic seizure dating about four years previously and which
had left a large cell in the substance of the middle lobe of the left
hemisphere, as evidence of its occurrence. There had been three or
four paroxysms at monthly intervals ; during the last few months
the dementia and general paralysis had made great progress
Another patient had presented a more striking ossific deposit This
was a fragment of bone, of a cubic form, about the size of a filbert
and studded all over with needle-shaped spicule. This fragment was
lodged in the fissure of Sylvius, adhering slightly to the pia mater.
It is probable that these spiculse irritated the otherwise healthy brain
and gave rise to the attacks. The patient had frequently suffered
from vomiting, both at the time of the fits, and in the intervals. It
was not clear whether these attacks of vomiting were referrible to the
cerebral irritation, or to onanism, to which the patient had abandoned
himself.
M. Loiseau related the case of an epileptic in whom it was found
that an osseous growth had caused absorption of a portion of the
hemisphere.
M. Ferrus related the case of a lady of high intellectual develop-
ment, who had suffered from intense pain in the anterior region of the
brain, and on one occasion an epileptic seizure occurred. It was
found that an osseous tuft had been formed on the orbitar plate
which had torn the membranes and injured the brain. ' '
A Peculiar Form of Insanity in Children.
M. Delasiauve brought this subject under the notice of the Societe
Medico-psychologique, February 2Gth. This affection M. Delasiauve
described as having for its fundamental character a disturbance of the
intellectual faculties, manifested more or less confusion of ideas, but
was always complicated with ecstatic phenomena, the paroxysms of
which varied in duration, and in some cases returned at short intervals.
The patients remained several hours of the day as if wrapt in a sort of
mystical contemplation. Often the attention was fixedly directed to
one spot from which not even the most vivid impressions could
arouse them. In other cases the attention was alternately directed to
different points. The limbs and body were placed in the most gro-
tesque attitudes and positions ; sometimes the head was bent in forced
directions, sometimes the arms and legs remained elevated and extended.
In some of these cases there was seen slow and measured jactitation,
after the fashion of Punchinello. 01 the eight or nine cases seen by
M. Delasiauve almost all were cured within a limited period, in jsome
108 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
cases with relapse. Bathing, sulphate of quinine, and attention to
hygiene, were followed by successful results.
Although these cases were important, they did not, in the opinion
of M. Delasiauve, deserve a special nomenclature as a new form of
mental disease. The phenomena of these cases do not belong to
mania, nor specially to early age. They are met with in those forms
of partial insanity attended with convulsions, such as catalepsy and
epilepsy. The ecstatic state corresponds to a slight degree of cerebral
erethism, whereby the intellect, acting through volition, is subordinated
to the automatic organic system. Hence, if this view be correct,
ecstasy may take place whenever from moral or physical causes the
normal activity of the nervous centres is increased, and favours
the production of spasm. The preference of these attacks shown
towards early age may be explained by the greater impressionability
of that time of life. In some instances this special predisposition is
referable to onanism, or intimidation, which either depress or concen-
trate the nervous sensibility. Several of the patients were addicted
to the solitary vice, nearly all had been the subject of cruelty or unjust
rigour, or had been frightened by exaggerated representations of their
offences, and by fear of the wrath of God.
M. Moreau had met with instances of this form of affection, and
regarded them as cases of epilepsy, attended with a degree of stupor,
offering some resemblance to ecstasy.
M. Belhomme inquired if M. Delasiauve considered that an analogy
existed between ecstasy and catalepsy ?
M. Delasiauve in reply, stated that he recognised in ecstasy a state
of muscular immobility without contraction, accompanying a parti-
cular cerebral disorder, while in catalepsy there was abolition of feeling
with tetanic rigidity. The difference is one rather of degree than of
kind. Ecstasy seems to be a slighter degree of this cataleptic state.
M. Alfred Maury, mentioned an epidemic melancholy which had
prevailed among the inhabitants of a district in Siberia, some years
ago, under the influence of a Buddhist prediction. In this disorder
the sufferers uttered a sad monotonous chant, concluding with a
paroxysm of excitement, which was followed by insanity or restora-
tion. The moral and physical condition of this people resembled that
of childhood.
M. Buchez did not consider that either of the speakers had eluci-
dated the phenomena related by M. Delasiauve. He would ask whether
ecstasy occurring in the insane and epileptic is of the same nature as
ecstasy occurring in the previously healthy and in those persons who
can induce the ecstatic condition by profound meditation ? He further
asked, whether ecstasy and catalepsy ^ are physiologically the same P
whether they might exist separately ? whether they have the same
organic seal ?
M. Baillarger had seen cases of melancholy stupor pass into ecstasy.
He objected to the use of the word " physiological" to express con-
ditions referred to in this discussion, and which he considered as strictly
pathological. For instance, if ecstasy be a suspension of the intel-
lectual powers, how can it be said to be a physiological state ?
foreign psychological literature. 109
M. Alfred Maury compared the state of ecstasy to the passing de-
lirium of fever, which, frequently recurring, may pass into insanity.
M. Buchez considered that there was a great analogy, hut not an
identity between the ecstasy occurring in health and that occurring
in disease. M. Buchez further illustrated his opinions by reference to
the state of internal abstraction or contemplation under which musical
composers, without the presence of a musical instrument, veritably
hear the pieces they compose; and a painter sees in imagination the
persons he transfers to his cam as.
M Ferrus asked if a person in a state ot ecstasy was, medico-legally
spealdno- responsible for his acts; M. Ferrus promised to lay before
the Society the particulars of some cases bearing upon this point.
On the Organic Cause of Mental Alienation, accompanied by General
Paralysis. By INI- Bayle, who lays down the following as the
chief points of his Paper:
1 There is a particular species of mental affection, of a symptomatic
character perfectly distinct from the essential forms of alienation,
cnaracxei, p J . - an mdividual malady, having its own
and forming a } y anatomical characters too distinct to permit
causes, with symptoms ana anawimu
of their heim>" confounded with any other affection.
2? Its causes have one common effect in slow or sudden
the peculiar feature of being characterized by ambition, and passing
successively through the forms of monomania, mania, and dementia.
Frequently, mania is wanting. ? ? n ,. c
4 The anatomical characters are those ot chronic mtiammation of
the membranes of the convexity of the cerebral hemispheres, often
extending to the subjacent surface of the substance of the brain
itself. . .
The proofs of these positions are deduced from the post-mortem
examination of the brains of insane paralytics compared with the
brains of sane individuals, and from the analogy of this disease with
other inflammations of serous membranes.
Am on0- the lesions discovered in the examination of one hundred
bodies and which were characteristic of chronic inflammation of the
mpmhrnies of the brain, some were met with in all cases, while others
were absent in a certain number. The changes constantly met with
were opacity, thickening, increased toughness of the arachnoid to such
an extent that sometimes it was possible to suspend a slice of brain
by its means without tearing it; extreme congestion of the pia mater;
thickening of the arachnoid of the ventricles, which also was covered
with granulations; considerable effusion of serum into the cavities of
the ventricles and into the network of vessels of the pia mater.
110 FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
The morbid appearances less frequently met with were adhesions of
the membrane, and the softening of the surface of the convolutions ;
false membranes, or extravasated blood. The substance of the brain
was softer in a few cases; in some it was firmer; in the majority it
retained its natural consistence.
These post-mortem appearances are not met with in other diseases
than chronic meningitis; the slight opacities, &c., occurring to-
wards the close of life in other forms of cerebral disease, do not offer
even an analogy. They have always been found by M. Bayle after
death from general paralysis, and never in the case of patients who have
died from other maladies; hence it is inferred that chronic meningitis
is the organic cause of insanity with general paralysis.
Structure of the Cortical Layer of the Convolutions of the Brain.
M. Baixlakger refers to his previous discovery of six alternate layers
of grey and white matter in the cortical layer of the brain, and states
that MM. Foville and Gratiolet, in confirming his results, have added
the existence of another layer of white matter. This last layer follows
internally all the folds of the cortical layer, as the pia mater follows
them externally. The cortical layer of the convolutions separates
itself distinctly from the white substance, especially at the depths of
the anfractuosities; it remains, in effect, as if doubled by a very thin
layer of this substance. This is a fact which, observes M. Baillai'ger,
he had himself more than once observed, but to which he had not
attached the importance it merits. M. Baillarger does not, in the
present communication, examine the structure of this white layer, nor
the nature of its connexion with the grey substance and the radiating
fibres. The present notice records a fact in pathological anatomy, the
separation of a group of convolutions from the white substance, and
lined by this seventh lamina, such as he has often met with in the
sheep.
A female, thirty-seven years of age, was admitted into the Salpe-
triere, suffering from symptoms of general paralysis; at the end of
eighteen months she died. The left hemisphere of the brain was found
softened throughout its whole extent. The attempt to raise the
thickened membrane brought with it the entire cortical layer and a
portion of the white substance of the brain. At the anterior and
superior part it was possible thus to raise and separate an entire group
of convolutions. On examining these convolutions in their then re-
versed position, their summits were smooth and of a bluish-white
colour. On cutting into the summit it was observed that the white
layer which covered the cortical substance was grey and very thin,
of a uniform consistence, and tolerably adherent. This white lamina
is the layer described by MM. 1 oville and Gratiolet as the seventh
layer of the cortical substance of the brain. "Annales Medico-Psycho-
logiques." Janvier.
" The American Journal of Insanity," July 1855, contains a history
of the several attacks of insanity under which his Majesty King
LAW RELATING TO CHANCERY LUNATICS. Ill
George the Third suffered. These particulars, which have not
hitherto been published in any collected form in this country, have
been collected from " parliamentary reports, public papers, political
squibs, diaries of persons about the court, tittle-tattle sent to other
nations," &c., and have now been embodied in the form of a narrative
by Dr Ray, of Butler Hospital, Providence, United States. We
take leave, however, to question whether the result is worthy of all
the labour it must have cost.^ We were in England too well aware of
the melancholy fact of the King s insanity at the time, if not familiar
with all the details. We have had too much reason to regret the
consequences thereof to wish to revive so painful a subject. We are
very well convinced that much indirect good has also been providen-
tially educed from that national affliction, by the countenance it gave
to improvement in the general principle of the treatment of the
insane. Nevertheless, so much being taken for ^ granted, we fail to
perceive the benefit that can accrue to psychological medicine from a
revival of scenes so painful, and from a history which, after all the
laborious research of Dr Kay, is still impeifect.
Our transatlantic brethren may probably trace in the results of the
mental disorder of Greorge the Third, their own elevation to a national
status. We may be disposed to concur in the inference, but content to
submit with the best grace we may to the dispensations of Providence,
we would not raise the veil that screens the domestic giiefs of royalty
in the belief that a sovereign has as inalienable a right to have his
home held sacred as has the meanest citizen of a republic. And not-
withstanding we may incur the imputation of a squeamish tenderness,
we hold that such a narrative as the history of the insanity of the
King goes very near to trench upon the inviolability of professional
confFdence. In the ordinary publication of cases by medical men,
names are usually suppressed?and where for the ends of justice both
names and particulars must be made known, still no more than is re-
quired for the furtherance of judicial objects is usually laid bare to
public gaze. Why, then, should not the same measure be meted out
to the most exalted member of society ?
