Psychology of Leibnitz
=======================

Abt. II.?
BY PROFESSOR HOPPUS, LL.D.
The speculative science of the Germans must be regarded as
dating from Leibnitz. The name of Puffendorf, indeed, is
generally placed first among those writers who have con-
tributed to tbe formation of an indigenous German philosophy;
but he cultivated only one branch?jurisprudence. Leibnitz
was in every sense universal. Our limited space obliges us to
condense to the utmost as plain an account as we can give of
the main psychological and metaphysical speculations, sometimes
vagaries, of this great master-genius.
Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibnitz was born at Leipzig in 1646.
He was contemporary with Newton, Clarke, Locke, Spinoza,
Malebranche, and other celebrated men; and he was not eclipsed
amidst the splendour of such a constellation?micat inter omnes.
The period was favourable to the influence of such a mind:
former polemic heats were allayed; and there was a growing
taste for research, and for scientific intercommunication; witness
the efforts, to this end, of Wallis in England, and Mersenne
in France. Germany was prepared to take her part in this
favourable crisis; and, in that country, Leibnitz's influence may
be traced in almost every branch of speculation down to recent
times. He, alone, is to Germany what Locke and Newton are
to England. But his fame is European; and it is well remarked
by Dugald Stewart, that his " best eulogium is furnished by the
literary history of the eighteenth century." At school he was
ardently devoted to classical learning; and he afterwards entered
the University of Leipzig, in which his father was professor of
i t " Leibnitzii Opera Philosophica qu? extant, omnia." Berlin. (By Professor
Erdmaun.)
326 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
jurisprudence. Here, though he studied for the law, he applied
himself intensely to almost every branch of knowledge, but
especially to mathematics and philosophy; and, in pursuit of
the latter, he devoted much time to Plato and Aristotle. He
early formed the project of laying the foundation of a new and
improved system of knowledge, in the attempt to combine what-
ever he could harmonize in the views and methods of these
ancients, with those of Descartes. His prodigious memory enabled
him to retain and recal his immense reading, but did not damp
his ardour for new discoveries, and for intercourse with all the
great men of his day who came within his reach. Almost fabu-
lous statements are made of his vast industry; but, no doubt, in
this, as in other things, he surpassed ordinary mortals, though
it must be an exaggeration to state, as Fontenelle does, that he
" did not leave his study-chair, day or night, for weeks together."
So anxious was he for knowledge of all kinds, that he was ready
to identify himself, for the sake of it, even with pretenders or
fanatical devotees to science. When still in his youth, he joined
a society of alchemists, at Nuremberg; into which he craved
admission by writing a letter to the adepts, which was so appro-
priately obscure and mystical as to induce them eagerly to elect
him as their secretary. His more public literary and scientific
career may be dated from the time when he was persuaded to
withdraw from this confraternity by the Baron von Boineburg,
chancellor of the Elector of Mentz, and whose valuable patronage
he now obtained.
The amount of Leibnitz's writings is immense; yet throughout
all his speculative pieces one idea reigns?that of a prima philo-
sophia, a science of first principles, which is to be the basis of all
systematic knowledge. But though his aim was thus one and
unique, his writings were for the most part inspired by occasions,
and were miscellaneous, often of a fragmentary character, found
in reviews and detached pieces, or in his extensive correspondence.
All are constantly marked by the same tendency to general prin-
ciples and fundamental truths, and to the harmonizing of previous
and apparently discordant systems, ancient and modern?by the
fertile and inventive character of his imagination, and by his
inclination to introduce mathematical ideas into general subjects.
By adopting demonstrative methods in the psychological and
moral sciences, he sanguinely hoped to put an end to controversy.
In thus maintaining that the methods and spirit of mathematics
should be carried into all other studies, he symbolized with
Descartes and Spinoza, however much lie differed from them in
other respects. He first distinguished himself in 1664, on taking
his Master's degree, when about eighteen years of age, by his
inaugural thesis de Pvincipio Individuationis, in which he
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 327
shows an accurate acquaintance witli certain phases of the scho-
lastic philosophy, and takes the side of the nominalists in regard
to the question of universals. He also here claims a real posi-
tive existence for individual objects, contrarily to the views of
Spinoza; and sustains his opinions by appealing to Aureolus,
Gregory Arimensis, Gabriel Bird, Durandus, and others, whom
he either quotes or refers to. We must not attempt to give a
particular account of his treatises, which now followed each
other in quick succession ; and which, from first to last, com-
passed almost the entire circle of human knowledge. We can only
touch on a few of these pieces?chiefly those which bear more closely
on psychological matters. His "Ars Combinatorial 1666, and
his posthumous fragment entitled, "Historia et Commendatio
Linguae characteristic? universalis," both relate to an idea which
he conceived when 16 years of age, of framing an alphabet of
human thought, which should comprise the most simple elements
of our ideas, and express their combinations. There was some
analogy between this scheme and some recent methods* which
propose to reduce reasoning, or even thought in general, to an
algebraical calculus. Leibnitz was astonished, he tells us, that
such a method had escaped Aristotle and Descartes: but
he never followed it out into the actual construction of a
universal language. It is curious, that about this time, our
philosopher employed his logic to persuade the Poles to choose
the Prince of Neuburg to their elective monarchy; but though
he brought into the field a phalanx of sixty propositions, bristling
with axioms rigorously applied, his logic was not strong enough
to seat the prince on the throne.
Leibnitz was now rapidly rising to honour, and he was made
a councillor and chancellor of justice to the Elector of Mentz:
but he still thirsted after knowledge; and his next project was
an Encyclopaedia of learning, on the basis of that of Alstedius:
however, this, like maDy other gigantic enterprises which he
conceived, was never realised. Amidst his other works on law,,
politics, history, philosophy, and two on mechanical principles?
which latter were rejected by men of science as resting on no
solid basis,?we see a " Defence of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
on the principles of Logic"! f Soon afterwards we find Leibnitz
inventing an arithmetical machine, intended as an improvement
on that of Pascal, and which is still to be seen at Gottingen.
He rejected, about this time, the place of Pensioner^ of the
French Academy, as it would have involved his professing the
Catholic religion; yet this discursive, and sometimes eccentiic
genius, in a work on German diplomacy, actually propounded a
* Particularly by Professors De Morgan and Boole,
t " Sacrosancta Trinitas per nova arguments logica defensa," 1670.
NO. III.?NEW SERIES. Z
328 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
scheme for making the pope the head of the Protestant as well
as the Catholic Church in the west, the German emperor being
the co-ordinate civil ruler. The idea was that of a general
government for Europe. Leibnitz actually corresponded with
Bossuet on the subject of a Catholico-Protestant union, on the
principle of mutual concessions. A year or two afterwards we
have a new phase of our author in his " Protogaea," a work on
the formation of the earth, and of which Dr Buclcland has re-
corded that it contains germs of the most enlightened specula-
tions of modern geological science. In 1710 appeared Leibnitz's
celebrated work, " Essai de Theodicee," in which are contained
his doctrines of pre-established harmony and optimism. It is,
in short, a defence of the wisdom of God, viewed in connexion
with the existence of evil; and it was aimed against the atheism
of Bayle. His " Monadologie" was posthumously published, and
was composed for Prince Eugene of Savoy. Just before his
death, Leibnitz was engaged in the celebrated controversy with
Dr Samuel Clarke, on freewill, the reality of space, and other
knotty points, which were all discussed in a series of letters, in
1715 and 1716; in which great learning is exhibited on both
sides, with occasional sharpness of retort on the part of our
philosopher. His important work, " Nouveaux Essais sur l'En-
tendement Humain," was not published in his life-time. It
was written as early as 1701, in answer to Locke's Essay; but
Leibnitz did not publish it, on account of Locke's death: " for,"
(said he in a letter to Remonde) " I cannot bring myself to
publish refutations of deceased authors."
The fame of Leibnitz during his lifetime was perhaps rarely
equalled. Even crowned heads did him honour. The German
Emperor awarded to him a pension of two thousand florins, with
the dignity of Baron of the Holy Roman Empire, and Aulic
councillor; and the Czar Peter conferred on him the title of
privy-councillor with a pension, in return for his advice in re-
gard to the civilisation of the Russian people. His talents were
undoubtedly great, and his ambition was greater. He even
tried his hand at poetry; but, like Cicero, he did not find the
muse propitious, and he gained no laurels by her inspiration.
He wrote a piece* in recommendation of the study of his native
tongue, but he composed very little in it. Frederic Schlegel
remarks that " it is a pity that lie did not write his philosophical
works in German: it would have been impossible to have left so
many divinely illuminated thoughts to swim in such a sea of
sciolism (halbheiten) as, alas ! has often happened in the barba-
rous scholastic Latin, and in French." -j- It was half a century
* Vid. "Collectanea Etymologica," Dutens, vi. p. 651.
+ " Einleitung zu Lessing's Gedanken."
PSYCHOLOGY OP LEIBNITZ. 329
later before German assumed the position which it now holds
among the languages of Europe. Some of Leibnitz's remarks
show that he himself was not fully aware of its resources and
its flexibility.* His Latin style is not generally elegant or
pleasing, and it often contains Gallicisms. It was notj on the
whole, such as to expose him to be beaten by the angel, as
was said of one of the Fathers, for writing with the pen of
Tully. It is less remarkable that his French prose should oc-
casionally fall into Germanisms; but his French style is not
wanting in simplicity and force, and it is often marked by a
great combination of life, point, and beauty.
There has never, that we are aware, been a complete edition
of Leibnitz's writings. Probably no one has ever waded through
all the vast heterogeneous matter that has actually seen the
light. Dutens's edition (Geneva, 1768) is in six quarto volumes, of
from 600 to 1000 mortal pages each ; but it is far from containing
all. Raspe published an important collection, entitled " CEuvres
Philosopliiques de feu M. Leibnitz." In 1805, Feder added a
selection of letters never before printed. In 1840, Professor
Erdmann, of Berlin, published " Leibnitzii Opera Pliilosophica
quse extant omnia," in one volume, which is a much more com-
plete collection of his pieces on speculative philosophy than is
to be found either in Dutens or Raspe. In 1845, M. Jaques
published a selection from Leibnitz's philosophical writings, at
Paris. Our author has had many biographers, of whom the
most recent is Guhrauer, who has made valuable additions to
our knowledge of this great man. We have some curious auto-
biographical fragments, in which Leibnitz describes the develop-
ment of his own mind. He here tells us how he invented for
himself an original method of studying Latin. He began by
" devouring Livy, and the Chronological Thesaurus of Calvisius."
The latter he easily managed, because he had a German book on
the same subject; but Livy required to be "devoured"
secundum artem. He at first chiefly pored over the words
immediately under the wood-cuts, and, at all events, missed
everything which seemed obscure and difficult. This operation
he repeated several times, and every time understood more and
more, till at last almost all was plain, and this "without a
dictionary."
He also informs us how his master wanted to check his
ardour, on pretence of regulating his studies, but leally on
account of his own ignorance; how he read Latin pretty well,
knew some Greek, and made verses, at twelve years of age.
Logic seems to have been next attacked, and our author says
* " CEuvres de Leibnitz, Dutens, v? 331*
z 2
330 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
that while others were horrified at this study, he was delighted
with it. He tells us that his
" Stature was of tlie middle height, and graceful; that his face was
pale, his hands generally cold, his sight keen, his voice shrill rather than
powerful, and that he found some difficult}' in pronouncing the guttural
letters, hut especially the h; that he went late to bed, and greatly pre-
ferred night studies; that he read much from childhood, and thought
more : that in most things he was self-taught (avrooticiKroQ) ; he was en-
dowed with an excellent invention and judgment, and found no diffi-
eulty in transferring his attention rapidly from one subject to another,
successively reading, writing, and speaking, and investigating any
matter to the very bottom : he was neither very sad nor very merry,
alike moderate in joy and grief, and he more frequently smiled than
laughed."
Leibnitz died in 1*716, in his seventieth year.
Ludovici and Hanscius have severally attempted a digest of
the philosophical opinions of Leibnitz, but neither of their
treatises is to be found in our British Museum. Such a work, if
well executed, would be of great value in abridging the heavy
toil of the student. The Protean forms which the genius of
Leibnitz assumed, the fragmentary manner in which hehas treated
many subjects, and the immense accumulation of materials and
of reflections on them which abound in his writings, are often
quite bewildering, as it is necessary to pursue his opinions on
some topics over so vast a field, in order to do them justice.
After all, the reader must often content himself with general
principles and germs of thought, which the author, impelled
onward by his ardour to embrace everything within the sphere
of human knowledge, did not allow himself time fully to
systematize and digest. Like Descartes, he aimed at a phi-
losophy which should embrace the first principles of all truth,
by a method as nearly as possible like that of mathematicians.
This was his ruling idea, and he was ever seeking, by means
of it, to give a certain unity to the ever-changing and kaleido-
scopic phases of his invention. With Spinoza he set out from
Cartesianism ; but, from the first, Leibnitz holds more of the
objective than Descartes, whose dualism did not satisfy him,
though he preferred the ideal tendency of this great modern
founder of more speculative intellectual inquiry to the Lockian
principle that we, in some way or other, owe all our know-
ledge to experience. "Descartes," said he, "has not led us
into the innermost apartment of truth, but he has led us into
the antechamber/' * He praised Descartes' work " De Methodo,"
and his " Meditationes," as being in the spirit of Plato, with-
drawing men's minds from sense to thought, usefully reviving
* Op. ii. p- 263, Dutens.
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 331
the ancient academic scepticism or caution ; but he justly charged
Descartes with speedily departing from his own principles, and
quitting doubt for hypothesis. Leibnitz, therefore, aimed at a
more consecutive and consistent method. We must seek for its
illustration, and for the opinions of the great Coryphseus of
German speculation in general, through the mass of his occasional
papers, such as his contributions to learned societies and his cor-
respondence, as well as in his fuller and more systematic
treatises, as his " Nouveaux Essais/' and his " Theodicee/' though
even here we look in vain for a formal and complete detail, or
even an outline of a system of philosophy. We are therefore
compelled to frame to ourselves some order in which best to
view his opinions, and to exhibit them briefly in their connexion
and mutual dependence.
It is proper to glance first at his doctrines relating to the
Nature, Origin, and Certainty of Human Knowledge, as
these points closely involve the prime psychological and logical
operations of the mind ; and, as in all the great writers who have
influenced philosophy 011 the side of psychology, their main re-
spective views on the grounds and method of knowledge, have
always been characteristic and fundamental. Thus Bacon laid
the basis of knowledge in experience by intuition. Descartes
began with doubting, and placed certainty in that of which we
could not doubt. Spinoza identified human and divine thought,
and held them to be the ground of knowledge. Malebranche
reduced all truth to " vision in God/' Berkeley found certainty
only in our ideas,?all else was illusion. Hume held 110 higher
truth than association ; with him causation involved 110 positive
and universal necessity. Locke traced certainty to the agree-
ment of our ideas, as derived from sensation and reflection.
Hobbes, Gassendi, and Condillac based it ultimately on sensation
alone. Leibnitz, like Descartes and Spinoza, endeavoured to re-
duce the form of truth and knowledge to rational axioms, though
he tested them in a different way. His views on the nature,
origin, and certainty of our knowledge may be gathered from
his tracts and fragments, entitled " Meditationes de Cognitione,
Veritate, et Ideis," " De Veritatibus Primis/' " Definitiones
Logicse," " DifEcultates quaedam Logicse/' " Sclireiben an Gabriel
Wagner vom Nutzen der Vernunftkunst oder Logik," "Reflec-
tions sur l'Essai de M. Locke," "Discours touchant la Method<3
de la Certitude/' " Nouveaux Essais sur 1 Entendement Humam,
and elsewhere. All the above, with the exception of the JNou-
veaux Essais/' are brief pieces.
Leibnitz's theory of knowledge is in its spirit Cartesian, or, as
lie himself would say, Platonic, as aiming at the a priori method
rather than that of experience. 1'he fact is, that neither method
S32 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
should be attempted alone ; they should correct and limit each
other. Of the two, however, we doubt not that the "high
a priori road" is the most dizzy and dangerous. It easily led
Pythagoras to number as the essence of all things; it conducted
the Eleatic school to Pantheism: Plato into the mystic region of
the Supersensibles ; Descartes to his plenum of vortices : it led
Malebranche to transfer the objectivity of our perceptions from
the sensible world to the Deity; and Spinoza was conducted
back by it to a semi-eleatic pantheism, and this by the march of
what has been called a " pitiless logic/' though with a sufficiently
pitiful result. The difficulty is to distinguish, in axiomatic
assumptions, what is rational and necessary from what is merely
egoistic and, fanciful. Though Leibnitz had some admirable
notions on first principles and axiomatic truths, he also fell a
victim to dogmatic hypothesis,?witness his romance of " Mona-
dology," which he appears really to have believed. The a 'priori
method, unrestrained by the modesty of reason and the due
sense of the limitation of the human faculties, has in subsequent
times produced the vagaries of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, and
other popular systems in Germany. Granting, as we do, the
value, importance, and necessity of fundamental or unprovable
truths, in their proper sphere, we only mean that the greatest
possible caution is necessary in the details. Leibnitz himself,
with all his genius, was eminently at fault in his appreciation
of the legitimate scope of the human faculties.
In the outset, however, of this theory of knowledge he is
more cautious than his predecessor Descartes, who held that
everything is true which is represented to us with perfectly
clear ideas. Leibnitz calls for such a test of this clearness as
can be relied on for truth ; and finding none, he prefers the
rules of logic as more suited to be a criterion. What he means
by logic, he distinctly tells us in his letter to Wagner. He would
not limit it to the testing of truth, but would make it include
methods of discovery ; in other words, he would embrace within
its sphere both deduction and induction.* Leibnitz distinguishes
the qualities of our ideas as clear, when we can ourselves dis-
tinguish them ; distinct, when we can accurately describe their
difference to others; and adequate, when all the distinctive
marks are equally capable of being described. The three marks
are found together in but few of our ideas ; for we rarely know
for certain that we have reached their final elements in the
analysis. When, however, this is the case, our knowledge is
intuitive, or a priori ; it is derived, says Leibnitz, not from the
* " Unter der Logit, verstehe ich die Kunst den Verstand zu gebrauchen, also
nicht allein was fiirgestellt zu beurtheilen, sondern aucli was verborgen ist zu
erfinden."?Schreib. an Wagn.
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 333
senses, but from the intellect itself. He instances our ideas of
number, as capable at once of a clear, distinct, and adequate
(perfect) analysis, and as therefore intuitive.*" He also would
say, that when we can thus attain to perfect knowledge, we have
a "real definition;" in all other cases only a "nominal" one.f
The pure mathematical sciences are the region of these adequate
and intuitive ideas. It is impossible for us here to dwell on the
vexed controversy of logical definition; we merely state in
brief Leibnitz's distinctions. Again, an idea is " true," as such,
when it is possible; " false," when it involves a contradiction.
Possibility is known a priori, when the ultimate elements of our
ideas contain no incompatibilities. " Pure intuition of the
primary possibles, by the resolution of ideas to their irreducible
elements, is the source of all absolute and demonstrative truth."
In plainer language, logical truth depends on the compatibility
of the hypotheses which lead to it; but the Cartesian, Leibnitzian,
and other continental speculations regarding " possibility" and
truth, we hold to be often fanciful and mystical, and not always
intelligible. We know possibility, a posteriori, on the other
hand, continues Leibnitz, by actual existence ; for if a thing
exists, it must be possible. The above distinctions were partly
brought forward by way of amending Descartes' principle, that
"whatever I clearly and distinctly perceive of anything is true,
?a principle, like most others, far from being exempt from
licence and abuse, though designed to be final. Leibnitz s at-
tempt to rectify or supplant it, though somewhat more critical
than the principle of Descartes, equally takes for granted that all
the criteria brought forward can always be depended on, and
precisely and strictly applied by human sagacity. But the in-
firmity of reason was not one of those facts which were most apt
to dwell on the sanguine and adventurous mind of Leibnitz : he
was far more habitually influenced by a conviction of the im-
portance, in some way or other of hitting upon a remedy for the
imperfection of the existing methods of philosophy; and his
reigning idea, as to this panacea, was the reduction of all our
knowledge by means of the a priori process, as found in
mathematics.
It may be well to observe, that our author's general views re-
specting the nature of " ideas" were perfectly simple, and un-
tin^ed with any infusion of the ancient idealism, or of its relics
in later times. He was not more a Platonic or mystical idealist
like Malebranche, or a spiritualistic idealist like Berkeley,X than
he was an idealist of the Peripatetic school; he distinctly rejected
* " Meditat. de Cognit."Nouv. Ess."
?f Ibid. " Reflections sur Locke."
? Vid. our account of Berkeley's Psychology, in this Journal, July, 1855.
334- PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
all sorts of images, and all their shadowy resemblances, and he
pronounced our ideas to be nothing more than certain affections,
or modifications of our minds. Descartes also had clearly main-
tained that no material analogies can explain thought; his
"ideas" were, in like manner, only conditions of our minds ; but
in proposing to deal with ideas, according to mathematical pro-
cedure, he^ differed from Leibnitz, inasmuch as he greatly neg-
lected logic as the source and type of deductive truth. It was
by way of facilitating the application of strictly logical processes
to our knowledge that Leibnitz attempted so much to elaborate
a theory of ideas. To this end he brings his views to a point,
when he lays down, as an a priori test of all deductive truth,
the principle of contradiction; which Aristotle had long ago
termed the "most certain of all principles" (SE^cuorarij rwv
apyCov 7raarwv,) and announced in the form : " a thing cannot
be and not be at the same time." A familiar instance of this
principle of contradiction is found in Euclid's Problem, " to find
the centre of a given circle," which is solved by reductio ad ab-
surdum, as the principle of contradiction is commonly termed
when applied to mathematics. But there is another principle,
that which embraces the real and the actual?all the things
among possibles, says Leibnitz, which the Deity has caused to
pass into positive existence. This is the principle of the suffi-
cient reason ; and it includes the law of fitness or order, the law
of causation, and of final causes : these are only various expres-
sions or formulae of the general principle.
Leibnitz describes the two principles in his "Monadologie," first
published from the original French manuscript by Erdmann, in
his recent edition of Leibnitz's philosophical writings; the
Latin translation of this manuscript being entitled, " Principia
Philosophise," in the edition of Dutens. " By the principle of
contradiction we judge to be false what opposes the true, and
true that which opposes the false : and by the principle of the
sufficient reason we consider that no fact can exist without some
sufficient reason why it is so, and not otherwise; though the
reason itself may most frequently escape our knowledge." The
first principle relates to the truths of reason, which are necessary,
and their opposite impossible, as involving a contradiction; the
second principle relates to the truths of fact, which are con-
tingent, and their opposite hypothetically possible. In analyzing
mathematical deductions, we come at last to primitive or identical
propositions, the opposites of which contain contradictions; as in
the case of {a + b) (a?b) = a~?b?; respecting which kind of
propositions Aristotle directly taught that equality is identity
(tv tovtoiq 7] Igotiiq tvuT)](i) ? But while rational truths may be
reduced to identities, and their denial involves contradiction,
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 335
facts, or contingent truths belong to the principle of the suffi-
cient reason. " There is," says our author, " an infinity of move-
ments and inclinations, present and past, which enter into the
efficient cause of my writing at this moment; but there must be
a sufficient or final reason or cause of it, out of the series of con-
tingencies ; and this is God." Ultimately, Leibnitz reduces even
the principle of contradiction to that of the sufficient reason,
and with more propriety, as appears to us, than Wolf, his suc-
cessor sought to reduce the latter to the former; for it is cer-
tainly a sufficient ground for believing demonstrated truths, that
their denial involves contradiction. We doubt, however, the
propriety of Leibnitz's extending his idea of the principle of
contradiction to those axiomatic truths which Kant afterwards
termed "synthetic judgments a priori," as for instance, every
change must have a cause; for we can hardly reduce the denial
of this to a logical contradiction, as in the case of Kant's " analy-
tical judgments," in which the predicate is only an exposition of
the subject, not a new idea. To deny that all matter is extended,
no doubt involves a contradiction in terms ; for matter means
extended substance ; but we believe in causation simply because
we cannot help it, whether this be held to be a " sufficient reason"
or not.
As to the principles themselves?that which can be reduced
to identity is true, and cannot be contradicted without absurdity
?and everything which happens in the universe of mind or
matter, involves some adequate cause (sufficient reason) why it
did not happen differently, whether we understand that reason
or not?our author justly regarded these two principles as re-
quiring no proof, being the spontaneous dictate of human intelli-
gence. We think him right, also, in maintaining that, without the
principle of the sufficient reason, we could not arrive at the proof
of the existence of God.* It is equally plain, he adds, that "every
part of mathematics may be demonstrated on the principle of
contradiction or identity; and that in Natural Theology, and
Natural Philosophy (so far as the ultimate principles of dynamics
are concerned) we find the sphere of the sufficient reason. It
was only thus that Archimedes, in his book ?De Equilibrio/
could account for the fundamental property of the balance."
The principle of the sufficient reason was the starting point
of Leibnitz's controversy with Dr Samuel Clarke; and it was
mixed up with the question regarding the determination of the
divine will. Clarke admitted that nothing is, without a sufficient
reason why it is as it is; but, he added, that the mere will of
God is often the only sufficient reason, in such a sense, that
unless the will of God is capable of acting without a predeter-
* " llecueil de Diverses Pieces."
336 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
mining cause, liis power of choosing would be reduced to mere
fatalism. Leibnitz replied, that Clarke only granted the principle
in words, but in reality denied it, and involved the conclusion
that God wills some things without a sufficient reason for so
doing. The dispute was, in fact, the old one about liberty and
necessity?one which we apprehend will never be settled satis-
factorily by argument. In this controversy many of Leibnitz's
theories on other subjects came incidentally forward; among the
rest, his definition of time and space as things merely relative,
the former being the " order of succession/' and the latter, the
" order of coexistence." And this surely is all that can be said,
objectively, of these two mysterious substrata of all our know-
ledge. His doctrines of monadology and pre-established har-
mony also incidentally appear in this controversy.
With regard to the relation of the Divine Mind to truth, Leib-
nitz maintained that all possible truth dwells in the under-
standing of God, and is, like himself, necessary and eternal;
actual truth, or that which is, depends on his will. Matters
of fact are contingent, like the laws of nature, on which they
depend: they might have been different from what they are;
or at all events they have only a moral necessity, that of order
and fitness?a necessity arising only from the certainty that God
will make the best possible choice, and not to be confounded
with absolute mathematical and metaphysical necessity, which
attaches only to the truths of reason. The sphere of absolute
necessity includes metaphysics, logic, ethics, and mathematics;
the sphere of actuality and reality includes physics in all its
branches. Hence two modes of inquiry; logical deduction on
the one hand, and experimental induction on the other.
An important point of our author's general theory of know-
ledge relates to the question of the origin of our ideas. Diffe-
rent schools are characterized by their respective views on this
subject. In regard to a vast mass of our ideas, there is and can be
no controversy. Kant on the one hand, and Locke on the other?
not less than the materialists, who exaggerated and metamor-
phosed Locke's doctrines, as the German Pantheistical idealists did
Kant's?agree that experience alone can teach us the properties
of things around us. But it is evident that we have knowledge
which transcends all experience, otherwise we could never
believe irrevocably in the necessity and universality of causation.
We shall not repeat here what we have said on the subject of
" innate ideas/' in our notice of the'' Psychology of Descartes"
in a former number* " Innate ideas/' and " innate principles,"
are unfortunate expressions, intended by the school of Descartes
and by Leibnitz, to mean nothing more than ideas and prin-
* Yid. "Psychological Journal," January, 1855.
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 337
ciples which are only occasioned by experience, but which really
emanate from the constitution of the human mind itself. We
have further explained this subject in the " Psychology of Locke/'
in another number of this journal* Locke evidently did really
admit the very doctrine which he appeared to deny, when
he argued at length against " innate truth." He was only
combating, throughout, an exaggerated form?we may almost
say a caricature, of the Cartesian view of "innate truth;" and
he did not sufficiently distinguish between logical propositions,
of which the " children" and " savages"whom he adduces "know
nothing," and those psychological impressions, activities, and ten-
dencies (Leibnitz would term them, " virtualities") on the basis
of which they exercise their mental faculties without being
aware of it. There is every reason to believe that, had Locke
survived?who died just at the time when Leibnitz was about
to publish his "Nouveaux Essais," in which he follows Locke's
Essay throughout, in its divisions, chapter by chapter?a most
instructive controversy would have arisen between these two great
psychologists, equally useful to them, mutually, and to the world
at large. We have no doubt that the issue would have been a
far greater agreement of opinion on the subject than the unini-
tiated reader of Locke's dissertation on " innate ideas" would
have supposed possible. There are not a few passages in the
" Essay" which might very well have been penned by Descartes or
Leibnitz himself; for they admit, in reality, all that these two
philosophers would, on explanation, have contended for, though
in a less technical?perhaps, in some respects, a less objection-
able, phraseology.-f- Lord Shaftesbury, in his " Characteristics,"
put the question in the right light, when he said: " Is the con-
stitution of man such, that, sooner or later, certain ideas will
infallibly, inevitably, necessarily, spring up in him ?"
Leibnitz, however, like the Germans generally, and like some
of our own countrymen who, without sufficient caution, follow
in their wake?failed to apprehend the scope of Locke, when
he represented him as maintaining the scholastic principle, nihil
est in intellectu quod non fuerit prius in sensu. This charge
is strictly applicable to the sensational theory of the " ideolo-
gists," as well as to that of the decided materialists: it answers
as a description of the tenets of Gassendi, Hobbes, and Condillac ;
but it certainly does not fairly apply to Locke, who distinctly
held that there was " another great source of ideas besides
sensation, namely, reflection, by which the mind furnishes the
understanding with ideas of its own operations." J Nor did
Leibnitz very cleverly mend the aphorism of the schools by
* Yid. "Psychological Journal," July, 1854.
+ Yid. "Essay," Bk. iv. chap. 11 and 13. I Ibid. Bk. ii. chap. 1.
338 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
appending to it "nisi ipse intellectus," as though, in any tole-
rable sense, the understanding could be " in itself." What he
meant, however, was plain; and Locke better expressed it by-
saying, that reflection must be added to sensation as a source of
knowledge; for, admitting fully the doctrine of primary truth as
a general principle, it is, after all, only by self-conscious reflec-
tion that we come to notice the a priori constitutional tenden-
cies and operations of our minds. Leibnitz's views of the origin
of human knowledge were essentially taken from the stand-point
of Descartes; and his theories on the subject were so much cast
in the Cartesian mould, that it is no wonder he should, on the
first reading of Locke's unfortunate chapters on " innate ideas and
principles," feel disposed to speak very disparagingly of the Essay,
as he does in his short tract on it, in 1696. " Scarcely any two
men could be supposed with more differently constituted minds
than Leibnitz and Locke. In this tract, the former saw no
difficulty in arriving at the conclusion that the soul must ever
be active, and "always think." Locke, with his usual caution,
did not deny this; but only said, that as we are not conscious
of it, we want the evidence of it. Leibnitz, too, spoke more
familiarly of the "infinite and the absolute" than Locke could
do; and this fashion has been very current among the later
Germans of the ideal school, and some of the French eclectics.
M. Cousin would seem to have almost entirely got over the
difficulty of comprehending the "infinite," if we may judge from
some of his strange assertions with regard to our knowledge of
the Deity. In the " Nouveaux Essais," Leibnitz speaks with great
respect, and even eulogy, of Locke, and in a tone little in har-
mony with the flippant remarks on him which have escaped
some of the Germans and French, and even some of his own
countrymen, who ought to have understood him best. "W e have
no doubt that Leibnitz was right in maintaining that certain
ideas, such as cause, existence, etc., are elicited only, but not
formed, by experience ; and that certain truths, as the axioms
of geometry, for example, are universal, necessary, and con-
stitutional to the human mind, psychologically, previous
to their being framed into logical propositions. Locke ob-
served that the given ideas arose in connexion with experience,
and that the alleged truths were not logically familiar to all
minds; and, therefore, he hastily rejected, altogether, the theory
of what are (by a term very liable to be misunderstood) called
"innate" principles, in the modified and unobjectionable sense
of Descartes and Leibnitz. Yet Locke really did admit these
very principles, in fact, apparently without heeding it, as we
have shown in our notice of Locke's psychology already alluded
to. Leibnitz sometimes aj)pears delighted with Locke's state-
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 339
ments, quoting them at length, or alluding to them, as closely
approximating in substance to his own views of " innate" truths,
which he sometimes terms " natural virtualities." " It appears,"
says he, " that our able author (Locke) assumes that there is
nothing virtual in us: but we must not take this rigorously."
Leibnitz again remarks: "I am inclined to believe that, funda-
mentally, his sentiments on this point are not different from my
own."
In respect to our idea of God, Leibnitz's views are Cartesian.
But, here, we must observe that he appears to have fallen into
a singular contradiction on this subject. He makes Thdophile,
who always represents his own opinions in the dialogue, say to
Philalethe : " I have always held with the innate idea of God as
Descartes maintained it; and I am still of the same opinion.*
But Philalethe, having occasion, afterwards, to name the princi-
ples which Lord Herbert of Cherbury laid down as innate, says
that some persons denied them. To this Theophile replies, that
while he takes all necessary truths to be innate, he maintains
that " these propositions are not innate, for they may be proved."+
Now, one of Lord Herbert's "innate propositions" is, that "there
is a Supreme Deit}'." We find no clue to any solution of this
inconsistency of statement into which Leibnitz has fallen. We
must not dwell further on this remarkable incongruity: we can
only add, here, that, in our view, it is more accurate to say that
the idea of causation is innate, than that the idea of God is so ]
though the necessity of causation, which is the same thing as
adequate causation, evidently leads us, by one single step, to an
Author of the universe. We hold that what are distinguished,
technically, by the Germans, as the " ontological," " cosmoiogical,"
and " physico-theological" arguments for a Deity,j are, in fine,
only so many forms of the argument from causation.
Having given some account of the views which maybe found,
respecting the theory of human knowledge, scattered over various
parts of Leibnitz's works, we shall now briefly sketch his Mona-
DOLOGY; which was written at the desire of Prince Eugene, and
first published under the title of " Principia Philosophise."
Agreeably to the Baconian ideas, so much in harmony with the
English mind, our distinguished countryman, Locke, indulges in
l j speculations as to the nature or essence of soul or mind ; and
?\ve may add, the nature or essence of matter. Leibnitz, on the
other hand, brought for the solution of both these questions a
* " Yous savez, Philalethe, que j'ai toujours 6t6, comme je suis encore, pour
l'idee innee de Dieu," etc.?"Nouv. Ess. cliapit. i.
+ " Je vous avoue que ces cinq propositions ne sont pas des principes inn?s,
car je tiens qu'on peut, et qu'on doit les prouver. Ibid, chapit. ii. 15.
+ Yid. Kant's "Kritik." (Rosenkranz, 1838), s. 462, seq.
340 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
bold and we may say fanciful theory, of which he appeared much
enamoured, though his followers have disputed respecting the
meaning of not a few of the dogmas which he lays down ; and
some have gone so far as to assert that he intended the whole as
only a flight of imagination. Of this, however, we have met
with no evidence, and we see no reason to doubt his sincerity,
though very much cause for more than doubting his judgment,
in propounding this philosophical romance. His monadology,
however, stands in very close connexion with his views of the
nature of knowledge, and especially with its a "priori aspect.
For if he had not exaggerated the power of the mind to seize on
truth intuitively, and to arrive at it by abstract thinking, he
never would have been so far led away as to suppose that reason
could construct all the elements of a universe by diving into
the depths of consciousness. In this and some of his other
theories, Leibnitz shows, by anticipation, the true general type
of that idealism which has so largely been exemplified in the
modern German mind. We do not mean to say that no truth is
mixed up with his monadological speculations; we speak of the
theory as a whole, and of the gratuitous assumptions which are"
often admitted into it, without any proof, or the possibility of
proof to the capacities of man : yet our sanguine author boldly
marches forward through all difficulties, and where to the eye of
ordinary mortals there seems 110 road or clue to any safe conclu-
sion, he easily finds one, and pioneers his way like a giant
striding through forests and over mountains, as readily as other
men can walk on plain ground. "
The simple, says our philosopher, is that which has no parts?
therefore no extension, therefore no form, therefore no divisibility.
Such is each monad; and monads are the true atoms,
unities, and elements of all things, whether material or intellec-
tual. At first Cartesian in his views of matter (as essential^ so
in other respects, in his method) he identified matter with ex-
tension. But now he argued strenuously against this most de-
fective theory of Descartes, as may be seen in various of
Leibnitz's treatises.* Even resistance (" antitypie") added to
extension does not, says he, explain motion; we must also have
a force of elasticity. He traces the pantheism of Spinoza (which
he terms a " detestable doctrine") and the hypothesis of
"occasional causes, as held by Geulincx and Malebranche, to
this dogma of Descartes?that matter and extension are one and
the same : for, " if so, all things are but fleeting manifestations of
one permanent substance, the Deity, as identified with nature;
* " De Vera, Methodo Philosophise " Epistola ad Thomasium " Commen-
tarius de Anhn& Brutorum; " Lettre a Fouclier; "Epistola ad Des Bosses;"
" De la Nature en elle-meme" Lettre a Bourguet, etc.
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
34-1
and as mere extension is incapable of action, we must at once
have"recourse to the agency of God as the immediate source of
all motion. There must therefore be a force in things. The mere
succession of phenomena does not meet the case ; we must sup-
pose a dynamic power?a cause or force, which we conceive of
I bv an irreducible (" innate") idea. We are compelled to this
view by the principle of the sufficient reason." But our author
went farther : each monad is a force existing not in posse only,
but also in esse. It is always more or less acting, like a bent bow
or a suspended weight; indeed, we find, in these very cases, that
the monads are always striving to change their condition, because
each is a force, ivTtXk\iio., a term used by Aristotle for an
efficient cause. Extension is the basis of geometry; force of
dynamics. Matter, however, has not only this active power or
force?it has also that passive power of resistance which Kepler
rilled inertia Leibnitz identifies inertia not very clearly with
the " mass of a body," which he calls " primary matterforce
added renders it complete, and then it is "secondary matter."
He traces the origin of our not,on of force-rightly, we tlnnk-
to ourselves as forces, the m01 or ego being a self-conscious force,
and giving us our first distinct notion of cause. Leibnitz is
always more of a metaphysician (in the German sense) than of a
Mvcholorist?he reasons more than he observes; he is impatient
of anything but results, or what be thmlts are such; and he
seems generally to care more to show what must be (as he sup-
poses) than what is. Yet he did not fail to mark the psycho-
logical origin of the idea of force, as actually known m conscious-
ness ? and?he justly makes self-consciousness our final appeal in
all that concerns our mental history and experience,* for we
know and feel that we are causes. But having greatly im-
proved on the method of Descartes, by bringing prominently
forward the idea of force, Leibnitz made a use of it which landed
him in a theory as gratuitous as that of Descartes' vortices.
The monads, he tells us, were created all at once, by a single
" fulo-uration" of the divine power, and will last for ever, if not
annihilated by the same power. His argument for their being
infinite in number is a curious example of the wildness, or at
least hastiness, of some of his a prior i reasonings. " It is pos-
sible that the monads should be infinite in number; and if they
were not so, it would argue a defect in the divine resources;
therefore they are thus infinite."f No two monads can be alike
in ill resnects, for if they were, they would be identical; they
must differ in the kind and degree of their inward activity.
* " De la Nature en elle-meme. Considerations sur la Doctrine d'un Esprit
universe!," (tot published m ?^sd^e'Xsses ,
342 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
This is Leibnitz's "principium iclentitatis indiscernibilium,"
which Kant has so ably criticised.* These monads are not
atoms of quantity (?atomi molis), but of "substance"?"not
material, but formal." They are forces, activities, souls ([dmes.)
The materia prima of body is merely passive and inert?it is
not a complete substance till it is endowed with a form analogous
to soul,?an original spontaneity of action, (evtcAexhciv n)v
7rpu)rr]v.) Our author even uses the word spirit, (corpus con-
stare ex materia et spiritu.) + All these monads have more or
less of perception and appetency. They are elsewhere described
as metaphysical points, substantial forms, true unities, indivisible
forces, without figure, without parts. Every created monad has
its own activity always within itself; no other monad can
originate any changes in it.
There are four sorts of monads. God is the primary monad
(moncts monadum). Next are finite spirits, including human
souls, which are distinguished from the monads below them by
reason, and the power of grasping necessary and eternal truth.
Next in order are the souls of brutes; these have not reason, but
only memory, perception, and volition. The lowest order of
monads " possess merely the monadic life," a sort of impulsive
force, without those faculties which even brutes possess ; and this
order includes vegetables and inorganic bodies. The essence of
all matter consists of these monads of the lowest class ; and even
these are endowed by our imaginative philosopher with life and
sensibility, as well as activity. They are all living, active beings,
and are always struggling blindly to change their condition, and
they have all some kind of "feeling or perception." Further-
more, one monad of the second order surrounded by an organized
mass of monads of the lowest order, constitutes a human being.
One monad of the third order surrounded by a similar aggregate,
constitutes a brute animal. Though these monads are har-
moniously accommodated to each other, they have no mutual
influence or agency on each other; and mankind are deceived
in the vulgar supposition that there is such a reciprocity of
action always going on in the universe ; this, as we shall presently
see, was one great peculiarity of Leibnitz's system, leading to a
further theory?that of pre-established harmony. Every monad,
moreover, is a " mirror of the whole universethe whole uni-
verse is reflected in it, and is different from what it would be had
any one single monad of the whole number not existed. As the
monads have different degrees of perfection, so "each monad has
a right to existence according to the perfection which belongs to
it." ? An infinite number of these monadic universes were pos-
* Vid. " Reflexion's-begriffe. Kritik der rein. Vernunft."
f "Acta Erudit." 1698, pp. 434-6.
PSYCHOLOGY OP LEIBNITZ. 343
sible, but only one could exist; and the sufficient reason which
determined the Deity to the choice of the actual one was, that it
* 106 ?f Leibnit2's theories,-that of
But enough of this ingenious philosophical romance-a snecu-
lation which seems to have originated verv rrmr-V, ; T ?, P?. ^
anxiety to penetrate into the nature and all th*** J^nitzs
force, and was based on the strange and inconsistent ? ?f
logical possibility led by a short?road toTutf ^neeVt
wonder that the charge of darkness and mysticism should lmve
been so widely brought against this extraordinary scheme ortW
it should involve within itself many inconsistencies and
contradictions?as when, in one place, he tells us that6the
monads of which matter is constituted are simple substances of
the lowest order,f and elsewhere asserts that matter is not a
substance, but a " substantiation," which he explains by the
expression, " well-founded phenomenon" (phenomdne bien
fonde) -,l language, this, which would seem much nearer to the
subsequent German idealism than his reduction of the essence of
matter to force.
Leibnitz's doctrine of monads involved that of Pre-esta-
blished HARMONY. ? The monads had no real agency on each
other, but were mutually isolated and independent. Besides
" how could the higher monadic spirits act on the blind though
living forces which constitute the lowest order of monads." This
objection was as old as Empedocles, of the Italic sect perhaps
earlier. It was his maxim that " like has no action on unliH "
a dogma which was fertile in producing the ancient idealism
founded on the supposed necessity of something intermediate in
perception, holding both of object and subject. It is sum??
that Leibnitz did not see the consequences of this doctrine which"
if legitimately carried out, would render even the divine 'aeS
m all created things impossible, for how could the infinite?*
act on materialism ! But our sanguine theorist was very slow
to realise the humiliating truth of the limitation of the humal
faculties, and to take it in connexion with another?namelv
that " facts are stubborn thingsand he was still slower to make
such considerations a main basis for philosophy He totally'
denied that there was any reciprocal agency whatever in the
universe, either between material things or between them and
mind. The soul acts precisely as it would do if there were no
bodies, and the body as it would if there were no souls. Leibnitz
* "Vid. " Monad." 54. + Ibid, passim.
J '1 Lettre h, M. Dangicourt."
? Vid. "Monad.;" "De la Communication des Substances"La Nature en
elle-meme"Nouveau Systeme de la Nature," etc.
no. in.?new series. a a
314 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
employs three hypotheses to account for the apparent agencies
and harmonies of the universe. Two clocks exactly agree. This
agreement may be supposed to arise from some reciprocal in-
fluence, or from the constant intervention of an artisan who re-
gulates their respective movements every moment, or from the
skill of the maker, who has so arranged the clocks at the
beginning, that they cannot vary. The common theory with
regard to soul and body is the first: they are supposed mutually
to affect each other; the second theory?that of the continual
intervention of the Creator?is the " occasionalism" of the
Cartesians, termed by Descartes himself assistentia and con-
cursus; the third, which Leibnitz adopts, is that of a harmony
of all nature, pre-established by the Creator, and having the
same effect as though there was the actual interagency which
mankind imagine to take place between things. Our author re-
jected the first hypothesis on the Empedoclean principle; the
second, as involving a perpetual miracle; and he adopted the
third, as avoiding both difficulties, and as also best agreeing with
another of his theories?namely, that there is always in the
outward universe not only the same quantity of force, but also
the same directions of motion. Descartes had said that there
was always the same quantity of actual motion; this Leibnitz
denied; but, as the monads were created all at once, " their
forces, when summed up, would always be the samestill,
though apparently the soul could change the direction of motion
at its pleasure, as Descartes had said, yet this variation, according
to Leibnitz, could only take place by a pre-established harmony
of all the directions of motion. Dr Samuel Clarke, in his con-
troversy with Leibnitz, evidently adopted the second hypothesis
in preference to the third, though not, it would seem, to the
exclusion of the first. The difficulty of drawing a line between
the limit of divine agency and that of second causes (which
Leibnitz, characteristically, seemed scarcely to appreciate) has
induced modern writers of celebrity to maintain, without hesita-
tion, that God must be supposed to be not only the author, and
in some way the upholder, but the constant actuator of all the
laws of matter and of mind; the only limit being in the moral
agency of accountable beings, who are themselves causes, with an
independent power of doing right and wrong.
Omitting other phases of Leibnitz's doctrine of pre-established
harmony, we must yield to the temptation of quoting Dr Thomas
Brown's graphically popular, though somewhat exaggerated
illustration of the main principle :
" The soul of Leibnitz would, though his body had been annihilated
at birth, have felt and acted as if with its bodily appendage,?study-
ing the same works, inventing the same systems, and carrying on,
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 34:5
with the same warfare of books and epistles, the same long course of
indefatigable controversy ; and the body of this great philosopher,
though his soul had been annihilated at birth, would not merely have
gone?through the same process of growth, eating and digesting, and
performing ?all its other ordinary functions; but would have achieved
for itself the same intellectual glory, without any consciousness of
the works which it was writing and correcting,?would have argued
with equal strenuousness for the principle of the sufficient reason,
claimed the honour of the differential calculus, and laboured to prove
this very system of the pre-established harmony, of which it would
certainly in that case have been one of the most illustrious examples."*
This ludicrous mode of treating the subject may at least serve
to relieve a necessarily dry discussion; though we apprehend
that Leibnitz himself, whose general good humour would most
likely have made him laugh with the rest could he have read it,
wild have replied, very obviously, that there could bo no " har-
mony" at all where one of the terms of correlation was supposed
^Leibnitz's extension of liis theory of pre-established harmony
to the "kingdom of God," by which he means, in general, the
moral world, led immediately to his OPTIMISM. Conceiving
that 0i priori reasoning, as explained in his views already given
re^ardL the nature mid certainty of human knowledge, led by
a direct road to truth, he found little difficulty in supposing that,
in Ms " nionadology," he had solved the question relating to the
nature and essenc? of substances The pre-established harmony
easilv accounted for all the dynamics of the universe, and the
actions of animal and moral beings; and now the result of the
whole is, among all that were possible, the best possible world?
that which contains the "greatest possible reality, unity, and
agreement of the manifold in all its parts/' But as evil, physical
and moral, is a great and mournful fact of this world, it was our
author's aim to point out the harmony of evil with the doctrine of
Optimism. His work entitled " Essais de Theodicee, sur la Bontd
de Dieu la Libertd de THomme, et TOrigine du Mai," was pub-
lished in consequence of the discussions on those subjects in
Bavle's Dictionary.t Bayle had asserted that philosophy and
theology were at variance ; nay, that even reason was inconsistent
with itself; and that it was impossible to reconcile the evil which
evicts with the idea of a wise, just, and good author and governor
of the universe. The Queen of Prussia, Sophia Charlotte a
kdv who substituted a taste for learning and philosophy for the
frivolities with which most personages of her rank are content,
w!?aware of Leibnitz's views on several articles of the "Die-
* Lecture XXXI.
+ " Dictionnaire Historique et Critique," 1097.
A A 2
346 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
tionary," and she desired him to publish on the subject. Hence
the " Theodicde," of which our account must be very brief. The
leading idea is, that as this world is the world which God has
chosen, it is, notwithstanding its sin and its misery, the best of
all possible worlds. Whatever discrepancy may appear between
philosophical and theological truth in any point of their com-
parison, it is not real; therefore there can be no actual collision
between reason and revelation. There are many things which
we cannot comprehend; but we may sustain them against ob-
jections, provided they do not, d. priori, involve logical contra-
diction, and are based on credible evidence.
In treating of evil, Bayle and Leibnitz set out in opposite
directions. The former boldly maintains that the world is im-
perfect, and cannot come from such a being as Christians under-
stand God to be ; and that the old Manichean doctrine of two
opposite principles, one good, the other evil, offers the only solu-
tion. Leibnitz sets out from the idea of the Deity, and maintains
that such a Being must have constituted the most perfect pos-
sible world. He distinguishes between metaphysical, moral,
and physical evil. The first is mere imperfection, the second is
sin, the third is suffering. The first is wholly inseparable from
the creature, for a being that is in all respects perfect must be
God: there must be this distinction between the Creator and
all creatures. And as to moral and physical evil, had they been
excluded from following on that which is purely metaphysical,
more imperfection would have accrued than by their admission.
"Everything was foreseen, and everything that would possibly
happen contributed ideally something to the divine determina-
tion to make the whole real." " It is true," says Leibnitz, "one
might imagine possible worlds without sin and without suffer-
ing?romances and Utopias ; but these worlds would be inferior
in good to ours, since God has chosen this world as it is."* He
goes on to show that the creature, as necessarily subject to
limitation, (metaphysical evil) "cannot know everything, and
may err." " God is not the author of this evil, which consists
originally in privation or negation." He " produces in the
creature all that is positive and good; but imperfections and
defects in action come from the original limitation of the crea-
ture as such/ t Leibnitz maintains fully the freedom of man's
actions, and that God s foreknowledge does not interfere with it.
By a distinction between the "provisional" and the "absolute"
will of God, our philosopher thinks he reconciles the permission
of evil with supreme goodness. He further adds: "We
must conclude that God wills all good antecedently, and the
best consequently as an end : he wills physical evil sometimes
* "Theod." Par. I. IS. f Ibid. 30-33.
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 347
as a means; but he only wills to permit moral evil on account
of the sine qua non or hypothetical necessity which allies moral
evil with optimism (le meilleur) ; therefore the consequent will
of God, which has moral evil for its object, is only permissive/'
But we cannot pretend to do anything like justice to the learning,
devout feeling, ingenuity, metaphysical acumen, and praise-
worthy desire to vindicate religion from gainsayers, which are
manifested in the " Theodic^e ?" we are obliged to confess how-
ever, that the grand and ancient question which it involves
(tto6zv to kcikov,) the origin of evil, is left by Leibnitz, as far as
we can see, just where he found it. Pfaff of Tubingen, indeed
endeavoured to prove that Leibnitz did not believe his own
doctrines, but agreed really with Bayle. This we hold to be a
libel wholly without foundation, entirely disproved by the sin-
cere tone of the "Theodic^e/'and by our author's general charac-
ter and writings.
For further light on some of the views of our author which
we have introduced to the reader, we must refer him to the
letters which passed between him and Dr Clarke, and which
originated in a communication from Leibnitz to the Princess of
Wales of that day, in which he passed an unfavourable j udgment ?
on the existing state of philosophical opinions in England. The
enlightened Princess handed over this letter to Dr Clarke, and
a controversy began respecting the agency of the Deity in the
universe, the principle of the sufficient reason, time and space,
and other points, including certain views of Newton and Locke.
On most of these topics there was evidently not all the difference
of opinion which at first sight appeared, due allowance being
made for the difficulty of adjusting the meaning of terms, and
the different points of view from which the same subject is often
apt to be regarded by different individuals. Leibnitz himself
was fond of trying to accommodate differences, when possible, in
this way ; he especially aimed to diminish the points in contro-
versy between himself and Locke, and expressly asserted, and
with justice, that, fundamentally, their differences on some im-
portant topics were much less than appeared.
We can only touch on a few remaining speculations of our
indefatigable and prolific genius. It was an old axiom, natura
non operatur per saltumLeibnitz called this principle the
law of continuity. It is this same law by which variable quanti-
ties, passing from one magnitude to another, go through all the
intermediate magnitudes, without passing over any of them ab-
ruptly. Leibnitz not only applied this law universally to nature
with Boscovich, he extended it beyond the province of mathematics
and physics, to mind itself. He proves, by its means, that the
soul can never wholly cease to think, even in a swoon or in
348 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
sleep ; and that the souls of brutes cannot be so much unlike those
of men as is supposed, because there cannot be discontinuity be-
tween the two. On the same principle, he tells us, there cannot
be, in strictness, such a thing as the death of an animated being.
JMight he not have proved, by the same law, that the interval of
being between the created and the Creating mind must neces-
sarily be filled up by insensible gradations; so that there can be
no chasm between the finite and the infinite mind ? But what a
contradiction ! Leibnitz, however, did nothing by halves. He
had a principle?a law?and it must be necessary and universal!
Of his physical and mechanical speculations, some estimate
may be formed, when we state that he retained the Cartesian,
vortices of subtile matter, with a plenum; while he admitted
Newton's principle of gravitation, though he has nowhere har-
monized the two systems. Again, on the other hand, we find him
writing to Dr Clarke, that "in the time of Mr. Boyle, and other
great men of Charles the Second's reign, no one would have
dared to broach such whims as some of Newton's."* Was it
that the world was not large enough for two such great men ?
He even strangely pronounced that Newton's views respecting
the necessity of the conservating or regulating agency of the
Creator in the universe had an impious tendency, by arguing im-
perfection in his works. Our author also engaged in a controversy
with the Cartesians respecting the measure of force ; the former
maintaining that it is proportional to the square of the velocity ;
the latter that it is as the velocity?a dispute which arose from
the apparent difference in the numerical quantities of different
effects. Laplace has ingeniously shown, by experiment, that we
ought to consider force as directly proportional to the velocity of
the moving body.
After all the gigantic labours of the mind of Leibnitz, as seen
in his speculative writings, which contained so many fertile
germs of thought, destined to be developed by his successors?
it is unquestionably as a mathematician that his fame rests on
the most solid basis. The controversy respecting the discovery
of the Differential Calculus has been almost national; the Ger-
mans having been as anxious to award that honour to Leibnitz,
as the English to Newton. Dr Guhrauer, the most recent bio-
grapher of Leibnitz, contends that the two discoveries were
different; but for this opinion there is no foundation. It seems
now admitted by all competent and impartial inquirers, that the
two distinguished men both came independently to the same
result by somewhat different methods, Newton representing by
the flow of a point at the extremity of a line, what Leibnitz
* " On n'aurait pas oser nous (lebiter des notions si creuses," Sieme ?crit de
Leibnitz.
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 349
represented by successive increments. But, on this subject, and
on the relative merits of the two philosophers in regard to their
respective developments of the method, it is sufficient to refer
to the brief statement of Professor De Morgan.*
As a metaphysician and moralist, Leibnitz is best represented
in his " Nouveaux Essais," (in which he criticises Locke,) and in
his "Theodicde"?works which all should well study who desire to
come into immediate contact with the mind of this extraordinary
man. The latter is his most complete work, and a signal monu-
ment of his learning and genius. _ In these, and in many of his
more fragmentary writings, there is much that has given law to
philosophical opinion in subsequent times; though it must be
admitted that the illustrious author frequently attempted unsuc-
cessfully to transcend the real limits of human thought, appa-
rently without knowing it His principle of contradiction is
invulnerable throughout the whole domain of logical truth. We
must however, contend that he earned his other principle of the
" sufficient reason" too far, as a solution of difficulties connected
with our contemplation of the moral universe. His doctrine of
the identity of indiscernibles" has been ably criticised by Kant,
and shown to be untenable.t His notions ot a, prion.truth, as
a <*uide to theory, were obviously extravagant; in proof of which
it is enough to refer to many parts of the Monadology, which,
acreeablv to the remark of Brucker, are so perplexed and ob-
jure as to confound his most admiring disc,pies. In regard to
a pre-established harmony of the universe, no doubt there is a
sense in which this is true; for, as has been beautifully said?
here even " all discord is harmony not understood by mortals.
But'of Leibnitz s views on this subject, so far as they are an
ttempt to explain the phenomena of perception, or to solve the
vstery of the mind's intercourse with the body and the out-
ward universe, it may safely be affirmed that no theory was
evermore gratuitous or baseless; and it did not survive Wolf,
his successor and expounder, who himself much restricted its
applications# #
We have already seen that our author's " Optimism" followed
consecutively from his doctrine of monads, and of pre-established
harmony. The idea was originally Plato's ; but Leibnitz's theory
is o-enerally accused of being more fatalistic than the Grecian,
though he himself would not admit it. In the " Theodic^e" he
makes use of an allegory from Laurentius Valla It relates to
Sevtus Tarquinius, and the outrage which caused the expulsion
of his family from Home. Leibnitz takes up the allegory where
* "Differential Calculus," pp. 33, 34.
j. ti -n a +t rlpq Nichtzuunterscheidenden, u. s. w. ; Via. Ampmbolie der
"KritiMerrein. W (Rose^).
350 PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ.
Yalla leaves it, and makes Theodoras, the high-priest at Dodona,
ask Jupiter why he had not given another will to Tarquin?
Jupiter sends the priest to Athens, to consult Minerva, who
shows him the palace of the Fates, in which there were repre-
sentations of all possible worlds, each containing a Sextus Tar-
quinius, with a different will. In the last and best of these
worlds, the high-priest sees Sextus, such as he is, with his exist-
ing will and propensities. Minerva is made to say:
" You see, it was not my father that made Sextus wicked. He was
wicked from all eternity, and he was so voluntarily. Jupiter has only
bestowed on him that existence which he could not refuse him in the
best of all possible worlds. He only transferred him from the region
of possible to that of actual beings. But what great events does the
crime of Sextus draw after it?the liberty of Eome?a government
fertile in civil and military virtues?an empire destined to conquer
and civilise the earth."
Theodoras returns thanks to Minerva, and acknowledges the
justice of Jupiter. This is truly Leibnitzian: but, ingenious as it
may be, we suppose that our readers will think it far enough
from being a special proof that the present is the " best of all
possible worlds." We may add, here, that our author's avowed
theory of moral necessity appears to have been essentially that
subsequently maintained by the great American metaphysician
and divine. President Edwards.
Religion, no doubt, compels the conclusion, that whatever the
Supreme Being does or permits, is done or permitted for the
wisest possible ends. This is probably the full extent of optimism
that it is given to man to realise; and it satisfies devotion.
But Leibnitz went further, and evidently regarded his " Theo-
dicsea" as claiming to be a more specific solution of the origin of
evil. We wish we could go more fully into his reasonings; but we
should not, by so doing, throw any further light on the subject.
The main idea is, that this must be the best possible constitution
of the moral as well as physical universe, because God, as the
perfect Being, could only have chosen such a world. Whatever
general sense, we repeat, this statement is capable of, the dif-
ficulty consists in its application, in detail, to the phenomena
and aspects of evil; nor could the subject even be entertained
at all, without theological discussions hardly suited to our pages.
After all, our author proves that evil in the universe is a good,
only by the fact of its existence. As to any independent argu-
ment, this great genius has failed, like all others who have
attempted the question; for his solution amounts, in reality, to
a petitio principii. It offers no satisfactory answer to the
many questions which might be asked as to a possible universe
PSYCHOLOGY OF LEIBNITZ. 351
viewed in connexion with a power, a wisdom, and a benevolence
to which everything-must be regarded as possible, but a logical
contradiction.
There can be no doubt that, with all his genius, Leibnitz was
eminently deficient, as compared with Bacon, N^ewton or Locke
in that practical, inductive (we had almost said English) habit
of mind, which some branches of truth especially demand. He
has even been accused of extreme credulity. He tells us of a
dog which he had heard speak several French words; amon?-
others, the, caffe, chocolat, and assemblee * Duo-aid 'Stewart
thinks that the dog's master imposed on Leibnitz by means of
ventriloquism. One thing is certain?that his genius enabled
him easily to frame theories; and, when once enamoured of them,
he no less easily could find in them harmonies with the principle
of contradiction, or the sufficient reason, or some other favourite
axiom ; and he was then ready to maintain them with a zeal and
a profusion of learning and argument worthy of the most re-
nowned leaders of the middle ages. However unfinished many
of his projects were, he seems never to have abandoned the
expectation of accomplishing them. This remark applies to
his vast scheme of a universal language, to his calculating
machine, and a variety of dynamical inventions. Bailly says of
him:
" As daring as Descartes, as subtile as Bayle, perhaps less profound
than Newton, and less cautious than Locke, but alone universal among
all these groat men, Leibnitz appears to have embraced the domain of
reason in all its exi,_ it, and to have contributed the most to diffuse
that philosophical spx.it which constitutes the glory of the present
age." +
W e close with a pas. age not less appropriate, from Mieville.
The allusion is to the n onument of Leibnitz, at Hanover, in-
scribed with the words C sa Leibnitzii:
" A pproach this tomb, ana contemplate the man whom it contains.
Observe the works deposited with him?his writings on theology and
metaphysics, his letters on toleration, his profound researches on inter-
national law, the mass of liis physical and mathematical solutions, and
a variety of other intricate disquisitions, which combined to give him
the character of the most general scholar of his age. He had the
honour of sharing the invention of the Differential Calculus with the
immortal Newton. An historian, a civilian, a metaphysician, and a poet,
Leibnitz may be said to have embraced everything. The treasures of
ancient learning were his, and he had the ambition to attempt a know-
ledge of the most abstruse subjects. He was thus led into bold specu-
lations, from the pursuit of which he was sometimes recalled by the
* Vid. ".Rapport de l'Acad&nie Eoyale des Sciences, hParis," 1706.
+ "Eloge de Leibnitz."
-\ /
S52 NOTES OF A VISIT TO THE
admonitory lessons of history, while, at other times, he ventured
beyond his powers, and allowed the guiding-thread to escape from his
hold, but proceeded, unconscious of his loss, and bewildered himself in
the illusions of system. He then no longer argued?an ardent imagina-
tion created for him an assemblage of fantastic beings; dazzling
hypotheses deceived his reason; and when he hoped to succeed in
laying open one labyrinth, he was entangled in another."*
* " Tombeaux du dix-huitibme Steele."
