Notes of A Visit to the Public Lunatic
=======================================

Art. III.?
ASYLUMS OF SCOTLAND.
(Continued from page 66.)
Murray's Royal Asylum.

This institution for the insane, founded in 1827, is situated near
Perth, upon the north-western declivity of the picturesque hill of
Kinoull having a magnificent prospect over the basin of the
river Tay, with the Grampian Hills on one side, and those of
Strathearn on the opposite. Being constructed on a kind of
slope, the lower story windows of the building are nearly on a
level with the adjacent ground in front, whereby, this part of the
structure is rendered rather dark, somewhat damp, and conse-
quently not so airy or salubrious as, the upper portion. In this
respect, the asylum partly resembles that of Colney Hatch, where
the same objectionable peculiarity prevails. Having been erected
prior to the introduction of many modern improvements, which
science and more extended experience have introduced into re-
cently-built asylums, several defects might be fairly pointed out
by hypercritical observers, but which need not be now mentioned;
as altogether, this establishment deserves much approval in re-
ference to its general management, and especially, with regaid to
the treatment of patients therein confined.

One great defect characterizes this asylum, namel}7', its present
scanty supply of water; and, what is still more regrettable, there
BY JOHN WEBSTER, M.D., F.R.S., AND F.B.C.r.j
Physician to the Scottish Hospital, tyc.
is very little prospect of this deficiency, in so necessary an ele-
ment in every institution for the insane ever admitting an
effectual remedy. Being placed so much above the neighbouring
river Tay's level, and the city of Perth, any supply from that
locality can never likely be conveyed to this high position.
Farther, as adjoining landlords have objected to water being
brought from sources on their property, the institution has to
depend chiefly upon wells sunk within its own precincts, aided
by rain reservoirs. The gardens attached are extensive, well
arranged, highly cultivated, and appeared exceedingly productive.
They produce plenty of fruit and vegetables for the establishment,
besides being, along with the adjoining fields?belonging to the
asylum?of great use to the patients, as such appendages supply
ample means for giving inmates employment, as also affording
amusement and healthy recreation.

Similar to every public institution for the insane throughout
Scotland, the Perth asylum receives both pauper and private
patients. Of the latter description, there were 50 inmates at the
time of my inspection, who paid from 801, to 250?. per annum,
board and lodging included. The pauper, or lowest class of
patients, pay eight shillings per week, which is certainly very
moderate, considering the recent high price of provisions. Taken
in the aggregate, the total lunatic inmates, on the day of my visit
to this asylum, amounted to 141 individuals, of whom 77 were
males and 6i females: hence giving, as at Glasgow, more of the
former sex than the latter. Amongst the above, only 2 men
laboured under general paralysis; 2 males and 6 females were
dirty patients; and 1 male and 2 females suffered from epilepsy;
the other'cases being mostly of a chronic description. No
patient was then under bodily restraint, excepting two males, who
had strong leather gloves temporarily upon both hands, to prevent
them destroying their clothes. However, one of these persons
had been only recently brought to the institution, in a violent
state of excitement, which seemed not yet abated. One female
lunatic also was placed in an open court-yard, to avoid all annoy-
ance to other patients through her violence, but none were
actually in seclusion; and the strait-waistcoat appeared un-
known, or had become a matter of history.

During last year, 36 new insane patients were admitted, of
whom 28 were males and 13 females; 6 males and 11 females
were discharged cured, whilst 7 male and 8 female lunatics died:
7 of the above deaths having been caused by cholera, which
visited the establishment last season as an epidemic. Respecting
the form of insanity in the cases admitted, it appears 8 were
examples of mania, 8 melancholia, 9 monomania, 7 dementia, 2
general paralysis, and 2 dipsomania. In 8 of the above patients,
a suicidal propensity exhibited itself more or less strongly; in
10, the insanity assumed a religious type; in 2 a homicidal and
mischievous tendency existed, whilst in 2 examples dementia was
complicated with epilepsy. Besides the 7 deaths by cholera, and
3 from choleraic diarrhoea, 1 case terminated fatally from organic
disease of the heart, 1 by apoplexy, 1 in consequence of typhoid
broncho-pneumonia, and 2 deaths occurred through senile ex-
haustion.

Occupying the patients constitutes a prominent feature at this
asylum. Consequently, in the female work-room, millinery and
needlework is an ordinary employment, whereby a large quantity
of the clothing required for patients is both made and mended.
The laundry likewise supplies regular occupation to various female
patients, as also the kitchen and ordinary household duties. In this
way a proportion of convalescents, or of those inmates labouring
under milder forms of mental disease, materially promote the
comfort of their less fortunate companions ii| affliction, whilst
they also assist essentially in maintaining the establishment's
efficiency. Shoemaking, carpentry, besides outdoor work in the
garden or grounds, further* afford daily occupation to numerous
male patients, the latter manual labour being both useful and
healthy for the insane. Amongst persons of education, especially
in the higher classes, it is not always so easy to engage such
residents in any kind of physical employment. Still, on the male
side, various inmates are employed as book-keepers, drawing
ornamental designs, in making fishing-tackle, or by playing on
musical instruments. Some amuse themselves at cards, bagatelle,
chess, or billiards; whilst others again frequent the bowling-
green, in order to enjoy the healthful exercise thus afforded.
Amongst lady patients, playing on the piano supplies a constant
source of j)leasure to several, besides those who are occupied in
needlework, reading, or in writing. Some spin, or manufacture
wax-flowers and ornamental knick-knacks. Hence, but few re-
main idle, and so avoid feeding on their own morbid illusory sen-
sations, which often prove injurious.

Irrespective of the zealous attention paid at this asylum to
occupying the inmates, whether pauper or otherwise, in manual
or bodily labour, recreating thern in various ways, besides pro-
moting their intellectual culture, wherever possible, now consti-
tute prominent features in its general management. Upon both
these important questions, a better exposition cannot be conveyed
to readers, than extracts from the recent annual report, which
states:?

" The introduction of recreations among the insane can no longer he
regarded as an experiment; their success lias been fully established by
the experience of the best asylums in this country, on the Continent,
and in America. They are not to be looked upon as mere transient
gratifications, or as frivolous, and tending to dissipate, degrade, or per-
vert the mental energies or moral feelings of the insane. Our own
experience of their curative value has been most encouraging. We have
frequently observed the first symptoms of improvement in the form of
a smile, a laugh, a critique, or a mark of applause, at a ball or a concert;
we have seen the most fatuous, apathetic, and indolent patient?the
melancholic and suicidal, as well as the proud monomaniac?delighted
with some lively or familiar music, or dancing with the greatest vivacity
at the weekly balls. Five concerts were given during the winter, in
presence of between 40 and 70 patients. The performances included
every variety of vocal and instrumental music, and the performers?
composed of a mixture of patients and officers?numbered from 10 to
20. No audience could have been more attentive, delighted, or grateful;
none could have behaved with greater propriety."

Pic-nic excursions to the neighbouring beautiful localities, fetes
champetres, athletic games, such as cricket, bowls, quoits, or foot-
ball, with promenades in the grounds, and pedestrian tours to
various places of interest in the vicinity of Perth, are frequently
made; whilst parties have likewise been sent into that city, to
attend various public concerts and exhibitions, as also the annual
races.

Respecting the education and intellectual culture of lunatic
inmates at this establishment, besides conversaziones held occa-
sionally, during the earlier months of winter, it is further stated
in the document already quoted, that?

" During the later winter months, a course of lectures on Economic
Botany, or the applications of botany to common life, was delivered on
the Saturday evenings to an average audience of thirty persons, belonging
chiefly to the higher classes of patients. By means of presenting objects
of natural history and scientific information under an attractive guise,
we have found the insane become accurate observers, apt students, and
frequently acute reasoners. The remarks made at the conversaziones
following each lecture, showed that the patients present had not been
mere passive or quiet listeners, but that their minds had laid hold of
many facts which not only served as nuclei for present reflection, but
formed solid increments to their stock of knowledge. The gradual acqui-
sition of scientific information by the insane not only tends to lead to
habits of correct observation, stimulate to the study of the good and
beautiful in nature, furnish the mind with the highest and purest subject-
matter for contemplation, and attract attention from the gross and de-
grading pleasures of the world, but it may become of infinite service to
them in after life, when they recover their mental equilibrium, and resume
their places in society. As an immediate and gratifying result of these
scientific meetings, four lectures were delivered by two patients to the
same audience, the subjects being respectively ' The Beauties of Nature,'
' Antiquities of Perth,' ' Comicalities,' and 1 Superstitions of the High-
lands.' These lectures were treated in such a way as to render them
popular and attractive; and a cordial vote of thanks was awarded by
the audience in approbation of the useful though unpretending labours
of their authors. The preparation of such discourses is not only valuable,
by diverting attention from morbid fancies and unpleasant associations ;
but the amount of reading necessarily involved cannot fail to leave a
lasting and useful impression."

Statements like these are exceedingly gratifying; and as
showing how the system pursued at this institution is proposed
to be carried out, during the ensuing season, an account of the
classes and lectures intended for inmates, throughout the winter
of 1855-56, is now appended, viz.;?

I.?Theory and Practice or Vocal Music, under the direction of Herr
Boos, Professor of Music, from Bonn-on-the-Rhine.
Thursdays, 5'30 p.m.
II.?Sub-Class tor the Practice of Vocal Music, under Mr. Williams.
Saturdays, 6'30 p.m.
III.?Practice of Psalmody, under Miss Blake.
Wednesdays, G.30 p.m.
IV.?Dancing and Deportment, under Mr. Guthrie.
Mondays, G'30 p.m.
V . Heading, Writing, and Arithmetic, under Miss Norman and Mr.
Williams. ^ ..
Fridays, G'30 p.m.
Yl. Religious Instruction, under Miss Norman.
Sundays, 6-30 p.m.
y-Q _Lectures. The Course of Lectures on " Economic Botany" com-
menced last winter, will be continued.
Arrangements have also been made for the delivery of the following:?
1. Galvanism; its phenomena and economical applications, illustrated by
the electro-magnetic apparatus.
2. The Blood ; its composition and uses, illustrated by the microscope and
by diagrams.
3 Time ; its proper occupation and uses, illustrated by anecdotes of the
" pursuit of knowledge under difficulties."
4. Jacobite Minstrelsy, illustrated by Jacobite melody, vocal and instru-
mental.

The Rev Mr Murdoch, of Ivinnoull, Dr Stirling, of Perth, and other
Gentlemen," have kindly promised their assistance in this department.
Besides these laudable exertions to occupy and cultivate the
mental faculties of lunatics whilst under treatment at this asylum,
their amusement likewise constitutes a prominent peculiarity;
hence, balls and musical entertainments aie of no unfiequent
occurrence. Thus, a grand concert was recently given, the follow-
ing being a copy of the printed

PROGRAMME.
PART I.
1. Opening Address  Manager.
2. Piano and Yiolin " Bo-peep Quadrilles" . . . { m^Go^nlock.
!Mad. Monti.
Madl. Marie.
Mr. Gowenlock.
4. Song?"Oh! Native Scenes" Miss Blake.
5. Recitation?"The Well of St. Kcyne" . . . . . Miss Norman.
G. Comic Song?" The Whale" M. Guillaume.
7. Song?" My ain dear Nell" Madl. Marie.
8. Trio?"Taste Life's Glad Moments". . . Misses & Mr. Gowenlock.
9. Song?" The Soldier's Return"   . Mad. Rothe.
10. Yiolin?Selection of Scotch Airs Mr. Gowenlock.
during the interval a
PAS DE DEUX MASTERS GOWENLOCK.
PART II.
11. Piano?Quadrille Music Mad. Catherina.
, ? _ ? ,f Miss Blake and
12. Duet All s Well ...   j Gowenlock.
13. Comic Song?" The Charming Woman" .... Miss Norman.
14. Recitation?" The Chestnut Horse" Mad. Joseph.
15. Trio?"Bonnie Wood o' Craigic Lea" . . Misses & Mr. Gowenlock.
16. Duet?"The Araby Maid . ....... j m^e S ^Pierre.
17. Song?:" Rowan Tree"   Mvdl. Marie.
18. Aria from "La Sonnamhula," "Still so gently o'er } ]\xISS Plaice
me stealing" )
19. Comic Song?"Lilly Baker" M. Guillaume.
20. Chorus?" Auld Langsyne" Corps Musical.

Doors open at half-past Six, Performance to begin at Seven precisely.
CONDUCTOR, HERR WISTOWSKI.?PIANIST, MADAM ANGELICA.

Contrasting these exhibitions with the harsh system formerly
pursued throughout many parts of Europe, even until very recent
times, and which have not yet been altogether laid aside in some
countries I might name, Scotland seems now to take the lead in
this onward movement. Of course, the genius and natural bent
of its jDeople render such occupations as have now been portrayed
more congenial than would perhaps be found, for instance, in
England, where music and dancing possess, by no means, the same
attractions as north of the Tweed. This opinion may be exem-
plified by the following quotation from a recent report of the
"Wilts Asylum, written by the physician, Dr Thurnam, which
says : " Dancing, we believe, seldom forms a part of the ordinary
amusements of the reputable poor of Wiltshire, and the medical
superintendent entertains considerable doubt as to the propriety
of its formal introduction into asylums for the poor, at least in
this part of England." Such opinions, certainly, do not apply to
Scotland, or even to Metropolitan asylums, and some institutions
in Ireland, where the case becomes no doubt often different. At
Bethlem Hospital, and the Colney Hatch Asylum, for instance,
musical parties and evening entertainments have occasionally
been given to the lunatic inmates ; but no English insane esta-
blishment appears yet to have surpassed that of Perth, in the
above peculiar features.

The authorities of Murray's Asylum being deeply impressed
with the conviction that,no more powerful moral medicines, where-
with to "minister to a mind diseased, can be advantageously
employed than occupation, recreation, and education, they have
consequently endeavoured to extend and vary the modes formerly
in use, of employing, amusing, and instructing the patients com-
mitted to their charge, according to the capacities or acquirements
of different inmates. In these praiseworthy endeavours, they
have been most zealously and efficiently seconded by Dr Lindsay,
the present resident medical officer and superintendent, who was
recently attached to the Royal Crichton Asylum, Dumfries : in
which psychological school, so well known by the philanthropic
labours of its eminent physician, Dr Browne, already several able
medical superintendents of public lunatic establishments have
been educated, and afterwards translated to fill superior situations,
in other similar institutions. To carry out these objects, besides
a good library, this asylum possesses a considerable collection
of?curiosities, with various periodicals and newspapers; whilst
the study of the beautiful, and a familiarity with Nature's works,
is further fostered by introducing various flowering plants into
the different galleries. Ihese become not only pleasing to the
eye, but otherwise prove useful, by encouraging the formation of
bouquets among ladies: which taste is further aided by cultivating
roses and annual flowers in the garden or ornamental parterres.
The professional attendants of this Asylum are Dr Malcom, an
eminent physician residing in Perth, and Dr Lindsay, the resi-
dent medical superintendent: of whom I would here briefly say,
they merit much commendation, both being zealous and efficient
officers in their respective departments.

Dundee Royal Asylum.

This public establishment for lunatics, which has, since its foun-
dation forty-three years ago, enjoyed a high reputation throughout
Scotland, is situated in the immediate vicinity of the town whose
name it bears. The ground occupied slopes toward the river
Tay, over and beyond which its inmates possess an extensive
prospect, as also along the opposite coast of Fife, extending up even
to Perthshire. In consequence, however, of the increasing size
of the flourishing commercial sea-port?now a near neighbour?
this formerly excellent, open, and unobstructed situation has, of
late years, been greatly deteriorated : whereby, several fine views
from the windows and court-yards are much spoiled by the roofs
of not very distant houses or factories, and even by various tall
smoking chimneys which intervene. Attached to the Asylum
there is an excellent garden, which, with the adjoining fields,
also under cultivation, comprise altogether about thirteen acres.
Since 1812, when the Dundee Asylum was first founded, many
extensive and important additions have been made at various
times to the building and precincts. At its first opening, accom-
modation was provided only for forty patients; now, it could
receive nearly six times that number. This enlargement has
enabled the authorities to dispense with various antiquated and
inconvenient appliances, so as thereby to satisfy many essential
requirements for promoting the well-being, recreation, and re-
covery of lunatic inmates under treatment.

When I visited this institution last September, the total insane
patients amounted to 212; 94 being males and 113 females.
These were divided into two classes, pauper and private; the
latter category then amounting to 36 persons, whose board varied
from one to three guineas per week. Amongst the aggregate
patients, 7 were epileptic males ; but no female inmate laboured
under that severe form of mental disease. Those classed as dirty
patients comprised 15 cases, of whom 8 were males and 7 females.
The physical health of all appeared so good, that only one
female remained sick in bed; and not a single individual was
then in confinement, seclusion, or subjected to restraint of any
description whatever. In short, the discipline, general appear-
ance of the establishment, quietude, and outAvard comfort of
the patients seemed altogether satisfactory; and I have seldom
been more gratified when perambulating any institution for the
insane, than on the occasion now mentioned. Having been
accompanied by my honourable friend Mr. Duncan, M.P. for the
borough, during this inspection, that gentleman became also
cognizant of the facts here detailed, and will doubtless verify the
general statements I have promulgated.

During the past year 51 new patients, including readmissions,
were received, 26 being males and 25 females; 12 males and 9
females were discharged convalescent, and 11 died, of whom 6
were male, and 5 female inmates. If the latter numbers be cal-
culated according to the admissions, the ratio of cures hence
amounted to 41 per cent.; the deaths being 21-57 per hundred
The forms of disease manifested, by new cases, were chiefly mania
and dementia: there being 18 examples of the former and 19 of
the latter; whilst 8 instances were classed as monomania and 6
as melancholia. Respecting the causes assigned drunkenness
like the fact noticed at Glasgow, appeared the chief influence?
9 victims being ascribed to that calamitous pronensitv ? *7 nrn^
from disappointment, and 3 from grief. Further 2 were puer
peral cases; 2 seemed produced by fright; I female betame
mad through jealousy; another by religious excitement ? but
in several the cause was unknown : whereas in 10 hereditary
predisposition was ascertained. Again, respecting the im-
mediate causes of death reported in the 11 fatal cases ? 1-
arose from general paralysis, of whom 3 were male patients ? 2
were occasioned by bronchitis; 2 by marasmus; 1 from pneu-
monia ; 1 through cardiac disease; and the eleventh was
ascertained to be gastro-interitis.

Occupations of different kinds, adapted to the previous em-
ployments, general character of inmates, and the nature of their
mental condition?all requisites of essential importance?seemed
assiduously promoted. Various patients, both male and female,
appeared occupied at the weaving-loom, or in winding yarn?
these being common employments in this district of Scotland.
Some were engaged in shoe-making, mending or making clothes,
and so forth; whilst others laboured in the garden. The kitchen
scullery, and laundry likewise afforded ample scope for beneficial
occupation. One patient may be mentioned as an apt illustra-
tion, who believed herself pursued, at night, by the devil and
bands of warlocks, or witches. This poor girl offered her services
to the matron, as kitchen-maid, and continued to work diligently ?
presenting herself at each succeeding hiring-term, to ascertain
whether she would be re-engaged: but appearing all the while both
happy and contented with the treatment received. Many other'
insane residents, whom it is superfluous to specify on this occa-
sion, were supplied with varied but appropriate means of
gratification, and opportunities for activity, if considered suited
to their different conditions. Nor were inmates always debarred
personal intercourse with the external world, or even from occa-
sionally mixing in general society. The town and neighbouring
country being occasionally visited by patients, for various pur-
poses, both on foot or in carriages. Excursions were also sometimes
made to a distance. For instance, during last autumn a lady
patient, accompanied by the matron, with an attendant, travelled
to Balmoral, and saw the queen in Crathie Church. Afterwards
she visited some fine Highland scenery, and then returned back
to the asylum ; her excursion having proved both beneficial and
satisfactory.

Amusements likewise are judiciously provided to gratify and
benefit the lunatic inmates. Frequent dancing parties take
place ; and even a customary tlirice-a-week ball is held in the large
flower-garden, where spectators and musicians occupy an orchestra,
raised upon a small mound, surmounted by a flag; whilst ample
opportunity is thus given to others, for indulging in merri-
ment, and innocent social tendencies. On the occasion of our
perambulating the various dormitories and court-yards of this
establishment, a male patient, who was an excellent performer
on the violin, accompanied us throughout. This amateur musi-
cian played exhilarating Scottish tunes, whilst we were visiting
the wards, which apparently caused much delight to the nume-
rous gratified auditors then encountered. The fiddler seemed a
welcome visitor amongst both male and female inmates wherever
he went; and I could not but observe the pleasure thereby
occasioned to many of these mentally-afflicted fellow-creatures.
Having met, in one of the gardens, a party of female lunatics
enjoying their customary promenade, they immediately formed
themselves into a kind of squadron behind our "fanatico per la
unusica," who then marched at their head, several singing, and even
some dancing in the rear. Altogether, the scene was a very pleasing
spectacle; their enthusiastic musical leader being an universal
favourite,and causedquiteasensationwhenmakinghisappearance.
Although lunatic asylums seem frequently the abodes of
melancholy, and residents may sometimes have but few gratifi-
cations, certainly, on the occasion now described, hilarity and
pleasure beamed in many countenances. Besides which, I may
add, the general aspect of the asylum, and other outward marks,
unequivocally manifested the physical comfort of the inmates.
On these points there was no mistake; and, I must say, much
credit is due to Dr Wingett, the resident medical superintendent,
as also the matron, Mrs. Wingett, for the systematic mode they
pursue in reference to the amusement, as also recreation of
patients placed under their charge and professional treatment.
A new church is now being erected, in a pleasant part of the
adjoining grounds. This building has much the appearance of
an ordinary parish kirk, in the light Norman style ; and as there
will be a continuous covered way connecting it with the asylum,
patients can thus always arrive dry-shod during unfavourable
weather: whilst, if fine, a walk through the garden-grounds must
prove agreeable, besides being very like frequenting an ordinary
country church for public worship. Within this precinct no prison-
like separation of the sexes, it was said, will be made in the in-
terior arrangements: which sometimes prevails elsewhere, so as.

thereby to remind spectators very much of some model dungeon-
chapels, wherein a large board jealously separates males from
ever seeing the faces of ^ any female worshippers, there also
assembled : and vice versa. Such minute distinctions may suit
criminals, but amongst lunatics, the system becomes as absurd
as it is injurious. Hence, in several modern and well-regulated
asylums, this plan is generally abolished, the objectbein<r to render
church attendance as near as possible similar to that pursued in
ordinary places of worship, although the females are usually placed
on one side, while male patients occupy the opposite
Amongst individual cases recently under treatment I would
quote the following brief remarks from a late report of this insti-
tution, to illustrate its proceedings, particularly as the facts are
also otherwise interesting:?

" Thus, one man who recovered during the year, passed his time
which was all divided into portions devoted to occupations of his own
choice?in painting in water-colours, in reading the German poets,
conning the newspapers, and smoking cigars in the garden. He im-
proved rapidly, and when questioned as to his wants and welfare, was
accustomed to reply that he had everything he required or wished for;
that he felt no more restraint than if he were in an ordinary hotel; and
that lie had worked himself in a state of good health by his laborious
artistic exercises. Another devotes most of his time to the rearing of
poultry ; he cannot he diverted from this to any more elevated employ ;
and living like a Rosicrucian philosopher upon the golden delusion that
he is above death or corruption, and that his body will continue to
flourish through all eternity in its present vigour, he seems to experience
the highest happiness. A third passes much of his time in actino- as the
amanuensis of the medical superintendent, and indulging the belief
that he has the regulation of the weather under his control is the
tutelar divinity of farmers, and can make the sun to shine or the rain
to fall, at his bidding ; he passes a very industrious life, in the assurance
that he is the most important and responsible man upon the face of the
earth."

R'may be further mentioned that, among the individuals re-
ceived into the institution during the past year, one imagined he
had a Divine commission for fire-raising and assaulting indi-
viduals. Another believed himself tempted by two imaginary
personages to kill his wife A female made an attempt to
strangle her husband, while he was asleep. A fourth, during her
frenzy, was happily saved by friends from destroying her children.
And lastly, a young female, in whom the incursion of insanity was
marked by her plundering and embezzling the property of her
friends. These facts indicate the fearful tendencies and tyrannous
controlling power of some forms of mental alienation, which are
not unfrequently met with in asylums for the insane.

However much many arrangements are worthy of commenda-
tion, nevertheless, one feature in the management of this public
asylum is highly objectionable,?namely, the regulation requiring
a fee for the physician, to be paid by the several classes of patients,
excepting on account of paupers sent by parishes. The sum
varies from half-a-guinea to four guineas, which is repeated
on the dismissal or death of an inmate, after six and within
twelve months. If, however, any patient remains longer than
one year, such payments are only demanded at the end of every
successive year of residence. In all public institutions, the salaries
of medical officers ought to be liberal, but fixed ; there should be
no distinction of classes, in reference to professional remunera-
tion ; nor must any premium be even in appearance held out, to
give more attention towards one inmate than another ; nay, of at
all making it the interest of any person in such establishments,
whether medical attendants or otherwise, to admit or retain
longer than may be necessary, within an asylum, patients who
prove, compared with others, in a higher ratio, remunerative.
Physicians ought never to be subjected to similar regulations, as
they thus become placed in an unprofessional position. Conse-
quently, the above rules?copied from the " Rates of Board" ap-
pended to the last Report of the Dundee Royal Asylum?should
be repealed, and expunged from similar future documents issued
by its executive.

Like the Murray Institution near Perth, this establishment has
only one resident medical officer, ? viz., Dr Wingett, who is
superintendent. There is likewise a physician, but he resides in
Dundee. During many years, this office was filled by Dr Patrick
Nimmo, long known as an eminent practitioner throughout the
country. Death having recently deprived the institution of his
valued services and great experience, Dr Robert Cocks has been
appointed as successor. Still, in this asylum, containing about
210 lunatic inmates, on an average, besides its numerous atten-
dants, Dr Wingett should have, if not a resident assistant, at least
be allowed one or two house-pupils or " internes," as in France,
to aid in minor duties, and to be available should any emer-
gency occur, during his temporary absence. The advantage of
young members of the profession residing in similar establish-
ments, seems so obvious as scarcely to require any argument.

Not only do such officials prove- of much assistance to the re-
sponsible medical attendant, but being so placed, " internes" have
ample opportunities for studying mental diseases, their nature
and treatment, so as thus to prepare them in the best school for
afterwards undertaking similar duties themselves, when appointed
to public asylums, or subsequently engaged in private practice.
In every large institution for lunatics, the medical staff ought
invariably to comprise resident pupils. Such a system works
admirably in France, and would prove equally beneficial in the
lunatic establishments of Great Britain.

Montrose Royal Asylum.

The institution which now comes under review is the oldest
public asylum for the insane throughout Scotland, having been
founded seventy-three years ago, chiefly through the exertions of
Mrs. Carnegie?a benevolent lady residing in the neighbourhood.
When first opened, and during many years afterwards, it was the
admiration of the surrounding country, the lunatic inmates being
there taken care of and treated quite differently, compared
with the system to which they had heretofore been subjected.
Consequently, this asylum became almost a show-place, like
Bethlem Hospital of the olden times. Whatever might be now
thought of the treatment formerly pursued, great credit is cer-
tainly due to the humane individuals who patronized and sup-
ported its objects by subscriptions, as also official administration.
However, like many things which have at last become antiquated,
whilst science and civilization were advancing, even although in
various respects this asylum haskept moving onward in the race of
improvement?still, from original defective construction, and recent
encroachments effected by commercial, money-making bodies in
its immediate vicinity, the Montrose institution must now take
an inferior position, compared with several insane establishments
more recently constructed in Scotland.

At the period of its foundation, the asylum was situated in an
open and airy portion of the "links" adjoining the town, then
unencumbered by neighbouring houses. Now, the building
is almost surrounded. On one side a new dock, often full
of vessels, has been constructed. On another, a ship-building
yard is established opposite, which nearly touches the dor-
mitories occupied by female patients : and through the windows
of which they can be easily seen by carpenters, workmen,
or others ; and vice versa. Again, on the third side a railway
station completes the obstructions. The asylum garden being
also of limited extent, and having no adjoining fields, wherein the
inmates might be employed, or obtain recreation unobserved, or,
at least, be not interfered with by the passing public, constitute
very objectionable features. To remedy such great defects, two
farms, at a little distance, have very properly been leased by the
official authorities; but, although these adjuncts comprise thirteen
acres, they are not sufficient for every purpose.

When perambulating the different departmentsoftliisinstitution,
the thought struck my mind that an examination of the numerous
additions and improvements made since its foundation, would
furnish a good history of the successive stages which have charac-
terized the varied treatment of insanity in this country. Thus the
old, dark, and badly-ventilated cells, considered so useful in 1780,
?the confined sleeping apartments of a later period,?the alcoved
dormitories constructed in the early part of the current century,
?the more airy rooms built about 20 years ago,?and lastly, the
cross-windowed, thoroughly-ventilated, as also exceedingly cheerful
dormitory completed only very recently, which seemed really of
a superior description, would each supply most instructive illus-
trations of the several epochs, as also of the modes of manage-
ment pursued respectively.

An impartial observer need, therefore, only examine these
several localities, in order to ascertain the prevailing opinions then
entertained regarding lunatics, as well by medical men as philan-
thropists.

Although recently much has been accomplished to ameliorate
defects, often inherent to all ancient constructions, the executive
now deem it unseasonable to do more in this respect, than they
reckon absolutely indispensable for the immediate health and
comfort of patients : particularly, when suggestions for erecting
a new asylum are under consideration. Several improvements of
importance have nevertheless been completed. A large room has
been divided into two apartments, to each of which a small gal-
lery was also added for exercise, or the temporary seclusion of
irritable inmates. Another spacious out-room has been also
appropriated to female paupers. The alterations now specified
have greatly contributed towards improving the classification,
and considerably to diminish any over-crowding in the asylum,
which was being the case recently, owing to an increased demand
for admission. A new dwelling in the garden, intended for Dr.
Gilchrist, the medical superintendent's, residence, having been
liberally given up by that officer, to relieve the pressure of appli-
cants, a large portion of it has now been fitted up temporarily for
higher class females, whereby increased accommodation is af-
forded. The attendants upon patients have lately also been con-
siderably augmented in number ; so that at present, there is one
attendant to about every fifteen lunatics. Still, in consequence
of the imperfect structural arrangements belonging to an old
building, and the absence of all mechanical appliances to lighten
manual labour, these individuals are even yet unable to perform,
the same duties often accomplished in other institutions, where
similar defects do not prevail. The ventilation of the older build-
ings, and especially the ground-floor cells, is very defective:
whilst sufficient day and work rooms for inmates do not exist;
the chief object, until of late, influencing the management having
appeared, rather to augment the number of beds for receiving
new patients, irrespective almost of any other consideration.
The dormitories throughout seemed clean, although sometimes
too crowded with beds. The patients generally appeared quiet
and orderly ; the resident officers having done everything they
could to ameliorate their condition, in spite of irremediable de-
ficient constructions and over-crowding. On the day of my visit,
the total insane residents amounted to 229 : of whom 96 were
males, and 133 females. Amongst these, however, 42 were classed
as private patients, each paying from 251, to 1001, per annum.
The epileptics comprised 9 males and 8 females : whilst, 13 of the
former and 20 of the latter sex were reported dirty persons.

Besides which, it should be mentioned, as many recent cases of
insanity, especially insane females, had been of late admitted, the
institution, consequently, had thus become less of an asylum, and
more like an hospital, than previously. In the dark cells, 9 females
and 2 males were then confined: most of.these cases being exceed-
ingly violent, particularly the female lunatics, some of whom had so
torn their clothes as to be nearly naked, and laboured under a high
state of excitement. One female also occupied a kind of box bed,
but padded throughout, and having a kind of net-work on the
top, to prevent her getting out of this enclosure. Such contri-
vance was employed, because the party would neither lie quietly,
in an ordinary bed, nor allow the clothes to remain on her per_
son. Two days afterwards, when I again visited this asylum,
along with my learned friend, Mr. Logan, Sheriff of the County,
and who on that day made an efficient inspection of the whole
establishment, the female above alluded to was sitting among
other patients as usual, being then much more composed. Be-
sides this fact, it is also satisfactory to report that, several of the
other female inmates, secluded in dark cells only two days before,
were now at liberty : their fits of excitement having passed like a
transient storm, and thereby leaving the sufferers perfectly tranquil.

Notwithstanding the statements just made, and although it is
admitted, according to the last annual report, that?

" Restraint is occasionally not only necessary, but proper, we have
not been called upon to apply it in any instance during the year. Only
one case has presented any difficulty,?the case of a self-mutilator, a
young female labouring under chronic mania, resulting from intense
hereditary predisposition. In three or four places, on the hands and
arms, she had made large and even dangerous wounds, tearing out the
soft parts with all the ferocity of a tiger. The determination had existed
for some days, and, as may be supposed, the strictest watching was use-
less. I had already made up my mind to the necessity of its application,
but, while meditating on the best form, I was gratified by the diminu-
tion, ultimately by the entire cessation, of the morbid propensity.
" Several eases, as formerly, have been brought to the house under
restraint, all of which have had their liberty granted at once, without
difficulty or danger. One of them?a married female?deserves notice.
A strong piece of wood was inserted bit-wise between the teeth, and
firmly secured by a strong cord tied behind the neck. The reason
assigned was that the patient had severely bitten her tongue. This
instrument of torture was at once removed, with great relief to the
sufferer. On its removal, both angles of the mouth were ascertained
to be in a state of ulceration, from the pressure of the wood, and the
tongue presented a foetid and sloughing mass to the depth of an inch.
The patient was in so anaemic and exhausted a condition as to render
recovery almost hopeless. She has, however, done well, but still labours
under a certain degree of mental depression, and some impediment of
speech, from the loss of so large a portion of the ' unruly member.' It
is sadly interesting to note that each of these patients has a brother in
the house.

Similar examples of cruel physical coercion towards excited
lunatics were formerly not uncommon. Now, these are much
less frequent; thanks to recent discussions in reference to non-
restraint, and the diffusion of more correct notions amongst the
community at large, respecting mental alienation.
To show the remarks made, in previous paragraphs, regarding
the irremediable defects of the present buildings, are not over-
drawn or unfounded, I would here append the observations made
by the present able medical superintendent, Dr Gilchrist, who
says?

" It will be readily admitted that, in all asylums, the basement stories
are less perfect in their sanitary conditions than the upper, partly from
their position and structure, more especially from the class of patients
who inhabit them. When it is remembered that Montrose Asylum is
the oldest in Scotland, and that the original cells (built in 1781) are
still occupied by the patients, it will readily be granted, without farther
proof, that the house is in a less satisfactory condition than most other
establishments, as to these cells at least. Here, as everywhere, a number
of patients have acquired dirty habits, due not to the disease under which
they labour, but to neglect in its earlier stages, in most cases before they
have been placed under appropriate treatment. Truth compels us to
state that the proportion of such cases is much greater here than usual.
This is due to several causes, some of which are happily now removed,
but others of them are irremovable, depending partly on the imperfect
structure of an old house, and partly on the very partial supply?in
some cases entire absence,?of the means necessary to the improvement,
removal, or prevention of such habits."

Such being the acknowledged defective condition of this now
venerable establishment, the resolution very recently passed by
its executive, to, construct another institution in the vicinity, is
highly commendable. A piece of ground, about thirty acres, has
already been purchased for that purpose : the situation chosen
being an elevation, with a southern exposure. It is airy, salu-
brious, and lying a few miles north of Montrose, will not be
obstructed by any neighbouring buildings. Altogether, the selec-
tion made of Sunnyside- the truly descriptive name this locality
now bears seems judicious; and doubtless the new asylum will
justify the anticipations formed of its future capabilities.

Throughout last year, 91 new patients were admitted ; of
whom 39 were male, and 52 female lunatics. The cures amounted
to 37, the sexes being nearly equal?seeing 18 male to 19 female
patients were discharged convalescent; which makes the pro-
portion upwards of 4-0 per cent, upon the admissions. On the
other hand, the deaths were 21?composed of 11 males and 10
females; which, therefore, gives a ratio of 23 per hundred, if also
calculated according to the numbers admitted. Amongst the
deaths reported, 4 were cases of general paralysis, 4 arose from
epileptic seizures, 3 from chronic bronchitis, 2 resulted from
apoplexy, 2 were caused by maniacal exhaustion: 3 males,
respectively, died of consumption, diarrhoea, and diabetes; whilst
3 females were also cut off by broncho-pneumonia, cardiac
disease, and fatal syncope?the largest mortality being recorded
in the month of December, when four patients died ; whereas,
the fewest occurred during mild weather. In reference to the
type of mental alienation, with which the 21 cases terminating
fatally were affected : it may be interesting to mention that, 4
laboured under general paralysis, 4 epileptic mania, 4 chronic
mania, 2 monomania, 2 melancholia, 2 dementia, one acute
mania, and another senile insanity; the last being an example
of suicidal melancholia.

Occupying the inmates constitutes a prominent feature at this
establishment, like most well-regulated asylums. Consequently,
as the report states, usually there have been employed of males, two
as tailors, as joiners two or three, as shoemakers one or two, as net-
makers four to six, as gardeners six to eight, as field labourers ten to
fifteen, as oakum-pickers fifteen to twenty, and others occupied in
the galleries, laundry, at the pump, pig feeding, from five to ten?
thus fifty to sixty were employed, exclusive of the higher classprivate
patients. Thirty or forty remaining unemployed. The greater number
of the pauper patients, especially from the immediate neighbour-
hood, being mill-workers, this diminished the proportion of those
trained in handicrafts, and rendered them less ready to engage in
such occupations. Out-door labourers appeared still fewer than
could be wished: but the sniallness of the garden, and the distance
and exposure of the fields, made it almost impossible to employ a
greater number. Again, regarding females, twenty to thirty were
engaged in sewing, five to ten in knitting, some in crochet and
other fancy work, with about twenty in the galleries, kitchen,
and laundry,?giving nearly fifty in a hundred. Attempts towards
increasing the workers on the female side, have hitherto not
been so successful as on the male. An arrangement, however,
has just been completed, by the removal of the higher class
females to the new building, which provides a work-room ; and,
as an additional qualified attendant has been engaged to super-
intend, one of whose special duties will be to induce and en-
courage patients to engage in such occupations, better results are
anticipated in future.

Recreating, as also instructing the insane patients, is justly
not overlooked ; on the contrary, such appliances in their treat-
ment seem liberally supplied. Thus, lectures, concerts, and other
sources of amusement and instruction in the town are visited, when-
ever an opportunity occurs, and to which convalescent paupers, as
also private patients, have access. Lecturers, vocalists, bands of
music, and so forth, are likewise frequently secured, wherever pos-
sible. Besides the above, there is a weekly dance, which forms a
great centre of attraction, in addition to other amusements, con-
stituting often an important item of moral improvement. Skittles,
quoits, bowls, and drilling, with other out-door games, being often
arranged during summer. Pic-nics, excursions to the country, and
visiting various scenes of interest in the neighbourhood?highly
deserving notice, on account of their natural beauty and historical
relations?have often been participated in by numerous plea-
sure-seeking parties of inmates, who could properly appreciate or
benefit by such privileges.

Reading and intellectual culture, whenever applicable in such a
community, are further far from being neglected. Newspapers
and serials being supplied, to satisfy this appetite?natural even in
lunatics. Besides the literary stores of this institution, which
furnishes its quota of amusement and instruction, portions of
the more fastidious reading inmates are supplied with books
from the public library in town. Attendance on religious ser-
vices also constitutes an important feature ; and recently, a large
addition has been made to the number of patients attending
chapel, many being even inmates who, formerly, would have been
deemed unfit to engage in such duties. A considerable portion
of the community, male and female, both of pauper and private
patients, occasionally attend the public churches of Montrose,
with evident advantage.

Recently, the physical health of most residents has been good,
and, on the whole, satisfactory. Unlike the'former season,
cholera has not prevailed in this establishment since that period ;
but it seems worth mentioning, on the other hand, that in the
beginning of last February, erysipelas broke out, five cases having
occurred in four weeks; whilst lately, an epidemic of apoplexy
made its appearance: four instances of that disease having
occurred during five weeks ; three being females in advanced life,
and whose insanity had been of long standing. Of the above,
two died after a few days illness : whilst the third, it was reported,
has now nearly reached her former condition, viz., chronic mania,
with periodical excitement. Very few patients were sick in bed,
the day I visited the asylum : and, in this respect, there seemed
nothing novel or worthy of remarking.

Notwithstanding the average insane patients, irrespective of
attendants, varied last year from 215 to 220, and the number
amounts now to 229, only one resident medical officer is attached
to this institution viz., Dr Gilchrist, who is likewise supermten-
dent. At the Glasgow Asylum, with 381 lunatics, there are
three medical attendants, as already stated, which gives one to
every 127 patients. Consequently at Montrose, there ought to
be at least one resident assistant also, seeing the physician has by
by far too many duties now to perform. Not only has that officer to
undertake occupations personally, which may be called manual,
and of minor importance, but he must likewise attend to and super-
vise the entire establishment. Further, as many inmates are ladies
and gentlemen, who become often more difficult to manage than
pauper patients, they are in a higher degree exacting as to the
attendance required; besides which, seeing such cases contribute
greatly towards the profit of this institution, its present medical
staff is certainly too limited. In fact, this defect is even more
prominent than at Dundee, where, although the asylum contains
fewer lunatics, there is also an attending physician, who shares the
responsibility with Dr Wingett. Here, moreover, irrespective
of the patients being in greater number, the medical super-
intendent has no professional assistant. Hence, if absent for
recreation or otherwise, only for short periods, which occasionally
must occur, as that gentleman is not a prisoner, proper aid
may not be leadily piocured, should any emergency supervene.
Some months ago, a second medical officer was voted by the
Board of Management; but difficulties respecting the appoint-
ment having arisen, and as only a very paltry salary was pro-
posed, hitherto no result has followed this proposition. Indeed,
it is said, several parties did not think the measure absolutely
necessary, since they considered four or five hours per day were
quite as much as any person could possibly spend on the patients
under treatment. If such opinions really existed, these authorities
would almost seem to have an impression that, the medical
superintendent of an asylum has really no other functions to
undertake, beyond those of a mere prescriptionist. Moral ma-
nagement must then constitute no part of the conception en-
tertained, regarding the great utility of possessing an adequate
professional staff, in extensive institutions for the insane. Notions
of tliat description are most erroneous ; and wherever it should be
still supposed an additional medical officer is merely wanted,
for the purpose of preparing medicines, dressing sores, or to per-
form minor operations, and be engaged only in inferior employ-
ments, such an idea is altogether a mistake. Consequently, both
at Dundee, but especially in the asylum now under review, there
ought to be, at least, two resident medical attendants.

Before concluding these remarks, I must however add?indeed,
my now doing so is only an act of simple justice?that Dr Gil-
christ performs his varied yet multifarious duties most zealously,
even although these have been, of late, greatly augmented, as
well from the introduction of many new attendants?at first but
imperfectly acquainted with their several occupations?as also on
account of the large accession of new patients. Besides the
above important considerations, it should further be noticed, in
consequence of frequent and sometimes important changes of
internal arrangements, Dr Gilchrist's labours have lately been
materially increased ; whereby the onerous and other functions
taxing the energies of that officer did not invariably prove so
smooth in their course as could have been wished, or the marked
assiduity displayed fairly entitled him to anticipate.
(To be continued.)
