The Diagnosis of Diseases of the Brain", Spinal Cord, Nerves, and Their Appendages
====================================================================================

art ?ecott&*
REVIEWS.
 #
To supply the practitioner and student with a concise manual of
Diagnosis of Nervous Diseases, is the object Dr. Reynolds has in view
in this work.
* "The Diagnosis of Diseases of the Brain, Spinal Cord, Nerves, and then-
Appendages. By J. Russell Reynolds, M.D., &c. London. 1855."
diagnosis of diseases of THE BRAIN. 91
In the present state of our knowledge, when the physiology of the
nervous system is involved in so much obscurity, any attempt to
classify its diseases on a purely pathological basis must result in
failure. Dr. Reynolds contents himself at present with symptoms
and physical signs, upon which he founds his classification?open it is
true to many grave objections, as we shall shortly see?but presenting
one decided advantage, namely, that it involves no theory.
In the first part of his book, the author considers in a general
manner the objects and elements of diagnosis, and the classification of
nervous diseases. The second part is devoted to diseases of the brain ;
the third, to diseases of the spinal cord; and the fourth, to those of
the nerves and their appendages.
The following analysis will supply the reader with an idea of Dr.
Reynolds' views.
The first chapter treats of the objects of diagnosis, which are three
in number, " first, the locality; second, the nature; and third, the
anatomical conditions of the lesion." ^ The symptoms by which we are
guided to the locality are "extrinsic" or constitutional, and "in-
trinsic," or local. As to the nature of the affection, it may be "acute"
or "chronic."
The anatomical conditions may be " simple functional derange-
ment,"?which the author supposes in the case of " epilepsy, chorea,
hysteria, neuralgia," &c.; or it may be a ' physical change, as in
organic diseases." . .
The second chapter considers the elements of diagnosis; b}7, which
" is intended the symptoms of disease, which furnish means by which
diagnosis may be established."
" The intrinsic, or proper nervous symptoms, are essentially modifi-
cations of the manner in which the organs of the nervous system per-
form their functions;" they may be "mental, or connected simply
with motility and sensibility."
The mental phenomena referrible to volition, may be in relation to
ideas, as when there is " modification of the power of attention,"
" modified power of apprehension," " changes in the faculty of recol-
lection," or "modifications in the power of directing thought."
Volition, in its relation to emotion, may be affected by " diminished
control of emotion,'' or by " diminished contrast of expression both
prominent features in various forms of insanity. " The two need not
coexist; the former is an internal change, sometimes to be discovered
only by diligent search, and by gaining the 'confidence' of the
patient; the latter betrays itself at once in his tone, manner, and
gesticulation." Diseased volition in relation to sensation may show
itself by the "morbid quickness of perception," as instanced by "the
hypochondriac, who not only exaggerates all his sensations, and with
unhealthy rapidity interprets them to his own discomfort, but can
create them in accordance with his preconceived ideasor by " the
maniac, who can with marvellous quickness of intuition adapt every-
thing that the individual hears, feels, or sees, into some confirmative
evidence of his own delusion."
The opposite condition of this, is when there is diminished pereep-
92 DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BRAIN.
tive power, which may be the case in delirium, or in that state where
the patient " lies perfectly motionless, cannot be made to utter
a sound, and makes no attempt to do so spontaneously." The author
takes exception to the phrase, " loss of consciousness," as applied to
this condition, "because," says he, "it is merely an assumption that
such loss exists?an assumption which the after-evidence of many
cases has proved to be incorrect." He proposes instead, " loss of per-
ception," as " conveying what exists in fact."
We doubt if this brings us much nearer the truth. A case occurs
to us, in which a man lay for months in this condition, apparently
having lost alike consciousness and perception, and who on recovering,
showed that he had not only perceived what was going on around
him?even to the motions of the spiders in his room?but had formed
his likes and dislikes to those attending on him in proportion as
they had been kind or unkind in their treatment. In fact, it is one
of the secrets of the moral treatment of the disease, that in general
the patients not only perceive and appreciate, but even remember acts
of kindness or cruelty, often when they do not appear to do so.
""Volition in reference to motility," may be affected in its "power
of occasioning movement," either by excess as in the maniac, or by
deficiency as in hysteric paralysis, so common in the female sex,
termed sofa disease.
There may be a defect in the " power of directing movements," or
in the " control of involuntary movement." The mental phenomena
referrible to "ideation," or " modification in the processes of thought,"
may have relation to "external impressions," either by abstraction
from their influence as in mental " absence," or by perverted notions
of their nature or relation.
Again, ideation in relation to internal sensations, may be affected
as in hypochondriasis, &c.; or it may be as " an independent process,"
either by " loss of power to appreciate the logical sequence of events,"
by the " sequence of ideas" being "rapid, but accidental," by "the
absence of all discoverable sequence," by the " loss of memory in
its severer forms," by " positively exaggerated ideation," which is
seen in some forms of delirium, or by "perverted ideation, or the
existence of fixed delusions," as in insanity. " Ideation in relation to
motility," is implicated in "the hypochondriac, the hysteric, and the
choreic patient," or in electro-biologic subjects, where muscular move-
ments are effected in opposition to the will.
The mental " symptoms referrible to emotion," consist in morbid
exhibitions of pleasure, displeasure, joy, sorrow, &c., either by their
exaggeration, perversion, or diminution.
The intrinsic symptoms which are not mental, are referrible to sen-
sation or sensibility, or to motility. Sensibility may be affected in
one of these ways, it may be increased, diminished, or modified, so as
to produce false sensations.
The phenomena of motility " resolve themselves into muscular
contraction or its absence."
The author classifies them thus :?
" a. Modified relation of motility to volition.
DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BRAIN. 93
" I). Motility as induced by ideation.
" c. Disordered relation of emotion and motility.
" d. Motility in relation to sensation.
" e- Motility in relation to reflection, or a sensual impression.
"/. Motility in relation to centric irritation.
"y. Motility in relation to electric stimulation.
" h. Proper motility of tlie muscles."
We omit any notice of the extrinsic symptoms, as there is nothing
peculiar in the author s arrangement of them.
In Chapter III. Dr. Reynolds explains'the classification he has
adopted, and his reasons for doing so, which are simply that he con-
siders it the most convenient for his purpose?namely diagnosis
The three objects of diagnosis, as stated above, are "'locality nature
and lesionand these are his guides in the following classification
I. Diseases of the encephalon.
A. Acute.
1. Febrile, or inflammatory.
2. Non-febrile.
a. Apoplectic diseases.
b. Diseases marked by delirium.
c. Convulsive diseases.
d. Diseases marked by pain.
B. Chronic diseases.
1. Marked by increased activity.
a. Ideation, its characteristic being hallucination, &c.
I). Sensation, its characteristic being pain.
c. Motility, its characteristic being spasm.
2. Marked by diminished activity.
3. Marked by the combination of increased and diminished
activity.
II. Diseases of the spinal column and cord.
A. Acute.
B. Chronic.
III. Diseases of the nerves.
A. Structural, or organic.
1. Neuritis.
2. Tumor.
B. Functional, or dynamic.
1. Neuralgia, and spasm.
2. Anaesthesia, and paralysis.
Chapter IV. treats of the diagnosis of locality eenerallv W,
to distinguish between "diseases of the nervous system itself" and
the nervous complication of other diseases;" also "affections of the
bram, spinal cord, and nerves from one another:" and between
CC ? -11 ill* 55 3 ^ WCUVVCCIl
meningeal and central lesions.
In diseases of the nervous system?
" 1. Prodromata are of intrinsic character, or absent;
" 2. Signs of distinct general disease are undiscoverable ?
" 3. The intrinsic symptoms precede such general or extrinsic
?
94 DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BRAIN.
. symptoms as may be present, and are of greater relative in-
tensity than the latter will account for."
When the nervous symptoms are hut complications of some general
or some extrinsic disease?
" 1. The prodromata are highly marked, and consist of extrinsic
symptoms;
" 2. The signs of general (or extraneous) disease are discoverable ;
" 3. The extrinsic symptoms have not only preceded the in-
trinsic, but the latter bear a definite and direct proportion
to the former; and the extrinsic derangements are more
highly marked than those which the supposed nervous con-
ditions could induce."
The points to be attended to in distinguishing disease of the brain,
spinal cord, and nerves from each other, are?
" 1. When perception, ideation, volition, and special sensations
are affected ; and motor and general sensory changes exhibit
a unilateral distribution, the brain is commonly the seat of
the disease.
" 2. When the mental functions are unchanged, and motility
and general sensibility are affected bilaterally, we infer the
spinal cord to be the locality of the lesion.
" 3. When the relations between motility, volition, and reflection
are lost, the mental functions being unchanged, and when
the motor and sensory disturbances are purely local, we
refer the disease to some of the nervous trunks."
The diagnosis between centric and excentric diseases of the nervous
system is guided by the following general characters. At the outset,
or at a very early stage in the development of a centric disease, there
is " loss of some one or more of the proper nervous functions, such as
by paralysis, ana;sthesia, loss of memory, &c."
Whereas, in " meningeal diseases there is extremely severe excite-
ment or exaggeration of function, such as furious delirium, anesthesia,
convulsions, and well marked epiphemena, pain, tenderness, &c."
The second part of Dr. Reynolds' work is occupied by the classifi-
cation of diseases of the brain and their symptoms. In Chapter Y. he
divides acute and chronic diseases into various groups ; the former into
" febrile, apoplectic, delirious, and convulsivethe latter into those
marked by excessive activity of some functions; those characterized
by diminution, and those presenting, in combination, the features of
the latter two."
This classification is avowedly a faulty one; it not only brings to-
gether diseases widely different in their nature, but separates others
which, if not identical in their pathology, are closely allied. The
author himself is not blind to those objections ; he says?" Although,
therefore, it will be found that softening of the brain (for example)
occurs in the apoplectic, delirious, convulsive, and quasi-febrile form, I
prefer considering that peculiar condition of the brain in conjunction
with its several groups of symptoms as representing four different con-
ditions of the disease, rather than looking upon them as variable pheno-
menal phases of the same malady."
if
b.,
r
DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BRAIN. 95
The sixth chapter is devoted to the " Differential diagnosis of acute
febrile diseases affecting the brain."
These are as follows :?
" I. Meningitis, or inflammation of the pia mater, distinguishing?
A. Simple i.e., non-diathetic, or primary, when affectin?"?
1. The convexity of the hemispheres.
2. The base of the brain.
B. Tuberculous, accompanying deposit in the pia mater.
C. Rheumatic, or meningeal rheumatism.
" II. Inflammation of the dura mater.
" III. Cerebritis, commonly meningo-cerebritis.
A. General, and then always meningo-cerebritis.
B. Partial, or limited (red softening).
" IV. Continued fever (typhoid and typhus) with cerebral compli-
cation.
" Y. Gastric remittent fever of children.
"VI. Simple hyperemia, or 'determination of blood.'
" VII. Delirium tremens, in its febrile form.
" VIII. Mania, with marked febrile symptoms."
" Meningitis of the base" is seldom to be distinguished from " menin-
gitis of the convexity of the hemispheres;" but when we see "intelli-
gence being preserved for a time (without delirium), and coma, or
somnolence, occurring very early in the disease," the base is probably
its seat.
11 Tubercular meningitis" is presented under two forms, the first
occurring in the child, the second in the adult. " Mutism is not un-
common" in this disease. The author quotes Dr. Walile as having
drawn attention to this symptom. The diagnosis of rheumatic menin-
gitis is based upon the facts of?
1. Rheumatic fever being present in a?
2. Weak or exhausted subject; and the sudden occurrence of
3. Delirium, of marked, furious character,
4. Cephalalgia, and
5. Spasmodic movements, partial or general, followed by a?
(5. Comatose condition, with paralysis. '
"Inflammation of the dura mater" is generally the result of the
suppression of a chronic discharge from the ear
Unless complicated with inflammation of the pia mater, the furious
delirium of meningitis is supplanted by oppression, drowsiness and
coma. '
"Cerebritis" may be "general" or "local;" there is "confused
thought," and general obscurity of the intellectual faculties?absence
of "excitement;" and in the partial form or "red softening," "loss
of power," with "tingling and numbness in one limb, or side!"
" Hyperemia cerebri," or cerebral congestion, " resembles very
closely," as, indeed, it probably is, the first stage of meningitis, from
which it differs only in its negative characters.
_ The febrile form of "acute mania" is so easily known from meningi-
tis and cerebritis by the mental phenomena, that it is unnecessary to
mention its symptoms.
96 DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BRAIN.
The other acute febrile diseases affecting the functions of the brain
are continued fever, "gastric remittent fever," and the febrile form of
" delirium tremens."
In the two former the head symptoms are accidental, and in the lat-
ter the previous history, as well as the characteristic form of delirium,
serve to distinguish it from allied diseases.
The seventh chapter is devoted to "apoplectic diseases;" there
are?
" I. Congestion of the brain, or c coup de sang.'
"II. Haemorrhage, extravasation of blood ('apoplexy' proper).
" A. Haemorrhage into the substance of the hemisphere.
"B. Ventricular haemorrhage.
" C. Arachnoid haemorrhage.
" III. Serous effusion in large quantity. (' Serous apoplexy.')
" IV? Local cerebritis, or ' softening of the brain.'
" V. Tumour of the brain, or meninges.
"VI. Tubercular meningitis.
" VII. Urinaemia and diathetic states.
"VIII. Anaemia, morbus cordis, vascular obstruction."
The phenomena of apoplexy are too well known to require specifica-
tion. Dr. Reynolds says, " The essential nature of apoplexy is the
occurrence of some static or dynamic change which, pro tanto, severs
volition and perception (the brain functions) from motion and sensa-
tion."
" As congestion frequently accompanies or precedes all apoplectic dis-
eases, its symptoms are often present as their prodromata. Where
congestion, however, forms the whole anatomic basis of developed apo-
plexy, they are more marked in intensity, and have commonly existed
for a longer period." Hemorrhagic apoplexy is characterized by the
suddenness of its invasion. " The patient, as a rule, if standing, falls in-
stantly, as if knocked down." The accompanying paralysis is generally
hemiplegicif the haemorrhage be into the substance of the hemispheres.
If it be into the ventricle, " the most frequent combination of symp-
toms" is profound coma, with general paralysis and rigidity. In arach-
noid haemorrhage the symptoms are more slowly developed, and " rarely
simultaneously."
" There is no certainty in the diagnosis of " serous apoplexy."
"The clinical history" of "acute red softening" " closely resembles
that of cerebral haemorrhage" .... "in some case the differentiation
is impossible." Apoplexy may occur in the course of the growth of
a "tumour of the brain," or in the progress of "tubercular menin-
gitis;" it may also be the result, or at least the accompaniment, of
various poisoned states of the blood, as in Bright's disease, jaundice, or
diabetes.
" Morbus cordis," anaemia, and vascular obstructions are the remain-
ing causes of apoplexy.
The diseases (Chap. VIII.) marked by delirium, unaccompanied by
fever, are?
" I. Hyperaemia of the brain and meningitis.
" II. Partial cerebritis, or red softening.
DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BRAIN. 97
" III. Delirium tremens.
" IV. Extrinsic diseases, including urinaemia, icterus, diabetes."
The first of these is marked by " the simplicity of the delirium?/, e.
its freedom from complication with other intrinsic nervous symp-
toms." J 1
In "acute softening," the" delirium is mild and inoffensive," and in
the intervals of delirium there is distinct mental weakness, loss of
memory, contusion ol ideas, &c.
Delirium tremens, on the other hand, is ?0f a fearful, wandenng,
but tractable type, with delusions; a peculiar tremor, wakefulness
a non-febrile state, with clammy, cool skin, and disordered, offensive
secretions.
In " diathetic diseases," "the delirium is commonly mild and 'low
muttering' in its character, attended by subsultus tendinum, or chronic
spasms."
Convulsions (Chap. IX.) may have a "centric" or an "eccentric"
origin. The latter are?
" I. Blood diseases, or toxsemiaj.
" 1. Introduced poisons, including the acute specific diseases the
exanthemata, mineral poisons, &c.
" 2. Retained poisons, or excreta, such as urinaemia, icterus rheu-
matism (?), &c.
"II. Eccentric irritations (not toxtemise).
" 1. Castro-intestinal dentition, dyspepsia, worms, constipa-
tion, &c.
" 2. Bronchio-pulmonary. Laryngismus, pertussis, &c.
" 3. Grenito-urinary. Morbid uterine conditions, calculoid affec-
tions, &c."
The " convulsive diseases of intrinsic origin (centric) " are?
" III. Idiopathic, without assignable static cause.
" IY. Congestion of the brain, and meningitis.
" Y. Softening of the brain (local acute cerebritis).
" YI. Tubercular meningitis.
" VII. Tubercle and tumour of the brain.
" VIII. Cerebral haemorrhage.
" IX. Cerebral hypertrophy.
" X. Acute chorea.
Cephalalgia as an acute symptom may be of extrinsic or intrinsic
origin; under the former we have it, 1, i? the acute specific diseases 2
rheumatic cephalalgia; 3, sympathetic headache. Where of ir.tr,'Li!.
origin it maybe,1, congestive; 2, inflammatory; 3, connected with
organic diseases ; 4, neuralgic.
Of chronic diseases of the brain, the first, treated of in Chapter XII
are those " characterized by exalted activity." ''
" A. Excessive ideation.
" I. Hypochondriasis.
"II. Tarantism.
"B. Excessive sensation.
" III. Hemicrania, or hyperalgesia cerebri.
" IV. Hallucinations.
NO. I.?NEW SERIES. H
98 DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BRAIN.
" Y. Illusions (vertigo of sensation, &c.).
" C. Excessive motility.
" YI. Yertigo of motion (rotatory movements).
" YII. Co-ordinated spasm (muscular tic).
" YIII. Chorea.
" IX. Tremor (paralysis agitans)."
The diagnosis of hypochondriasis from melancholia, says the author,
" is based upon the hypochondriac's constant self-regard, and the
habitual reference of his delusions to the corporeal sphere."
"The predominance of motor disturbance" in hysteria "will gene-
rally serve to distinguish" it from hypochondriasis.
By " hallucinations," the author means those which are unconnected
with insanity; so that the subject of them, " although his phantasms
may have the appearance of reality, does not believe in their objective
existence."
A somewhat similar distinction should be drawn between the illu-
sions of the sane and insane. Muscse and tinnitus aurium are illusions
common to every one, and the result of a real impression on the
sensory nerve; but where the muscse, on the one hand, are firmly be-
lieved to be furies or devils, or the ringing in the ears, on the other, is
transformed into " voices," then the mind is insane.
The same thing holds good in reference to optical illusions, as
spectra; the sane mind can by experiment convince itself of their real
nature, whereas no process of reasoning will ever unseat the delusive
impressions of the insane.
" The most important chronic diseases of the brain, and nervous
system generally, present a combination of exaggerated activity in
some portions and diminished function in others."
Those so characterized are as follow :?
" I. Hysteria, and allied affections, catalepsy, &c.
" II. Epilepsy, 'le haut' and 'le petit mal.'
" III. Tumour of the meninges, cerebrum, and cerebellum.
" 1. Carcinomatous, ) ,. ,,
" 2. Tuberculous, / sometimes separable.
" 3. Aneurismal, fibroid, hydatid, &c., not separable.
" IY. Chronic meningitis.
" Y. Chronic softening.
" YI. Induration of the brain.
"1. In the adult (from epilepsy, lead poisoning, &c.)
" 2. In the child (hypertrophy of brain).
" YII. Chronic hydrocephalus.
" YIII. Urinsemia."
There is nothing pathognomonic in the symptoms of 'specific
tumours. The tuberculous and carcinomatous are inferred by the pre-
sence of the cachexia; the aneurismal by the existence of arterial dis-
ease elsewhere; while the other varieties may be guessed at from the
discovery of similar growths in other parts of the body.
As indications of the " special locality" of a tumour, the following
are valuable. " Pain is most commonly situated on the same side as
that in which the tumour exists." "Motor phenomena (both spas-
DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BRAIN. 99
modic and paralytic) are observed almost invariably on tlie opposite
side."
"Convulsions are most frequent in tumours of the cerebellum."
" Amaurosis, on tlie other hand, is most common in tumours of the
anterior cerebral lobes."
"The implication of the special senses generally (but not exclu-
sively) indicates a location near the base."
A suggestion of Romberg's, confirmed by one case observed by Dr.
Reynolds, will form a valuable means of diagnosis, if more extended
observation proves it to be trustworthy; namely, that when the tumour
is situated 011 the upper surface of the encephalon, a " forced expira-
tion increases the pain whereas when affecting the base, " this effect
is produced only by inspiration."
" Paraplegia rarely occurs from encephalic tumour, unless the cere-
bellum is its seat."
" When softening has observed a chronic course throughout, its
most difficult differentiation is from tumour and meningitis. The
three may, however, be distinguished in many cases by the following
characters.
"A. Tumour,?intense, locally limited, paroxysmal pain ; anaesthesia
of special senses; local paralyses; epileptoid convulsions without
paralyses ; unimpaired intelligence ; coma at close of life.
" B. Chronic meningitis,?pain, not very severe, not limited; mental
and emotional excitement; disorderly spasms and paralyses; with
frequent, but irregular accessions of fever.
" C. Chronic softening,?oppressive, not intense pain ; with gradual
failure of intelligence, motility, and sensibility. '
The nervous symptoms of urinsemia may resemble those of these
three affections, but then " the pain is rarely acute ; there is drowsi-
ness, or a peculiar coma and stertor, and the extrinsic symptoms fur-
nish the means by which a diagnosis may be established."
The third part of the book is devoted to diseases of the spinal
cord.
With regard to the special locality?the cervical, dorsal, or lumbar
regions may be affected.
When the lumbar or lower dorsal portions of the cord are the seats
of disease, the "lower limbs are alone implicated." "The bladder
and rectum are paralyzed." If the upper dorsal region be affected,
" respiration is impeded;" " unless the lesion extends above the second
dorsal vertebra, the upper limbs retain their function." "Affections
of the cord opposite the first dorsal, or the last two cervical vertebra:,
implicate the movements of the arms."
" If the disease extends no higher than the sixth cervical, the arms
retain their movements at the shouldersif above the sixth or fifth,
" and the phrenic nerve is implicated, the dyspnoea is most urgent."
" If the lesion exists higher than the fourth or third vertebra, death
is extremely rapid, owing to asphyxia from paralysis of the respiratory
muscles."
" The locality of disease may be discovered by the existence of
spontaneous pain, or tenderness, at a particular point of tlie vertebral
H 2
100 DIAGNOSIS OF DISEASES OF THE BKAIN.
column ; and the latter may be estimated by pressure, concussion of
the spinous processes, or the application of heat (by means of a sponge
or cloth wrung out of hot water)."
" Where motility is at first exclusively affected, the anterior and
antero-lateral columns are most probably diseased; and vice versa,
when sensibility is primarily deranged, the probability is, that the pos-
terior, or postero-lateral columns are principally affected."
" Acute diseases of the spinal cord and its meninges" are as fol-
lows :?
" I. Plethora spinalis, or congestion.
" II. Meningitis.
" III. Myelitis (acute softening).
" IY. Meningo-myelitis.
"V. Tetanus (idiopathic).
"VI. Hydrophobia.
" VII. Haemorrhage, meningeal and spinal.
" 1. Into the spinal cord.
" 2. Into the tuber annulare.
"VIII. Concussion of the cord."
Spinal meningitis is ushered in by " highly marked fever," and is
accompanied by " pain referred to the spine, at first slight, but rapidly
increasing in severity, and becoming almost intolerably violent." Tonic
spasm is the chief motorial symptom.
Myelitis, on the other hand, is denoted by "peripheral pain, or
anaesthesia, and paralysisit is " commonly hyper-acute, and termi-
nates in a few days ; but if this is not the case, sloughing of the inte-
guments occurs, and hastens the prostration of the patient to a final
issue."
Meningo-myelitis " is more common than either of its elements in
an isolated form."
The chronic diseases of the spinal cord are?
" I. Chronic myelitis (or softening). ?
" II. Chronic meningitis.
" III. Induration and hypertrophy.
"IV. Tumours.
" 1. Diathetic?e.g., tubercle, carcinoma.
"2. Non-diathetic?e-cj., hydatids.
"V. Idiopathic paraplegia (dynamic)."
In the fourth and last part of this work, Dr. Reynolds considers the
'diseases of the nerves.
The diagnosis of the particular nerve affected " can be arrived at
only by a knowledge of the anatomical distribution," "and physiolo-
gical functions of each division."
The functions of a nerve may be modified by?
" I. Excessive activity.
"A. Of sensation or sensibility.
" B. Of motility.
" II. Diminished activity, or complete loss of function.
" A. Of sensation, or rather of impressibility.
" B. Of motility."
T
FOREIGN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE. 101
The special diseases of the nerves are thus arranged :?
" 1. Neuritis (inflammation of the nerve trunks).
" II. Tumours ; of two kinds.
" a. Painful subcutaneous tubercle.
" b. Neuroma (of various kinds).
" B. Inorganic or functional.
" III. Neuralgise, considering specially,?
" a. Facial. Neuralgia of the fifth nerve.
" b. Ischiatic. Sciatica.
" c. Dorso-intercostal.
" IY. Hypercineses, or spasms, considering specially,?
" a. Facial-spasmodic tic.
"b. Oculo-motor. Strabismus.
" c. Laryngeal. Laryngismus stridulus.
" Y. Anesthesia}, especially of the fifth nerve.
"VI. Acineses, or paralyses, and especially that of the facial
nerve (portio dura oi the seventh).
