Woman In Her Social Relations, Past
====================================

Akt. II.?
AJNJD 1 K-hibiliJNT.
IN an early number of this J ournal, woman was considered psycno-
logically ; let us now shortly view her in her social and political
relations. The student of history, when once his attention is
called to the fact, must regard with some surprise the scanty
mention made of the female sex in those annals which profess
to treat of the birth and growth of the nations of the earth.
Where history merges into the golden land of fable, he will
indeed find women playing a conspicuous and important part in
the affairs of life ; it was for a woman that Troy was ten years
besieged by all the myrmidons of assembled Greece ; in the
quarrel caused by a woman that the fields of upper air resounded
with the conflict of angry deities, while Scamander flowed
522 WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
purple with the blood of heroes. It was for wrong done to
a woman that Tarquin and his race were expelled the Roman
throne ; it was a woman who rallied the energies of Britain, and
vanquished the descendants of Brutus, *at what is now our
modern town of Colchester, till forced to yield herself in a less
victorious field. But lower down the stream of each nation's
life, the traces of women so utterly disappear, that the student
is tempted to ask himself whether there really wrere any wives,
mothers, and maidens, in those days, bearing the same equal
numerical proportion to husbands, fathers, and youths, as they
do at the present day; or wrhether armed men did not rather
spring full panoplied from the blood of fallen warriors, to hate,
to fight, and to destroy, to make experiments in legislation, and
to matriculate in various forms of legal and illegal murder, till
they too gave place to the generation which should succeed and
do likewise.
In no book is this utter absence of the female element more
strangely noticeable than in the most erudite and philosophical
production of late years?Mr. Grote's " History of Greece/' In
twelve thick volumes, containing the result of the labour of a
life, full of carefully arranged information concerning the most
fruitful epochs of ancient time?the years in which not only
politics, but literature and the arts attained a development to
which we may well question ourselves if our own be indeed supe-
rior, we find no more mention of women than that Sappho had
a great gift of song, that Socrates was afflicted by a cross wife,
and that Pericles rejoiced in the love of that one woman of old
Athenian days, whose majestic and beautiful image stands out
all the more prominently from the field of ancient history,
because it is so solitary, so entirely unique. Then how many
pages of Gibbon or of Hume may the reader devour, asking
vainly, "Were there any women; what did they do, what did
they say ?" This one perhaps, went to rescue her husband from
prison, or that one died a martyr, or a third held gallantly her
lord's castle against the besiegers, till he could hasten back to
the rescue from some distant war. Of the first eight centuries
A.D., we chiefly learn that Alfred's mother taught him to read,
and that Christianity was welcomed into England by " a Queen
of Kent," witness any number of cartoons by ambitious British
artists. In France we have Brunhilda, wife to Sigebert (575),
and the queen of Charlemagne, that fair Fastrada, for whom he
mourned with such inconsolable bitterness ; but here we trench
once more upon the world of fiction, for the story runs off into
magic rings and such veracious ornaments of history. As
to Haroun al Raschid, the third in the illustrious trio of
monarchs who ennobled the ninth century, his very name is
PAST AND PRESENT. 523
synonymous with all manner of wild and witty fable, and what-
ever were the accredited exploits of that great hero of eastern
romance, even Professor Smyth could not have extracted a
single golden grain of truth from the chronicles in which
" The tide of time flow'd back with me,
The forward flowing tide of time :
For it was in the golden prime
Of good Haroun al Rascliid."
Yet through all these centuries before and after Christ, the
human race was, as now, wrought up of two inseparable ele-
ments : " male and female created He them/' and the influence
of the woman penetrated subtlety into every cranny of the social
edifice. The religious ideas of each age were fostered and dif-
fused by women as surely as they are at the present day ;?the
morals of the time were such as their education, their consent,
allowed in practice ;?the universal ideal of the nation could be
neither higher nor lower than the level of that all-pervading,
all-influential body of female opinion. A moment's thought will
show this: no idea could prevail in a society, were it in every
household a matter of question and disunion ; the women must
either oppose or succumb to any given dogma, large or small. If
they oppose, they ultimately modify; if they succumb, they
enforce it with the weight of prejudice added to that of reason.
Whether it be by dint of beauty, of tears, or of finesse, the un-
cultivated woman is equal in fact to the uncultivated man: if
he loves her, she sways him ; if he beats her, she conspires against
him ; if he denies her a voice in the council, she takes care to
exercise it at home. If he misuse her fine nature, he finds that
he has created for himself a torment more intense, because nearer,
than any other can be ; his wine is turned into vinegar, his roses
are changed into scorpion's tongues, so that the silence of history
in reference to women, while it is amply significant of the public
estimation in which they were held at any given epoch, is in no
wise significant of that natural and indestructible balance which
the Creator made when He " formed man in His own image,
male and female created He them."
We are therefore cast back upon those traditions which we
have before alluded to as flowing down to us from the hidden
sources of history proper, through many a picturesque and wind-
ing way; and these, however little they may represent the out-
ward fact, do in reality contain the very kernel of the past life
?of a nation, giving at least the ideal to which it was directed,
clothed in the costume and surrounded by the accessories of
those historical epochs in which the traditions developed. As we
ascend into the heroic age, and ask of the legend, the epic, and
524 WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
the drama, what manner of men the primeval epoch bore, we
find the two sexes playing nearly equal parts in the game of ex-
istence ; a grand heroic game as it is painted ! It is true that
wives and daughters were strictly reduced in theory to a condi-
tion of obedience?that Iphigenia bows before the knife, while
contending warriors wrangle over the fate of Helen, as though
she were a stock or a stone ; but we nevertheless find them the
centres of great movements, the inspirers of great passions, hold-
ing in their slender hands the thread of many a mighty fate.
" Thebes or Pelop's line,
Or the tale of Troy divine?''
So that such legends represent life more truly than any number
of chronicles of wars?than any diagrams of political constitu-
tions ; for it is not the outer framework of the history of a country
which can give food for thought, or teaching for practice ; it is
only the inner reality of life as it was lived among its people,
which can do this : knowledge of what were the moral elements
of their society; how they moved and spoke and dressed, how
they wooed and wedded, and buried their dead ; of what manner
was their worship, and upon what rested their hope and their
faith.
And when, by the help of these poetical pictures, we come to
ask ourselves what, in the earliest times of which we can form any
image, was the relation of women to society considered in the
aggregate political sense, we are inclined to say that it possessed
a sort of rough equality with that of men; that where poli-
tical constitutions were so simple that to wield arms under some
strong and valiant hero, and to take occasional part in the deli-
berations of camp or council, were the chief political duties of
the husband, the wife who bore and reared the young warriors,
and took her full half share in the simple exertions demanded
by the needs of primitive existence, could hardly be said to
hold an inferior place, or be less of a citizen than he himself.
But when society became more complex, when distinctions of
rank were defined and cemented by interchange of service and
privilege, when Lynch law no longer prevailed for the redressing
of evils, but the Areopagus and the Forum, the Witenagemote
and the Parliament, came to supersede the rough and ready
machinery of earlier ages,?then, amid the linked spheres of
what we consider a more perfect political system, women found
no place. The sex cannot be said to have held any relation to
the state during the historical eras, except in that singular and
anomalous instance when, as in our own country at the present
day, a woman filled the highest post in the realm, presiding, in
the capacity of sovereign, over that government in whose behalf^
PAST AND PRESENT. 525
bad she been of lower degree, sbe would not even bave possessed
tbe privilege of giving a vote towards the election of the meanest
official.
Parallel with the rise of elaborate political systems, sprang
into being those arts and sciences which became with men the
subject of long study, and the material of severe and learned
professions. Not only were women (either by nature, law, or
custom) debarred from the profound investigation of the one,
and the careful practice of the other, but even amateur attain-
ment was considered apart from their sphere of duty, so that a
still further division was created between the sexes, and the
pair who in barbarian life pursued in divers manners, but in
strict conjunction, the simple aims of physical existence, came
at length to have scarcely any interests in common, save those
which spring directly or indirectly from love. The student finds
himself, therefore, reduced to ask how the laws which were framed
by men bore upon the other sex, happy if a vivid imagination,
the power of seizing upon a few meagre and scattered hints,
combined with subtle analysis of the state of feeling which dic-
tates any given law, and into which such a law must again re-
act, afford him any help in reconstructing for himself something
like a real colour-picture of that past which lies buried, for the
casual reader, under a mountain of dates and names and dry
records of facts, bearing indeed on certain interesting pro-
blems of legislation, but having little relation to any of the more
vital questions affecting the moral growth of humanity. Not
that we would under-estimate the value of conclusions in favour
of democracy, of equal taxation, and impartial criminal law; yet
our most valuable facts on such subjects must be drawn from
modern social investigation, not from historical records or ab-
stract deduction. It sometimes seems to us that history, as at
present availably written (for it requires somewhat of the imagi-
nation of the poet to seize and employ, like Carlyle, the more
rich and subtle hues of historical truth), and politics as at pre-
sent conducted, are nearly as abstract as mathematics them-
selves ; that the fate of nations is played with by those in whose
hands lie their more external destinies, much after the manner
of a game of chess. The soldiers are but as animated pawns,
Russia against France becomes a scientific question of weight
and resistance ; but descend into those home regions from whence
the material of the war is drawn, from whence the bare facts of
the chronicle are distilled, and how wTould the scene change;
how vivid, how full of life, of the pain of parting and the joy
of meeting, it would become. The automata are animated, it is
no longer the nation merely, no longer Britannia with her lion,
or Gallia with her cock and tricolor. The women start into
526 WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
their pristine equality of interest; they are the mothers of soldiers
and sailors, and assemble by hundreds, weeping in the morning
twilight to see them depart; they are the wives of the bread-
winners, and each tax, each change in the administration, sends
a subtle thrill from the Lords and Commons through the needs,
the sympathies, and the sorrows of the women to the farthest
corner of the land. Let us therefore inquire what have been
the laws relating to women in various ages and countries, that
being a very rough, but almost our only means of attaining to
something like an idea of the real social condition of the sex.
We find in Michaelis's " Laws of Moses," first volume, 34th
chapter of the English translation, by Alexander Smith, D.D.,
various particulars collected together concerning the legal posi-
tion of Jewish Avomen. Among the Hebrews, wives were com-
monly bought, according to the practice of the East. The case
was the same among the Arabs and Syrians. In the language
of the latter, mechiro, or the sold, is equivalent to the
espoused, just as in the German Chronicles of the middle ages
we find it stated that A B bought C D, that is, married her. The
Arabs have, along with their religion, carried this practice far
into Asia, and established it in countries where, before their con-
quest, it had no footing; and Arireux, in his Travels, says that
among the Mahometans there are three sorts of wives?married,
bought, and hired. Polygamy, in raising the demand for women,
sets as it were a price upon them ; and as in Jewish days a girl
was under the control of her father and brothers, this price would
naturally be exacted. It does not appear, however, that the rule
was invariable, since Sarah and Rebecca seem to have held
positions of power and freedom incompatible with being the
subjects of sale; and the presents which Abraham's servant
brought with him when he came to seek a wife for Isaac, were,
however rich, presents, and not purchase-money. But we find
Jacob giving seven years' labour as the price of Rachel; and
even in the most poetical of the marriages recorded in the Scrip-
tures, that of Ruth, we find the spirit of the contract to prevail
externally; for Boaz called the elders together, telling them that
lie had purchased Ruth to be his wife. A large number of
women, both Jewish, and of foreign birth taken in war, were
virtually slaves, and occupied definite legal positions as servants
or as handmaids. These were all in a measure protected by the
Mosaic regulations. For instance, a master who did not choose
to marry his Israelitish handmaid himself, was not allowed
to retain her, deprived of the joys of domestic life, but was
obliged when any one?such, for instance, as a near relation or
an intending husband?expressed a wish of redeeming her, to let
her go at reasonable ransom. The whole sex was, however, in a
PAST AND PRESENT. 527
state of miserable legal slavery: where there were sons, they seem
to have exercised a certain authority over the fate of their
sisters, even during their father's lifetime; where there were
none, " an heiress durst not marry without her tribe, and seldom
did marry out of her family." Again, Jephtha, having offered to
the Lord as a burnt-offering the first living thing which should
meet him on his homeward return from the war, is welcomed by
his daughter " with timbrels and with dances. She was his only
child: beside her he had neither son nor daughter." But he
having opened his mouth to the Lord, could not go back, and
appropriated her in fulfilment of the vow, with much lamentation
indeed, but no apparent opposition on the part of her com-
panions. It was not her war, nor her vow; but being as much
her father's property as a sheep or a goat, she came under the
category of " the first living thing."
Egyptian manners were very different. Herodotus affirms that
throughout Egypt it was customary to marry only one wife ; and
" if the authority of Diodorus can be credited, women were
indulged with greater privileges in Egypt than in any other
country." We learn from Wilkinson various details?such
as that women reigned as sovereigns; that they were not secluded
as in Greece; part of the worship of the gods was entrusted
to their management, and that not in processions and ceremonies,
but under enrolment in regular priesthoods ; "and if we are not
correctly informed of the real extent and nature of their duties,
yet, since females of the noblest families, and princesses, as well
as the queens themselves, esteemed it an honour to perform
them, we may conclude the post was one of the highest to which
they could aspire in the service of religion." It is worthy of
remark, that direct mention of priestesses is made in that Rosetta
stone which is one of -the principal antiquarian objects of in-
terest in our British Museum. The pictorial illustrations which
we possess of Egyptian life give us more idea of social customs
than antiquity generally vouchsafes to the student; and we may
mention in passing that we see in the strange frescoes which that
clear climate has preserved, various indications of the domestic
avocations of the women, of their weaving, and use of the distaff,
of their practice of music, and sometimes, unfortunately, of their
being too much addicted to convivial entertainments !
In an article contained in the Westminster Review for October,
1855, the reader will find a variety of curious information con-
cerning the women of Arabia, of China, the Indian Archipelago,
and many other "far contrees" of this habitable globe, where
men and women are living together under various laws, all
characterized by the same general feature, that of regarding the
latter as articles of property. The Pagan Arabs not only bought
528 WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
their wives to the number of eight or ten, " but actually
exchanged them with each other." Mahomet, reducing the
number, did away altogether with the right of exchange ; but
" the father still disposes of the daughter in marriage, and a pay-
ment to the father or guardian is necessary to legalise the mar-
riage, and the least sum allowed by the law is ten dirliems,
or drams, of silver?about five shillings." In other respects, the
exclusive habits of Mohammedans in regard to women are
well known. The Hindu laws also make marriage a matter
of bargain; and that from the earliest times of which any record
is obtainable. Mr. Mill, the historian of India, " is convinced that
the life of Hindu women is a life of the most abject degrada-
tion." This conclusion is based on the study of the Hindu law.
The romantic literature of the country gives a very different
impression, and must be taken largely into account when striking
the balance of argument in respect to any people, as it gives the
modification induced by the growth of public opinion on the
rigour of the law.
Let us now turn to the two greatest nations of antiquity, whose
polity and customs have in many ways largely affected our own.
We find Grecian women " always in a state of tutelage, per-
petually in the power and subject to the direction of their
fathers, husbands, or other legally appointed guardians." (West-
minster Review.]) An heiress's son, when he came of age, was
empowered to enjoy his mother's estate, allowing her a main-
tenance. If a woman were cited into court, the form used was
?" We cite A B and her guardian," she, alone, being a nonentity.
Mr. Grote informs us (vol. vi., page 133) that " the free-citizen
Avomen of Athens lived in a strict and almost Oriental recluse-
ness, as well after being married as when single : everything
which concerned their lives, their happiness, or their rights, was
determined or managed for them by male relatives; and they
seem to have been destitute of all mental culture and accom-
plishments." Women were located at the back of the house,
often in the ^ upper part; and it is sufficiently indicative of the
excessive strictness of their seclusion, that when the Athenian
women stood at the doors of their houses to inquire the fate of
their husbands after the defeat at Chaeronea, it was considered
discreditable to them, and to the city. Athenian women, it is
true, took part in religious processions, but were then always
veiled.
At Sparta the liberty enjoyed was much greater. Only
married women wore the veil; maidens went abroad uncovered ;
and Mr. Grote tells us that " Xenophon and Plutarch represent
the Spartan women as worthy and homogeneous companions to
the man. The Lykurgean system (as these authors describe it),
PAST AND PRESENT. 529
considering tlie women as a part of the state, and not as a part
of the house, placed them under training hardly less than the
men." The reader may here note an exception to the assertion
made at the opening of our subject, that in the historical eras
women could hardly be said to hold any relation to the State at
all. Nor was this a political, but rather a physical relation, arising
from the great importance assigned to the bodily condition
of the Spartan citizens, and consequently to the training of the
mothers who bore them. Mr. Grote continues as follows:?
" Female slaves are good enough (Lykurgus thought) to sit at home
weaving and spinning, but who can expect a splendid offspring, the
appropriate mission and duty of a free Spartan woman towards her
country, from mothers brought up in such occupations ? Pursuant to
these views, the Spartan damsels underwent a bodily training analo-
gous to that of the Spartan youth, being formally exercised and con-
tending with each other in running, wrestling, and boxing, agreeable
to the forms of the Grecian agones. The presence of the Spartan
youths, and even of the kings and the body of the citizens, at these
exercises, lent animation to the scene*. In like manner the young
women marched in the religious processions, sung and danced at par-
ticular festivals, and witnessed, as spectators, the exercises and conten-
tions of the youths, so that the two sexes were perpetually intermingled
with each other in public, in a way foreign to the habits, as well as
repugnant to the feelings, of other Grecian states."
The law, however, dealt as hardly by women in Sparta as in
other communities. They were disposed of in marriage accord-
ing to the will of fathers and guardians: if the parent died
without determining the fate of his daughter, it became a legal
question "to whom, among the various claimants, the best title
really belonged/'' This is analogous to the modification of that
early Athenian law by which an heiress and her inheritance
belonged to the family, and the consent of the kinsmen was
necessary to her marriage ; for it was afterwards allowed that her
father might dispose of her by will or otherwise; but if " he died
intestate and without male children, his heiress was legally com-
pelled to accept her nearest kinsman, not in the ascending line,
as her husband." Nay, it seems that dying husbands could, and
did, bequeath their wives to other men.
We must also observe that, in other respects the law and feel-
ing of Athens were "as unjust to women as they are in all
barbarous, and we may add, in all civilized countries, adultery
being only recognised and punished on the part of the woman,
wholly overlooked on that of the man.
We now come to Rome, whose systeni of laws lies at the
foundation of much of our own constitution, and here we are
met by the somewhat discouraging fact, that the laws regarding
530 WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
women, rigorous in republican days, gradually expanded into a
most remarkable fairness and equality in those very centuries
when the empire was approaching a disgraceful decline and fall.
It is unpleasant to connect the epoch of some of the worst women
the world has ever seen with the very changes we are desirous of
effecting in our own country; but since the connexion will pro-
bably be used in argument by those who think it advisable to
retain our system as it is, it may be well to direct the attention
of the student to those other causes which degraded Imperial
Rome?the concentration of wealth in metropolitan cities, undue
and unjust taxation, the decomposition of an immense unwieldy
empire?various causes which are not working in our modern
civilization, and which education, and the different industrial
position of the female sex, forbid us to imagine can again
recur.
We cannot here do better than quote a passage from the
" Report of the Personal Laws Committee on the Law relating
to the Property of Married Women," lately published by the
Law Amendment Society.
" In the earliest period of the Republic, the rights and conditions of
married women were entirely subordinated to the absolute power of the
head of the family, or -paterfamilias. The wife passed into the hus-
band's possession under the marriage contract, which pursued the
forms of a sale. He had absolute power over her as over a slave, even,
as is alleged by some, to life and death. She had no dowry; she
could not possess property: and whatever came to her hands imme-
diately became the property of the husband. The injustice of these
regulations was, however, felt by the great legislators of the common-
wealth."
And the following extract from Fraser, on Personal and
Domestic Relations, describes the condition of the Roman wife
at the best period of their laws :?
" The Roman wife was not held to be sunk in the husband, but
after the marriage she remained as capable of independent action as
before. Each could possess and enjoy property; and whatever one
acquired, the other could have no participation in. The wife's debts
could be recovered only from herself, and the husband's were effectual
only against his own person and property. But the presumption in
any case was in favour of the husband; and unless the wife established
by legal evidence that the property was hers, the husband, his heirs, or
his creditors, could demand it."
Again,
" The mode in which the independence of a Roman wife, as to pro-
perty, was maintained, was as follows: Previous to marriage, a portion
of the wife's property, called dos or dower, was set apart for the ex-
PAST AND PRESENT. 531
penses of the wedded state. The administration of this settled pro-
perty was committed to the husband, and, if it were of a perishable
nature (res fungibiles), he became absolute owner of it; but, if
land, he had no power of alienation, not even with the wife's consent,
except under very special circumstances. All her other property,
moveable or immoveable, whether acquired before marriage or after,
was entirely tinder her own authority and control, and was called
paraphernalia (bona paraglioma)."
In other respects the laws of Rome changed no less. "Women
were freed from tutelage, and the change was wrought in great
measure by the help of one of the forms of Roman marriage
called usus. This provided that the woman passed from the
power of her father into that of her husband, by remaining an
unbroken year in his house ; but if she absented herself for three
nights, a trinoctium, she remained in her own familia. In this
she followed a general law of property, of which ownership was
acquired by continual possession. The patricians, appreciating
the value of the remedy thus afforded in shielding them from
some consequences of intermarriage with plebeians, caused a
formal recognition to be made by law of " the interruption of
possession as a means of preventing the wife from falling into
the power of her husband." The annulment of infant betrothal
followed, and increased facilities for divorce, giving to women
the same defences as to men, till at length the whole code pre-
sented the first and last specimen of just legislation on these
points that the world has seen.
With the fall of Rome came the destruction of her social
system ; but wide and sweeping as was the torrent of barbarism,
such remnants as the Roman ruins scattered far and wide over
Europe, and mixing their stately strength with the Gothic
picturesqueness of Aries, Nismes and Avignon, were not the
only traces which remained of her influence. We find some
apposite remarks in M. Guizot's " Lectures on European Civili-
zation," which we proceed to quote.
" A municipality like Rome might conquer the world, but could not
so easily retain and govern it. Thus, when the work appeared com-
pleted, when the entire west, and a great portion of the east, became
subservient to Rome, this prodigious number of cities, of small states,
formed for independence and self-existence, became disunited, and de-
tached themselves in every direction. This was one of the causes which
led to the foundation of the empire. It was necessary to change the form
of government for one more concentrated, more capable of maintain-
ing union among such discordant elements. The empire attempted to
bind together and to unite this widely diffused society. * * *
We observe at the fall of the Roman empire the same fact which we
recognised at the foundation of Rome, viz., the predominance of the
municipal character and government. The Roman world reverted to
??BHI
532 WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
its pristine condition; it was formed by a confederation of cities, and
after its dissolution, the same, or similar cities, remained."
The municipal institution and the idea of an empire, M.
Guizot considers to be the elements which Roman civilization has
transmitted to that of Europe; " on one side the principle of li-
berty, on the other that of a general and common civil legislation,
?the idea of absolute power,?the principle of order and servitude."
To these let us add the example of a code of laws respecting
women, which for wisdom and enlightenment have never met with
a parallel; and since, in other directions, the revival of Roman
law in the middle ages has so powerfully influenced our own,
inducing changes in feudal jurisprudence which have gradually
penetrated to the roots of our social life, we may hope much
from a clear statement and wide dissemination of its principle
and practice in regard to the female sex. And however little it
may be the custom to think one of as great value as the
other, society will assuredly find the condition of half its com-
ponent elements no less important than any question of town
government. That federal system which combines the greatest
amount of local action with the most implicit obedience to a
central power, as in the example of the United States of
America, is acknowledged, (save for the blot of slavery in this
particular instance,) to be the ideal dream of politicians, and the
legislation which secures to the different members of a human
family the most perfect freedom of action, allowing them to
move spontaneously around one great central idea of duty, will
be found to secure in the end the closest unity and the pro-
foundest peace.
We now come to consider the social ideas of those races
which, a few centuries after Christ, poured down upon Rome,
till
" Feeble Ctesars shrieked for aid
In vain within their seven-hill'd towers."
It was not what we might expect, for we find on all hands
that in the earliest times of Teutonic invasion, the women held
a position of almost supernatural elevation. The early Germans,
we are told by Gibbon,
? Treated their women with esteem and confidence, consulted them
on every occasion of importance, and fondly believed that in their
breasts resided a sanctity and wisdom more than human. Some of
these interpreters of fate, such as Yelleda in the Batavian War, go-
verned, in the name of the deity, the fiercest nations of Germany.
The rest of the sex, without being adored as goddesses, were respected
as the free and equal companions of soldiers; associated, even by the
marriage ceremony, to a life of toil, of danger, and of glory. In their
PAST AND PRESENT. 533
great invasions, the camps of the barbarians were filled with a multi-
tude of women, who remained firm and undaunted amidst the sound
of arms, the various forms of destruction, and the honourable wounds
of their sons and husbands. Fainting armies of Germans have more
than once been driven back upon the enemy, by the generous despair
of the women, who dreaded death much less than servitude."
Yet this enthusiastic tone of character did not carry its de-
velopment on into the increasing civilization of the Teutonic
race. The elaborate Roman law was destroyed, and it would
seem as if the poetical and religious halo described above ceased
to afford protection to female interest; for the feudal spirit,
moulding the institutions of each Teutonic nation, deprived
women of everything like legal independence. Land was held
by military tenure, and the law of primogeniture bestowed the .
family property on the eldest son, leaving the younger ones to
carve their own way to fortune, and the daughters dependent on
marriage or the convent. Chivalry tempered the despotism of
the feudal tenure among the upper classes, but could have little
influence over the lower ; and till the era of the printing press,
when the literature of the ancients was once more disseminated
through those countries over which tliey once held imperial
sway, the female sex was left to its unaided influence for any
freedom or authority it might possess.
Having traced the legal condition of women in other ages and
countries, it is now time to come to our own, and to ask ourselves
what is the present condition of those Englishwomen whom it is
the custom to regard as the freest of their sex. And here wre
are met by great contradictions between the law and public opi-
nion ; the former encumbered on all hands with the fag ends of
feudalism, the latter according year by year a larger share of
freedom and of influence in many directions. The body of edu-
cated Englishwomen press against the law which encircles them,
with a weight and persistency which will eventually change
nearly all the legal conditions of domestic life ; though its moral
ideal, deeply rooted in the inmost heart of a Saxon and Chris-
tian nation, shows little symptom, and we thank God for it, of
dissolution or decay.
To be brief, the English law of the present day, according full
liberty to the unmarried woman past her minority, replaces the
wife in the position of a minor, property and person being vir-
tually in the power of the husband. His power over the one is
modified by various legal devices by which parents contrive to
secure at least the capital of such property as they bestow upon
a daughter, to her and her children ; and the action of the Courts
of Equity can be invoked, by those who possess money and pa-
tience, for the protection of bequests and the redress of any
NO. IV.?NEW SERIES. N N
534 WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
flagrant wrong. His power over the other is modified by the
Habeas Corpus Act, by various statutes concerning the keeping
of the peace, and by a strong and ever increasing force of public
opinion, which claims for women, of the lowest as of the highest
class, an absolute exemption from personal tyranny, and is even
inclined to give the husband a quid pro quo for every unmanly
blow inflicted upon the person of his wife. The practice of the
law diverges ever more widely from the theory of the law, and
the whole question is in that confused state of germination in
which a different opinion prevails on every side.
The law declares that " a man and wife are one person. The
wife loses all her rights as a single woman, and her existence is
entirely absorbed in that of her husband. He is civilly respon-
sible for her acts ; she lives under his protection and cover, and
her condition is called coverture."* Society declares that a man
and wife are in many cases essentially two people, each possess-
ing strong individuality, each perhaps practising a different pro-
fession or means of getting a livelihood,?perhaps even separated
both in the inner and the outer life, and warring at as great a
distance as is allowed by the length of their chain. Society, in
according education to women, has made them capable not only
of managing, but of acquiring property by their own exertions,
and has given them the desire to do so. The law declares that
" a husband has a freehold estate in his wife's lands during the
joint life of himself and his wife?that is to say, he has absolute
possession of them as long as they both live." Also, that " money
earned by a married woman belongs absolutely to her husband
and that " what was her personal property before marriage, such
as money in hand, money at the bank, jewels, household goods,
clothes, &c., becomes absolutely her husband's, and he may assign
or dispose of them at his pleasure, whether he and his wife live
together or not." Society tries hard to circumvent the law, to
contrive strong and cunning settlements, whereby the wife's per-
sonal property before marriage may be settled on herself. Society
sets up a somewhat complex and crazy machinery to redeem the
wife and children out of the power of a bad man, where such
happens to be, and is even now making an effort to get that
part of the law radically altered which relates to property. And
this brings us again to the before-mentioned Report of the Law
Amendment Society, which may be considered as the latest
and most authentic source of information. It contains in the
Appendix various details as to the law in various of the United
* " A Brief Summary in Plain Language of the most Important Laws concerning
Women, together with a few Observations thereon," By Barbara Leigh Smith,
John Chapman.
PAST AND PRESENT. 535
States of America, and sums up the result in the following para-
graph (page 11)
" The United States of America, which for the most part adopted
the common law of England, some with, some without, the correctives
of courts of equity, have, during a long course of years, gradually modi-
fied the harshness of the law which denies property to married women.
And in the great States of New York and Pennsylvania, as well as in
New England, in Texas, California, and the newly settled States, a
married woman is allowed, with more or less modification, the same
eights over property as if she were single. In the States where the
civil law prevailed, the provisions of the Roman code had already secured
independence to married women."
The Report also specifies the provisions of the French law,
which is much more equal than our own, and concludes with a
recommendation that a law of property as to married women'
should be based 011 the following principles:?
" 1. That the common law rules which make marriage a gift of all
the woman's personal property to the husband, to be repealed.
" 2. Power in married women to hold separate property by law, as
she now may in equitjr.
"3. A woman marrying without any antenuptial contract, to retain
her property, and after acquisitions and earnings, as if she were a
femme sole.
" -1. A married woman, having separate property, to be liable on her
separate contracts, whether made before or after marriage.
" 5. A husband not to be liable for the antenuptial debts of his wife
any further than an}7" property brought to him by his wife under settle-
ment extends.
" G. A married woman to have the power of making a will, and
on her death intestate, the principles of the statute of distributions as
to her husband's personalty, mutatis mutandis, to apply to the pro-
perty of the wife.
" 7. The rights of succession between husband and wife, whether as
to real or personal estate, courtesy or dower, to be framed 011 principles
of equal justice to each party."
It may be long before any such law receives the sanction of
the British legislature, but the day must come, as assuredly as
that of any of those great reforms which have gradually been
incorporated in the statute book.
But the relation of the law to women forms but a small por-
tion of the relation of women to society ; and the question is now
becoming complicated by new elements which rise into view with
every new phase of development afforded by the increased edu-
cation of the sex. How great a change has been effected since
the days when the good and learned Elizabeth Carter was a
kind of national prodigy for her translations from the Greek, and
N N 2
536 WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
concerning whom, a hundred years ago, a report arose in the
town of Deal, where she resided, that she was about to be re-
turned as the borough member to Parliament! There are hun-
dreds of women who could now translate Epictetus, and thousands
who could write as good poetry as the stately odes and verses
perpetrated by Elizabeth Carter, which are perhaps about the
level of a University prize poem. A woman of ability possesses,
in the present day, advantages in the way of education which
in some respects transcend those of men. She has not, it is
true, that assistance to a severe mental training which the great
schools and universities afford to the other sex, and can seldom,
for lack both of teaching and of stimulus, attain to the same
accurate technical proficiency in any branch of knowledge as is
demanded from an aspirant to one of the learned professions.
On the other hand, leisure, freedom from the trammels of one
engrossing subject, and keenness of general social sympathy,
secure to a really cultivated woman a certain breadth of survey ;
and where she is not a slave to prejudices of social etiquette, her
conversation possesses a universality of interest and a depth of
moral insight, which are not often matched, at least in general
society, among men possessing even eminent attainments in one
or two special directions. This new power may be seen at work
on all hands, rousing up discussions on social subjects, striving to
force out fresh lines of occupation, creating fermentation in the
most orderly homes, and in many cases, where it finds a diffi-
culty in harmonizing with the existing state of things, bringing
not peace, but a sword.
No fact is in the present day more noticeable than that the
religious systems of England afford no definite or regulated scope
for female activity. We have had plenty of exciting convent
stories, full of abduction, seduction, and murder; it is now time,
in the revolving cycle of opinion, to ask ourselves whether we
did well when, at the Reformation, we overthrew all those grand
fabrics whose ruins yet stand up in our old towns and amidst our
wooded valleys, beautiful even in their decay and desolation.
Protestant Germany has its large, orderly hospitals, managed
entirety by deaconesses of the Lutheran persuasion,* and Catho-
licism directs into many fertilizing channels the fund of energy
and kindness at its disposal; but in England a hard Puritanism
succeeded the downfall of the old faith, alien in its main features
to all the distinguishing characteristics of women, which in fact,
from the extreme prominence given both to the Jewish and to
the Pauline theology, it more than half-despised. We do not
ignore the heroic virtues which the Protestant spirit fostered;
the brave women of the Commonwealth, nor those who went out
* Vide a little pamphlet by Miss Nightingale on the Deaconesses of Kaisers-
wertli, an institution founded by Pastor Fliedner.
PAST AND PRESENT. 537
in the Mayflower to found the present race of New England
women, who for energy and intellect are the flower of their kind.
But we do believe that much was swept away which it would
have been wise to have retained, since religious and benevolent
women have from that time struggled, in a disorganized and
therefore comparatively ineffectual way, to forward those works
of charity and mercy towards the fulfilment of which the Catholic
Church affords so much training, help, and encouragement.
In a little volume called " Hospitals and Sisterhoods," the
reader will find details as to Catholic Orders of Nuns which
it is not very easy to meet with elsewhere ; for in Protestant
accounts of the Catholic Church, or in histories of the Reformation,
is so slight a mention of the organizations for female activity,
that it is evident how little their peculiar spirit and work is.
understood by the writers. The very Encyclopedias which give
elaborate accounts of monks and monasteries pass over the
word nun with little more than a derivation. Yet in the
opening words of Chapter YI. of the little book above-mentioned;
?" It would not be possible to give within the compass of these
pages the rise, progress, and extent of the religious orders of the
Roman Catholic Church. Every talent committed by God to
mankind found in them scope for use." On page 92 may be found
an account of the Order founded by St. Yincent de Paul; and
apropos of this, we read in Ranke's "History of the Popes,"
vol. ii., page 449, a passage exactly expressive of the marked dif-
ference between the practical organization of Catholic, and Eng-
lish Protestant communities. Speaking of the saint in question,
the historian observes :?
" The Order of the Sisters of Mercy also owes its origin to him?an
order in which the more delicate sex, at a time of life when all the
visions of domestic happiness or worldly splendour float before their
eyes, devoted themselves to the service of the sick,?often of the
abandoned,?without venturing to give more than a transient expres-
sion to those religious feelings which were the source and spring of all
their toils."
These efforts for the improvement or the consolation of
humanity are more happily become of constant recurrence ^ in
every Christian land; the education of the poor, the promotion
of learning, the mitigation of human suffering, everywhere com-
mand attention. Never will such efforts succeed without a
union of varied ability and knowledge with religious enthusiasm.
In Protestant countries they are too generally left to the^ energy of
each successive generation, and to a sense of the necessities of the
moment. But Catholicism aims at giving an unalterable basis
to associations formed for such objects, and an uniform direction
to the religious impulse which prompts them, in order that every
effort majr be consecrated to the immediate service of the
V
538 WOMAN IN HER SOGIAL RELATIONS,
Church, and that successive generations may be trained by ai.
silent but resistless process in the same spirit.
If Miss Nightingale, on her return from the East, should suc-
ceed in founding any permanent institution for the training of
nurses, she will lay in England the first stone of an edifice which
may go far to replace those institutions of whose moral value we
deprived ourselves somewhat too hastily, when we confounded in
one sweeping indignation both use and abuse.
But it was not only in works of practical benevolence that the
Catholic Church developed the energies of the sex : Romanism
also afforded large scope for the intellectual powers of women,
and that in many ways. Female saints seem to have been in as
high favour, and to have been as much quoted on spiritual sub-
jects, as those who bore masculine appellations. The reverence
paid to the Virgin may be considered as devoted to her super-
natural mission and motherhood ; but the saints were mere
women who attained their high spiritual rank by their own
endeavours after holiness. We find in a work by the Rev. W.
Faber* perpetual reference to the sayings of female saints, to
revelations made to them, and to treatises on religious subjects
written by them. Father Faber is a convert, and one of the
most eloquent of the English Catholic clergy of the day; and
this reference to women is perhaps one of the most marked
features of a book whose popularity has been very great.
Apropos of the religious foundations of the middle ages, and
the position assigned to women by the Catholic Church, we will
here quote an interesting passage from a French work entitled
" Histoire Morale des Femmes, par M. Ernest Legouvd/' It is
well worth a perusal by all who are interested in the subject;
and we are moreover informed in the preface that the ideas upon
which the book is based have formed the subject of a public
course of lectures delivered by M. Legouve at the College de-
France:?
" Convents Lave always been regarded as prisons for women ; and,
in truth, no places have heard more sobs and legitimate cries of revolt.
Women have, however, only there experienced freedom ; and there only
have they been able to show what they were worth. A woman powerful
in heart and mind, Avas stifled in the jail of a German or a feudal mar-
riage ; in the cloister she lived, she acted ; as the superior or head of an
order she governed. One who wishes to judge of women, should read
the history of the great religious foundations. Worldly goods to admi-
nister, souls to guide, regulations to establish, journeys to undertake,
law suits to undergo, memoirs to draw up; all, in fine, which consti-
tutes tlie mechanism of social, if not political functions, became for
them a necessity, and out of this necessity they created a long array of
virtues.
* tt All for Jesus."
PAST AND PKESENT. 539
"The Abbey of Fontevraud exhibits, if one may so speak, a whole
series of eminent men in the succession of its superior abbesses: the
monks found themselves, as is known, face to face with nuns in rela-
tions of submission, of deference, even of obedience.
" The abbess bore the title of General of the Order. The abbess
alone administered the goods of the community. The abbess only
could receive an adept in religion. The abbess decreed civil and eccle-
siastical punishments. The abbess chose the confessors for the dif-
ferent houses of the order.
" Did this concentration of administrative powers in the hands of
women injure the prosperity of the institution ? Not at all. No con-
gregation was richer or more illustrious. Enemies were, however, not
wanting. During six hundred years, and under thirty-two abbesses,
not one of those privileges but was attacked by masculine pride or
violence ; not one which was not maintained by the energy of women.
" We cite the institution of Fontevraud, we might cite two hundred-
others, for this is no question of a few isolated traits, nor of superior
women ; it is by thousands, and in every age of the modern world, that
women have displayed the true qualities of organisers. Let us mention
St. Theresa, that poor barefooted Carmelite, as she called herself, full
of good desires, but destitute of the means of executing them, and who
succeeded alone, and without help, in founding twenty monasteries in
Spain. Let us mention Heloise, who in the government of the Para-
clete showed, as directress, so noble and delicate a talent. Let us
mention the company of daughters of charity, who sometimes went
by tens, twenties, and thirties on to the fields of battle to tend the
wounded, as in the wars of 1650 and 1G58; sometimes set out for
foreign countries, in order to strive against some public scourge, as
during the great pestilence which depopulated Varsovia in 1652.
" Finally, the history of Port Royal offers to our eyes, among
women free to act, all kinds of firm and spirited conduct. So many
signs of firmness, of administrative talent, of the sentiment of duty,
of the spirit of business, of active charity, of good practical sense, so
much merit of all sorts displayed during several centuries by women,
en masse, in the only social career which was open to them, disposes,
it appears to me, of half the question we proposed to ourselves
in this chapter. Women should possess a place amidst social functions
in the name of social interest itself."
While Miss Nightingale was pursuing in England those studies
which resulted in her fitness for the post of public usefulness she
lias since occupied, and while Miss Sellon was organizing, in
spite of opposition, a semi-Protestant institution under the care
of the Bishop of Exeter (and doing noble work in the west of
England during times of cholera and fever), an attempt was
made in America to open the medical profession to women, and
it appears to be succeeding, in spite of the strong feeling of op-
position which such an idea would naturally at first excite. Yet
it is but an extension of the idea of nursing, which brings women
A
5-iO WOMAN IN HER SOCIAL RELATIONS,
into quite as many painful scenes, and would be, if efficiently
carried out, as repugnant to fanciful and effeminate delicacy.
The ladies of the middle ages were distinguished for their leech-
craft, and nobody accuses them of having stepped beyond their
province. The name of Elizabeth Blackwell begins to be well-
known amongst those who feel interest in social questions. This
lady was born in Bristol, but emigrated with her family to
America while yet a child. Being cast upon her own exertions,
by family circumstances, she was for a few years a teacher, but
the idea of opening out a new path for women having pene-
trated, and at length engrossed her mind, she made arrange-
ments for commencing the study of medicine in the family of a
physician, and finally sought admittance into some regular
college. With great difficulty she found one which would receive
her, in Geneva College, New York State, and passed some time
there amidst much social opposition in the town, but perfect re-
spect and appreciation from professors and students. She took her
degree triumphantly, and received the same afternoon innume-
rable visits from the ladies of Geneva, who had hitherto shunned
her! After attaining this platform, she came to Europe, and
resided for some months in Paris, during part of which time she
was immured in the Hospital of La Maternity, in company with
a crowd of French women of the lower class, training as mid-
wives. This she always described as the most irksome associa-
tion she had to undergo during her studies, infinitely more so
than that of the male students of an educated class. She was
afterwards permitted to " walk" St. Bartholomew's Hospital in
London, and while residing here made many friends among
English people. She returned to New York in 1851, and has
gradually built up practice and reputation by force of accurate
knowledge and a clear commanding character of a very uncom-
mon order. She has published a volume of lectures, which were
delivered to a class of ladies in 1852, entitled "The Laws of
Life, with special Reference to the Physical Education of
Girls, and which may be bought in London from American
booksellers. It contains knowledge, thought, and feeling, which
secure it an increasing circulation. This lady has a younger
sister, Emily, who has pursued nearly the same path of study,
and was for some time a pupil to Dr Simpson, of Edinburgh.
It is at present uncertain whether she joins her sister in New
York, or attempts to establish a practice in London.
The relation of the female intellect to the arts is another
question which is rapidly rising into importance. It is very
certain that no women have hitherto shown the least claim to
be associated with men on the higher platforms of artistic emi-
nence ; unless we except the name of one living artist, Rosa
PAST AND rilESENT. 541
Bonheur. However much we may make of the name of Ange-
lica Kauffmann, or of those of the few female students scattered
among the Italian schools, no honest mind will for a moment
assign to them more than a third-rate place. No woman has
excelled in sculpture; we can even remember no statue by one,
which has attained any degree of celebrity, except that of the
Maid of Orleans, by the daughter of Louis Philippe. We
trust, however, that Miss Hosraer, the young American sculp-
tress, now studying under Gibson, at Rome, may ere long
vindicate her claim to rank as a true artist. No woman has
shown a commanding genius in poetry between the dates of
Sappho and Elizabeth Barrett Browning,?a sufficiently wide
interval, one would think, for the outcoming of any eminent gift
of song. The great oratorios, the great operas, even the madri-
gals and canzonets are all written by men. Ttoe music of the
heavenly spheres has never, it would seem, been heard aright by
women, nor by them translated into the language of earthly
sound. So much must be fully granted, for it is true, and is said
on all hands, whenever any appeal is made for the thorough pro-
fessional education of women in the arts. Yet they possess, as a
sex, all those qualifications of sensibility and quick perception, all
that fineness and glow of temperament which peculiarly distin-
guish the artist from other men; and when this is balanced and
supported by so large a share of practical intellect as women of
the present day do undoubtedly exhibit, why is it that they do
not excel in the creative arts? Those who hope little of women
will reply that nature never intended, and that domestic duties
will not allow of the sustained study and hard work necessary for
the attainment of jDroficiency in any art; that women are intended
to appreciate painting, music, sculpture and poetry, and to diffuse
their influence through society, not to struggle for the bays. Those,
on the other hand, who hope much from' women, will say that
no genius can force its way through such external disadvantages
as those which hamper the sex ; that the opportunities of study
are in all ways restricted ; that the great public institutions are
closed to them; that even in youth they are hampered by a
thousand silken fetters of domestic life, and that any artist really
put into the position of a female student would be sorely inclined
to throw brush, chisel and harp into the nearest fire that came
to hand. But the truth seems to us to be, that any lengthened
discussion on this point is useless, for that the question is rapidly
narrowing to a practical issue; the facilities for artistic study,
though still far behind those of men, are increasing every day ;
and so many women have entered the artistic career that social
disabilities will gradually disappear. The public is also tho-
roughlv willing to appreciate female work, perhaps even to regard
542 WOMAN IN HEH SOCIAL RELATIONS,
it more highly, when it is good, because it is a woman's. Rosa
Bonheur's great picture of the Horse Fair was greeted with a
generous chorus of admiration, and her claims to rank as equal
or superior to Landseer discussed on all hands. Mr. Ruskin
holds up the Misses Mutrie as flower painters of the first order;
and poor Edgar Poe, in collecting those poems which, headed
by the " Raven/' have lately attained such general circulation
among lovers of literature, gave an American's tribute to our
greatest female author in these words :?" To the noblest of her
sex?to the Author of " The Drama of Exile"?to Miss Elizabeth
Barrett Barrett, of England, I dedicate this volume, with the
most enthusiastic admiration, and the most sincere esteem." So
that women have no cause to complain of due recognition being
withheld from them; they have now but to try the question of
their powers fairly in an open field.
We have omitted to mention the dramatic art, in which
women at least equal men. At the present day there are no
actors who may be classed with Rachel, Ristori, and Charlotte
Cushman, while Mrs. Sid dons, in the memory of our fathers,
claims a pre-eminent place.
We have not yet touched upon literary women and their
effect on the age, because it is the most obvious part of our
subject, and one on which little can be said that will not have
suggested itself to the reader. It is in fiction of a profound and
passionate order that they have chiefly excelled ; and remarkable
it is that when they do take up the pen, it is not to depict the
external conventionalities in which women are supposed to
abide, or those mild passions which poets feign to reside in the
female breast, but to plunge into the deepest mysteries of
human life, raking and ploughing into experiences upon which
men seldom touch. The names of George Sand and Gurrer
Bell are associated with books which have struck at the very
heart of modern society; and Frederika Bremer, though her
mind is of a more tenderly sympathetic cast, and softened by
that gift of humour which is one of the safety-valves of genius,
is fond of uncovering the mouths of social pits into which the
stoutest beholder can only look and shudder. Women use their
pens as dissecting knives, and lay bare social arteries till the
blood spouts up, and common-place readers cry out and say it is
all shocking and false; but yet people buy the books, and they
are worn to rags and tatters in circulating libraries, and pass
through edition after edition in defiance of the reviews. How
different from the days of Miss Edgeworth and Jane Austen!
from their clear, charming, crystalline pictures of life, dealing so
artistically with all on the surface and never penetrating beneath.
In other departments of literature women have not done much
PAST AND PRESENT. 543
of mark, but more and more of the writing of the day falls to
their share. In newspapers and periodicals, as editors, as com-
pilers of historical and all manner of other matter, they begin to
form a formidable phalanx, and to exercise an increasing in-
fluence. And the part they play in the papers, and in par-
ticular the wide power exercised by one pen, which still
labours on indefatigably in spite of failing health and numbered
days,?we allude to that of Harriet Martineau,?suggests the
question of what position women will eventually take in relation
to the State, for it is evident that while their influence is pene-
trating in all other directions, it must in time bear influentially
on politics. This is the opinion of such men as John Stuart
Mill and Herbert Spencer; the latter observes in his " Social
Statics/'?
" It is, indeed, said tliat tlie exercise of political power by women is
repugnant to our sense of propriety?conflicts with our ideas of the
feminine character?is altogether condemned by our feelings. Granted,
but what then ? The same plea has been urged in defence of a thou-
sand absurdities, and if valid in one case is equally so in all others.
There was a time in France when men were so enamoured of ignorance,
that a lady who pronounced any but the commonest words correctly,
was blushed for by her companions; a tolerable proof that people's
feelings then blamed in a woman that literateness which it is now
thought a disgrace for her to be without. It was once held unfemi-
nine for a lady to write a book; and no doubt those who thought it so
would have quoted feelings in support of their opinion. Yet, with
facts like these on every hand, people assume that the enfranchise-
ment of women cannot be right, because it is repugnant to their
feelings."
"We are, however, trenching on speculations so far ahead of any
possible result, that we feel upon dangerous ground, and must
pray our readers to remember that there is the widest difference
between holding an opinion, based on philosophical grounds
however firm and true, and any attempt to force that opinion
into facts which are wholly unsuitable for its reception. It is a
common sneer to picture " Women in St. Stephen's," but there
they never will be. St. Stephen's will have given place to some
assembly more orderly and better ventilated, before women take
practical part in political life. It is customary to represent
theoretical changes as if each were to take place alone. But it
is not so, the combinations of society are as infinite and wonder-
ful as the never-repeated patterns of a kaleidoscope; one bit of
the system never alters singly, but in new and totally unexpected
directions we find adaptations to the ruling idea of the time.
Those who care to see the best that can be said on the subject of
the enfranchisement of women, will find it in an article contained
544 ON DREAMS AND APPARITIONS.
in tlie "Westminster Review" for July, 1851, and also in a
small tract on the subject published by Chapman.
We have now gone through the various departments of society
wherein women do or may find a place, without a word on the
cardinal fact of life for both men and women?their domestic
relations. In the first place, it is a subject upon which so much
has been said or sung, that its usual aspects are pretty well ex-
hausted ; in the next place, its profounder theory involves the
whole moral and religious condition of both parties, and cannot
be compressed into a paper such as this. Our silence, then, is
from no sense of their unimportance, but because we accept the
household love and the household duties as the most sacred and
perfect manifestation of a noble human character, and consider
that their due training and fulfilment depend upon deeper causes
and principles than we can treat of here.
