On the Connexion Between Morbid Physical and Moral Phenomena
==============================================================

V
Art. Y.?

BY TIIE HEV. J. F. DENHAM, M.A., E.K.S.
[No. VII. of a Series.]
ArPENDIX I.
The general proposition about to be maintained is, that devia-
tions from moral rectitude in the thoughts, dispositions, and
actions of mankind are associated with bodily disease, and
caused by it; understanding, however, by the latter term
literally all states and conditions of the body removed from its
normal condition?beginning with the state of simple bodily
excitement produced by evil ideas addressed from without to the
mind and affecting the body through the mind ; and including
the morbid effects on the mind of physical excitement applied to
the body; and all the morbid alterations invariably produced on
the mind and moral powers by functional or organic diseases,
PHYSICAL AND MORAL PHENOMENA. 573
malformation, &c. We are about to adduce reasons for the opinion
that an abnormal or morbid condition of the body of some or other
kind or degree, is the proximate cause of vice, sin, and crime ; and
that since such a condition of the body and its morbid effects on
the mind constitute insanity, either latent or active, partial or
entire, temporary or chronic, that vice, sin, and crime originate
in insanity in the comprehensive and philosophical sense of that
term. It will be allowed, on all hands, that vice, sin, and crime
are effects; and we are about to investigate the proximate
causes of those effects. We wish to find an intelligible and pro-
bable answer to the questions?Why any human being becomes
vicious, sinful, or criminal ??Why all human beings are not
similarly and equally vicious, sinful, and criminal ??and Why
any human being is not at all times similarly and equally
vicious, sinful, and criminal ? And we believe that the answer to
these questions is to be found in the differences of the physical
condition of different individuals, and in the difference of the
physical condition of the same individual at different times with
reference to health and disease, however produced.
In behalf of this opinion an appeal will first be made to our
consciousness and experience ; secondly, to our observation ;
thirdly, to the authority of the Scriptures; fourthly, to the
opinions of the Catholic fathers; fifthly, to the Articles and
other documents of the Church of England ; sixthly, to the
teachings of its standard divines; seventhly, to the involuntary
concessions of the adversaries to this opinion. We shall, lastly,
offer some practical conclusions from our subject. First: We
appeal to the consciousness and experience of every individual,
and we ask, in regard of those deviations from moral propriety
with which all considerate persons will, we believe, acknowledge
themselves to be too frequently chargeable?whether they are not
conscious, upon due attention to their mental and moral states, that
a suggestion, temptation, inducement, occasion, or motive to any
of these deviations of any kind and degree whatever, does not
then, only, become effectual when after that a certain kind
of physical excitement has been sensibly produced in the brain
circulation, &c.?whether they are not conscious that some
or other portion of our physical nature must first become
involved and coactive with the suggestion, temptation, induce-
ment, occasion, or motive,?and whether it is not, through
means of such a physical coaction, continued and increased^
that the balance between the moral powers and inclination is
ultimately destroyed? We appeal to the experience of all
persons whether their only safety from an evil suggestion, &c.,
does not lie in the resolute suppression of it before such a
physical coaction has been effected?whether, if they have
574 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MOEBID
often neglected such a suppression, the physical coaction does
not become more readily effected, and whether, in the case of a
continued neglect of such a suppression, the physical coaction and
tlie compliance with the temptation, &c., do not become irresis-
tible? We appeal to their experience of themselves in regard of
what is commonly called their " infirmity," " failing/' " weak
point," or " besetting sin," or what they are " given to"?whether
we have not now set before them the true account of its origin
and power over them. What, indeed, is meant by the common
phrase " keeping the mind calm," but the prevention of a
physical perturbation ? It is possible that a previous morbid
state of the body or physical defect may render the prevalence
of the temptation more easy; but even in this case the coaction
with it of the physical portion of our nature is clearly percep-
tible. We further appeal to the experience of every man
whether he has not often found that a diseased or disordered
state of his body has been attended with an inclination or
tendency to some or other kind of immorality, either of thought,
disposition, or action,?and whether, in proportion as his bodily
state approaches the condition of health, such an inclination
or tendency is not diminished. Is any man equally inclined to
be amiable and virtuous under all the different states of his
bodily health and strength,?under a careful moderation and
selection in regard of his food, a due attention to exercise, &c.?
and under a system of excess, negligence, or indolence? We
believe that the reply to these appeals will afford a decided pre-
sumption in favour of our opinion respecting the physical origin,
or at least proximate cause, of vice, sin, and crime; for since all
persons are conscious of such an origin and proximate cause in
regard of minor immoralities, it is, we think, only fair and safe
to infer a similar origin and proximate cause in regard of those
greater immoralities of which mankind are guilty; agreeably to
?Sir Isaac Newton's second rule of philosophising, that "pheno-
mena of the same sort are to be accounted for by the same
cause."
Secondly, we appeal to the observation which all persons are
more or less constrained to make on their fellow men. Let,
then, any person direct liis view to his acquaintances and friends,
and does not the certainty of hereditary vices, sins, and crimes,
and of vices as associated with particular bodily constitutions,
conformations, states and conditions, present itself with irresis-
tible conviction to his mind? Who has not observed instances
among mankind of what Shakspeare calls?
" Some vicious mode of nature in them,
As, in their birth, (wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose its origin,)
PHYSICAL AND MORAL PHENOMENA. 575
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
Oft breaking down tlie pales and forts of reason; .
The stamp of one defect
Being nature's livery, or fortune's star."*
Who has not had reason to say?
" Blessed are those
"Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled,
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please:
That are not passion's slaves ?"f
Perhaps the most palpable instance of the connexion between
morbid physical and moral phenomena is afforded by intoxica-
tion and its consequences on the disposition and conduct. In
Dr. Lettsome's well-known scale of Drunkenness, the vices, sins,
and crimes vary in degrees of atrocity proportionably to the
strength of the different alcoholic stimulants,?that is, according
to the degrees to which a morbid state of the physical portion of
the drunkard's system is produced. Even constitutional excite-
ableness alone may, if indulged, lead to many immoralities.
Hysteria in children of both sexes is often attended with a pro-
pensity to falsehood, hypocrisy, and other forms of vice. So is
also a precocious or rapid development of the juvenile constitu-
tion, whether male or female: such cases either terminate in the
subsidence of immoral propensities along with the completion of
the physical development, or in death. I find in my memoranda
the case of a female child of about nine years of age, of premature
growth, excited manners, peculiarly sparkling eyes, keen-minded
and mischievous, who would, unless closely watched, approach
visitors to the house in a most winning manner, and, haying
gained their attention, would violently thrust her finger into
their eyes ; and having accomplished her purpose, would burst
out into triumphant laughter. She died before she was ten
years old, of fever. It is, I believe, universally admitted that
insanity of all kinds is attended with a propensity to some
or other kind and degree of immorality, as is also mental weak-
ness or a deficiency of understanding.
I give the following instances that have come under my
notice : they may be considered as types of classes containing
many individual cases: # ?
A young man, aged 23, of delicate constitution, defective
moral and religious education, habitually talkative, boastful,
prone to exaggerate, but yet possessing a remarkable aptitude
tor drawing, was, during the last few years of his life, addicted
to sensuality and the company of the dissolute ; seemed totally
* "Hamlet," Act 1, scene iv. f Act 3, scene ii.
576 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORB-ID
destitute of all ideas of justice to God, to himself, or his fellow-
creatures. Even a short time before his death, and when he was
supposed to be too weak to need surveillance, he managed
to rise from his bed, and was found at the distance of several
miles from his abode, in a most deplorable state, in one of
the lowest haunts of profligacy. The cause of his death, accord-
ing to the opinion of his medical attendants, was diseased heart
combined with phthisis. Often have I seen a family plunged into
distress by the early and sometimes sudden indications in some
one of the younger members of it of waywardness, proneness to
immorality, insensibility to all expostulations and reasoning, and
even to any consideration of self-interest. The result has been,
generally, insanity or early death. " Enemies to themselves" is
the popular comment in such instances; and I have had
reason to believe that there was in some of these cases a real
hatred of themselves, a wish to degrade and ruin themselves, and
an impatience till they had thoroughly succeeded.
Case 2.?A young man, of delicate appearance and very
excitable temperament, thin, pale, and diminutive for his age,
introduced himself to me as the son of a clergyman, and com-
plained of an incessant inclination to abandon himself to immo-
rality, although, as he assured me, he was a perfect stranger to
the vice to which he was tempted. It bad, however, become his
fixed idea, although he responded, and apparently with sincerity,
to my exhortations arid warnings. I heard a few months after-
wards that he died in an asylum for the insane.
Case 4.?Reported to me by the survivor. A young man,
remarkable for the correctness of his demeanour, was many years
ago proceeding one evening to chapel at Cambridge, accompa-
nied by a fellow-student and friend, when he suddenly proposed
to abandon chapel and resort to the haunts of dissipation. His
friend expressed his astonishment at this unexpected develop-
ment in his character. He nevertheless turned away, was absent
all night from his college, and three weeks afterwards he died
raving mad.
Case 5.?A young female, who had always evinced some
degree of mental and bodily weakness, vanity, singularity, prone-
ness to squander money, was attacked, at about seventeen years
of age, with mental aberration, accompanied with well-defined
catalepsy, attended with preternatural acuteness of the senses.
She appeared able to discern by her smell whatever was brought
into the house, though confined to the highest room in it. She
knew who came into the house, and heard their footsteps when
too distant for others to hear them ; was sullen and violent, and
unless prevented, would feel after those who came to see her
PHYSICAL AND MORAL PHENOMENA. 577
and bite them, and expressed her disappointment by rage and
hideous noises. One medical attendant pronounced her " a de-
moniac, such as we read of in the time of Christanother, more
wisely, predicted recovery upon a change in constitution. His
prediction was fulfilled, and for some years after she filled an
humble station of usefulness.
Another case was of a female of nearly the same age, of ple-
thoric constitution, who, after a severe fright, evinced symptoms
of malignity and frenzy, and the same disposition to bite per-
sons. In order to effect her purpose, she feigned sanity in the
most plausible manner, bit the person who believed her, and
expressed her satisfaction at having done so with derisive
laughter.
Another young female also showed a strong propensity to
mischief and falsehood, along with decided indications of in-
sanity. She accused the servants of theft, and secreted articles
herself, in order to bring their honesty into suspicion. She
nevertheless expressed a strong desire to be confirmed ; could
not be made to understand her moral unfitness for the rite, and
ultimately, by an ingenious stratagem and deception, managed
to receive it at a distance from her own neighbourhood. I have
known instances of young females who, along with similar mental
and moral characteristics, evinced an impetuous, unintelligent
wish to change their religion, be baptized by immersion, take
the veil, &c.
A female in a workhouse, considered insane by all around her,
repelled all religious instruction, would not be present at prayers
if she could avoid it, and repeatedly replied with great apparent
animosity to all my exhortations to confidence in God, " He
did not save my brother," whose death by the hands of justice
had, I was informed, caused the overthrow of her reason.
I have met with several instances in which a severe illness or
accident had greatly altered the moral dispositions. A man
received a blow on his head by being thrown out of his gig, and
to the end of his life was remarkable for pride, which had not
been particularly observed in him previously. A young man,
after a fit of epilepsy, became habitually conceited, and mani-
fested a strong propensity to immorality. Instances of the asso-
ciation with diseased heart of horrid thoughts, temptations to
vice, and especially to inebriety, have often come under my
notice. Frequently have the sufferers complained that they
" felt everything affect their heart," and have stated that a
sensible perturbation of that organ preceded their dreadful ideas,
inclinations to violence and crime, dejection and despair, thoughts
of self-destruction, &c. None but those who have ministered to
578 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID
such sufferers can form an idea of the extent and variety of the
abnormal ideas, feelings, and inclinations by which they are fre-
quently assailed.
Thirdly. We now proceed to adduce the references contained
in the Scriptures to the association of bodily disease, in the com-
prehensive sense of the term already assigned to it, with vice,
sin, and crime, and according as these references occur in a chro-
nological arrangement of the Old Testament, Apocrypha, and
New Testament. I request permission, however, to reproduce
here, from No. 3 of these papers, the leading assertions of the
Scriptures respecting the degenerate and damaged state of the
body or " flesh," as they frequently term it, and respecting the
consequences of various kinds produced on the mind, soul, or
spirit, by its union with these intellectual and emotional princi-
ples of our nature. It was there shown that the Scriptures
acquaint us with an immense deterioration that was inflicted on
the body and external circumstances of the first parents of the
human race, in consequence of their transgression, and entailed
upon all their posterity; that this deterioration is assigned by
the Scriptures themselves as the proximate cause of the existing
phenomena of the perturbed state of the mental and moral
nature of man, and that extraordinary instances of these pheno-
mena are ascribed to those additional physical disturbances by
which the state of the body is well known to be still further
removed from its normal condition ; that St. Paul declares that
" the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh; that they are contrary the one to the other, so that we
cannot fully do the things that we would ;" that he thus describes
his own state: " In me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good
thing. I find a law that when I would do good, evil is present
with me. I delight in the law of God after the inward man,
but I see another law in my members warring against the law
of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin
which is in my members. So then with my mind I myself serve
the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin " that he asserts
the " disposition of the flesh is enmity against God; it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can bethat both
St. Paul and the other Apostles perpetually use the terms " sinful
flesh," the " infirmity of the flesh, " weak through the flesh,"
the " lusts of the flesh, our " vile " mortal bodies;" and exhort
their readers to avoid " the lusts of the flesh which war against
the soul," and " to mortify the deeds of the body/' as the indis-
pensable means of virtue and salvation; that St. James gives
the following account of the origin and progress of sin : " every
man is (effectually) tempted when he is drawn away of his own
lust and enticed: then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth
PHYSICAL AND MORAL PHENOMENA. 579
forth sin that St. Paul includes among " the works of the flesh"
not only the more obvious sensualities, but even " idolatry,
witchcraft or poisonings, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders," and declares that
"he keeps under his body, and brings it into subjection, lest by
any means when he had preached to others he himself should
be a castaway."
I now beg to add, that, according to the Hebrew psychology,
which has every likelihood of being the true and correct, the
body and mind of man are represented as constituting one
entity, so that whatever affects the body may be reasonably ex-
pected to affect the mind, and vice versa. I beg to state this
biblical principle of the unity of man in the language of Milton,
who, of all students of Scripture may be expected to be fully
acquainted with its theory of human nature.
"Man having been created after this manner, it is said, as a con-
sequence, that ' man became a living soul,' whence, it may be inferred
?unless we had rather take the heathen writers for our teachers
respecting the nature of the soul?that man is a living being, intrin-
sically and properly one, and individual, not compound, or separable;
not, according to the common opinion, made up and framed of two
distinct and different natures, as of soul and body, but that the whole
man is soul, and the soul man?that is to say, a body or substance
individual, animated, sensitive, and rational; and that the ' breath of
life' was neither a part of the Divine essence nor the soul itself, but,
as it were, an inspiration of some divine virtue, fitted for the exercise
of life and reason, and infused into the organic body; for man him-
self, the whole man, when finally created, is called, in express terms, a
living soul. God having completed His whole work of creation, and
rested on the seventh day, it would seem, therefore, that the human
soul is not created daily by the immediate act of God, but propagated
from father to son in a natural order."
It appears probable that this doctrine of the unity of man
was known to some of the more ancient Greek philosophers, and
its consequences also recognised by them, viz., that not only
whatever affects the body must also necessarily affect the mind,
but that the body itself is, according to its several states, the
origin of corresponding ideas to the mind.* So also in later
times, Gaubius remarks :
" The mind itself and the body, which are things, according to the
opinion of most men, extremely different; when they coalesce to con-
stitute man, they associate so intimately, and with so close a contex-
ture, that they seem to penetrate each other; and if we may use the
chemist's phrase, we may affirm, that they melt one another down into
* " Lewes's Biographical History of Philosophy," vol. i. p. 89, &c.
580 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID
one common mass, so that whilst life remains in vigour, where the
mind is, there the body is, and wherever the body is, there the mind
is also ; nor can there scarce a particle of us be found in which a mix-
ture of each may not be discovered."*
" The mind perceives differently according to the various conditions
of the body to which it is joined, and she may be disturbed by the
body in her operations, and at some times be hindered from thinking
as she would, and at other times be compelled to tliinh according as
the body commands."
More towards our own times Dr. Feuchtersleben remarks:
" Matter and spirit, when they are united to form body and mind,
can no longer be considered otherwise than as unity. No one who is
acquainted with human nature will deny that those peculiar maladies
of the mind, error and vice, originate frequently in states of the
body."+
In still later times, Wilkinson, in his work on " The Human
Body and its Connexion with Man," has exhausted the applica-
tion of the unity of human nature and the intellectual and
moral coaction of the body with the mind.
But the Scriptures, as is well known, contain in the earliest
portion of them, an account of the introduction of moral evil
among mankind, and we think that account includes precisely
such a coaction of the physical, mental, and moral part of our
nature as we have already,- by our appeal to our consciousness
and experience, shown to attend the perpetration of moral evil
to the present hour. We think that, according to St. James,
" lust," or bodily desire, excited in the first instance by an evil
idea coming from without, and by its consequent disturbance of
the physical part of Eve's nature, and by that disturbance over-
whelming her moral powers, was the completing cause of the
primal transgression. " The serpent"'?whatever may be meant
by the term?(for we hold with Dr. Jortin, that this question is
immaterial, since all temptation succeeds upon the same prin-
ciples, and is to be repelled by the same means)?"the serpent"
first calls the attention of the woman to the nature of the prohi-
bition imposed upon herself and her husband, in the following
dangerously suggestive language : "Yea, hath God said ye shall
not eat of every tree in the garden ?" Now the mere act of
having the attention called to the nature of an object, causes, as
no doubt does every idea, a change, to some extent, in the brain,
the nervous system, and the entire physical constitution, so
that the status of the subject of such attention is never, phy-
* " A Philosophical Discourse on the Management and Cure of the Disorders of
the Mind," by H. D. Gaubius. Translated by J. Taprell, M.D., p. 2.
f " Medical Psychology." Translated for the Sydenham Society, p. 73.
PHYSICAL AND MORAL PHENOMENA. 581
sically, intellectually, or morally, 'precisely tlie same afterwards
as before. We all know, too, the importance that the mind of
a child, or of an innocent female, should never, even in a single
instance, have even its attention called to any idea that may
possibly become injurious. Yet up to this point the nature of
?Eve, though in an altered state, was not so far changed as neces-
sarily to induce the act of transgression. She was, however, in
some degree prepared for it, though not irretrievably. But her
dangerous attention to it, and the injurious effects upon her of
such attention, were still further increased by her reply, by her
" parleying," as it is called, with the temptation; when she
said unto the serpent, " We may eat of the fruit of the trees of
the garden, but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of
the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall
ye touch it, lest ye die," which latter words being not recorded
m the original prohibition, would seem like the result of excite-'
ment. However, the very recital of the prohibition would in-
crease her danger, for it would increase her attention to the for-
bidden object, and to the restraint on her liberty connected
with it, and her mind would thereby be still further prepared
to yield to the bold assertion of the tempter, "Ye shall not
surely die, for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof,
then shall your eyes be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, know-
ing good and evil." Her perilous attention to the entire subject
and perception of restricted liberty would now be still further
increased, but still the temptation does not succeed until her
physical appetite for food becomes also interested in it, for
according to the narrator, " and when the woman saw that the
tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant," (or, as in the
margin, a desire to the eyes,) " and a tree to be desired to make
one wise, she took of the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave
also unto her husband with her, and he did eat." Such was
the process, consisting partly of an evil idea, addressed from
without to the mind of Eve, and partly of the commotion in the
physical portion of her nature, excited by that idea and increased
still further by her own contemplation of it, whereb}7 her moral
perceptions were ultimately overwhelmed. We think we see
this process recognised by herself in her reply to the question,
" What is this that thou hast done ?" when she said, " The
serpent beguiled me," or "elated," or "puffed me up," as
Bishop Horne translates the word rendered " beguiled" in our
version; and St. Paul remarks that the serpent " beguiled"
(t^r/Trar^iTEv) Eve by his subtlety. Who can believe that during
the progress of the temptation to its conclusion, that the circu-
lation of her blood was as entirely calm as it was before the evil
idea was presented to her attention?that her cheek did not
NO. IV.?NEW SERIES. Q Q
582 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID
glow with unwonted ardour?that her quicker breath did not
fan her lips, disparted with wonder, curiosity, and ambition ?
Who can doubt whether the final act was not the result of that
irresistible impulse which, to this hour, is the immediate cause
of compliance with any temptation that the mind has contem-
plated, until an impetuous tumult of excited feelings has been
produced? We think that the nature of intoxication and its
effects on the mind and moral powers afford a strong resemblance
to the several phases of this as well as of every subsequent pre-
meditated transgression. Accordingly, Milton, with no less phi-
losophical than scriptural accuracy, represents that,
" In her cheek distemper flushing glow'd, [that she was]
Heighten'd as if with wine, jocund and boon."
Nor does he omit to mention "the fruit" as one "which to
behold might tempt alone/' or to make " the guileful tempter"
descant on the physical attractions of " the goodly tree."
" Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixed,
Ruddy and gold:
And from whose houghs a savoury odor blown;
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense
Than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats
Of ewe or goat dropping with milk at even,
TJnsuck'd of lamb or kid, that tend their play."
The poet thus particularizes the agency of physical causes,
" Meanwhile the hour of noon drew on, and waked
An eager appetite, raised by the smell
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
Solicited her longing eye."
He thus describes the completion of the act?
" What hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both body and mind ?
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the fruit, she pluck'd, she ate;
Greedily she engorged without restraint,
And knew not eating death."*
Although, however, temptation of every kind proceeds and,
prevails by means of raising a similar disturbance in the phy-
sical part of our nature, yet moral evil achieves an easier con-
quest over fallen humanity, in consequence of " the weakness of
the flesh," and " the law of sin inherent in its members. It
seems also probable, that every good or evil action, or even idea,
serves to substantiate a corresponding structure in some or other
part of the body that facilitates the repetition of such an action
* "Paradise Lost," book 9.
PHYSICAL AND MORAL PHENOMENA. 583
or idea, and that such a structure constitutes the principle of
good or evil habits. It is also certain, that when once the
moral principle is overwhelmed and the dominion of vicious
habits is established, and especially when in such a case, our
nature is subjected to physical or mental excitement, the pro-
gress of depravity may resemble that " of a bowl down a hill,
that increases its motion by going, and will not be stopped or
diverted," and that the enormities resulting from moral insanity
may be boundless.
In pursuing our Scriptural investigations, we find the murder
of Abel by his brother Cain ascribed by the writers of Scripture
to " hatredbut both hatred and murder are by St. Paul
enumerated among " the works of the flesh," as also that
" wrath" and those other evil passions indicated by Cain's .
" fallen countenance." Moses also intimates the connexion
between polygamy and depravity, and evidently dates from the
marriage of the sons of God (or his worshippers) with all the
daughters of men (or the irreligious), whom they chose, "the
great wickedness that was in the earth" before the Deluge. The
most learned commentators also point out physical and moral
as well as religious reasons for the prohibition of " eating blood"
imposed upon the family of Noah and his descendants ; and also
for many of the Mosaic regulations respecting food. In the
Book of Job, which comes next in our chronological order, that
patriarch evinces his acquaintance with the tendency of feasting
to produce impiety, and fears lest his " sons," during their several
days' festival, may have " cursed" or forsaken " God in their
hearts." Satan suggests that " if God would put forth his hand
and touch or afflict Job's bone and his flesh, Job would curse
Him to his face." Satan received permission to make the trial,
and Job, in the anguish of his bodily pain, " cursed his day," and
said many things, both then and afterwards, that fully illustrate '
the maddening effects of intense bodily suffering on the mind, &c.
Eliphaz argues: " What is man that is born of a woman that he
should be righteous ?" Bildad asks, " How can he be clean that
is born of aivoman?" wThere the physical origin of man seems
admitted as the invincible cause of his moral imperfection. Job
thus expostulates with the Almighty as a reason for forbearance:
" Hast thou eyes of flesli ? or seest thou as man seeth ?" In this
early book we find the important concession that moral evil,
is sometimes associated with a deficiency of mental strength, or of
natural understanding. " Wrath killeth the foolish man, and
envy or indignation slayeth the silly one." Here, too, we find
one of those numerous and diversified references to the heart
which abound in the Scriptures. J ob complains, " God maketh
my heart soft, and the Almighty troubleth me:" which seems
Q Q 2
584 MORBID PHYSICAL AND MORAL PHENOMENA.
like an allusion to the timidity connected with such a physical
state of the organ. It is frequently considered that such
references as this, and those others that will be subsequently
selected out of a multitude, are to be regarded as metaphorical
expressions. But we think that the remark of Sherlock applies
to them that " metaphors do not arise out of nothing." May we
not rather suppose that such expressions are derived from actual
observations made by priests, sacrificers, embalmers, and diviners?
Returning to the historical books of Scripture, and omitting
the instances quoted in the previous paper, we find the immoral
effects of the excess of wine remarkably illustrated in the case
of the two priests Nadab and Abihu, who together with all
the people, had experienced terror at the manifestation of the
Divine presence, yet shortly afterwards attempted to celebrate
the divine service in a state of inebriation, and were miracu-
lously punished with instant death. The idolatry of Solomon
himself is ascribed to his voluptuousness and old age. The
writer of the book Ecclesiasticus also remarks that " He bowed
his loins unto women, and by his body he was brought into sub-
jection." Repeated references occur to the debasing effects of
sensuality on the moral principles. It is particularly enjoined
on " kings and princes not to drink wine or strong drink, lest
they drink and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any
of the afflicted." " Whoredom and wine, and new wine, take
the heart." The slave of lewdness thus testifies to its tendency
to lead to still further depravities, " I was almost in all evil in
the midst of the congregation and assembly."
(To be continued.)
V
