Lunatic Asylums in Ireland
===========================

497
Owing to the judgment pronounced by the Court of Queen's Bench in Dublin
111 January last, ignoring the validity of the appointment of chaplains by the
Executive Government of Ireland in the Belfast District Asylum, and, as a
consequence, in all the other public asylums in that country, it has become
necessary for the Government to apply to the Legislature for power to make
legal what has been solemnly declared to be illegal, as is palpable from the
third clause of the Bill?" to Explain and Amend the Acts relating to Lunatic
Asylums in Ireland" (No. 2)?now before us, which is as follows, viz.:?
"All appointments of officers for such Asylums, and all salaries of such
officers fixed or granted, and all matters and things heretofore done by the
Lord Lieutenant, or by the Lord Lieutenant and Council, with respect to such
appointments, shall be and remain good, valid, and effectual, but subject to the
powers and provisions hereinafter contained."
It remains to be seen if Parliament, before which the Bill is at present,
will give its sanction to this ex jwst facto species of legislation, which of
all others is to be looked upon with a very jealous eye, perverted as it might
be to the most unconstitutional of purposes. The first clause of the Bill states
tliat, "in citing this Act, it shall be sufficient to use the expression, 'the
Lunatic Asylums (Ireland) Act, 1S5G.' " The second clause has reference to
the interpretation of terms, viz :?" Asylums" shall mean "Asylums for the
Lunatic poor." " Officer" shall mean and include " Managers, Chaplains,
Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries, Matrons, Attendants, and Servants." This,
we think, is a pretty enlarged, if not an offensive and levelling interpretation
of the term "Officer." In the army, what would be thought of classing officers
and privates in one category? In civil life and civil employment a little less
insulting interpretation of officer and servant might have been adopted; and in no
public institutions is it of more consequence to be rather 011 the particular than
the loose side of using lit and proper terms, and observing due punctilio, than
in establishments set apart for the treatment of the insane, where so much
depends upon and is to be accomplished by the prestige of position, and the
moral weight and influence such gives to those in their chief chargc. And
here we may state, that we think this is the fitting place again to express our
decided opinion, that the time has now fully arrived when an^ effort should be
made to give up the barbarous and unscientific nomenclature in common use as
regards institutions for the Insane and their inmates, and in their stead to
adopt one more in harmony with the advancing intelligence of the age, and of
a less offensive nature. The opportunity now presented by this Bill should
not be lost by the Inspectors in Ireland, and others in authority, of disusing
such terms as Lunatic, Manager, Matron, &c., all of which are highly objec-
tionable, the first being absolutely wrong as applied to insanity, being under
and affected by lunar influence and changes ; the second leading to the notion
that the medical man in charge?as, we presume, manager has reference to?
has to break-in and restrain a number of animals instead of treating human
beings under disease; and the third savouring strongly of the prison and the
workhouse. Insane person, Hospital or Asylum for the Insane, Resident
Physician or Medical Superintendent, and Superintendent of 1 em ales or
Housekeeper, respectively, should be substituted for the above most objection-
able terms. We therefore call the particular attention of the inspectois,
Drs. TV hite and Nugent, to these points, in the full expectation that they will
use their official influence in a matter of some importance, as ^ve conceive this
to be; for after all, there is something in a name, Shakspeare s dictum not-
withstanding to the contrary that, "a rose by any other name v ould smell as
sweet." Besides, we do not know if it have struck others as it has ourselves,
that, if the term " manager" remain, any individual, any layman?educated or
uneducated?a half-pay officer, or other totally unsuited person, might be
498 LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN IRELAND.
appointed to an officc no doubt intended, by a mental reservation, to be filled
by a member of the medical profession, as it should, and as is and must be tlie
case in this country, as well as on the continent and in America. Why, then,
should so all-important a post of duty be left thus open to the caprice ot any
public functionary, 110 matter how high his office?even that of the Lord Lieu-
tenant of Ireland, to be professionally filled up, who, by clause eight in the Bill,
is to have the patronage of appointing " the Manager, Matron, and Visiting
Physician ?" The fourth clause stands thus?viz.,
" The Lord Lieutenant and Council shall, from time to time, in the case of
every such Asylum established, or to be hereafter established, fix and determine
the number and description of officers for every such Asylum."
According to the above clause, the Lord Lieutenant and Council might, if
they pleased, appoint a posture master, a professor of gymnastics, a dancing
master?and far more objectionable officials might be attached to asylums, if
the course we have named could be considered exceptionable?in fact, any
number of persons they pleased?so unlimited is the scope of this curiously
framed clause; but the eighth one is, we presume, a set-off to it, being quite
antagonistic in its powers?viz.,
" All officers of every such Asylum, other than the Manager, Matron, and
Visiting Physician, shall be, from time to time, appointed by the Governors,
and, whether now holding ofiicc or hereafter to be appointed, shall be removable
at the pleasure of the Governors."
So that here we have, in one plan, the executive empowered to make appoint-
ments to an unlimited extent, and, in another, the power vested in the local
boards of governors, of "removing all officers at their pleasure other than the
Manager, Matron, and Visiting Physician " ! The farce of blundering legisla-
tion could no farther go than this. Por any public functionary or functionaries
to be given so arbitrary a power as to remove an officer " at pleasure" is
seriously to be deprecated, as it might be brought to bear in a manner nothing
short of oppression, and yet without any remedy to the aggrieved party. No
one could be considered in the light of a public servant who might at any time
get his dismiss at the pleasure merely of a superior authority. Tinder such
circumstances he is the servant of an irresponsible party pro tan to, and will be
tempted accordingly to bccomc a tool or worse in the hands of those who can
place the screw upon him at any moment. This ought not so to be.
The remaining clauses of this Bill are as annexed?viz.,
The Governors of such Asylum shall, from time to time, subject, to the approba-
tion of the Lord Lieutenant in Council, lix the salaries to be paid to such offi-
cers respectively; but, if the Governors shall neglect so to do, or if the Lord
Lieutenant in Council shall disapprove of the salary proposed for ahy officer, it
shall be lawful for the Lord Lieutenant in Council to fix and determine the same.
It shall be lawful for the Governors, with the approval of the Lord Lieutenant
in Council, from time to time, to alter the salaries to be paid to such officers
respectively.
The Manager, Matron, and Visiting Physician of every such Asylum shall
be, from time to time, appointed by the Lord Lieutenant, and, whether now
holding office or hereafter to be appointed, shall be removable at the pleasure
of the Lord Lieutenant.
It shall be lawful for the Governors, on the recommendation of the Inspectors
of Lunatics, or of one of them, to direct that any officer who is incapable, from
age, infirmity of mind or body, or otherwise, to discharge the duties of his office,
shall be superannuated, and shall receive such yearly superannuation pension
as, upon consideration of all the circumstances ot each case, shall appear to be
just, not exceeding such proportion of his salary and allowances as hereinafter
mentioned (that is to say, for above iiltecn and less than twenty years' service, a
pension not exceeding two-thirds of his salary and allowances, and, for above
? twenty years' service, a pension not exceeding his salary and allowances).
LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN IRELAND. 499
The several salaries and superannuation pensions, now or hereafter to
become payable, shall respectively be advanced, paid, presented for, and raised
m like manner as any other moneys advanced or raised for supporting
and maintaining such Asvlums respectively, under the said recited Acts,
or any of them.
Whereas pauper lunatics only can now, by law, be admitted into any such
District Lunatic Asylums, and there are others of the industrious classcs
suffering from insanity who may be benefited by treatment in Lunatic Asylums,
but whose relatives are unable to meet the expense of Private Asylums, and
are not willing to accept gratuitous relief, and it is expedient that some
provision should be made for such classes : Be it, therefore, enacted, that
it shall be lawful for the Governors of any district Lunatic Asylum (subject to
any orders to be made by the Lord Lieutenant in Council) to receive as
inmates any persons not coming under the description of pauper lunatics (but
to be treated in all respects as if pauper lunatics, clothing only excepted),
on such terms as to payment or otherwise as the Governors shall deem proper,
and the moneys so received as payment for such persons shall be applied to the
support and maintenance of such Asylums.
It shall be lawful for the Lord Lieutenant in Council, from time to time; to
make any general or special orders regulating the admission of such lunatics
not coming under the description of paupers, or prohibiting the admission of
such persons.
This Act and the said recited Acts shall be construed together as if one Act.
The superannuation clause is a redeeming one in this Bill, as the absence to
the present time of any such provision for so meritorious a class of officers,
has been long and justly considered a great grievance. The only suggestion
we would venture to make on it, is, that those officers who had served " above
twenty years " in the unceasingly onerous and responsible duties of an Asylum,
should certainly be given the option of retiring 011 their well-earned pension,
if they pleased, without requiring the preliminary "recommendation of
the Inspectors to the Board of Governors" for such, on the plea of " incapability
from age, infirmity of mind or body, or otherwise, to discharge the duties of
his office!" A little more liberality in this respect, would not have
deteriorated from the purposes of the measure now under consideration.
The clause making provision for the reception of a class of patients
not hitherto contemplated in the District Asylums of Ireland, appears open to
many grave objections. Tar be it from us to say a word against the relief of
those, the subjects of mental derangement, who are neither paupers nor
sufficiently in the enjoyment of the means of being placed in a private Asylum.
We consider that the case of such unfortunately circumstanced persons
is deserving of the utmost amount of sympathy. But to place this class, as is
intended, in common with the ordinary inmates of a pauper Asylum, would, in
our judgment, be nothing short of a "cruel kindness." If 110 other plan can
bn devised, an entirely separate and distinct portion of the District Asylums
should be set apart for their care and treatment. Besides, it would lead
to endless disturbance and jealousies, to mix up the pay and pauper inmates
together. The former, and their friends, would still be soliciting and
expecting additional indulgences and attendance?the latter, seeing, or sus-
pecting even, anything of this kind, would not be slow in resenting it,
and thus an under-current of dissatisfaction and envious feeling would be con-
stantly at work, which would soon destroy that harmony of action so essential
in any public establishment, especially those for the insane. The step, no doubt,
is a benevolent one ; but we are quite confident a wrong method has been taken
to carry it into effect. No element of discord, however remote, should be
introduced into the details of our public Asylums. Ihe rights of the pauper
insane shoidd not, then, be trifled with, or experimented upon by the Legislature.
At present, however, we can say nothing more 011 this important.subject.
