William Palmer
==============

Akt. VII.-
On Tuesday, the 13th November last, a mare, called Polestar,
won the Shrewsbury handicap stakes. Her owner was Mr. John
Parsons Cook. He was so elated at the result of the race, as to
be deprived, for a few minutes, of speech. He was a young man,
evidently of weak intellect. He had inherited a fortune of twelve
or thirteen thousand pounds. This he had dissipated on the turf.
His success at Shrewsbury was of great consequence to him, and
he looked to the realization of his bets and stakes as a means of
retrieving his shattered fortunes. Alas, for human calculations !
In one short week?viz., on the Tuesday following?this unhappy
young man died in severest agonies, the victim of the most
remorseless and treacherous murder ever recorded in the annals
of crime ! He fell by the hand of a friend and boon companion.
Six months after, on the 27th of May, 1856, providentially for
the ends of justice and the interests of society, the perpetrator of
this foul murder was convicted and sentenced to execution; and,
on the 14th of last month, he, in the presence of 50,000 persons,
suffered an ignominious death upon the scaffold. We might well
leave him in the hands of a merciful Saviour, satisfied that the
majesty of justice has been vindicated on earth, except for some
important psychological and medical considerations to which we
consider it our duty, as public journalists, to direct particular
attention.
The murder of Cook was only the climax to a series of
WILLIAM PALMER. 4l9
criminal acts. It is indisputable, that Palmer's pecuniary em-
barrassments were extreme; that he had effected a policy on his
brother Walter's life, the payment of which was refused by the
insurance office; that he had not only forged his mother's name,
but branded his wife in her early grave (and how early, he only
knows) with the guilt of the forgery; that he robbed Cook of
1800L, and fraudulently laid claim to 4000L against Cook's
estate ;?these alone form an accumulation of direct and circum-
stantial evidence of the utmost weight against him, apart from
the particular crime for which he was arraigned. To those who
are accustomed to weigh the value of evidence, there could not
remain the shadow of a doubt respecting his guilt; everything
spoke against him, nothing told in his favour; and, in fact, the
strongest testimony against his innocence was elicited in the
cross-examination of the witnesses for his defence.*
* " It is now six months since Jolm Parsons Cook expired in agonies at the inn at
Rugeley, and from that time to this the public interest has suffered no abatement.
The terrible details of this case and of the two others in which suspicion was
raised against the prisoner have been discussed in every household of the three
kingdoms. Popular feeling was so excited in the neighbourhood of the deed that
the prisoner's advisers asked, and the Crown acquiesced in, a change in the place
of trial. A new Act of Parliament was passed to enable the Queen's Bench to
send the matter before a metropolitan court. The postponement of the trial gave
the prisoner every facility in preparing a plausible defence, even to the selection of
scientific men to detail the events of their practice and to prosecute special experi-
ments. The Crown, of its own free will, furnished the defence with all the evidence
which it was intended to bring forward. Finally, six months after the commission
of the crime, the Chief Justice of England and two other Judges celebrated for their
experience and acuteness took their seats on the bench. A jury, not taken from
among the farmers of a small country district, but selected by chance from the
trading class of a population numbering 3,000,000 of souls, removed as far as pos-
sible every suspicion of unfairness. Then came a trial of extraordinary length and
labour. The opening speech of the Attorney-General lasted more than four hours;
his reply was nearly as long. The prisoner's counsel defended him in a speech of
eight hours. The case for the prosecution lasted six days ; that for the defence
more than three. The summing-up of the Chief Justice commenced at the sitting
of the Court on Monday, and was not concluded until yesterday afternoon. The
men of highest standing in the medical profession gave their evidence for the Crown
or for the prisoner. Finally, the jury, after listening with unwearied patience to
the arguments and testimony of nearly twelve days, retired to consider their verdict.
On their return into court the foreman pronounced the terrible word which consigns
William Palmer to a murderer's doom.
" In the justice of the verdict every one who has followed these memorable pro-
ceedings must fully concur. Never was a crime more cruel, treacherous, and cold-
blooded ; never was it brought home by proof more cogent and irresistible. True,
the evidence was circumstantial, but in some respects circumstantial evidence is
the best. Where the proof of crime is assumed from the testimony of two or three
who declare to its actual commission, there is room to doubt whether animosity, or
a wish in the witnesses to screen themselves, may not have led to perjury for the
destruction of an innocent man. But where a long series of facts, deposed to by
numbers of persons unacquainted or unconnected with each other, all points to one
conclusion, then there can be little doubt as to the decision. Never did testimony
more various and more unshaken unite to bring home guilt than in the case of
Palmer. Cook is well and in high spirits, and sudd&nly is affected by sickness for
which no one can account. A few days afterwards he arrives in Eugeley with the
420 WILLIAM PALMER.
"We have thus briefly recorded the history of the criminal, for
the purpose of noticing the moral signs of depravity which form
so striking a part of his character. He was a member of the
medical profession?one of ourselves. He studied at St. Bartho-
lomew's Hospital, under some of the most distinguished teachers
of medicine, surgery, anatomy, physiology, chemistry of the day;
so that, with but moderate talents and not more than ordinary
attention, he could scarcely fail to be well educated in the rudi-
ments of his profession. This was less than ten years ago, if his
age be correctly stated at thirty-one. It does not appear that
prisoner, and there the symptoms are repeated. He is not bilious, nor suffering
from any complaint which should produce vomiting, and yet he is sick after every-
thing that the prisoner administers. A servant in the place tastes some broth pre-
pared at the prisoner's house, and suffers in the same manner for hours afterwards.
"When the unhappy man dies, antimony is found in the blood,?a fact which science
pronounces conclusive of its having been administered within forty-eight hours
before death. Yet no medicine containing antimony had been openly prescribed,
nor is it pretended that the deceased was in the habit of taking any such drug.
In fact, the defence totally evaded the question of the antimony altogether. The
counsel brought witness on witness to give their speculations on tetanus, epilepsy,
and convulsions, but no answer was made to the evidence which proved that Cook
had vomited for day3 without a cause, and that after his death a poison which kills
by producing vomiting had been found in his body in a state which showed it had
been recently swallowed. Can we, therefore, come to any conclusion but that the
prisoner, a medical man, having this ding in his possession, and knowing its
effects, had used it for the purpose of producing in Cook symptoms which might
be confounded with those of ordinary disease ? For it is worthy of notice that it
was not the interest of Palmer that his friend should die until the stakes and bets
he had won were due, but that he should be ill and unable to receive them person-
ally. Hence we find antimony used until Palmer has gained possession of large
sums on Cook's account, and then, within a few hours, as soon as it became his
interest that Cook should die, the first dose of strychnine is administered. Palmer's
affairs, in fact, grew more desperate every day. The usurer who had him in his
power was incessant in his demands for money. Palmer had forged his mother's
name, the bills were due, and writs were out against both mother and son. Twenty-
four hours might discover all; for, unless 450/. were paid immediately to Pratt,
proceedings would be taken against Mrs. Palmer. Cook had won money at
Shrewsbury races, and had it about him ; bets were due to him in London. That
money disappears, no one knows how, and as for the bets, Palmer receives them
through an agent, and applies them to his own use, the day before Cook dies.
Here, then, is a motive for haste. If Cook discovers that he has been robbed, if
the creditors discover that Mrs. Palmer's name has been forged, Palmer may within
a week stand in a felon's dock. He knows the use of strychnine. He knows that
it kills 'by tetanic fixing of the respiratory muscles.' Perhaps he does not know
that it causes horrible convulsions of the whole body, but thinks that the sufferer
dies with merely internal spasms. If we believe the witness Newton, he buys
strychnine on the Monday night, and on that night he administers pills to Cook,
which are followed by tetanus. There are doubts thrown on the evidence of
Newton, because he concealed, or at least did not volunteer it, until the eve of
the trial. But, even supposing this young man to be capable, for no earthly
reason, of swearing away the life^ of one who had never done him wrong, the case
does not end here. Another witness, whose testimony is not disputed, swears
positively to the purchase of six grains of strychnine at another shop, that of
Mr. Hawkins, on the succeeding day, but a few hours before Cook's death. If
ever anything was proved in a court of justice, it is the purchase of this deadly
drug by William Palmer. The defence, loosely enough, shifted its ground as
regards this question. First, it was that no poison had been purchased, and that
WILLIAM PALMER. 421
he was more exposed to corruption during his studies than the
rest of his fellow-pupils, many of whom have, since then, shown
themselves to be well-informed and respectable practitioners.
Mr. Serjeant Shee, in his eloquent speech for the defence,
quoted a letter of Palmer's to the lady who subsequently became
his wife, penned by himself while he was yet a pupil, and
evincing his affection for her. Some of the daily press affect to
see in this letter nothing but deceit: for our parts, we own we
believe every word of it, and think that he felt sincerely what he
there expressed. It is one of those strokes of nature without
which the likeness of the criminal would have been too darkly
Newton was perjured; then it was that the strychnine might have been wanted to
kill dogs which annoyed Palmer's horses in a paddock. N either of these assertions
are supported by a jot of evidence. The testimony of Newton was not shaken ;
that of Roberts was not even questioned. As for the supposed purpose of the
strychnine, no evidence followed the suggestion of the prisoner's counsel. The
death of the deceased occurred on the evening which succeeded the last purchase.
He died just as strychnine is proved to kill. The evidence of the medical witnesses
for the Crown is decisive as to the improbability of his dying by any known form
of disease. Mr. Curling, Dr. Todd, Sir Benjamin Brodie?all speak positively as
to this point. Thus three main points of the case are made out fully,?the death
of the deceased by strychnine, the purchase of the poison by the prisoner within
a few hours of the death, and the prisoner's pressing motive for the destruction of
his companion.
" Only on one point can there be the slightest doubt. The body is unskilfully
dissected, and the stomach, with some of the other parts, is sent to L)rs. Taylor and
Rees. They find no strychnine. Of course, on this the whole defence rests. A
number of medical men are brought to declare that if strychnine had been taken it
must, in their opinion, be found. But one fact is worth any number of opinions.
Drs. Taylor and Rees perform experiments with rabbits, giving them not large
doses, like the defence doctors, but just enough to kill. In two cases strychnine is
found ; in two it is not. Therefore these two gentlemen are justified in declaring
that, according to the tests made use of by them in the case of Cook and in the case
of the animals^ the poison is sometimes found and sometimes not. We cannot but
think that the witnesses for the defence endeavoured to prove too much. Scientific
dogmatism could go no further thau when two gentlemen alleged that Cook could
not have taken strychnine because he allowed himself to be touched,?an act which
always threw a rabbit into a spasm. Equally unavailing for the prisoner were the
suggestions as to the cause of death; it was apoplexy, epilepsy, idiopathic tetanus,
traumatic tetanus, epilepsy with tetanic complications, and so on. There were as
many opinions as men ; and though certainly a prisoner is not bound to account for
the cause of death, yet a jury, observing the differences between these witnesses,
who made such a display of science, might naturally be led to think that their
opinions were not sufficiently authoritative to destroy the testimony of facts and
the deductions of common sense. If we add to this that in one case a medical
?witness confessed to having expressed a belief in Palmer's guilt, and an opinion of
the incompetency of Dr. Taylor to detect it, we can have little wonder that the jury
should have made so little of the large array of testimony for the defence.
All these points were fully noticed by the Chief Justice in his long and conscien-
tious summing up, as well as those minor incidents which strengthen into certainty
the belief of the prisoner's guilt. The anxiety about the jar, the presents to the
coroner, the attempted bribing of the postmaster and the postboy, the curiosity
about Dr. Taylor's analysis, leading the prisoner to procure the tampering with his
letter, and inconsistent with the knowledge that no strychnine had been administered,
all forced home the conclusion of the prisoner's guilt."?The Times, Wednesday,
May 28, 1856.
422 WILLIAM PALMER.
coloured and deformed ; and if, in spite of this early avowal, he
afterwards ended by maligning, if nothing worse than maligning,
the first object of his affections, it is only one proof more of the
desperate means that a course of vice forces us to at last?
Nemo repente turpissimus fuit*
He was essentially selfish?it is the main feature of his cha-
racter. Everything turned upon SELF. The murder of Cook,
the alleged murder of Walter Palmer, his brother, his design
upon Bates, his treaty with Pratt for the possession of the
winning horse, Polestar,?all turned upon self. Everything was
made subservient to this end ; he was ready to sacrifice the
world to it; he did, in fact, sacrifice his own mother to his un-
worthy purposes; and, in endeavouring to suborn the postboy,
he was, at the same time, ready to sacrifice Mr. Stevens's safety,
by the upsetting of the fly, in order to break the jar which, in
all probability, contained the damning proof of his own culpa-
bility, t
* '' The mass of the evidence against him may be broadly ranged under two prin-
cipal heads. 1. The moral. 2. The scientific. As regards the moral, or circum-
stantial branch of the evidence, the most zealous opponents of the propriety of the ?
conviction would probably admit that, taken by itself, it enormously preponderated
against the prisoner. \Ve need not again travel over ground with which the
general public are so familiar. Suffice it to say, that the following are a few of the
points which the prisoner's defence left wholly untouched :?No answer was given
to the charge that Palmer had, within a few days before Cook's death, applied nearly
2000/. of Cook's Avinnings to satisfy the claims of his own money-lenders; no
account was given of the disposal of the strychnine which Palmer was proved to
have purchased on the very eve of Cook's death; no explanation was given of
Palmer's strange eagerness to get the body put into a coffin, of his demeanour at
the post-mortem examination, of his tampering with the jars containing the matter
about to be sent up to Dr. Taylor for analysis, of his attempt to bribe the postboy,
of his inquiries as to the possibility of discovering strychnia in the body, of his
exultation on receiving a negative answer, of his eagerness to ascertain the result
of Dr. Taylor's report, and his subsequent endeavours to pervert and misdirect the
mind of the coroner. But on these and on other similar points it is really unneces-
sary to dwell. As far as the circumstantial evidence is concerned, all those who
by patient attention to the case have qualified themselves to form a judgment, must
admit that, in its cumulative effect, it told with overwhelming weight against any
rational theory of the prisoner's innocence."?The Express, June 7, 1856.
?f* ' The very moment when he was enjoying the good-will of his neighbours, living
apparently an easy, careless life of enjoyment, he was inwardly distracted by all
the passions of the gamester. Under the jovial expression of these rubicund cheeks,
who could have imagined the secret history which was being transacted ? For this
jolly fellow was racing, betting, winning?more often losing?and encumbered with
debt. To relieve himself fiom his obligations he was contracting more debt?
selling himself body and soul to money-lenders?using the hand of his own wife (he
himself confessed it) to forge the name of his own mother on bills of acceptance for
thousands of pounds, knowing at the very time that nothing but a lucky cast could
make him to discharge those obligations, which, nevertheless, if not discharged,
must prove passports to prison. Nor was this all. Other means were needed to
satisfy his wants: and Palmer was not the man to hesitate. He had a wife and a
brother. Money must be had. He insured their lives. His brother was fond of
liquor. He hired a wretch to lead him on to fatal excess, and death soon overtook
WILLIAM PALMER. 423
Let us analyse the character still more closely. There were
some vices from which he was singularly free. He was not
proud, but, on the contrary, he stood greatly in need of so superb
a passion as that of pride, which might have preserved him from
his other more desperate and debased propensities,?it would
have imparted to him a higher bearing, and the appearance, at
least, of nobler behaviour; only, he was not proud. Nor does he
seem to have been of an angry and choleric temperament, but
just the reverse?always cool and collected, wary and sagacious.
Neither was he gluttonous nor drunken; and even his more
sensual pleasures he managed with so much address, that they
did not disgrace his reputation so much as they ought to have
done. He could join his friends at the table, but he only lent
himself to it, without suffering it to take the mastery over him,
?r to deprive him of his senses and vigilance. He was too
cautious to be caught in his own trap. And, lastly, he was not
slothful, but most diligent in the object of his research; for he
left nothing unattended to, albeit his engagements ultimately
outstripped him in the race.
" Consider the man. In tlie eyes of his fellow-townsmen this
country surgeon had acquired a character for respectability. To most
people he seemed an agreeable person?to many even gentlemanlike.
He lived in his native town of llugeley ; he was admitted to its leading
official society. He had soothed the pangs of many a youthful
mother, and watched the sick-bed of many a first-born infant.
Latterly, indeed, he had withdrawn from the practice of his profes-
sion, having betaken himself to Tattersall's and the turf.
"In the character of William Palmer there is, indeed, a sort of
dramatic monstrosity. He was no common-place villain. The bludgeon
and the horse-pistol?the knife and the centre-bit?were ^ not his-
weapons. LikeCsesar or Napoleon, his pawns were men. His instru-
ments were mortal. He turned everything to his own use?his per-
sonal appearance?his professional knowledge?his mother?his
brother?his school companions?his friends?the friends of his friends
?postmasters ? money-lenders ? coroners?profligate attorneys."?
The Leader.
His sense of justice, or probity, was very small. He squan-
him. His wife was his slave?to be coined into cash. As a medical man he might
himself minister to her ailments. She must die. Her husband?so will the legend
for ever run?will himself conduct her to the gates of death. He seats himself by
her bedside with his own hand he tenderly administers the poisonous drug
writes down his orief in his private diary?watches the vital power of the poor
creature slowly evaporate under his fatal skill?consoles his wounded spirit for her
fortunate loss at the very steps of the altar-and then gathers in the golden harvest
of deliberate crime. This surely is not the man who would reveal himself to the
thousand eyes of a crowded court of justice. He had played the stokes of life and
death too often and too successfully before he stood within that dock. In the last
momentous scene?the crisis of his life?no weak emotion was to disturb the serene
apathy of this consummate artist."?The Leader, June t, 1856.
NO. III.?NEW SERIES. F F
42-4 WILLIAM PALMER.
dered liis own means, unscrupulously made use of those of
others, and disregarded truth, life, honour, and money alike. He
carefully removed every obstacle that stood in his way, and
made use of every means in his power to facilitate his plans.
He killed Cook, forged his mother's signature, rifled his asso-
ciate's purse the moment the breath was out of his body. He
was a liar of the first magnitude. His last instructions to Pratt,
the solicitor, were most of them false ; his answers to Mr. Stevens
respecting the betting-book were prevarications too transparent
not to be seen through ; his hints as to what they were likely to
find in the "post-mortem examination of Cook's body ; his telling
Mr. Jones that Cook was suffering from a bilious attack; and
his persuading Dr. Bamford to fill up the certificate of death
with the word " apoplexy," were all of them deliberate lies.
The theme of his life was lying and money-getting throughout.
Medicine offered no opportunity of making a fortune in anv way
equal to that of betting, racing, and life-insuring. He might,
in the course of a long career, have realized a few thousands by
means of the practice of medicine; but this was much too slow
a game for one whose love of money could only be gratified with
thousands and tens of thousands, though lost as soon as gained,
and scarcely enjoyed even when won.
"He possessed," says the Daily News, "every requisite which
would, a 'priori, be deemed necessary to success in the career to which
he devoted himself; and yet this cold-blooded schemer, who never
allowed any considerations of wrong, or morality, or fear, to stand for
a moment between his desire and its object,?this calculator who had
reduced life to a game of chance,?money his only object, and crime
his familiar means,?was singularly unfortunate as a speculator on the
turf. The insurance of his wife's life?say, rather, the blood-money
received for his wife's murder?paid off with difficulty the racing debts
of 1854'. In 1855 those debts had again reached the enormous aggre-
gate of from 10,0002. to 20,000Z. And yet the die with which this
man played was loaded,?the hand that threw it never trembled with
compunction. He owned horses, he was intimate with trainers, he
was deeply versed in all the secrets of the turf; and yet this was the
result ruin, forgery, murder, and, finally, the scaffold. We disclaim
the puerile exaggeration which would represent even the professional
turfman as necessarily a candidate for ruin, or an adept at crime.
Neither would we be so^ unjust as to hold up to reprobation the men
in high station who actively engage in such sports. A great distinction
should be drawn between those who engage in the turf as a mere
gaming speculation, and he who is influenced by right and honourable
motives?viz., the improvement in the breed of horses. We must,
however, admit that a life whose business is reckless and illegitimate
speculation, whether on the racing-course or at the gaming-table, or
in the Stock Exchange, is a life of all others most demoralizing in its
tendencies, and is obviously unfavourable to the healthful development
WILLIAM PALMER. 425
and training of the mental and moral faculties. It is a career in
which occasional success establishes nothing beyond the copy-book
truism, ' that there is no rule without its exception,'?a career in
which, for one prize, there are a thousand blanks,?a career in which
the most brilliant success is less enviable than success in any other
field of legitimate enterprise,?a career in which failure has recently
led to such crimes as those by which Sadleir has lately ruined a pro-
vince, or that more execrable guilt which, in Palmer's case, has
appalled a world."
Another chief quality was his self-possession.
"His self-command was perfect. His readiness of resource mar-
vellous. Hig presence of mind never forsook him. In powers of far-
reaching combination he has rarely been surpassed. In the still more
singular gift of making absolute tools of those whom lie wished to use,
the annals of greatness or villany might be searched in vain to find
his peer. In this respect Jonathan Wild the Great was nothing to
him. The fancies of Fielding's fiction are distanced by the facts'
?f Palmer's history. Cheshire, the postmaster, was his thrall, Cook
his cully, old Dr. Bamford his dupe; he won over Ward, the coroner,
by his presents ;?nay, even in the supreme crisis of his fate, he
contrived, apparently, to produce a belief in certain quarters that the
righteous sentence just passed upon him was rather the result of popular
prejudice than of even-handed justice."*
* "The evidence of one witness on tlie trial of William Palmer is of especial
interest to the community, and, as any comment upon it can have no effect upon
the case, we call attention to it at once. The pecuniary troubles of the prisoner
for many months previous to the death of his companion, Cook, are detailed at great
length by Mr. Thomas Pratt, solicitor, of Queen-street, Mayfair. The history is
instructive for those who may at any time feel inclined to begin the seductive
practice of borrowing money on their own personal security. It certainly requires
no great arithmetical genius to calculate what 1000L at GO per cent., payable
monthly, will amount to in a given term of years, nor is there much forethought
necessary to show a man that, with the most unceasing and fortunate exertions,, he
is hardly likely to extricate himself from debt which increases with such terrible
rapidity. The evidence of Mr. Pratt is an old tale, and often told, the fust small
loan duly repaid, then a larger sum, then the borrower's acceptances, then those
presumed to be his mother's bills renewed, interest payable monthly, threatening
letters, entreaties for delay, falsehood, forgery, appropriation of another man's
money, and then the final crash. It is worthy of attention in all its naked
simplicity.
" About two years and a half since the acquaintance between Palmer and Mr.
Pratt began. Palmer borrowed 1000/., which he repaid. More seems to have
been borrowed during the ensuing year from Pratt or other persons, for when Anne
Palmer, the prisoner's wife, died, and Mr. Pratt received 8000/. from the offices
on account of the policies on her life, G500/. was at once applied in payment of
bdls due. In April, 1855, Mr. Pratt was again applied to for a loan of 2000/. on
a bill purporting to be accepted by Mrs. Sarah Palmer, and by November last
there were eight bills held by Mr Pratt or his clients, the total amount being
12,500/. ' The interest,' says the witness, ' was paid monthly. With two excep-
tions, these bills were discounted at the rate of CO per cent. Thus the interest to
he paid by Palmer for money borrowed within seven months was probably upwards
?f 6000/. a-year, the income of a leading barrister or physician. If the prisoner
had become possessed of an annuity equal to the salary ol a judge or a minister of
state, it must have been swept away yearly during his whole life in merely paying
F F 2
426 WILLIAM PALMER.
The seeming nonchalance and indifference with which he
listened to the sentence of the judge and quitted the dock, is
the interest of this temporary ' accommodation.' No wonder there are soon urgent
letters on the part of Mr. Pratt, and evasive answers from his client. Walter
Palmer is dead, but, even if the Prince of Wales Insurance-Office will pay the
13,000?., it cannot be received directly; so Mr. Pratt writes, ' Do pray think about
your three bills so shortly becoming due. . If I do not get a positive appointment
from the office to pay, which I do not expect, you must be prepared to meet them,
as agreed. You told me your mother was coming up this month, and would settle
them.' Again, on the 2nd of October, ' Bear in mind that you must be prepared
to cover your mother's acceptances due at the end of the month.' On the 18th, ' I
send copies of two letters I have received. As regards the first, it shows how im-
portant it is that you or your mother should prepare for the payment of the 4000?.
due in a few days.' What is the position, then, of Palmer? He has 4000?. to
pay, and can only pay 250?., and promise 250?. more. 'For goodness sake, do
not think of writs I will get you the money, even if I pay 1000?. for it.'
The two sums of 250?. seem to have mollified Mr. Pratt for a few days. On the
31st of October he writes?'The 250?. in registered letter duly received to-day.
With it I have been enabled to obtain consent to the following.' And then he tells
Palmer that, with the exception of issuing writs against his mother, no proceeding
as to service shall be made until the morning of Saturday, the 10th, ' when you are
to send up the 1000?. or 1500?. You will be debited with a month's interest of
the whole 400?. out of the money sent up.' On the 11th of November Palmer
was not ready with the 1000?., but he brought 300?., making in all 800?.
paid;?'200?. teas deducted for interest, leaving 600?.' Thus, out of the money
which Palmer had scraped together in the course of the past month, a fourth?
200?.?went as the month's interest of the 4000?. Of course Mr. Pratt was still
pressing for his balance of 3400?. On the 17th Palmer is able to send a check for
200?.; on the 19th he pays in 50?., and promises 450?., which accordingly was
liquidated out of Cook's money. But even then the call was for more. On the
very day of Cook's death Palmer writes, 'I will send you the 75?. to-morrow.'
This 75?., it afterwards appears, was for the renewal of a bill for 1500?. for one
month, being at the same reasonable rate of 60 per cent. On the 24th of November
Palmer paid as small a sum- as 251. on account of a 2000?. bill due a month
before.
" Such are the transactions at this present day between borrower and lender. A
man involves himself in debt, of which the interest every eighteen months equals
the principal, and another is found to lend him the money, with, we must presume,
a knowledge that he has no settled occupation, and that his resources are only
derived from the betting-ring, or contingent on what he may inherit from his
relatives. These are not transactions between a youth at the University and a
wine-merchant acquainted with his prospects. They seem the ordinary dealings
between two grown-up men, each of whom has had considerable experience of the
world, and especially of that shrewd class with which Cook and Palmer associated.
One man forges his mother's name, and pays 60 percent, to have the bills renewed;
the other takes his 60 per cent., which Mrs. Palmer is supposed to allow her son
to pay for the accommodation. It cannot be doubted that, although commercial
pursuits are highly honourable, such a trade as that of Mr. Pratt and his ' clients,'
of whom he ' obtains consent' when a bill is to be renewed, is hardly calculated to
improve the public morality. The wonder to a reflecting man is, how any one
should give way to such madness as to involve himself in meshes from which he
must in reason be convinced there is no escape. The sudden pressure of some
' debt of honour' leads, probably, to the first application, and once fairly entangled,
there is no escape. One who trusts so much to fortune as the betting man, no
doubt thinks that the next 'event' will bring deliverance from all his troubles, and
first in confidence, and at last in desperation, he continues his terrible course. It
may be beyond the power of law to prevent such dealings, but we may certainly
say that the man who supplies money to one thus rushing to ruin deserves any loss
he may sustain, and that anything which may lessen the gainfulness of his trade will
be a benefit to society."?The Times, May 22, 1856.
WILLIAM PALMER. 427
nothing more than vulgar and impudent bravado, and if it proves
anything, proves too much for his cause. Under such awful
circumstances, an innocent prisoner would be ready to sink into
the earth with shame and confusion?the mere suspicion would
be enough to harrow his feelings and congeal his blood. But
to bear?not the suspicion?not the imputation?but the very
conviction of crime, in the open face of day, with composure?to
speak of it with philosophic indifference, and to declare that it
will not even so much as disturb the night's repose?this is the
sign of hardened villany and a callous conscience, unless it be
sheer affectation and practised effrontery. Palmer s allusion to
God as the defender of innocence, can only be viewed as another
part of the same detestable jargon.*
The Express, of June 2, says Thurtell confessed a dozen murders which he cer-
tainly never committed. He declared that he drowned a young man at Norwich
who was known by the townspeople to be non-existent; and he told ridiculous stories
knocking gamblers on the head with dumb bells behind doors in gaming-houses/
where nothing of the sort ever took place. This sort of bravado, and that with
which he went out of the world, produced something of the effect he intended on
ignorant and impressible minds, and a bad tone was introduced into the immorality
of young scamps of that day which aggravated the grief they caused at home and
the mischief which they diffused abroad. When the murderer is not a hero he
tries hard to be a saint; and as the lower part of the press has been usually more
or less to blame in the first case, the weaker part of the religious world have been
so in the other. Since Dr. Dodd?who fully expected to be in heaven before
Dr. Johnson?there have been plenty of wretches who have regarded, or pretended
to regard, the drop as the gate of heaven. Public good sense has of late years so
risen up against this folly and blasphemy that we may hope it has been checked
for a time.
TIIURTELL AXD PALMER.
With the difference that the circumstances of Thurtell's guilt are not comparable
in atrocity with those of the poisoner's, there are points of strong resemblance
between the two men. Each was born in a fair station, and educated in conformity
with it; each murdered a man with whom he had been on terms of intimate asso-
ciation, and for whom he professed a friendship at the time of the murder; both
were members of that vermin race of outer betters and blacklegs, of whom some
worthy samples were presented on both trials, and of whom, as a community,
mankind would be blessedly rid, if they could all be, once and for ever, knocked on
the head at a blow. Thurtell's demeanour was exactly that of the poisoner s. We
have referred to the newspapers of his time in aid of our previous knowledge of
the case, and they present a complete confirmation of the simple fact for which we
contend. Prom day to day during his imprisonment before his trial he is described as
collected and resolute in his demeanour," as " rather mild and conciliatory in his
address," as being visited by "friends whom he receives with cheerfulness," as "re-
gaining firm and unmoved," as "increasing in confidence as the day which is to decide
his fate draws nigh," as "speaking of the favourable result of the trial with his usual
confidence." On his trial he looks " particularly well and healthy." His attention
and composure are considered as wonderful as the poisoner's; he writes notes as
the poisoner did; he watches the case with the same cool eye ; he retains that
firmness forwhich, from the moment of liis apprehension, lie has been distinguished;
he '? carefully assorts his papers on a desk near him ;' he is (in this being singular)
his own orator, and makes a speech in the manner of Edmund Kean on the whole
not very unlike that of the leading counsel for the poisoner, concluding, as to his
own innocence, with a So help me God ! Before his trial the poisoner says he will
he at the coming race for the Derby. Before his trial Thurtell Bays, " that after
428 WILLIAM PALMER.
"We find the same mental phenomenon in nearly every phase of
crime. The expression of strong religious sentiment is often
common to great culprits. It is difficult to discriminate between
their sincerity, however ill-timed, and their hypocrisy, however
useless, when employed for the sake of glossing over their known
and conscious iniquity. It may be both the one and the other;
but whether or not, none except the weak-minded and inex-
perienced is ever deceived by it. It sounds like what it is, a
disgusting blasphemy. William Palmer, it is said, went to
church and received the sacrament the Sunday after his (mur-
dered ?) wife's decease :?
" With devotional visage
And pious action, we do sugar o'er
The devil himself."
Yiewed psychologically, such mental phenomena are to be
considered. Either it is an impairment, vitiation, or total want of
the moral sense, mostly connected with debility, or struma, or
disease of the nervous structures, sometimes connected with
drinking, or severe abstinence, or reverie, or preternatural
energy, or the loss of self-control, to a degree which none, except
those acquainted with the natural history of mania, have the
most distant notion of. It is the same as the hump-back, or the
club-foot, or tuberculosis, in common pathology, and an out-
standing symptom of a disordered intellect. It is shocking to
see religion thus travestied ; but, then, the. best things are the
most abused?fictitious piety is an excellent mask for wicked
purposes. True religion is never ostentatious, nor does it court
popularity. It hides itself within the heart, and is practically
known by the life and conduct of those under its influence.
Palmer was what the Times characterized him?a most
" vulgar criminal." To our taste, his gait, his physiognomy, his
chevelure, and his attire, were essentially vulgar?not the vul-
his acquittal he will visit liis father, and will propose to him to advance the portion
which he intended for him, upon which he will reside abroad." So Mr. Manning
observed, under similar circumstances, that when all that nonsense was over, and
the thing wound up, he had an idea of establishing himself in the West Indies.
When the poisoner's trial is yet to last another day or so, he enjoys his half-pound
of steak and his tea, wishes his best friends may sleep as he does, and fears the
grave "no more than his bed." (See the " Evening Hymn for a Young Child.")
When Thurtell's trial is yet to last another day or so, he takes his cold meat, tea,
and coffee, and " enjoys himself with great comfortalso on the morning of his
execution, he awakes from as innocent a slumber as the poisoner's, declaring that
he has had an excellent night, and that he hasn't dreamed " about this business."
Whether the parallel will hold to the last, as to "feeling very well and very com-
fortable," as to "the firm step and perfect calmness," as to "the manliness and
correctness of his general conduct, as to the countenance unchanged by the
awfulness of the situation"?not to say as to bowing to a friend from the scaffold
"in a friendly but dignified manner"?our readers will know for themselves when
we know too.?Household Words.
WILLIAM PALMER. 429
garity of untutored ignorance and rusticity, but the saucy, jaunty,
and confident vulgarity of low life *
Palmer had not the physiognomy of a great criminal. There
was nothing positively forbidding or repulsive in his countenance.
is anterior cranial development was good?the posterior part
oi the head (the seat of the animal passions, according to phreno-
logists) was obviously large. He had a thick and coarse neck,
^considering Palmer as a physiognomist, no person could have
" TJi is is the man should do the bloody deed,
The image of a heinous fault
Lives in his eye; that close aspect of his
Does shew the mood of a much troubled breast."
or that on
" His eye-balls murdered tyranny
Sat in grim majesty to fright the world."
He looked the good-natured, easy, well-spoken, and jolly
tavern companion, always ready to seize a friend by the hand,
and to join a boon companion in the festive cup. So much for
his physiognomy.
And here we take leave of Palmer as a psychological pheno-
menon, and may we never look upon his like again. Let us
turn to the medical evidence, and consider its nature and utility
on an occasion so trying as this has been. The medical evidence,
as it is called, divides itself into the medical and chemical; and
of these two, the chemical is subsidiary to the medical; for,
without the physician to judge of the symptoms, the chemist is
not competent to decide upon the cause of death. It is all very
well to send portions of a dead body up to London, for the first
analytic chemist of the metropolis to test by its proper chemical
re-agents, and then for him to declare that he finds such and
such a poison in them, to the very fraction of a grain, and that
this poison was the cause of death ; it is all very well and very
scientific for the chemist to be able and to be allowed to make
this declaration, nor have we any ground for supposing that he
does not declare the truth ;?but, after all, what does it amount
to ? A\ hat is the bond fide result of the analysis ? Does it, in
+ft, absolutely account for the death ? Is the final test equal to
the emergency? We maintain not.~f* We affirm that these
* As an instance of Palmer's self-possession and coolness during the trial, it may
be mentioned that he was continually writing notes commenting upon the evidence,
and giving instructions. The following is one of them. Alluding to one of his
Medical witnesses, he wrote to his attorney or counsel, " This is a muff, and is
??'g more harm than good."
+ The verdict of "guilty" which the jury has given, if uninfluenced, as we may
^ell suppose it to he, by the pathos of the defence or the declamation of the pro-
430 WILLIAM PALMER.
questions can be answered only by the physician who was in
attendance, and who dispassionately considers the individual
symptoms of each case brought under his notice. But, nay, we
are answered ; the chemist did, in fact, find the arsenic?here it
is! Granted: but did the patient die with the symptoms of
poisoning from arsenic, or mercury, or whatever else it might be
that the chemist had succeeded in detecting in the remains
subjected to his chemical experiments? In short,did the arsenic,
&c., kill him ? He might have taken the arsenic, and the
arsenic may have been found in him, and yet he may not have
died from the effects of arsenic as a deadly poison. Did he
then die from the effects of the arsenic found ? This is the
question : not what was taken, nor what was found, but whether
what was found and taken was the cause of death ? The physi-
cian alone can answer this question?not the chemist. We
know a lady at this moment who is always, and always has been
taking mercury, with or without medical advice. Now, if when
she dies, her mortal remains were to be enclosed in a jar and
sent to Dr. Taylor for analysis, doubtless he would detect no
small quantity of mercury in all her tissues. Yet she has not
died, is not dying, from the effects of the mercury. Every
medical practitioner knows instances of persons who are in the
habit of taking as much opium daily as would, at the first dose,
kill another not habituated to the use of the drug in such
secution, is a verdict which must be respected, to whatsoever consequence it may
lead. We will not, in this place, attempt to review or detail the nature of the
evidence adduced on both sides, and upon which the jury were required to decide.
Circumstantial evidence never became more elaborate or more lengthy, and the
serious question that arises for the future will be, how far evidence of that nature,
involving scientific difficulties, can be regarded as the foundation of a death
penalty 1 But there is another question, which at this moment, we should not seek
to avoid. The prejudice in the public mind against the prisoner was so far just
that it had its origin in the natural detestation which is felt against great crimes.
It was assumed that he had become an adept in the art of poisoning his friends?
that his nearest relatives and closest companions were not safe from his power?
and that no language could be strong enough to describe the cold, savage, and
diabolical skill with which he had, more than once, executed his purpose. Now, if
all this, and even much more, instead of one act of homicide, had been proved,
we should be asked, if it would be wise and safe to abrogate the capital penalty,
when so much outrage is by one man committed against the feelings of society 1
Must there be no opportunity for the strongest evidence of the public detestation
?DEATH ?
We think not. Let it not be imagined we believe that William Palmer is a
greater criminal than the jury have made him out to be ; far less let it be imputed
to us that we wish to palliate tragedy of any form or degree. But the answer to
the difficulty which this case has apparently raised is either an inspired answer or
a human one. If inspired it will stand thus : "Vengeance is Mine." If human,
it could not be better put than in the words of a distinguished member of the
French National Convention who, before he became corrupted, said, To kill a
man?know ye what that means ?" "It means, he continued, " to kill his possible
return to virtue, to kill expiation, and?infamous act?to kill repentance itself!"?
Morning Star, May 28, 1856.
WILLIAM PALMER. 431
quantities. Were such a person to die, say from asphyxia,* soon
after he had swallowed his last quotum, opium would doubtless
be found in his stomach in a deadly dose: and yet the opium
would not be the cause of the death. Again; persons are in the
habit of drinking wine or spirits very freely, all their lives, and
live to be old in spite of their excess: of course, if such a one
dropped suddenly from some accidental cause, not visible exter-
nally, ardent spirits might be found in the ventricles of his brain
even, without their having been the cause of his decease. We
knew a gentleman who was affected with rupia, a skin disease,
on his face. He consulted a medical practitioner, who cured it
by arsenic. Subsequently this gentleman took arsenic by him-
self, whenever the disease reappeared, and always with the best
effects, and we believe he still continues the same practice when-
ever the symptoms recur: now, though this gentleman were to
die, and his viscera, &c., submitted to the proper chemioal
re-agents, and arsenic found, as it needs would be, in every part,
yet the arsenic could not, per se, be pronounced to be the cause
of death ; because it has not only not killed him, and years have
* Difficulty of Detecting Poison in the Blood.?At an inquest held on
Wednesday, by Mr. Wakley, coroner for West Middlesex, on a child poisoned by
the impure air inhaled under the bed-clothes? a circumstance by which the coroner
remarked at least 150 children annually lost their lives in his district of the
county alone?Mr. Wakley, after the inquiry had been gone through, commented
upon the recent mysterious facts in connexion with the trial of Palmer,
observing?"A good deal has lately been said about poison in the blood and
chemicaf analysis" Now, this child died, literally speaking, from poison; but,
if a careful analysis of the blood was to take place, not the most shrewd man could
say what poison it contained. The child is covered over by the bed-clothes, it goes
on sleeping, the blood becomes poisoned from the want of natural air, and, even-
tually, life stops, the departure of vitality being similar to the slow flickering of an
extinguishing candle, when it has no wax or tallow to support its further burning.
I have had as many as seven such cases in this parish during one week, and it is
the most difficult?indeed, an impossible thing?to prove whether the children had
been wilfully so poisoned or not?(Sensation). Not all the science in the woi ld
could prove if the deaths, in many cases, were accidental, or brought about by
design."
" A case is on record where a man was in the habit of taking 3A grain closes of
morphia for tic doloureux. By mistake the druggist gave him strychnia. He
remarked at the time he took it that it was very bitter. While walking along the
street afterwards he felt numbness along the back of his legs. He went by a public
conveyance to a village where his business lay, and returned by the next oppor-
tunity, experiencing all the time the same symptoms. On his return they became
worse, "accompanied by a sense of want of power, and a sort of dragging of the
muscles of the legs, which soon became so great, that, as he describes it, he had
to put his hands at the back of his thighs in order to push his legs along. Ihis
\\as two-and-a-half hours after swallowing the supposed medicine. lcre^va-s s?
lttle unusual in his appearance, that a friend laughed at liim- 1 e ? owing ^ le
effect to his friend, and bending himself, he suddenly fell, and on being raised
felt excessively nervous and alarmed. His friend saw him home. He went to bed
five hours after havin"- taken the poison. He then took a similar dose, and in ten
minutes was seized with violent spasms of tetanus, which recurred at intervals of
a quarter of an hour. In thirteen hours he recovered, having taken seven grains
of strychnia !"?Dr. Glover : The Express, May 28, 1856.
432 WILLIAM PALMER.
elapsed since he first began taking it, but it has, on the contrary,
been the means of restoring and preserving his health. So that
the mere chemical evidence of poison being found in the body is
no proof, either absolute or presumptive, of the person having
died from the effects of the poison so found; and to conclude
that the poison found by the chemist is the real cause of the
death, would lead to very grave and dangerous consequences.
The physician who saw the patient last is the only person who
can say whether the poison found was or was not really, or likely
to be, the sole and absolute cause of the patient's decease.
Too much stress is laid on the chemical evidence, although
the final decision of the jury did not, in the recent trial, turn
upon it, good as the chemical evidence might be. The moral
evidence was more than enough. But before chemical evidence
can ever be relied on in a court of law, we must have a chemical
board, publicly appointed and legitimately authorized, to make
these chemical experiments; and, for the future, no single man,
nor even several men, however eminent their position or un-
doubted their skill, should be intrusted with such important and
delicate investigations. Should not the accused person be reprer
sented at this chemical board ? We would not trust our lives in any
analytic chemist's hands, whoever he might be; and, in truth, if we
were on the jury, we would never find a verdict of wilful murder
against a person upon the sole ipse dixit of one analytic chemist,
who secretly performed his investigations in his private labo-
ratory, and then alleged that he had, after boiling down a
man's liver, lungs, spleen, and heart, detected the 50,000th
part of a grain, or even half a grain, of arsenic, strychnia, or
antimony. The idea is monstrous; the precedent, if allowed,
pernicious to the last degree; and no life is safe under such an
irresponsible mode of proceeding. These delicate investigations
should be in the hands, not of a private chemist who may be
retained on either side, but of a public, acknowledged, and
responsible board of independent and skilful men, whose minds
cannot be 'prejudiced one way or the other.
But to return to the consideration of Palmer's case. The cir-
cumstantial and moral evidence* was strong, convincing, un-
* " Palmer has had the benefit of such a trial as we believe he could not have
obtained in any other country whatever. It is with great satisfaction that we
compare the method of procedure observed in this case with such a trial as that of
the Duke de Praslin or of Madame Laffarge. No traps were laid for the prisoner
?he was not entangled in his own admissions, nor convicted by his own confusion.
His guilt, on the contrary, was demonstrated by a clear chain of reasoning, which
inevitably connected him with the crime. Mr. Smith's endeavour is to show that
he was condemned upon what is called chymical evidence alone. He tells us that
the theory of absorption as propounded by Dr. Taylor is new and hypothetical, and
not in any way warranted by experience. He adds, ' If strychnia is not absorbed
and decomposed, and can be found under similar circumstances to those which
WILLIAM PALMER. 433
answerable, and conclusive; but not so, according to our judg-
ment, the legal. Palmer was indicted for murdering John Parsons
Cook by means of strychnine; and strychnine was proved to
have been purchased by Palmer beyond a doubt; but there was
no positive proof that Palmer administered it to Cook, or that
Cook died from its effects, except the symptoms of death, which
were alleged to result from strychnine poison?no strychnine
having been detected in the body ! As to Dr. Taylor's theory,
respecting which so much has been written, to our minds it was
wildly hypothetical and vaguely speculative. He found himself
in a difficulty, and that difficulty was his apparent defective
analytical investigation of the contents of Cook's stomach. In
Taylor's report, he says that Cook died, " in absence of natural
causes of death, of antimony," he having discovered half a grain
of it in Cook's liver ! Dr. Taylor was forced to admit that that
quantity of antimony was insufficient to account for Cook's death,
and, when pressed upon the point, said that Cook must have
taken more than that. Why ? Credat Judceus, because it
passed off by vomiting ! Hypothesis again ! But why " passed
off ?" Is such the fact ?* If sufficient tartar emetic be given to
excite sickness, what evidence have we that it "passes off" at
all in the substance vomited ? Does it not first enter the blood,
existed, and now exist, in the case of the late John Parsons Cook, then my client
will have been the victim of an erroneous conviction, if strychnia cannot now be
discovered in the body of the deceased.' Now, this is a view of the case in which
we cannot acquiesce." Even if Professor Taylor's theory with regard to the absorp-
tion of strychnine be proved by subsequent experiments to be erroneous, enough
appeared at the trial not only to warrant} but to necessitate, the condemnation of
Palmer. The only conclusion we draw from Mr. Smith's remarks is, that if the
absorption theory "be incorrect, then the manipulations of Professor Taylor were
unskilfully performed. Whether he could discover it or not, the strychnine was
there. Mr. Smith should remember that the cliymical evidence with regard to the
presence or absence of strychnine was one thing, the medical symptoms quite
another."?The Times, June 5, 1856.
* STRYCHNINE?ITS EFFECTS ON ANIMAL LIFE.
To the Editor of the Times.
"Sir,?As some of the most eminent toxicologists seem to disagree relative to
the effects of strychnine when taken into the animal economy, perhaps the follow-
ing facts may be interesting to your readers.
"Being in Mexico in 1849, I had an opportunity offered me of witnessing the
wholesale poisoning of wolves by nux vomica. The plan adopted is to give an old
worn-out mule the poison. In a short time death ensues; the wolves, which infest
that part of Mexico?Parras?devour the carcase; they after a few hours die; their
m 'n ^urn are eaten by the turkey-buzzards, who also die.
These facts demonstrate that the active principle?i.e. strychnine?is not
destroyed by absorption, but remains undecomposed, though disseminated through-
out the system in the most infinitesimal atoms.
"Yours,
"June 3. Philo-"Veritas."
The Times, June 5, 1856.
" If it is worth while to have a police?to have judges and lawyers, it is worth
while to provide some adequate endowment or inducement for the cultivation of
434 WILLIAM PALMER.
and subsequently act upon capillaries of the stomach, inducing
sickness and vomiting ? When speaking of the modus operandi
of the tartrate of antimony, Dr. Headland observes,?
" By an influence on a part of tlie nervous system?apparently the
vagus nerve?it produces, first, the state called nausea, and afterwards,
vomiting.!
" This nausea is not produced to any extent by a mere irritant
emetic, such as sulphate of zinc, which acts externally and takes effect
immediately. The antimonial cannot act so quickly; part of it must
first be absorbed, so that it may reach the nerve. We know that it
does not act by outward irritation, from the fact that if the solution
be injected into the veins at any part of the body, it will equally pro-
duce nausea and vomiting."?On the Action of Jfedicines, by F. W.
Headland, M.D.
Again, Dr. Taylor says, the minimum dose of strychnia
cannot be detected, but the maximum can. Well, admit this
hypothesis : what proof was there that the minimum dose was
given by Palmer? From the severity of the symptoms that
preceded Cook's death, we should infer (if they arose from
strychnine) that Palmer had administered to him, not the mini-
mum, but the maximum dose. Again, we say that, strong as
the moral and circumstantial evidence was, the strictly legal
evidence was most unsatisfactory and defective.
How much public anxiety, expense, angry altercation, profes-
sional bickering, and disruption to healthy, calm, and tranquil
thought, would have been saved, had the presence of strychnine
poison been detected by Dr. Taylor when he made, in the first
instance, the chemical analysis of the contents of poor Cook's
stomach ! It is alleged by some of the most able toxicologists
and chemists of the day, that if Cook's death had been caused
by the minutest dose of strychnine, Taylor ought to have dis-
covered it. They assert that his mode of analysis must have
been defective. So say Messrs. Herapath, Letheby, Nunneley,
Kodgers ; and the latter gentleman says, in a letter published in
the Times since Palmer's conviction,?
" I cannot conceive an opinion more dangerous to public safety than
that a fatal dose of poison can be so nicely adjusted as to escape
discovery after death. Yet such has obviously been the tendency of
many letters published in various journals for some time past. It was
with feelings of deep regret that I noticed in your edition of to-day a
medical jurisprudence. A medical witness is not an ordinary witness?lie is an
investigator. On the strength of his professional skill depends the value of his
testimony; and as the labourer is worthy of his hire, the attention of the public is
seriously called to the importance of a subject connected closely with the safety of
property and of life."?]Jr. It. 31. Clover, F.R.>S.i. rlhe Express, May 28, 1856.
WILLIAM PALMER. 4)35
communication from a former colleague of mine, Mr. Ancell, who I am
sure would never have sent it, had he been aware of the nature and
results of numerous experiments lately made by myself independently,
and in conjunction with Mr. Girdwood. I have asserted, and do
assert, that strychnine cannot evade detection if proper processes be
employed for its separation.
" In this opinion I am supported by the highest chemical authorities
of the day, and now request a space in your valuable columns to give
to the world a process which accompanies this letter, and which has
enabled my self and Mr. Girdwood to detect that fearful poison in the
blood, liver, tissues, and contents of stomachs of animals poisoned by
doses such as those Dr. Taylor administered in the experiments on
which he founded his theory promulgated at the late trial, and which
has also enabled us to separate the strychnine from the tissues and
organs of a dog after the body had been interred twelve months. The
results of these experiments, but without a description of the process
employed, were forwarded by myself and Mr. Girdwood for the con-
sideration of Sir George Grey, as we were of opinion that if John
Parsons Cook was poisoned by strychnine, no matter how small the fatal
dose, its presence could even now be clearly demonstrated if the tissues
of his body were subjected to the same mode of analysis.
" I cannot conclude this letter without expressing my opinion that,
as of all known poisons there is not one more readily detected in the
tissues than strychnine, consequently no death ought to be attributed
to its agency unless its presence be clearly demonstrated."
" The process alluded to in the above is as follows The tissues of
the body are rubbed with distilled water in a mortar to a pulp, and
then digested, after the addition of a little hydrochloric acid, in an
evaporating basin; then strained, and evaporated to dryness over a
water-bath; digest the residue in spirit, filter, and again evaporate
to dryness; treat with distilled water, acidulated with a few drops of
hydrochloric acid, and filter; add excess of ammonia, and agitate in a
tube with chloroform; the strychnine in an impure condition is
entirely separated with the chloroform. This chloroform solution is to be
carefully separated by a pipette, and poured into a small dish, and
evaporated to dryness; the residue is moistened with concentrated
sulphuric acid, and heated over a water-bath for half an hour ; water is
then added, and excess of ammonia?again agitated with chloroform,
and the strychnine will be again separated by the chloroform, now in
a state of sufficient purity for testing, which can be done by evapo-
rating a few drops on a piece of white porcelain, adding a drop^ of
strong sulphuric acid, a minute crystal of bichromate of potash being
added in. the usual way; or the elegant mode proposed by Dr. Letheby
can be adopted."
That strychnine was either in the contents of the stomach or
in some of the tissues of Cook's body, able chemists entertain no
shadow of a doubt. Had Taylor been happily successful in
436 WILLIAM PALMER.
his analysis, and had detected even the 50,000th part of a
grain of the poison, that discover}', conjoined with the over-
whelming and crushing circumstantial evidence of Palmer's
guilt, would have settled his conviction and condemnation in a
few hours.
As to what was the real cause of Cook's death, Brodie, Todd,
and others have no doubt. They affirm that it was strychnine.
The questions raised by the defence of the possibility of Cook's
death being the result of some tetanic disease, instead of poison,
is alleged to have broken down, and disappear in the course of the
cross-examination by the Attorney-General.* It has subsequently
been conjectured that death might possibly have arisen from some
new form of disease, of a tetanic character, not yet recognised.f
Cook was said to have died with identically the same symptoms,
even to the very last expression of " Turn me over," as Mrs.
Sargeantson Smyth and Mrs. Dove, in both of whose cases strych-
nine was known to have been the cause of death beyond dispute.
Five theories were set up by the defence in opposition to the fact
of the identity of death from strychnine in Cook's, Dove's, and
Smyth's cases. The five theories were?idiopathic and traumatic
tetanus, tetanic complications, epilepsy, and angina pectoris.
As to idiopathic tetanus, it was asked, where were the signs
* "It is not, of course, for us to suggest what considerations may have acted with
greater force upon the minds of the jury, but We should have thought the
medical symptoms, and the manner of their succession, quite conclusive. It was
proved by such an agreement of medical testimony as we do not remember to have
seen in any former case, that the symptoms observed in the case of John Parsons
Cook were inconsistent with any other hypothesis than that of death caused by
poisoning by strychnine. The attempts made for the defence to neutralize this au-
thoritative and direct testimony resulted in an entire failure. We had enough of such
miserable jargon as ' epileptic convulsions with tetanic complications but we put
it to the recollection of any person who was present at the trial, or who has read
the reports of it with ordinary attention, if the overpowering weight of credible
medical testimony was not in favour of the view that such symptoms as those of
Cook were inconsistent with any other hypothesis than that of death by strychnine ?"
?The Times, June 5, 1856.
+ " Only one question was unconsidered in this trial, and that question, though
among the bare possibilities, is so highly improbable that it was perhaps well not
to raise it. Cook's symptoms were not the symptoms of any known disease. But
within this century has not a disease before unknown been generated in India, and
propagated throughout the world? Forty years ago the symptoms of Asiatic
cholera were not the symptoms of any known disease, and would have been con-
fidently attributed to poison. Indeed, the ignorant everywhere imputed the
ravages of the disease to poison. Experience has corrected the error ; but the
question to be asked is, what must have been thought of the first case or cases,
what mistakes made about its nature unknown ? A new disease is then among
the possibilities ; and it might have been fitting to consider the question, if the
circumstances of the case, as well as the character of the symptoms, had not so
strongly borne out the conclusion of death by the strychnine procured and substi-
tuted by Palmer for the medicine supplied by Mr. Bamford.'?The Examiner,
May 31, 1856.
WILLIAM PALMER. 437
Of it? If it was traumatic, where was the wound or injury of
a nerve to account for it ? No one could point it out. As for
tetanic complications, the witnesses for the Crown scouted the
idea. Epilepsy?Was it epilepsy? Not one of the medical
witnesses either for the prosecution or the defence could say it
was. Hydrophobia would have been a much more plausible
theory to account for Cook's symptoms?though it does not appear
that Cook had ever been bitten by a mad dog?than the suggested
one of angina pectoris; for hydrophobia is a tetanic disease,
whereas angina pectoris is not*
One question more remains to be considered,?viz., whether, if
chemistry fail to discover any poison in the corpse, it is proof
absolute or presumptive of no poison having been administered ?
Here, again, we apprehend that chemistry is inadequate to the
task of deciding so vital a question, and that the physician alone
is the referee whose testimony can be relied on in explaining the
matter. For different persons are susceptible of the operation of
the same medicine in different degrees, according to the peculiar
idiosyncrasy of the patient; one person being killed by a dose of
poison so minute, that it would be innoxious to another, and
vice versa. Every medical man knows the susceptibility and
insusceptibility of particular patients to the action of particular
remedies,?as of mercury, for instance. Thus, half a grain will
salivate one patient, while large and frequently-repeated doses
will scarcely affect the system of another; nor is it possible to
foresee or explain these peculiarities. ? Here, then, is a set of
cases in which chemistry is likely to be greatly at fault, but
where the practical physician can alone determine whether the
symptoms at the time of death were those of poison, be the dose
large or small, and whether the particular symptoms were those
of this or that kind of poison, though no poison be subsequently
detected in the organic remains. We are, therefore, forced to
conclude that chemistry is subsidiary to medicine, and that
analytic chemistry is overrated when its ipse dixit is received as
* The analogy between traumatic tetanus and hydrophobia is much closer and
stronger than at first sight appears probable. Traumatic tetanus, or trismus,
arises from the injury of a nerve, generally of the toe or thumb. Hydrophobia
arises from the bite of a dog or cat, rabid or not, as it may be ; for it is not abso-
lutely proved that the animal must needs be rabid. But, by the bite, the cutaneous
nerves are lacerated or punctured in a peculiar way. Now, the first symptom is
that of shuddering, and a sense of creeping over the skin, aggravated by a light
touch, or a current of cold air. Then the sight of any liquid m motion produces
the horripilations of the skin. After this, the back of the head and spine become
painful; and, lastly, the difficulty of swallowing ensues, and is the same as the
lockjaw, or trismus, being a reflex act from irritation of the top of the spinal
chord and medulla oblongata. Both in hydrophobia and lockjaw the intellect may
remain entire to the last.
438 WILLIAM PALMER.
the ultimatum of an inquiry in a court of law, and its testimony-
allowed alone to determine the guilt or innocence of the accused
person. We have already declared our conviction that the
verdict in Palmer's case did not turn upon the chemical, but
upon the moral or circumstantial evidence; and we have fol-
lowed out this train of argument for the express purpose of
drawing the true line of demarcation between chemistry and
medicine, and of placing each of them on its proper basis. A
great deal of the confusion of ideas would have been saved on
the recent occasion, had there been a Crown officer of anatomy to
perform the post-mortem examination, of chemistry for the
chemical experiments, and of medicine for the medical symptoms,
independent of the scientific witnesses subpoenaed on either side,
for the elucidation of the truth; and the appointment of such
officers is not more preposterous than the law-officers of the
Crown, without whom justice could never be awarded.
We subjoin from the Times a truthful and graphic account of
this wretched criminars execution. The day previously, Mr.
Smith, his solicitor, was summoned by telegraph from London
to Stafford, at Palmer's earnest request, and he arrived at
half-past 10 o'clock at night, and had an interview with the
convict, in the presence of Major Fulford, the governor of the
gaol. The prisoner had declined to retire to rest until Smith
came, and from that circumstance and the anxiety he had shown
to have him sent for, it was supposed that he had some important
communication to make' to him ; but it was not so. On going
into the cell, the Governor informed Palmer that if he had any-
thing confidential to say on family affairs to Mr. Smith, he (the
Governor) would keep it a secret. The prisoner replied that he
had not, and he hoped the Governor would lose no time in pub-
lishing all he said. He also added, all he had to say was to thank
Mr. Smith for his great exertions?the officers of the prison for
their kindness to him?and that Cook did not die from strych-
nine. Major Fulford expressed a hope that in his then awful
condition he was not quibbling with the question, and urged
him to say "Ay" or il No," whether or not he murdered Cook.
He answered immediately, 11 Lord Campbell summed up in
favour of poisoning by strychnine." The Governor retorted,
it was of no importance how the deed was done, and asked
him to say " Yes' or "No" to the question. Palmer said, " he
had nothing more to add. He was quite easy in his conscience,
and happy in his mind." This is the Governor's version of the
conversation; but upon the material point Mr. Smith stated,
just after leaving the convict, that what Palmer said to him
was, " I am innocent of poisoning Cook by strychnine;
WILLIAM PALMER. 439
and all I ask is, that you will have his body examined, and
that you will see to my mother and boy."
Towards midnight he had taken a painful leave of his imme-
diate relatives, and was now awaiting his irrevocable doom. He
had slept two hours and a half in the early morning, and, on
awakening, the Chapl ain entered his cell. He said, in reply to
a question asked by the rev. gentleman, that he felt comfortable,
and was quite prepared. He continued in bed until half-past 5,
when he had some tea, and again at half-past 7. To the warder
who brought him the tea on the last occasion, and who asked
how he was, he said he was very comfortable. The Chaplain
remained in almost constant attendance upon him until the hour
of his execution. Shortly after 7 o'clock, Lieutenant-Colonel
Dyott, the high-sheriff, and Mr. Hand, the under-sheriff,
arrived at the gaol, and at once proceeded to the prisoner's cell,
where they found him in earnest conversation with the Chaplain.
After a brief interval, the High-Sheriff asked him if he was
prepared to admit the justice of his sentence. He replied, with
the most energetic gesticulation, "No, sir, I do not; and I go
to the scaffold a murdered man." He added that several persons,
whose names he would not mention, were guilty of his murder,
and that he could not acknowledge the justice of his sentence.
The cell of the prisoner was one of a series situate on the first
floor of an oblong building, around which a light iron gallery
was thrown. Almost immediately opposite the door of his cell
a bridge went across to the gallery on the opposite side, and from
the centre of the bridge an ornamental stair of iron descended
into a large corridor on the basement story. Here were stationed,
shortly before 8 o'clock, the High-Sheriff of the county and the
Under-Sheriff; Mr. "W. H. Chetwynd, a magistrate of the county
Major Fulford, the governor of the gaol; Mr. Hatton, the chief
of the county constabulary, and the representatives of the pi ess,
awaiting the awful ceremony about to take place. At that
moment, a tall, broad-shouldered, elderly man, with short grey
hair, and dressed in a white smockfrock, emerged from a room
in the corridor, and ascending the light iron stairs, entered the
condemned cell. This was the executioner, a labouring man re-
siding at Dudley, named John Smith, and this was his first
introduction to the convict, whom he at once proceeded to pinion
in the presence of the High-Sheriff and the Chaplain. While
this operation was bein0- performed Palmer betrayed no symptom
of emotion, and simply requested that the cord might not be
drawn too tightly. Th.6 High-Sheriff and the Ohciplcxin thon left
the cell for a sliortitime, and the prisoner remarked to the officeis
who attended him that they would observe that he had not
no. in.?new series. g g
440 WILLIAM PALMER.
changed from what he had always said, and he then said, " All I
have to ask of you is to pray for ray child." The High-Sheriff
and Chaplain again visited the cell, and, thinking that the
prisoner might perhaps object to say anything in the presence
of the officers, they were requested to withdraw. At this moment
all the preparations were complete. The unhappy man was
pinioned, the executioner was standing by him, and nothing was
required but the signal to move forward to the scaffold. The
Chaplain, in the most solemn manner, exhorted him to admit the
justice of his sentence. The prisoner firmly replied that it was
not a just sentence. "Then," said the Chaplain, "your blood be
upon your own head." To this observation the prisoner made
no answer.
At this moment the prisoner appeared for an instant at the
door of his cell, and took a cursory look at the official gentlemen
waiting below to conduct him to the scaffold. He entered his
cell again, and immediately afterwards the Chaplain and the
High-Sheriff emerged from it, accompanied by the convict, who
tripped nimbly down the stairs into the corridor, followed by the
executioner. The remarkable appearance of the prisoner at this
time will not easily be forgotten. Contrary to all usage, he wore
the prison dress, consisting of a dark grey jacket, trousers and
waistcoat, all of the coarsest description, a blue checked cotton
shirt, and a pair of thick list shoes. He carried a handkerchief
in one hand, of the same coarse material. At his own request,
his light sandy hair had been closely cropped, which brought the
whole configuration of his large round head and face into striking
prominence, and, with the dress he wore, gave to his whole
physique an air of singular repulsiveness which was not at all
natural to him. It ought, however, to be stated that the wearing
the prison dress was not intended as an indignity, but simply
arose from the circumstance of his having no clothes of his, own
in the prison. The melancholy procession was now formed which
was to conduct him to his doom. The Chaplain went first., read-
ing the burial service, followed by the Under-SherifF, then by
the High-Sheriff, carrying their wands of office, next by Palmer,
then by the executioner, and finally by Major Fulford, the
governor of the prison, Mr. Hatton, the chief constable, and
several of the officers of the gaol; and in this way he was
escorted to the scaffold amid the tolling of the prison bell. His
bearing in these last moments of his life elicited the amaze-
ment of all who witnessed it. As he passed Major Fulford, who
was waiting to fall into the procession, he bowed to him in an
easy, offhand manner, and then stopped for an instant to shake
hands with one of the officials of the prison whom he recognized.
WILLIAM PALMER.
441
He marched along with a light, jaunty step ; but the expression
of his mouth and the pallor with which his features were suffused
indicated the deep current of natural emotion which he strove in
vain to conceal. The distance he had to traverse from his cell to
the scaffold was very considerable, and included three short
flights of stairs, but his step never for an instant faltered. As
the procession reached the entrance of the prison, Mr. Wright,
the philanthropist, who was standing near, stepped back to
allow it to pass; the convict bowed courteously to him, and then
walked lightly up the steps leading to the scaffold, and of his
own accord placed himself under the beam. The executioner at
once proceeded to adjust the rope round the culprit's neck, and
was about to retire from the scaffold, when he seemed to re-
member that he had not drawn the white cap over his face. He
returned to do so, and then the convict shook hands with him
and bade him good-bye. An instant elapsed before the bolt was
withdrawn, and the rapid inflation and collapsing of the part of
the cap which covered his mouth evinced the intensity of his
feelings at this awful moment. The drop at length fell, and he died
almost without a struggle. Once or twice, when the executioner
was gently holding down his legs, he raised himself slightly up,
and there was a simultaneous convulsive movement of the
shoulders for an instant; but he exhibited no other sign of life.
He held a handkerchief in one of his hands, where it still re-
mained tightly clenched when the body was cut down. W^.th
some very slight exceptions, the deportment of the crowd, among
whom were many decently-dressed women, was decorous in the
0x.tr? m 0
So ended the life of William Palmer. It will be perceived
that he made no confession of his crime* This is, on public
grounds, deeply to be lamented and deplored. When pressed to
confess, all that he would admit was, that " Cook did not die
from strychnine." It was obvious, by his refusing to answer the
question repeatedly and earnestly addressed to him a few minutes
before his execution, whether he was instrumental in Cook s
death, that he was exercising some mental reservation on the
" On the morning before his execution, he asked the Rev. Mr. Sneyd if a
sinner could be saved who confessed to God, but preserved silence towards men.
The reverend gentleman declined to give a positive answer, lest he should be
thought to encroach upon the divine prerogative of mercy. But after further self-
deliberation, he returned to the prisoner's cell, and said to him, You have asked
me a difficult and abstract question. Your Bible tells you that all liars shall have
their part in the lake of fire and brimstone. If you persist in proclaiming your
innocence when you know that you are guilty, you will die with a he in your
mouth, and you know the consequences.' The tears stood for a moment in Palmer s
eyes,but he quickly recovered himself, and made no further remark."? The Leader.
G G 2
442 WILLIAM PALMER.
point. When Major Fulford begged him to admit the justice of
his sentence and unburthen his conscience before entering into
the presence of his Maker, Palmer's remark was, " Cook did not
die from strychnineand when implored to say " Yes" or
"No "to the question?was he not the murderer of Cook, he
replied, "I have nothing more to add; Lord Campbell sum-
raed up for strychnine." If Palmer had positively repudiated
all participation in Cook's death, his denial of the fact, even at
the awful moment immediately preceding his execution, would
not have been entitled to one moment's consideration, or to the
slightest credence; but, as Palmer would not deny his guilt, but
persevered to the last in emphatically asserting that Cook did
not die from the effects of strychnine poison, we think we are
justified, according to the recognized rules of evidence, in con-
cluding that strychnine was not the specific poison that caused
Goolc's death. The reader must view Palmer's statement not
only in conjunction with the fact that Drs. Taylor and Rees
could not discover strychnine in the contents of Cook's stomach,
but in relation with the conflicting medical testimony ad-
duced at the trial, as to the true character of the symptoms
exhibited by Cook during his last fatal illness. We cannot con-
ceive how any person, accustomed to consider and weigh nice
points of evidence, can arrive at any other conclusion. That
Palmer murdered Cook is, to our mind, an indisputable fact;
but, according to our apprehension, strychnine was not the
poison used for the purpose ! Well, then, it may be asked, if
Palmer was conscious of his having accomplished his murderous
designs by the administration of some other poison, and not by
strychnine, how can his solemn declaration?"I am an innocent
man"?be made consistent with such an hypothesis ? It must
be borne in mind that William Palmer was indicted for murder-
ing John Parsons Cook by means of strychnine. He was
accused, tried, convicted, sentenced, and hanged for committing
the murder in the manner set forth in the indictment. If
strychnine had nothing to do with Cook's death,?if the poison
had never been exhibited by Palmer to Cook, or by any other
person with his knowledge,?then Palmer was falsely convicted,
for he ivas innocent of the particular offence imputed to him.
If a man is accused, tried, convicted, and hanged for drowning a
person found, under questionable and suspicious circumstances,
dead in the water, and he had no more hand in so destroying
him than the Emperor of China or the King of the Sandwich
Islands, the accused party is wrongly convicted and unjustly
punished. He may, some days prior to the death of the party
found drowned, have administered to him some deadly drug, or
WILLIAM PALMER. 443
have given him a blow on the head, thus causing temporary
mental derangement, impelling the party to the act of suicide,
but of the particular and specific offence for which he is tried, con-
victed, and executed?viz.,murder by drowning?he is clearly and
undoubtedly innocent. The fact of the man being a murderer and
justly deserving death upon the scaffold does not affect our position.
The offence or crime for which a party is arraigned must be
clearly established against him before he can legally be found
guilty and punished. There would be no safety or security
lor society unless this principle were strictly, stringently, and
jealously adhered to in the administration of the criminal juris-
prudence of the country. We feel anxious to place this question
fairly, dispassionately, and legitimately before our readers, not
having the faintest shadow of a doubt as to the guilt of the
miserable man who has gone to his last account, or as to the
moral justice of his conviction, sentence, and death.
We are of opinion that the important point under considera-
tion should not be permitted to rest unsolved. If a mistake has
been committed, no harm can arise from a candid and honest
acknowledgment of the fact. Jf an exhumation of the body of
Cook should take place, and the discovery of strychnine or some
other poison in the tissues be detected, then much dissatisfaction
would be removed from the public mind. It is useless to close
our eyes to the fact that such a feeling exists to a great extent
in this country, and among those, too, who were most profoundly
prejudiced against the unhappy man, and who called loudly for
the execution of the law. We subjoin, in conclusion, the follow-
ing able remarks of a contemporary in reference to Palmer's last
moments.
" The hope that Palmer in his last moments would make such a
confession as would clear up once and for ever the doubts that
still remain in the minds of many persons as to his guilt, has
been disappointed; and his last words will, we fear, only tend to
strengthen the opinion of those who denied that Mr. Cook died
from the effect of strychnine. The few words that the wretched
criminal uttered before proceeding to the scaffold, instead of
clearing up the difficulties which have beset the minds of many
medical men, will only tend to still further perplex them. ' I
am innocent of poisoning Cook by strychnine/ was all that
Palmer, whilst standing upon the verge of eternity, could be
brought to say, although urged in the most solemn manner to
admit or deny the fact of his having murdered Cook. I he
general impression seems to be that this denial was a mere
quibble, and that he ' paltered with us in a double sense m
denying the justice of his sentence merely because Loid
4U WILLIAM PALMER.
Campbell summed up in favour of strychnine/ It seems to us,
however, that if we admit the possibility of a man quibbling and
attempting to deceive with the halter round his neck, he would
not much fear going into the presence of his God with a lie in
his mouth; we therefore do not attach much importance to his
denial of having given Cook this poison. It may be, however,
that some drug was used in the pills substituted for those ordered
by Dr. Bamford, which Palmer affected to believe was the cause
of death rather than the strychnine.
" The correspondence which has lately taken place between
Mr. Herapath and Sir Fitzroy Kelly, relative to TawelFs case,
would seem to show that the pseudo-Quaker's confession was in
some respects similar to the statement made by Palmer. ' It is
true/ says Sir Fitzroy Kelly, ? that he (Tawell) confessed his
guilt; but I have the best reason to believe that his confession
was that he committed the murder, indeed, but in a manner
totally inconsistent with the truth of the scientific evidence upon
which he had been convicted.' We can easily understand that a
man, in order to escape as far as possible the posthumous infamy
which attaches to the memory of a diabolical murderer, may so
colour certain facts known only to himself, as to lead him, not
perhaps wholly in bad faith, to deny the legal justice of his
sentence. This is the only manner, however, in which we can
excuse him from the horrible crime of telling what we cannot
help thinking to be a fearful falsehood, whilst just without the
presence of the Almighty, if we may be allowed to use such a
phrase when speaking of the Omnipresent.
"Although it may appear late,we reiterate our desire that the
body may be once more exhumed for the purpose of thoroughly
examining every portion of it in the presence of the leading toxi-
cologists of the day. It will be said, perhaps, that .such a course
would seem to imply a doubt that Palmer was really guilty?a
fearful doubt even to suggest, now that it is beyond the power of
man to see justice done to him. We do not think, however,
that any such objection should stand in the way of clearing up
the case, as far as it can be cleared up indeed, by a more thorough
and patient examination of the body than it has yet received.
Indeed, we think the very equivocation of the murderer on the
scaffold might be used as an argument for the course we recom-
mend. Taking for granted that Cook was poisoned by Palmer,
as the whole country most undoubtedly does, and taking for
granted, as many people do, perhaps, that Palmer was speaking
the truth in denying that he poisoned Cook with strychnine, the
question which arises next is, With what was the murder com-
mitted? What subtile agent could have been employed that
ON SUICIDE AND SUICIDAL INSANITY. 445
killed, and yet escaped the notice of men of science ? It seems
to us that not only those who believe strychnine was the agent
used by Palmer should desire a further analysation of the subject,
but also those who deny it, and yet believe that he drugged his
victim to death."*
* " The Association Journal," 21st June.
