Annual Meeting of the Association of Medical Officers of Asylums And Hospitals for the Insane
==============================================================================================

646
Part Fourth.
girtrmitl gUprtnuni

The stated Annual Meeting of the above Society was lield on the 1st August,
in the Derby County Asylum, at Mickleover, presided over by Dr Hitchman,
the Physician Superintendent of that establishment. The attendance on the
occasion was very large and influential: amongst those present were Dr Camp-
bell, Essex Asylum; Dr Thurnam, Wilts Asylum (who, however, was obliged
to leave before the regular business commenced); Dr Forbes Winslow, London;
Dr Robert Stewart, Resident Physician, Belfast District Asylum; Dr Sher-
lock, Resident Physician of the Worcester County Asylum ; Dr Tuke, Chis-
wick ; Dr Caleb Williams, York; Mr .Walsh, Surgeon Superintendent, Lincoln
Asylum; Mr. Cornwall, EairfordRetreat, Gloucestershire; Dr Dickson, Resi-
dent Physician, Manchester Royal Asylum at Cheadle; Mr. Buck, Medical
Superintendent, Leicestershire Asylum; Dr Mackintosh, Dinsdale Park, Dar-
lington ; Dr McCreipt, Assistant Resident Physician, Somersetshire Asylum at
Wells; Mr. Ley, Medical Superintendent, Oxfordshire and Berkshire Asylum;
Dr Lockhart Robertson, London; Mr. Brushfield, Medical Superintendent,
Chester County Hospital for the Insane; Dr Davey, Northwood; Dr Prichard,
Abington Abbey; Dr Hewson, Physician Superintendent, Coton Hill Institu-
tion for the Insane, Stafford; Dr Bucknill, Physician Superintendent of the
County Devon Asylum at Exminster; Dr Boisragon, Physician Superintendent
of the County Cornwall Asylum; Mr. Isles, Cirencester; Dr Seaton, Sudbury;
Dr Warwick, Salisbury; Dr Paul, Camberwell House; Mr. Eddison, Not-
tingham; Mr. Millar, Stone; and Mr. Stilwell, jun., Mickleover.
Several letters of apology for non-attendance were read by the President,
and amongst them from Dr Conolly, of Lawn House, Hanwell; Dr Kirkman,
Suffolk; Dr Flynn, Clonmel, Ireland; Dr Williams, Gloucester, &c. &c.
Much sympathy was felt, in consequence of the melancholy fatal accident
which happened recently to Dr Williams, the Visiting Physician of the Not-
tingham County Asylum, who was to have been present, but for his sudden
and lamented removal.
The minutes of the last annual meeting held in London were read and
confirmed.
Dr Campbell read the Auditors' Report, which stated that the accounts of
the Treasurer had been audited and found correct, with a balance to the credit
of" the Association.
Mr. Ley entered into a lengthened statement of the past and present condi-
tion of the Association as to membership, by which it appeared, that during the
past year one hundred members had paid their subscriptions, and that several
more would still, it was likely, do so. The Association, he observed, was in a
very solvent and flourishing state, financially and influentially, and had every
prospect of being increasingly so.
Dr L. Robertson read a list of new members, thirteen in number, now pro-
posed to be balloted for; also of the following four honorary members, viz., Sir
Benjamin Brodie, Bart., Dr Holland, Mr, Wilkes (late Medical Superintendent
of the Staffordshire Hospital for the Insane, now one of Her Majesty's Com- ?
missioners in Lunacy), and Dr Peach (one of the Visiting Magistrates of the
Derby County Hospital for the Insane).
ANNUAL MEETING OF MEDICAL OFFICERS. 64-7
Dr Forbes Winslow having inquired if Mr. Wilkes desired being still con-
nected with the Association, the President read a letter from him, the purport
of which appeared to remove all doubt upon that head.
A long discussion now ensued as to the shortest method of proceeding with
the ballot for so many, the time of the meeting for general business being very
limited. Dr Forbes Winslow and Dr Caleb Williams moved a resolution to
the effect that pro hac vice the candidate members, ordinary and honorary, be
elected by ballot in the mass, and not individually, with the view of saving
time. This course, however, being strongly objected to, as being likely to
establish a bad precedent, an amendment was moved by Dr Davey, seconded
by Dr 11. Stewart, that a ballot be taken for each proposed member separately,
which being pressed to a division was lost, and the original resolution carried
by a large majority, when the several candidates on the list were unanimously
elected.
Dr Tuke then gave notice that he would at the next annual meeting move
that the names of candidates for honorary membership be sent in in sufficient
time to the Secretary of the Association in order to appear in the printed
notice issued to members for the annual meeting.
Mr. Ley now moved, in very complimentary terms, that Dr Forbes Winslow
be the President elect for next year, observing that no member of their im-
portant branch of the medical profession had done more to advance its interests,
and support its high character and independence, than Dr Winslow.
Dr L. Robertson seconded Mr. Ley's motion, stating that this was an
honour which accidentally devolved upon him, as Dr Sutherland, had he been
present to-day, intended to have done so, and in his stead Dr Bucknill, who,
however, had not yet made his appearance, which was to be regretted.
The President having put the motion from the chair, it was carried hem. con.
Dr Forbes Winslow returned thanks for the enviable honour and position
now conferred upon him, and assured the meeting that he most fully appre-
ciated both, and that nothing should be left undone on his part to promote the
increased usefulness and the high and important objects of their invaluable and
influential Association.
It was now arranged that the annual meeting for 1857 should be held in
London, the exact time and the place to be for future arrangement. It was
suggested, however, as regarded placc, that the Freemasons' Hall should not
be selected, it being deemed a very inconvenient locality.
Mr. Ley was re-elected Treasurer; Dr L. Robertson, General Honorary
Secretary; Dr Robert Stewart, of Belfast, and Dr W. A. F. Browne, of
Dumfries, Honorary Secretaries for Ireland and Scotland respectively; and Dr.
Campbell and Mr. Prichard, Auditors; all for the current year.
Dr Forbes Winslow, seconded by Dr Prichard, moved that Dr Bucknill
be reappointed the Editor of the Association's Journal, which he did with great
pleasure, the able manner in which it had been conducted reflecting the
greatest credit upon Dr Bucknill and the Association. The motion having
een put from the chair, was carried unanimously. _
A short adjournment now took place, during which the members were enter-
tained at a splendid luncheon provided by Dr Hitchman; which having been
done ample justice to,, the several wards of the establishment were visited and
minutely examined, as also the farm and grounds, all of which afforded the
utmost satisfaction, each department of this extensive hospital affording the
fullest evidence of the greatest care and skill being exercised in the conduct
and arrangements.
The meeting having been again constituted by the President resuming the
chair, Dr Winslow called attention to the extraordinary circumstance, in this
asre o'f advance and progress, in the treatment of the insane?so far as regarded
the district hospitals for the insane in Ireland?that to the present time no
U U 2
648 ANNUAL MEETING OF MEDICAL OFFICERS.
authoritative provision was made in them for their being superintended by
gentlemen of the medical profession exclusively, as was the case in England,
Scotland, all over the Continent, and in the United States of America. True it
was that the Lord-Lieutenants of Ireland had, for some years past, according
as vacancies occurred in the public asylums in Ireland, exercised the powers
vested in them by Act of Parliament, by appointing none but physicians to
preside over those important institutions; but this was more from the force of
public opinion and other accidental circumstances than from any legal obliga-
tion imposed on their Excellencies to do so, who might, if they pleased, appoint
their valet or their butler to so responsible a charge, and be blameless in, he
admitted, such an unlikely event, so entirely was a free choice left in their
hands. He (Dr Winslow) need only refer, in proof of this, to a Bill before
Parliament last session, known to them all, having been published in the
medical periodicals of the day, for "Amending and Explaining" the Acts for
the Regulation of the District Asylums in Ireland, in which power was
to be continued to be given to the Irish Executive Government to appoint
" managers, matrons, and visiting physicians," by which it would be seen that a
resident medical officer was entirely overlooked, if not purposely ignored,
instead of being unmistakeably and most distinctly provided for. What the
term " managers" meant was a mystery to them on this side of the Channel;
but perhaps their respected member, Dr Stewart, whom he was happy to see
amongst them to-day, could enlighten the meeting on that head : if intended to
mean duly-qualified members of the medical profession, it was anything but a
flattering title to their body, and should give place to a more correct and less
offensive designation. In fact, the time had fully arrived that this Association
should express its mind upon the subject; and with this view he would, with-
out further preface, move the adoption of a resolution to the effect that it be
strongly urged that, in the Bill announced officially to be introduced into Par-
liament next session in regard to the Irish asylums, it be made legislatively
compulsory to appoint none but members of the medical profession as the chief
resident officers of those" important public institutions.
Dr Seaton said that, fully concurring in all that had been so well stated
on this very important matter by Dr Winslow, he cordially seconded the reso-
lution.
Dr Stewabt, at the special call of the meeting, begged to state that the
case was precisely as Dr Winslow had mentioned, there being no legal obliga-
tion binding the Irish Executive to commit the superintendence of the district
asylums in Ireland to medical men, but that, since the year 1843, no instance
had occurred of any but physicians being placed over them as vacancies arose
amongst the lay officials quaintly styled "managers." This new order of
things had its commencement in the Belfast Asylum, and in his own person;
for when he (Dr Stewart) was appointed, some years previously, to that esta-
blishment, his being a member of the medical profession was an accidental
circumstance, and not required, if not actually a fault; his duties being
simply " moral," and not at all in a medical capacity. In the year referred
to, however, viz., 1813, Lord St. Leonards, then Sir Edward Sugden and the
Chancellor of Ireland, seeing that changes were requisite in the internal regime
of the Irish asylums, induced the Privy Council to adopt an entirely new code
of rules and regulations for their government, which, though an improve-
ment in many important respects on the old ones, were found impossible to be
carried properly out in their new professional aspect unless by a medical man
residing in the asylums. The Governors of the Belfast Asylum in this diffi-
culty applied to the Government to permit their resident officer to act medi-
cally as well as morally, and to be recognised as the " Resident Physician"
of the institution, which was at once agreed to, thus getting accomplished a
former earnest suggestion of the Governors to the Executive, that a medical
practitioner only should have the immediate conduct of an hospital for the
ANNUAL MEETING OF MEDICAL OFFICERS. 649
insane. It -was thus that their profession obtained a locus standi within the
walls of the public asylums in Ireland, and not by any legal enactment, as
most assuredly ought to be the case, however good and liberal the acts of the
Government might have been of late on this head.
Mr. Ley strongly supported the necessity of the resolution, and referred to a
proposition of his at a former meeting of the Association, that a standing com-
mittee should be appointed to watch over all measures before Parliament
relating to lunacy, and act according as circumstances required.
After some further remarks, the resolution was unanimously adopted, and
copies of it directed to be forwarded to the chief secretary of the Lord-Lieute-
nant of Ireland and the Irish inspectors of hospitals for the insane, and also
that a deputation should wait at the Irish office in London on the chief secre-
tary, during the ensuing session of Parliament, to urge the requirement sug-
gested in the resolution being embodied in the proposed Bill to be then brought
forward for amending and explaining the Acts in connexion with the public
establishments for the insane in Ireland.
Mr. Buck made some pointed observations, incidentally arising out of the
state of the Irish asylums, upon the studied avoidance of anything approaching
to the medical element in the last report, as well as the reports generally of the
Commissioners in Lunacy, which he considered very remarkable in such im-
portant official documents.
Dr Lockhakt Robertson, after some forcible and well-received remarks,
moved a resolution pressing the proper authorities to take immediate steps for
the due establishment of a military hospital for the insane.
Dr Davey, in seconding Dr Robertson's resolution, in the spirit of which
he said he heartily concurred, stated that having had much intercourse with
military medical men, he in that way knew that the necessity was urgent for a
military asylum.
The resolution was carried unanimously.
Dr Caleb Williams, of York, referring to what Mr. Ley had said to-day
about a standing committee to watch the progress of actual legislation in lunacy
affairs, and it forcibly striking his mind that such a committee would be of the
utmost importance to be in existence to unite with and move along in every pos-
sible way with the Commissioners in Lunacy, not be in antagonism with them,
now proposed that such a committee be appointed, consisting of the President
elect, Mr. Ley, Dr Ilobertson, Dr Sutherland, and Dr Conolly.
Dr Seaton seconded the resolution (whose name had been included in it,
but was subsequently withdrawn on the ground simply that the committee
should not be too large).
Dr Winslow said that he deemed of the utmost importance the actual
existence of a committee such as was now suggested, and mentioned facts
which came within his own knowledge during the progress of former legisla-
tion in lunacy, of the serious want of such an authorised committee, and the
exertions he himself had personally to use, to have details of the greatest
moment corrected during the progress of bills in connexion with their
specialty.
Dr Bucknill (who joined the meeting shortly before this stage of the pro-
ceedings) observed, in supporting the resolution, that at the recent general
meeting in Birmingham ol' the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association,
from which he had just arrived, Mr. Spooner, M.P., pointedly stated that when
measures in regard to medical legislation were before the House of Commons,
he and the other private members were left so entirely in ignorance ol the pro-
fession's wishes in those matters of detail wherein their own interests were so
mainly concerned, that it was impossible, under such circumstances of apathy
and indifference, serious defects in legislative proceedings of a professional
character would not ensue.
The resolution, after some further remarks from Dr "Williams, Mr. Eddison
650 ANNUAL MEETING OF MEDICAL OFFICERS.
(who suggested that the committee should, if necessary, call a special meet-
ing of the Association), and others, was adopted unanimously.
Dr Bucknill, in laudatory terms, now moved a resolution expressing the
satisfaction of the Association at Mr. Lutwidge's elevation to be a Commissioner
in Lunacy.
Dr Wixslow seconded it, and stated that for several years before the Lunacy
Commission existed, of which Mr. Lutwidge had been its first and most effi-
cient secretary, he (Dr Winslow) had been on terms of private intimacy with
him, during which he always found Mr. Lutwidge a man of the highest honour
and worth.?Resolution carried.
The case of the convict Dove having been submitted to the Association by
Dr Davey, who considered him not responsible for his acts, a long and desul-
tory debate ensued, which, however, ultimated in no practical result. After
the transaction of some further routine business, the chair was vacated by Dr.
Hitchman, when a cordial vote of thanks was passed to him for his able and
urbane conduct as President, as well as for the hospitable and sumptuous
entertainment provided for the Association. The Yisiting Justices of the
asylum were also thanked for their permission being given with the best spirit
to the Association to hold their annual meeting on the present occasion in their
asylum, thus affording the opportunity of seeing all its departments, the com-
pleteness of which, in every respect, and the high order in which the institu-
tion was kept, elicited the warmest commendation of the Association.
In the evening the Association, with several invited guests, dined together,
according to custom, Dr Hitchman being in the chair. This was an exceed-
ingly social and pleasant finale of the day's proceedings, the interchange of
good feeling and friendship being abundant, and the speeches delivered on the
occasion, especially by the President, being of a high order of eloquence and
ability.
THE CONFESSION OF DOYE.
"I left the farm at Whitewell, near Barnham, in February, 1855, and then
went to reside at Normanton. I continued there until the 21st of December,
1855, at which time I removed to Cardigan-place, in Leeds. In September,
1854, I had some conversation with one John Hardcastle, who was employed
as farm-labourer at Whitewell, about ' wise men' being able to find out tiiieves.
I had shortly before that lost a dog. He said they could, and mentioned Har-
rison, of the South Market, in Leeds, as being a wise man. He then stated,
as an instance, that he (Hardcastle) had heard that the bailiffs were going to
enter his house with an execution; that he went over to consult Harrison,
and to get him to do something to keep them from coming; that Harrison
had caused the horse which was being driven by the baililfs to take fright;
that they were thrown out and injured so much, and were confined to bed so
long, that lie, Hardcastle, was able to remove the goods out of his house.
Hardcastle lived about Meanwood at this time; he went home every Saturday
night, and returned on Monday morning. He also stated that oil a former
occasion two guns had been stolen from some place at or near lloundhay, where
he was then working; that he consulted Harrison, and Harrison told him that
he would cause one of the men to pass by him the next evening and shoot a
rabbit; that a man did so the next evening, and lie was apprehended. I had
at that time given a notice of my intention to quit my farm, and I was desirous
of retaking it of Mr. King, the steward. I talked of this to Hardcastle, and
he told me that Harrison could so work upon King as to induce him to let it
me again. I then desired Hardcastle to see Harrison, and told him that the
next time I went to Leeds I would see him with him (Hardcastle). We were
THE CONFESSION OF DOVE. 651
mowing tie barley at the time when this conversation took place. Hardcastle
afterwards told me that he had seen Harrison, and that Harrison would be
glad to see me. In about a month after this I went over to Leeds with Hard-
castle. We had some potatoes to take to the market at the time. After
selling the potatoes we went to see Harrison. We met with him at his own
house; this was about noon. He arranged to meet us at the Old lied Lion
Inn (Orrell's), which is in Meadow-lane. He did meet us there almost imme-
diately. We were in a room together there until about six in the evening. I
told Harrison, in the presence of Hardcastle, that I wished to retake my farm,
and Harrison then promised to come over to my house and see about it. He
did make some arrangement as to when he would come, but I forget the time;
my impression is that there was no particular conversation about any other
matter that afternoon. I gave him the date of my birth to work on my nati-
vity. We sat drinking together, and I paid for a good deal of it. In about
ten days after this, Harrison came over to the Fox and Grapes Inn, in Kiddal-
lane, near my farm, with Mr. Orrell, of the Old lied Lion. Harrison came to
my house about nine o'clock in the morning. He left Orrell at the Fpx and
Grapes. I met Harrison near the gate leading out of the turnpike-road.
Hardcastle was with me at the time. I then said to Harrison, in the presence
of Hardcastle, ' I shouldn't like Mrs. Dove to know that you are here.' Har-
rison said that he would make all right. We then went into the fold-yard, and
thence into the granary, on the eastern side of the buildings. Hardcastle did
not accompany Harrison and myself into the granary.' When I gave Harrison
the date of my birth, at Orrell's, I understood that Harrison required that
information to work on my nativity, before he could induce King to let me the
farm again. When we got into the granary he pulled out a mahogany box,
with a large mariner's compass in it, to see what were the cardinal points in
which my house stood: after doing this he brought out of his pocket five little
Eieces of copper of the shape of halfpennies; on each of these he marked a
ind of liieroglyphical form. I then asked him what those were for. He said,
' Your house and farm are bewitched; I'll show you what they are for.5 I
then turned round and gave him a few potatoes (three) of a large kind of sets;
they were called flukes. We then went downstairs, and as we were going
down Harrison slipt one of the copper pieces in between the steps leading out
of the gangway into the fold-yard. When wye got down the stairs, Harrison
asked me if there was any way into that yard except by the large fold-gates.
I told him there was a road through the cowhouse. We then went through
the cowhouse and through a door opening into a shed; and while in that shed
he, Harrison, turned and looked round, and then threw one of the copper pieces
on to the wall-piate between the cottage and the shed, and then said, ' That's
all right.' We then went round the end of the wagon-shed to the gate where
I first met him, through that gate across the road to a gate opposite, at which
place he produced another of the copper pieces, and he there placed that copper
piece between the gate-post and the soil. We then returned to the first gate,
where he produced another, which he placed between the gate-post nearest to
the orchard and the soil there. When he had done that he commenced to
pray, at the same time leaning his head upon his arm, which was then upon
the gate-post. He prayed aloud, so that I could hear him. I do not remem-
ber the words, but it was a prayer in which he relerred to the seven wise men,
and of which he was one, and it was to free me and the farm from witchcraft.
His prayer occupied about five minutes. When lie had concluded, he said,
' There, you are all right now; no one can pass this gate to do you harm.' I
then asked him where was the other coin. He said it was in his pocket, but
that it must be planted in the house. We then went into the house, and
I then introduced him to my wife as a dental surgeon, and as having
known him some time. I then asked him to stop to dinner, and he
652 THE CONFESSION OF DOYE.
stayed. Before dinner, I and Mrs. Dove showed him round the' house, and as
we came down stairs Harrison told me that he had planted the other copper
piece. My wife was then in the bed-room. I drew some beer, and whilst we
were sitting in the common sitting-room my wife passed through that room
into the kitchens, and Harrison then said to me there, 'No person will ever
molest you,' and at the same time asked for pen and paper. I got them for
him, and lie wrote some hieroglyphical signs, and gave them to me, saying, ' If
you want to retake the farm, and you put that paper in your pocket, you may
then go to Mr. King, and he will let you it; only, you must let me know
beforehand when you are going.5 I put that paper in my pocket. Mrs. Dove
then came into the room, and the conversation then ceased. In a short time
Harrison made some remark about my wife's health,?she then looked sickly
and weak. I iold him that she had no appetite, and that she was never out
of the doctor's hands. He then said to her that if she would only use herbs
she would soon get well. He mentioned the herbs, and I was to obtain them
at the druggist's, which I afterwards did. After dinner I accompanied Harrison,
at his request, to the Pox. Hardcastle was also then with us, and as we were
going we met Orrell. As we were going I inquired of Harrison if he had
written out my nativity ? He said that he had not done it, but that he would.
He had something to drink at the Fox. We stayed there until about three
o'clock in the afternoon. I sat next to Harrison, and I gave him then half-a-
crown. The other parties could not see me give him the half-a-crown.
I next saw Harrison iri two or three weeks after he had been over at the
farm: this was at his own house. I then told him that I had not been
able to see Mr. King, and that I had lost my paper, and I asked him to give
me another. He gave me another paper, and it was then agreed between us
that I should see Mr. King on the following Wednesday. I then told him
that I and Mrs. Dove were unhappy together; but at this time some other per-
son came into Harrison's, and he said, ' We'll have a glass together at Orrell's,
and talk the matter over.' I went there, and he promised to follow imme-
diately. He came there shortly afterwards, I and Harrison, and remained
there about half an hour. At this interview I repeated the remark that I and
Mrs. Dove were very unhappy together, and he replied, ' No wonder. Mrs.
Dove is always vilifying and backbiting you to her friends, and she is two-
faced.' I then asked him if anything could be done so that we might live
happily together, for 1 had married her for love and nothing else. He imme-
diately said, ' That can be done; but it will take some time -to work it round.'
I asked him to do it, and he promised, saying, I might go home and be con-
tent, for he would cause her to meet me with a smile. He then asked me
what I was going to give him for coming over to my house, and I told him
that if he would let Hardcastle know what it had cost him I would pay him
(Harrison) the next time I saw him. I then left him and went to the Black
Swan Inn, at the bottom of Lowerhead-row, in Leeds (Mr. Swales's), for my
horse, which I had left there in the morning. I got my horse, and at this time
the ostler's wife at that inn told me that some sacks had been stolen from the
inn-yard, and which were under her husband's charge. I then said to her, ' I
know a man, or a wise man, who can tell you who has stolen them.' This was
during the time that her husband was getting my horse out of the stable.
When he came I took him into the house (that is, the house occupied by the
ostler), and I took down the name of the owner, and number of the stolen
sacks. I then mounted my horse with the intention of going to see Harrison,
for the purpose of obtaining the information as to.the thief. I started, and as
1 was passing Orrell's my horse stumbled and fell. I was thrown over the
horse's head; my right arm was dislocated. I then went into Orrell's and got
a bed there. Harrison came there, I believe, at Orrell's request. Ilarrisou
proposed to set my arm, but I preferred having our own surgeon. Mr. Mor-
THE CONFESSION OF DOVE. 653
ley's assistant came and set it, I had no further conversation with Harrison
that evening. He was offended because I would not let him set my arm. I
was removed home the same evening in a cab. In a short time after this,
Hardcastle informed me that Harrison expected half-a-sovereign. Hardcastle
was going to Leeds with potatoes for sale, and I ordered him to pay Harrison
that sum out of the money which he would receive. I was afterwards
informed by Hardcastle that he had paid it. In about ten days after my acci-
dent, I sent Hardcastle with a sample of wheat to sell in Leeds market, and
which he sold to Sutcliffe and Hartley, of Bradford; but they never paid for
it. The wheat was delivered on the Thursday, and the price was to have been
paid on the Tuesday following. I went over on that Tuesday, but Sutcliffe
and Hartley were not there; they had left word at the New Inn, Yicar-lane,
that they would meet me 011 the following Tuesday. On that Tuesday I
went with Hardcastle, but as they did not meet me at the New Inn, we went
to Harrison's to request him to try to get the money. He went with ns
to several public-houses, but could not find the parties. He then said he
would influence the parties to meet us on the following Tuesday, and pay
the money. He said he would lay a spell upon them, which would cause them
to meet and pay the money. I can't state whether Hardcastle heard this or
not. On the following Thursday, Hardcastle was in Leeds; and saw Harrison.
Hardcastle stated, on his return home, that Harrison and the parties would
meet at the Talbot Inn on the following Tuesday. On that day Mrs. Dove
accompanied me to Leeds in the phaeton, and Hardcastle went with a cartload
of potatoes on the same day. We stayed at the Black Swan Inn. I and
Mrs. Dove went to the Talbot at two o'clock. Harrison and Hardcastle came
in there at that time; we waited some time, but the parties did not come.
"VVe then went to several public-houses to search for them. Mrs. Dove com-
plained of fatigue, and said she would follow us.
" Harrison and Hardcastle went with me into the Ship Inn, and we there
met with Hartley, who walked away. Harrison promised to get the money, but
never did.
"About the back-end of October, 1854, my poor father was very poorly
indeed. I then went to Harrison, and told him so. I asked him if he would
get better; he said, 'No.' I then said to him, ' Do you know when he'll die ?'
Harrison answered, 'Between November and February.'
" In about a month afterwards I called upon Harrison again, and spoke
about the disagreement with my wife. He then told me she never would
be right until she had children, and that I had missed my mark by marrying
her at all. He also said, if she would continue the medicine which he had men-
tioned?I mean the herbs?it would soon cause her to breed, and she would
then be all right. He inquired if she had taken any of it. I told him that she
had taken some little, but she would not take any more. He then said, Go
home, and he would make all right.'. After drinking more together, I left him.
" I met him at Orrell's accidentally in December, 1854. I told him that my
father was not getting any better?could he tell me particularly when he would
die? He said he could; aud I then asked him if he would, and he then
answered, 'Yes; he will not live till the 25th of December.' Nothing further
passed at that time that I remember. My father died 011 the 2 *lth of December
111 that year; but after the interview which I have j ust mentioned, and before
my father's death, I had seen Mr. King, who would not let me have the farm.
I, in consequence of this, saw Harrison. This was about ten days before my
father's death. I told him of Mr. King's refusal, and that at the" time he
refused I had the paper in my pocket. Harrison said, ' Never mind; work your
land as usual; he will let you the farm yet; he has a spell upon him; he is an
Irishman, and will take a good deal of working upon; but rather than you
should miss the farm, it will be death to him.' At this interview I rather
654 THE CONFESSION OF DOVE.
doubted Harrison's power"; but my father's death happening before the 25th
of December, I was impressed with a strong belief that Harrison was possessed
of supernatural power.
"I left the farm in March, 1855, and went to reside at Normanton.
"About August, 1855, I had some unpleasantness with my wife, and I went
over to Harrison at Leeds. I told him of it, and he promised to make it all
right. He told me that I must let him know by letter how things went on. In
two days after this I wrote to him, stating that my wife was no better, and that
he must do something to cause peace. I sent this letter by a neighbour named
Fisher, who was a porter at the station, to post. Mrs. Dove knew that I had
written a letter, but didn't know what about. She therefore sent the servant to
Fisher's to get it back. SJie did so. Mrs. Dove then took my letter out of the
envelope, and sent a blank sheet of paper instead. I was not aware of this at
the time; but hearing some whispering between Mrs. Fisher, Mrs. Dove, Miss
Susan Jenkins (who was then staying with us), and the servant, I suspect ed
there was some deception about the matter. 1 then wrote another letter to the
same effect to Harrison, and posted it myself the same day before two o'clock.
At three o'clock I went by train to Leeds to see Harrison. When I arrived,
he had received the envelope with the blank sheet of paper therein and my
letter. He inquired the reason of the blank sheet of paper, and I told him. I
then again informed him of my unpleasantness and unhappiness with my wife.
He then said, 'You never will have any happiness until she's out of the
way.' I said, ' How do you know that ?' He said, ' If you'll come up-
stairs, I'll tell you; for I've got your nativity marked out.' I then went
upstairs with him. He there took out of a drawer a sheet of paper
about the size of that now used by you, and on which there was a circle
drawn, with the signs of the zodiac. There were also hieroglyphical forms,
opposite various figures denoting years, beginning at 27 (my age), and con-
tinuing down to 50 or 52. The figures after 27 were 32 repeated twice or
three times. He referred to the forms opposite the various figures, and read
from a book my destiny. He said that between the age of 27 and 32 every-
thing would go against me?I should have nothing but misfortunes?that at 32
the sun and moon would come in conjunction (1 think conjunction was the
word he used), and that then everything would be in my favour; that at 32
years of age I should lose my wife ; that at 32 I should marry again; that at
32 I should have a child, and that at 32 I should have an addition to my
fortune, and that for my sake he did not care how soon it was here, for until
then I should never be a happy man ; that after I was 32 everything would go
on well for a few years. He made other remarks as to different periods of my
life to this effect?that at one period I should have another addition to my
fortune; at another that I must be careful what I was about to avoid a law-
suit ; at another, I must neither travel by land nor by water, for if I did an
accident would occur; but lie ultimately said I should die respected by every-
body around me. _
" At this interview I asked him what description of woman I should marry
for my second wife F He referred again to the same paper and to his book,
and then said, f The person that you ought to marry will have auburn hair,
light complexion, and a good fortune;' and he added, 'If yon had married a
person of this description fit first, you would have done well,' He then closed
the book, and we then left and went to the New Grogs Inn, We had a glass
or two of ale each there, and then parted,
" The next time I saw Harrison was when I had walked over from Normanton
to Leeds, I had a walking-stick with me, which had been given me by William
Windsor, who is now with Mr. David Holnies, the auctioneer, I cannot men-
tion the date, but I think it was about September last. Miss Jenkins was staying
with us at the time. When I got to Harrison's he saw the stick, which had
THE CONFESSION OF DOVE. 655
my initials on it. He fell in love with the stick, and I gave it to him. My
interview was in reference to my wife. I said to him?we were talking of a sepa-
ration?4 Would she go ?' He replied, ' She knew better; but if she would, let
her go.' I told him that I did not wish for a separation, but I wished happi-
ness. He then said, 'If she goes, she will return.' We went to the New
Cross Inn, and had some ale there, and then parted. My wife inquired about
my walking-stick, and I told her that I had left it at Leeds. She afterwards,
as I believe, informed my brother-in-law, Mr. Marsden, that I had dealings with
Harrison, and that Harrison had got my stick, for in a short time afterwards I
heard that Marsden had been at Harrison's with a policeman, to get the stick
back from him. I heard this from Marsden, who wished me to give him an
authority to Harrison to deliver up the stick. I did not give the authority,
but wrote to Harrison to keep it, as I had given it to him. My wife com-
menced upbraiding me about giving the stick, and told me that if 1 would not
send for the stick she would send Miss Jenkins for it, or go herself. They both
went, but Harrison would not deliver it up. Shortly before they went over,
and also after they returned, we heard strange noises in our house at night,
after we had gone to bed. The noise was like that caused by breaking of pots,
and sometimes as if some heavy package was rolled across the floor. One night
I thought some person was kicking the door, but when I looked at the door
there were no marks. All the noises I attributed to Harrison. I afterwards
told him so, but he denied it. On the next day, after Mrs. Dove and Miss
Jenkins had been for the stick, I gave Miss Jenkins a letter to Harrison, re-
questing him to give her the stick, which he did. When the stick was returned
the initials had been removed, and the letters ' H. H.' put in their place. The
same evening that the stick was returned there were great noises in the house.
I saw Harrison again in November about my wife's temper. He said, 'Never
mind, all will soon be right; she'll die before March or before the end of Febru-
ary.' I am not certain which he said; but when he told me that my wife would
die so soon, I said to him that he had before told me that she would die
' at thirty-two,' and he then answered before thirty-two,' but ' I did not say
how much before.' We then went to the New Cross Inn, and had some ale
there. Nothing further occurred at that time that I remember. We removed
to No. 3, Cardigan-place, in Leeds, on the 21st of December, 1855. In a few
days afterwards I went to the New Cross Inn, and Harrison came in: the news-
paper was produced, and Harrison read about Palmer's ease. I then asked him
whether strychnia could be detected. He said, 'No, nor yet any other vege-
table poison.' I then said, ' What other vegetable poisons are there that can-
not be detected ?' He -replied, ' Digitalis, belladonna, particularly if it was
crystallized.' These were all he remembered at the time. I then asked him if
he could get or make me some strychnia ? We had then got to our new house,
and were much annoyed with cats. The house had been previously unoccupied,
I wished to destroy the cats by poison. I had never heard of strychnia, until
Palmer's case arose. Harrison refused to get me the strychnia, and -I told him
that I could get it elsewhere.
" I went to him again in January last about my wife, On this occasion I
gave him a book, 'The Magazine of Art.' I told him about my wife's temper,
and he again said, ' She wont live long,' I told him that she was poorly then.
He said, ' She'll never get better, us I told you hefore; she will die in February.'
I had no further communication with Harrison until Thursday, the Qth of
March, 1856. My wife died on the 1st of that month. On Thursday, the 6tl\
of March, I went tq the New CrQss Inn, and after heing there a few minutes X
sent for Harrison, He came. I announced to him my wife's deaths at the
same time informing him that, an inquest was held as to my wife's death,
He inquired the reason why the inquest was held ? I said, ' My wife died
Yery suddenly, and Mr, Morley, tlie surgeon, cannQt account fqr it, and. it is
656 THE CONFESSION OF DOVE.
known, that I had strychnia in the house. Mr. Morley thinks some might have
been spilt, and my wife have got some accidentally.' I then said to him, ' You
told me that strychnia could not be detected, but I have since seen in the
' Materia Medica' that it can. What is your opinion now ? Can a grain or a grain
and a half be detected ? For there is great difference of opinion on the subject.
Professor Taylor says that it cannot be detected twenty-four hours after death
in the human body.' Harrison said, c What! have you poisoned your wife ?' I
replied, ' No; I should be very sorry.' Nothing further passed at this time. He
left me at the New Cross Inn between two and three o'clock in the afternoon.
"On Friday, the 7th of March, while the inquest was going on at Fleisch-
mann's Hotel, I went to the back door of Harrison's house. This was about
three o'clock in the afternoon. I then said to him that the inquest was going
on, that several witnesses had been called, and that I was suspected of poisoning
my wife; and I then said to him, ' How will the case go ? Shall I be imprisoned?'
He replied, ' It will be a very difficult case; but I can work you out.' I then
said to him, 'You only say you can. Now tell me, will you?' Harrison re-
plied, ' Set yourself altogether at rest; I will.'
" I did not see Harrison again until he was examined as a witness at the
Court-house, on the 12th of March, and I had no communication with him
between the 7th and 12th of March. I had no conversation with Harrison on
the day of his examination. I merely heard the statement which he made as a
witness on that day.
" On the 2Gth of March last, at which time I was in custody at York Castle,
I wrote a letter to Harrison for the purpose of ascertaining what would be the
result of my trial. I sent this letter by a militiaman who was leaving the
prison. He promised to conceal the letter in his clothing, and to put it into
the post-office. I sealed the letter. I afterwards learned that this letter had
been found by the officers of the gaol, who had searched the militiaman on his
leaving prison. I have not sent any other letter to Harrison or any other person
secretly since I was committed to prison. "William Dove.
" Taken by me?J. M. Barret.
"(Signed at 2.50?23rd June, 1856.)"
Up to Thursday, Aug. 7, Hove maintained his innocence, but on Mr. Barret
calling upon him that morning he desired him to call again, alone, in the after-
noon, as he wished to say something to him about the murder.' Mr. Barret
accordingly did so, and the unhappy man then made the following confession,
and a fearful thunderstorm which passed over the Castle at the time gave to
the scene a character and effect which can never be forgotten by those
present:?
" The Statement of William Dove, made to Mb,. Barret, his Attorney,
on Thursday, tiie 7th day of August, 185G.
" I wish to repeat that the statement which I have previously made
to you respecting Harrison is strictly true. Harrison has, during the time
that I was at the farm at Bramliam, and also when I lived at Norman-
ton, and afterwards at Leeds, frequently told me that I should never be
happy until my wife was dead. This was when I was pressing Harrison
to put a spell upon her, so that I might live happily with her. About
the end of last year, or the beginning of this, I was m Harrison's warehouse,
opposite his house, and he then told me that belladonna could not be found in
the human body after death, particularly if it was in a crystallized state; and
he then offered to make me some, but I did not request him to do so. At
this interview he stated very positively that I should never be happy until
she was out of the way. I had no desire at this time to get rid of my wife.
My belief was that Harrison was possessed of some supernatural power, and
that lie could, through some influence, compel her to live happily with me.
THE CONFESSION OF DOVE. 657
He kept continually telling me that I should not be happy until she was
out of the way. I asked him in the month of February if he could do any-
thing to get her out of the way, and he said he would lay her on a sick bed
and she would never get better. The first strychnia was got, as mentioned by
me in my former statement, on the 10th day of February last, and for
the purpose of killing cats. It was not got for any other purpose, and
at that time I never thought of poisoning my wife. The whole of the
strychnia obtained on the 10th day of February was used for killing cats.
The second quantity of strychnia was got by me, I believe, on the Thurs-
day or Friday following, but I wont be sure as to the day. The first and
second quantities of strychnia were kept in the razor-case, which was placed
on the mantelpiece in my bed-room. I did not when I got the second quantity
of strychnia think of poisoning my wife. I should not have got the second
quantity of strychnia but for the wish expressed by Mr. Morley's assistant to
have the skin of a cat for a tobacco-pouch. I had before this given a book to
Harrison, and on the day that Elizabeth Fisher left our house I had consider-
able unpleasantness with my wife about Harrison having that book. She had
a bad opinion of Harrison, and I think feared him. I had told her when at
Normanton that he had predicted her death at the end of February. On the
Saturday after Elizabeth Fisher left, I took the paper containing the strychnia
out of the razor-case, and put it in my waistcoat-pocket. I then went to my
mother's house. In the afternoon I had previously called at Mr. Morley's
for my wife's medicine. It was an effervescing draught in two bottles.
At my mother's that evening I took the cork out of one of the bottles
and touched the wet end of it with the strychnia. I then pift the cork
in the bottle again and shook up the draught. Before this I ought
to have stated that I had during that Saturday afternoon put a very small
quantity of the strychnia, perhaps half a quarter of a gram, in some jelly
which my sister Jane brought from my mother's. My wife took a spoonful,
and made a remark about how bitter it was, and she then requested Mrs.
Fisher to take some. She did, and then remarked it was bitter as aloes. I then
took a spoonful, but did not taste the bitterness. I then stated that I did not
find the bitterness, and requested Mrs. Fisher to taste again, but she refused. I
then took a second spoonful, and tasted the bitterness. I did not swallow any.
The remainder was thrown away at that time. It was after this that I went to
Mr. Morley's and my mother's. On that Saturday evening my wife took some
of the draught in Mrs. Whitham's presence. Mrs. Whitham tasted it, and stated
that it was bitter. The draught was not shaken that night before it was taken.
My wife did not suffer from the effects of it at all. On the way from my
mother's towards home on that Saturday I threw the remainder of the strych-
nia away. I cannot tell you the feelings of my mind when I put the strychnia
into the jelly and into the mixture. I cannot describe them. I did
not think at the moment when I put it in as to its effects or conse-
quences. On the Sunday evening following, which was the. 24th day of
February, I went into Mr. Morley's surgery, and, there being no person in at
the time, I took perhaps ten grains of strychnia and folded it in paper. When
I got home I placed it in the stable. On the Monday morning I gave my wife
her draught (the effervescing mixture) about half-past nine, and at ten o'clock
she had the attack as mentioned by Mrs. Fisher and Mrs. Whitham. At
the time my wife took that draught she complained very much of the bitter-
ness, and added, that she would tell Mr. Morley about it. There were three or
four doses left in the bottle after that draught was taken, and I broke the
bottle in my wife's presence, fearing that Mr. Morley might taste it. The mix-
ture was changed on the Monday. The mixture then given was very bitter.
On the Tuesday night, or Wednesday morning, I applied the wet end of the
cork of the medicine bottle to the strychnia, as before. I think there might
658 the confession of dove.
be from half a grain to a grain of strychnia on the cork when I put it in the
bottle. I shook the mixture up. There were then only two or three doses in the
bottle. I don't remember my wife having any attack on the Wednesday. She
took her mixture 011 that day. On the Thursday I got another bottle of medi-
cine from Mr. Morley's, and I again applied the wet end of the cork to the
strychnia as before. About the same quantity of strychnia adhered as on the
former occasion. The last dose of that mixture was taken on Friday night,
at ten o'clock, and my wife was taken seriously ill in half an hour, but she
had no arching of the back on that occasion that I recollect. Mrs. Fisher is
mistaken, I think, on that point, but her statement in other respects is true,
I believe. On that Friday night I got another bottle of medicine from Mr.
Morley's. This mixture was directed to be taken four times a-day. I did not
put any strychnia into that mixture or medicine, and I did not put any upon
the cork of the bottle. Mrs. Whitham gave a dose out of that bottle in the
afternoon of Saturday. The strychnia was in the stable, where I had first
placed it, and there was no strychnia in the razor case 011 that day, nor during
any part of that week. I was drinking at Sutcliffe's public-house on that
Saturday, and I was more or less affected by liquor all the afternoon and even-
ing. About three o'clock in the afternoon I went into the stable and took
about a grain and a-half of strychnia out of the paper, and put it in another
paper, which I placed in my waistcoat pocket. I put that strychnia into the
wineglass, which contained a little water?I believe the water which was left
in the glass by Mrs. Whitham after giving my wife the third dose in the after-
noon ; but I have no recollection as to the time when I put the strychnia into
the glass. 1 gave the mixture in the evening, in the presence of Mrs. Whit-
ham and Mrs. Wood, as stated by them in their evidence. I poured the mix-
ture into that wineglass which contained the water and strychnia. I did not
put the strychnia into the wineglass in the presence of Mrs. Whitham and
Mrs. Wood, or either of them. I know that I put the strychnia in before, but
I cannot remember how long before giving the medicine. I did not, when I
gave the medicine on the occasions mentioned, think of the consequences of
giving it; but when I saw my wife suffering from the attack on the Saturday
night, it flashed across my mind that I had given her the strychnia, and that
she would die from its effects.
" I was muddled before this, and didn't know what I was doing. When the
thoughts of her death crossed my mind, I immediately regretted what I had
done, and I believe if Mr. Morley had come in at that moment I should have
told him what I had given her, so that he might have used means to restore
her. I cannot disguise the anguish I felt when I returned from Mr. Morley's
and found my wife dead.
" Palmer's case first called my attention to strychnia, but I never should
have thought of using that or any other poison for the purpose of taking my
poor wife's life but for Harrison, who was continually telling me that I should
never have any happiness until my wife was out of the way. I felt my situa-
tion immediately after seeing my poor wife's corpse, and I then feared a post-
mortem examination taking place within twenty-four hours after death, as I
understood that Professor Taylor had stated that strychnia could not be,de-
tected after that number of hours had expired. Harrison had told me that I
should marry a lady for my second wife haying auburn hair and light com-
plexion, as I before stated to you. I did think that when my wife should die
that I would make Mrs. Whitham an offer of marriage at a suitable time. I
did not think that what I was doing would cause my wife's death, and I did
not give the strychnia with a view to destroying my wife to get Mrs. Whitham.
Mrs. Whitham always treated me as a neighbour, and no more, and I wish to
add that I believe her evidence against me is strictly true.
" I have not the slightest recollection of my wife ever stating that she wished
THE ? CONFESSION OF DOVE. 659
her friends to have a post-mortem examination, as stated by Elizabeth Fisher,
and I do not believe that my wife ever made any such statement to Elizabeth
Eislier, or any other person. I once told my wife when she was ill, some weeks
before her death, that if she died there should be a post-morteni examination. I
said this because she told me her friends would blame me if anything happened
to her. She immediately objected, and requested that I would never consent
to such an examination, and added, ' My uncle Bishop will see that you have
not one.'
" I continued to believe in Harrison's power for some weeks after I was
committed to prison. I believed that he had the power to save me until June
or July. On the day when I wrote the letter commencing ' Dear Devil,' I was
in a low, desponding, and queer state. I can't describe my feelings. I during
that day thought of committing suicide. The instrument which was found upon
me on the search made that day would have been probably used for that pur-
pose. In the evening of that day I wrote that letter, but 1 cannot tell you my
feelings at that time. I did feel certain that the devil would come to me that
night according to my request. I wrote that letter, but never intended it to
be seen by any person. "When they commenced to search me for the instru-
ment I tried to conceal the letter, but the deputy-governor accidentally saw it,
and took it away. I did not write that letter in consequence of any suggestion
from any person or persons, and never mentioned that letter, or the search
which had been made on the 24th of April, to Mr. Barret, my attorney, until
within two or three days of my trial, and then only because he stated that he
had received information on the subject on the Saturday before.my trial. I
have only to add that the verdict of the jury was just and correct, and that I
freely forgive every person who has been concerned against me, as I hope to be
forgiven. " W illiam Dove.
" Condemned Cell, York Castle, August 7.
" Signed in my presence, J. M. Barret, 5.30 p.m."
The concluding portion of the letter addressed by Dove to Mr. Barret on
Eriday evening was as follows :?
" I would wish to remark, that I committed the crime through the instiga-
tion of that bad man, Henry Harrison, of the South-market, Leeds. Had it
not been for him I never should have been in these circumstances.
" I remain, respected sir, yours respectfully,
" J. M. Barret, Esq." " William Dove.
STATISTICS OF CRIME.
A Blue Book lately published contains tables of criminal offenders in the year
1854, preceded by explanations and calculations from the pen of Mr. Redgrave
of the Home Office. It appears that the total number of commitments during
the twenty-one years from 1834 to 1854 amounted to 196,864, of which
29,359 took place in 1854. The commitments of 1854 exhibited an increase of
no less than 8*5 per cent., and exceed the average of the ten preceding years
by 7'5 per cent.
This increase is unhappily general, only six of the English counties being
exempted from its influence?viz., Yorkshire, Cambridge, Cumberland, Lin-
coln, Oxford, and Salop, where a slight decrease appears. In the metropolitan
counties the increase was considerable?viz., in Middlesex, 13'4 per cent.; in
Surrey, 12'8 per cent.; and in Kent, 119 per cent. Lancashire shows an
increase of 8*0 per cent.; Derby, one of 24"9 ; Notts, one of 31T; Leicester,
one of 36-5; Warwick, one of 147 ; and Worcester, one of 13"9. In Essex
and Herts?agricultural counties?the increase was respectively 13'4 and 23*2.
660 STATISTICS OF CRIME.
In North Wales a decrease of 2-0per cent, is reported, and in Sonth "Wales an
increase of 14T per cent. It is satisfactory to add that the increase is con-
fined to the least grave classes of crime, and that violent oflences have, on the
whole, declined. In murder, manslaughter, and infanticide the aggregate
decrease is 13-6 per cent. There is an increase in'the unnatural crimes, but a
decrease of 7'6 per cent, in rapes, and attempts to violate the person. In the
newly-defined offence, " assault and inflicting bodily harm" (14 & 15 Yict.,
c. 19), the numbers are 23'7 per cent. less. There has been an increase in
burglary and violent robberies, and the robberies without violence include
above four-fifths of the commitments for indictable offences; and in this large
class the increase of 110 per cent., observes Mr. Redgrave, shows how largely
the increased commitments of 1854 are made up of the less grave offences.
Picking pockets forms an exception to this increase; while there is a large and
progressive increase in larcenies by servants and frauds. Malicious offences
against property do not comprise 1 per cent, of the total of the commitments.
In forgeries, the number of commitments has been stationary, except as
regards bank notes, in which offence an increase of 33 per cent, is reported,
progressive for the last ten years. Coining is also on the increase, probably
owing to the frequent refusal of the Mint to prosecute. There is a marked
decrease of offences against the Game Laws. Perjury has been on the increase
since the alteration of the law of evidence. Of the 29,359 offenders com-
mitted, 6,274 were acquitted and set free, 38 detained as lunatics, and 23,047
convicted of the crimes charged against them. Of these 23,047 convicts, 49
were doomed to death, 310 to transportation, 2,108 to penal servitude, 20,388
to imprisonment, and 192 to be fined or whipped. The decreased proportion
of acquittals in 1854 is very remarkable, the increased commitments having
added exclusively to the convictions. The effect of any diminution in the
severity of punishment has not been confined to the offences to which it imme-
diately referred; but has practically operated as a reduction of the whole scale
of punishment. Of the 49 persons sentenced to death, only five expiated their
crimes on the scaffold. It is sad to observe that the constantly increasing pro-
portion of female committals only slightly decreased, while the actual number
committed increased. In 1854, the proportion was 29'2 females to 100 males;
in 1853, 29*5 ; and in 1852, 25*7. In 1842 it was only 21*6. In 1854, 14,073
prisoners were tried at County Quarter Sessions, 3,119 at the Middlesex Ses-
sions, 5,394 at borough sessions, 4,571 at the assizes, and 1,512 at the Central
Criminal Court.
