The District Hospitals for The Insane In Ireland Superannuations
=================================================================

In our last number we callcd particular attention to "No. 2 Bill," then before
Parliament, " to explain and amend the Acts relating to Lunatic Asylums in
Ireland."
That Bill, we have now to state, was withdrawn by Government, owing to
the manner in which it had been mutilated in its original fair proportions after
passing through Committee in the House of Commons. Eor several reasons
we do not lament this result. One is, that we decidedly objected to the clause
it contained of interfering so seriously with the existing admirable management
of the Irish Asylums, by endeavouring to have introduced into them an ele-
ment of discord by mixing together pay and pauper patients?a change which,
we take for granted, could never have received the sanction or approval of the
able and thoroughly practical Resident Physicians of those establishments, or
of the Government Inspectors, Doctors White and Nugent. A plan of pro-
cedure more clumsy or utterly destructive to all harmony of action could not
have been conceived, or one worse calculated to be a relief to the parties for
whom it was intended to serve?viz., patients neither paupers nor in indepen-
dent circumstances. At another time we may more fully go into this point,
contenting ourselves for the present in again simply protesting against what
HOSPITALS FOR THE INSANE IN IRELAND. 613
was proposed to Parliament in this respect. A second reason we have for
rejoicing rather at " No. 2" Bill sharing the fate of the " Innocents," is that
the amendments it sustained in committee were of too sweeping a nature, so far
as placing the entire appointment of officials in the hands of the Local Boards
of Governors, which would not have been a step in the right direction in the
sister country, but exactly the reverse. The principal executive appointments
in them, we have no hesitation in saying, ought to be vested solely in Govern-
ment, as they are at present; otherwise the Irish Asylums would soon degene-
rate from the high position they have so creditably and justly reached, and
ultimately become mere offshoots of the Union Workhouses. With regard to
the vexed question of Chaplains, we are clearly of opinion that their appoint-
ment in Ireland should not be compulsory, as was, and evidently still is, aimed
at by certain parties, but simply permissive; and that the Local Boards them-
selves, being for many reasons the best judges of the necessity or otherwise of
such functionaries, should be the authority to take the initiative in their
appointment. Another cause we have for not weeping excessively at th'e fate
of "No. 2 Bill" is, that its superannuation clause did not, in our mind, go far
enough, inasmuch as it gave no claim to a pension, such being made to liinge
upon, firstly, the recommendation of the Inspectors; and secondly, it being a
sine qua non that the party seeking such should be proved to be the subject of
mental or bodily infirmity. Under a certain term of years, we think such a
restriction as the latter would be only reasonable?indeed, indispensable. But
in the case of those who had faithfully and efficiently served twenty years in
the anxious and unspeakably arduous duties of unbroken attendance in the care
and management of a public asylum?duties which will surely be admitted to
be of a most harassing and trying nature?we hesitate not to say that they are
pre-eminently entitled to claim as a right the enjoyment of their full salary thus
fairly and hardly won; for we maintain, without fear of contradiction, that
twenty years of unremitting labour in the daily?and nightly, too?anxieties of
a lunatic asylum, are fully equal to double that number in any other department
of the public service, and should be requited accordingly; the wear and tear of
mind and body the individual so circumstanced has sustained, most righteously
deserving this small reward for all that he has undergone during that period of
time in the discharge of duties impossible to overestimate in their importance to
society at large. We accordingly objected to this clause in "Bill No. 2" in
our last number, seeing that it was so scant and illiberal in letter and spirit,
and therefore were pleased that the Bill fell to the ground, in the full expecta-
tion that a better, to say nothing of a worse one, would be forthcoming in the
next meeting of Parliament. But, sooner than we anticipated, the pensioning of
the Irish Asylum Officials was again specially taken up, just before the late
Session concluded, by a private member of the House; Sir Robert Ferguson, of
the city of Derry, bringing in a Bill for that worthy object alone, the same
proving to be totidem verbis the precise clause as contained in the defunct
"Bill No. 2" of Government. This new Bill passed the several stages of a
first and second reading, and through committee, without any amendment or
objection of any kiud?as it did, it should be specially observed, in its original
Governmental shape, as one of the clauses in " No. 2but on its third reading,
Sir Robert Ferguson moved certain amendments, which were passed as a matter
of course, aud which were supposed to be merely formal, there being no debate,
explanation, or remark made on them in the House, either by him or any other
member, to say nothing of sufficient notice being given to parties most
interested. In fact, the whole affair was quite a surprise. This Bill, however,
in its new phase as an Act (19 & 20 Vic., c. 99), proved a most miserable
and discreditable affair. Instead of containing the grain of wheat in the bushel
of chaff which it merely did originally, it was plundered even of that simple
grain, those amendments referred to of Sir Robert's placing the conferring
644) REVIEWS.
of pensions nnder the regulations of the Civil Service Pension Act (4 & 5
Wm. IV.), which, for seventeen years' service, handsomely allows a party to
crave, as a matter of grace and favour, three-twelfths of the paltry ana inade-
quate salary lie might have enjoyed, and so on up to fifty years' service, when
the maximum of eight-twelfths is all that would be granted; and not even then,
unless the party had plaintively repeated " pity the sorrows of a poor old man,"
by proving himself to be infirm in mind or body (both of which he could
do beyond fail, only that long before he would have paid the last debt of nature),
and to have " discharged the duties of his situation with diligence and fidelity"
all that time! We cannot trust ourselves now to express our opinion of the con-
duct pursued by Sir liobert Ferguson in relation to the above short and simple
statement of facts. By the courtesy of Parliament, he has the title of
" honourablenor do we mean to hint that he is not entitled to such a style
of address, or that anything not perfectly honourable and straightforward was
intended in the above proceedings in the " Honourable House," in which
he was the facile princeps on this occasion; but this we will say, that the
whole proceeding bears a very extraordinary aspect, and loudly calls both for
explanation, and a repeal of an Act passed under such remarkable circumstances,
and which is neither more nor less than a sham. And further, as we have seen
elsewhere pertinently stated on this subject, we may observe, that "if either
individual members assumed to be independent, or the Legislature at large, are
desirous to maintain a character for plain dealing, they should beware above all
things of enactments so smuggled through Parliament as to compel those more
immediately affectcd to feel almost (altogether?) as if they were simply
swindled."
