On the Connexion  Between Morbid Physical and Religious Phenomena
===================================================================

Abt. V.?
:Author: THE REV, J. F. DENHA1T, M.A., F.R.S.r ETC.
pSTo. YI. of a Series.]

In several former papers of this series, references have been made
to the subject of Introspection ; as being both an effect and
reacting cause of bodily disease; and as being combined with
morbid religious and even moral phenomena, and as the indirect
cause of such phenomena. This subject will also be still more
largely referred to in future papers; and especially in the next
of them, Introspection will be considered as one of the chief
proximate causes of moral evil. I beg, therefore, to offer a
complete explanation of my views of it on the present occasion,
distributed under the following particulars :?I. The definition
of introspection. II. Proofs that it is not the normal condition
of the mind, but the effect of bodily disease, and that the indul-
gence of it augments bodily disease. III. A description of the
morbid religious phenomena with which it is frequently attended.

IY. A specification of the chief mischiefs resulting from it.,

Y. The suggestion of some means for its prevention and cure.

I. Definition. By introspection is meant, as the etymology of
the term imports, the act or habit of looking within; and it is
now to be understood as the attention of the mind being turned
inward upon itself; or, to the contemplation of its own real or
supposed phenomena, and especially of what are commonly
called its own feelings. It is briefly, the state of the mind's
positive consciousness of itself.

II. The following proofs are offered in support of the conclu-
sion that introspection as now defined is (1) not the normal
condition of the mind; but that (2) it is a result and reflex
cause of bodily disease. The most natural, and therefore the
best condition of the mind, and in reference to its entire agency,
is that of subconsciousness, or of a consciousness which although
constantly possessed, and accompanying all the mind's present
operations,* is not perceived by the mind itself; does not rise so
high as to obtrude itself on the mind's own attention. This
normal condition of consciousness, I shall beg leave to call the
negative state of the faculty; and, on the contrary, to affix the
name of positive consciousness to that state of it in which it
becomes so active, or rises so high, as more or less to occupy, and
therefore to embarrass, the mind s attention.

And with regard to the intellectual part of our nature, all persons
* Stewart's " Outlines of Moral Phil." Edin. 1829. Sec. 1?9.

are aware that all tlieir best mental operations are conducted during
the negative state of the consciousness ; when, to use popular lan-
guage, " we have become lost," or " have forgotten ourselves," in
our subject or object:?that is,when our consciousness,though still
alive, is not so active as to be perceived by us, and therefore, does
not clog the operation of any of our faculties or powers. Thus, we
never think or write, or speak so well, as when, along with a
sufficient acquaintance with our subject, we have ceased to be
aware that we are so employed. We even learn best when we
are least conscious that we are learning. Every teacher knows
the importance of inducing self-forgetfulness in the pupil, be-
cause no progress can be made until this oblivion of self is estab-
lished. With regard also to our moral powers, we are never so
virtuous and truthful as when we speak and act without having
a distinct idea that we are virtuous and truthful. The same
remarks apply also to our religious and pious capabilities. On
the contrary, if we become conscious that we are thinking upon
any subject, the process of thought becomes instantly perturbed,
or suspended?if that we are speaking, we hesitate?if that we
are acting in a just and upright manner, our moral fabric under-
goes a tremor?if that we are pious, our piety partakes of
formality and effort. These observations may be extended to
our most habitual, and even to our automatic actions. Thus, if
we become conscious of the action of breathing, nictitation,
walking, &c., these become either suspended, or performed in a
less regular and efficient manner. Even in regard of our bodily
existence in general, or of any of its particular parts, it is well
known that the highest state of health is that of a negative
consciousness?or when we do not find our attention called to
the existence or action of any portion of our frame?but that,
on the contrary, whenever we become aware that we have a
head, heart, stomach, foot, &c.,that is, whenever a positive state of
the consciousness in regard of any of our members, &c., begins, it
is a certain intimation of some injury, weakness in them, diseased
state, or disordered action. It would seem, then, that the most
perfect action of all our intellectual, moral, and religious powers,
as of our physical, ever goes on in a degree below our conscious-
ness of it; and that, on the contrary, a state of positive con-
sciousness, by whatever means produced, indicates a wrong action
of that portion of our nature to which it belongs. In fewer
words, excellence of all kinds is unconscious of its own existence
?a maxim that may be illustrated in all the various departments
of talent, beauty, virtue, piety, &c. In still fewer words, self-
consciousness spoils action.

I crave permission to introduce, at this stage of my observations,
the fullest and best reference to the subject of introspection that
I have met with, taken from a work* which I may quote with-
out thereby involving an entire acquiescence with all its contents,
by the Kev. Chauncy Hare Townshend, A.M., late of Trinity Hall,
Cambridge.

" Consciousness is susceptible of various developments, which have
never yet been properly distinguished into their several grades. Meta-
physicians have done no more than enumerate the simple consciousness
of the moment, and remembered consciousness. They have omitted
a third action of this faculty?namely, reflective consciousness, or
internal observation, which is one of the operations of consciousness ;
and, not being identical with its parent, should not be involved with
it in one common definition. Simply to feel, or simply to pass again
through a succession of former feelings with a sense of their relation
to one personal identity, is not the same as to be self-regardant and
watchful of our sensations as they arise. Under the last circumstances
the mind is manifestly in another state and tone of feeling. Its state
is then, that of introspective consciousness?or the mind's action when
self-regardant. It has ourselves for its object. It-varies in degrees,
from the constant self-scrutiny, both mental and physical, that some
persons carry on in society, when they observe their every least word,
fearful to utter aught amiss, and their own least gesture, lest they
should commit an awkwardness?to the unmixed and simple conscious-
ness of reverie. Would we find man's distinguishing stamp of mental
superiority, we must seek it in that abstraction in which the pure in-
tellectuality reigns alone, and almost free from any disturbance of the
introspective consciousness, which being of itself an act, annihilates,
pro tempore, all other acts. Were we perpetually to exercise the reflex
act of the mind?and to pause upon our thoughts with self-observa-
tion, our train of ideas would halt, and fall to pieces for want of
connexion.

" But this is not all. Any admixture of the introspective conscious-
ness detracts from the perfection of one's acquired and habitual
motions, as much as it spoils the freedom and bold expansion of our
thoughts. Of this we may soon convince ourselves. Though generally
insensible of the act of breathing, we may, by attention, become aware
of the process. What follows ? An immediate sense of uneasiness,
and interruption of that regular motion which seems to go on so
well of itself. Again, that winking of the eye, whereby the organ
is healthily preserved, becomes a torment if we think about it.

Again, too, every musician must have felt that, when he has learnt to
play a piece of music by heart, if he thinks upon the direction of his
fingers, he is apt to play false. Let him trust to the simply memorial
consciousness of his physical being, and he does not err. Again, the
operations of memory are impeded by the introspective consciousness,
as Darwin, in his Zoonomia, observes,?'We frequently experience,
when we are doubtful about the spelling of a word, that the greater
voluntary exertion we use, that is, the more intensely we think about
it, the further we are from regaining the lost association, which readily
* "Facts in Mesmerism," &c. Second edition, 1844, p. 201, &c.
recurs when we have become careless about it.' Introspective con-
sciousness, then, appears equally to mar our liberty and our memory,
both of thought and action; and consequently it should seem that,
in proportion as we can be exempted from its interference, we must
attain a higher state of intellect, and of corporeal activity. This we
may surmise; but proof is not wanting to confirm it. The state of
the philosopher who solved the problem of the universe, was avowedly
a state of abstraction, and of self-forgetfulness ; and it is equally well
known that natural sleep-walkers who can never be supposed capable
of self-scrutiny, will achieve featswhich would be the horror of their
Availing hours. They will stand, self-balanced, on the ridge of a house,
where, under the usual conditions of consciousness, they could not
preserve their equilibrium for a single moment. They will cross a
roaring torrent on a single plank?but if suddenly awaked to a con-
templation of themselves, or their situation?they will lose their footing
or perhaps die of alarm. Are these examples too far removed from
general experience ? We will, then, bring the matter at once home to
every man's personal feelings. What is it that accompanies and adds
to the awkwardness caused by timidity ? An overwatchfulness, a care
that mars itself?in fine?the too predominant presence of the intro-
spective consciousness. The shy scarcely ever forget themselves, as it
is called?make them do so, and their deportment is at once improved.
In proportion as introspectiveness is annulled, the powers of thought
and motion are developed."

It seems also deserving of notice that the evils of introspection
are recognised in the instinctive language and ideas of the un-
educated classes, when they speak of " thinking too deeply about
things/' " brooding over our thoughts/' &c., " letting things take
hold of one," " the thoughts preying upon themselves," " laying
things to heart," " falling down upon oneself;" and when they
advise those suffering from such a state of consciousness to
" divert their thoughts to other things," to " look outward rather
than inward"?which last advice is often given, from necessity,
by that class of religious teachers whose instructions chiefly
tend to awaken positive consciousness in their hearers, in order
to prevent the formidable consequences sometimes resulting
from such instructions from reaching a disastrous extreme. It
is also worthy of remark that the frequent comment of the
healtliy-minded portion of the community on the victims of
morbid religious feelings is, that such persons are " always think-
ing about themselves.

If the foregoing proofs, &c., be deemed sufficient to render
probable the position that introspection, or positive conscious-
ness, or that state of the mind in which it is self-regardant, or
its attention is directed to itself, to its own existence, percep-
tions, feelings, &c., is not the normal condition of the mind,
because it suspends, or perturbs, or perverts the mind's action?
the conclusion seems to follow that (2) such a condition of the con-
sciousness is the result of disease; and since, further, it is the
opinion of the highest medical authorities that the state of our
intellectual functions depends chiefly upon the condition of the
nervous power,* the inference seems safe that a tendency to
introspection originates in some kind or other of bodily disease
immediately or ultimately affecting the brain,?and thereby the
mind,?whether the disease be constitutional or self-induced,
whether chronic or temporary, and whether originating in ideas
first addressed to the mind, such as erroneous religious instruc-
tion acting upon an infirm or morbid temperament, &c., or in
the indulgence of introspection as a morbid gratification, or the
cultivation of it as a mistaken religious duty. The proof of the
morbid physical origin of introspection might indeed be rested
on our experience or observation, from which we learn that
neither ourselves nor others are prone to this state of mind,
except along with some conscious disease or disorder of the vital
organs.

I would here beg to resume a principle frequently propounded
in my preceding papers?that the body?the entire physical
constitution?may be the origin or source, according to its par-
ticular state in regard of health, not merely of corresponding
feelings, &c., but also of conceptions, ideas, and trains of thought,
and that a morbid physical state or action, and especially of the
brain, heart, stomach, liver, bowels, &c., excites, perhaps pri-
marily through morbid sensations, a corresponding set of morbid
thoughts, perceptions, reasonings, and imaginations, in all their
alternations and variety?or, to use the words of Gaubius, " the
mind perceives differently according to the various conditions of
the body to which it is joined, and she may be disturbed by the
body in her operations, and at some times be hindered from
thinking as she would, and at other times be compelled to think
as the body commands.

III. It is now proposed to describe the morbid religious phe-
nomena sometimes attending introspection. The patient's atten-
tion is more or less concentrated on himself, and on what is
called, in the language of a certain religious school, his " expe-
rience'?that is, upon the state of his feelings, or, to speak more
strictly, on the suggestions arising from his feelings to his mind.
Even his countenance, attitude, and manners, but especially a
peculiar introverted expression of the eyes, indicate that the
process of his auscultation to his own inward feelings, &c., is
* Cullen's " First Lines of the Practice of Physic," book iv., ch. i., paragraphs
1540-1

+ "Philosophical Discourse on the Management and Cure of the Disorders of
the Mind," by H. D. Gaubius. Translated by J. Tapprell, M.D.
going on. Yery often he endeavours to excite in himself what
he considers a desirable state of feelings, which he still mistakes
for ideas; and not a few persons succeed for a time in the
endeavour, by directing the action of the mind to some part of
the frame, chiefly the stomach, and other viscera; and from
whose morbid action the coveted feeling may be excited by the
proficient almost at will. As might be expected, the ideas he
obtains from such feelings, whether of an elated or despondent
nature, are irrational, and after passing through various alterna-
tions, end in a settled vapidity, occasioned, as it should seem, by
the exhaustion of the physical organs, &c. He then experiences
constant dissatisfaction with himself and with everything he
does, complains that he cannot feel, or " realize," religious truths
or objects, finds no " evidences" within himself of his acceptance
with God, but is full of unbelief and guilt, that his mind is cold or
dark, or that his soul is beset with horrid suggestions. These, and
all other morbid religious phenomena, are always attended with
similar phenomena in regard of other subjects and objects: thus
the patient is also otherwise excited or despondent, suspicious,
distrustful of himself, and incapable of sound mental exertion,
and even of correct moral feeling. The usual course of the
disease is its mitigation along with returning health, and increase
along with the increase of bodily ailment; it becomes chronic
when associated with chronic disorder, and along with the decay
of the physical powers terminates in fatuity.

IV. The mischiefs resulting from introspection include all the
evils that can arise from the disturbance or suspension of all the
powers and faculties of our nature; but in particular cases will
depend upon the degree to which it is exercised, and the extent
and nature of the physical disease, organic or functional, with
which it is combined; nor can it be doubted but that the indul-
gence of it, in consequence of directing the mind's attention to
the diseased physical state or action, increases such state or
action, so that the ill habit of mind and body co-act and increase
each other; and the very texture of that part of the body and the
perverted action of the mind upon it may become reciprocally both
cause and effect. Besides those evils already adverted to under
previous particulars, introspection is the especial parent of inde-
cision, uncertainty, and scepticism, which may proceed to the
extent of a total loss of confidence in all sensations, percep-
tions, and principles. Such an effect in the department of
religion is thus described by the judicious Hooker:?

" Men may many times in judgment of themselves be so confounded,
that they find not themselves in themselves. For that which dwelleth
in their hearts they seek, they make diligent search and inquiry. It
abideth, it worketh in them, yet still they ask where; still they lament
as for a thing which is past finding: they mourn as Rachel, and refuse
to be comforted, as if that were not which indeed is, and as if that
which is not were; as if they did not believe when they do, and as if
they did despair when they do not; which in some, I grant, is but a
melancholy passion, proceeding only from that dejection of mind, the
cause whereof is the body, and by bodily means can be taken away. . . .
They fasten their suggestions upon the distrustful cogitations of the
flesh, whereof finding great abundance in themselves, they gather
thereby. But tell this to a man that hath a mind deceived by too
hard an opinion of himself, and it doth but augment his grief: he hath
his answer ready, ' Will you make me think otherwise than I find,
than I feel in myself! I have thoroughly considered and exquisitely
sifted all the corners of my heart, and I see what there is. Never seek
to persuade me against my knowledge. ' I do not, I know I do not,
believe.

I would suggest, for the consideration of the reader, whether
the ancient Pyrrhonism and the absurdities of scepticism in all
ages may not have arisen from a like cause? It may also be
remarked that introspection may be a conducing cause of moral
evil. To me it seems certain that no moral evil can arise with-
out a previous act or habit of this reflex act of the mind, that
the oiigin of vice and crime is the " manet alta mente repostum,"
the " flaramato secum corde volutans," the " imo pectore," the
" intus," so often referred to as such by the Roman poets. The
Scriptures also thus describe " the wicked" and " the workers of
iniquity" They search out, or imagine wickedness; both the
inward thought of every one of them, and the heart is deep/'f
It is " the imagination of the thoughts of man's heart that is only
evil continually."J It is "when lust hath conceived that it bringeth
forth sin."? Certainly introspection is one cause of idleness, the
acknowledged origin of all sins, or rather it is the pernicious
employment to which idleness resorts, and out of which it fabri-
cates its mischiefs. Hence, too, most likely arose the Christian
maxim to lay the check upon the thoughts, or, to use its own
expression, upon "the heart as the origin of all evil tliings.""||
It would also seem to be the excellence of Christianity, that, in
regard of its facts, duties, worship, and expectations, it is not a
contemplative religion; and, I may be permitted to remark,
upon the same quality as attending the practical expression of
Christianity embodied in the Liturgy and offices of the Church
of England.

The liability to the peculiar kind of hypochondria, as, perhaps,
the physician would call it, which I have denominated intro-
spection, may, no doubt, as already intimated, be partly ori-
* Works vol. ii. pp. 592-593. Oxford, 1845. + Psalm lxiv. 5, 6.
I Genesis vi. 5. ? James i. 15. || Matthew xv. 19.

ginated or augmented by those books or that kind of preaching
which inculcate an unsparing and critical examination, not of
" our lives and conversations by the rule of God's command-
ments/' but of the internal phenomena and feelings?under the
name of self-examination ; and I beg leave to offer a refutation
of that misuse of the Scriptures upon which such a self-
examination is commonly founded. The passages usually urged
are the two following: " Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that bread and drink of that cup and " Examine
yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves."f
If, however, these passages, and any other frequently adduced
for the same purpose, be interpreted according to their context,
scope, and occasion, no direction can be fairly derived from them
for that analysis of the mental phenomena, feelings, &c., involved
in the process of introspection. A reference to any respectable
commentary will show that St. Paul, in the first of these passages,
requires the Corinthians only to examine themselves " whether
they partook of the Lord's Supper as a common meal, or as the
bond of a faction, or to promote some worldly purpose ;"J and
that in the second of these passages, the apostle directs the
Corinthians to "judge by the miraculous gifts among them, and
which St. Paul had himself imparted to them, whether Christ
spoke in, or by him, or not,"?" simply to ask themselves."^ It
is worthy of notice, that the apostle declined to "judge himself,
but left the judgment of himself to the Lord ;"f| and that the
psalmist asks of God to " examine him and know his heart; to
try him and know his thoughts; and see if there were any
wicked way in him, and to lead him in the way everlasting."^]"
It is also remarkable that the nearest approach to introspection
recorded in the Scriptures terminated in an unfavourable result.
It is that of the psalmist, who " communed with his own heart,
and made diligent search," or, as in the Prayer-book version,
" searched out his own spirits," and who consequently became
bewildered and despondent, and lost all faith in the divine
mercy, and at length ascribes his state of mind to " his own
infirmity," and adopted the better method of considering " the
works" and the recorded acts of the Almighty, as the means of
his consolation.

There is, also, extreme danger attending the attempt to raise
within ourselves an intense perception of any of the realities of
our creed,?to "realize" such things, as it is called,?because, it
being impossible to know when such a perception is adequately
raised, the mind, habituated to the attempt at raising it, strains
its own powers to an unlimited extent, and ultimately under-
mines its own energies.

It was, no doubt, a sense of the general evils resulting from
introspection that induced " the self-torturing sophist" Rousseau,
who was himself a miserable sufferer from them, to maintain
that it is so far opposed to our nature, that "the man that
reflects is a monster/' It must, however, be allowed, that the
most correct, as well as most serviceable, of all our perceptions,
?intellectual, moral, and religious,?are those which first and
almost immediately arise in the mind; and that, on the con-
trary, those which are the result of the most laborious thought
and intense feeling are generally the most absurd, and even
immoral. It is part of the great poet's description of the
dangerous man, that "he thinks too much and certainly, the
best disposed and conducted persons are those who do not
scrutinize their thoughts and feelings too deeply.

V. The prevention and cure of a tendency to.introspection,
considered as the result of bodily disease, must be sought?
primarily, at least?in the care and restoration of the bodily
health. Along with medical means appropriate to the case, the
utmost care should be taken to prevent the mind's attention
from being turned inward upon itself, or upon its own thoughts,
&c, by directing it entirely to outward and interesting objects
and engagements, and to a diversity of them in a natural but
unbroken succession. Idleness ought to be especially avoided,
as one chief cause of this malady, and particularly in the case of
bodily disorder?of which, however, it is both the effect and
cause. The natural liability of the mind to become disordered
when disengaged, is evident even in the cessation of its activity
preliminary to sleep, and during imperfect sleep itself. Hence
the poet who best understood human nature, whether sane or
diseased, puts the prayer into the lips of a good man,?
" Merciful powers,
Restrain in mc the cursed thoughts, that nature
Gives way to in repose."f
It is, also, sometimes requisite to forbid the study of mental
philosophy to such persons as are prone to introspection, and to
which study they are often inclined, and who commonly imagine
that they are studying the phenomena of the mind, while, in fact,
they are only contemplating their own morbid feelings. No
persons, indeed, under an inferior state of health, should indulge
reflection, which, even in the best state of health, generally
injures both mind and body, and too frequently raises a host of
irrelevant ideas, and useless, if not pernicious, feelings. When
' * " Julius CcesarAct i., Scene 11. + " Macbeth," Act ii., Scene 1.
carried beyond due bounds its results may be formidable. I
find two cases in my memoranda, both of them of persons of
learning and talent,?the one of a man who meditated on death
till he acquired the fixed idea that he possibly had already
died, and was already in the state of existence after death; and
the other, of a man who, by too long and profoundly studying
the subject of the Divine existence and attributes, became tor-
mented with the propensity to ask why he himself was not the
Divine Being. Certainly it is preferable to be " fools of nature/'
than
" So horridly to shake our disposition,
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls.

It is also advisable to prohibit the perusal of religious bio-
graphies, whicli too frequently excite an inclination, or a sense of
duty, especially in hypochondriac temperaments, to cultivate a
tone of sentiment and motive never really possessed by any
human being. Nor less needful is it to inculcate a virtuous
satisfaction with the attainment of ordinary virtues, and the due
performance of common duties. The victims of introspection
not unfrequently are plagued with an ambition
" For that goodness, which, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in its own too much.

It is in consequence of this emulation of ideal excellence,
co-operating with disease of the physical constitution, that the
anguish of a mere intense consciousness may be mistaken for the
action of conscience, contrition, or humility, but whose unfailing
result is merely religious indolence or despair. All stimulants
and excitements, physical and mental, should be avoided, for
they all have a tendency to heighten the self-consciousness; and
in this quality consists their attraction and their danger. The
author of the "Natural History of Enthusiasm" remarks on the
too great possibility of " rushing from the scenes of an excited
devotion to the chambers of filthy sin."$ It should be the
constant object of us all to use the means of grace simply as
means, and with faith in their efficacy, and to take more care of
our conduct than of our feelings, for these will generally take
the direction, good or evil, given them by our practical de-
meanour. It is also a good rule to turn the attention from the
object or idea that excites the undue action of the consciousness
to that undue action itself; for when the mind is drawn off from
the object or subject to attend to its own operation, that opera-
tion ceases and escapes our notice ; and, what is equally valuable,
we also forget the subject or object.?
* "Hamlet," Act i., Scene 4. + "Hamlet, Act iv., Scene 7.
Isaac Taylor, ? Reid, Essay i., cli. vi., sec. 4.
