On Some Unrecognised Forms of Mental Disord-Uk
===============================================

V
Art. VIL

BY FOKBES WIN SLOW, M. D.
{Continued from page 90.)
I NOW proceed to cite a few illustrations of this type of unde-
tected insanity. A lady, who up to the age of forty-three was
never known to manifest anything resembling a passionate dis-
position or a bad temper, became, after the birth of her last
child, subject to paroxysms of overpowering and ungovernable
passion, induced by the most trifling and apparently insignificant
causes. This continued for several years, her state of mind never
being considered otherwise than sound. I had several oppor-
tunities, after her morbid condition was recognised, of observing
her fits of rage ; and certainly I never witnessed any demonstra-
tions off the stage so truly appalling. Her intellect was not
deranged, id est, there was no aberration of idea in connexion
with the case ; there was no appreciable delusion, no perver-
sion of the affections, and no hallucinations of the senses. Her
mental affection manifested itself solely in these sudden par-
oxysms of intense passion. These attacks generally occurred
once a week, sometimes only once during the month ; but for a
short period she had them more frequently. They were almost
invariably preceded by vertigo, pain in the occipital region,
and a dimness of vision. It was the presence of these
physical symptoms that led to the supposition of the existence
in this case of some undetected cerebral mischief. I ordered
leeches to the head, a few days in advance of the expected par-
oxysms ; regulated the bowels and secretions, and thus greatly
diminished the intensity of the passionate excitement, but failed
in entirely curing the case. Dr Cheyne refers to a somewhat
similar instance in his work on "Partial Derangement of Mind
ISSUE
OX SOME UNRECOGNISED FOllMS OF MENTAL DISORDER. 283
associated with Religious Impressions." He says, a friend of his
was one day n ing with a clergyman of refined manners, who
for many years had been devoted to the service of God. To the
amazement of his friend, Ins companion, without any adequate
provocation, fell into a paroxysm of ungovernable fury, swearing
at a wood-ranger, and threatening him with vengeanc^, becaus?
he had been dilatory in obeying an order which he had received re-
lative to a matter of little importance. Had (observes T)r fWnfA
this fact become public, all the devotedness to his profession for
which this excellent man was distinguished 1 i '
have been considered as assumed, and?his habitual l
demeanour, arising from a sense of his own umvorthinesTas^he
result of hypocrisy It appears that this gentleman had'a short
time previously undertaken a duty which led to over-excitement
of the brain. He was quite conscious of the incongruity of his
conduct. It appears that his only brother had died in an asylum
I have a young lady under treatment whose only appreciable
morbid condition is that of being subject to violent and uncon-
trollable fits of passion. These attacks frequently occur durino-
the night. The poor little creature is painfully conscious of her
sad infirmity, and assures me that she struggles heroically against
it. We sometimes in practice see a modified form of this affec-
tion exhibiting itself in a bad, morose, and capricious disposition,
called by Dr Marshall Hall, who has seen several of these cases,
"temper disease." This affection is not, however, confined to
the female sex. A celebrated member of the House of Com-
mons, now dead, had periodical attacks of this nature, particularly
after his brain had been overwrought. I was informed by a par-
ticular friend of the gentleman to whom I refer, that he once
saw him in a terrible paroxysm of fury after making an election
speech. He was perfectly conscious that at these periods he was
temporarily beside himself. He was in the habit of dashing cold
water over his head during the fit, and occasionally when suffer-
ing from much physical exhaustion he has been known, with
great benefit, to drink at a draught a pint of port wine. The
celebrated Spanish General Galvez was subject to attacks of this
nature. A bottle of claret was his remedy. It immediately
composed his mind, piobably, as Dr Rush remarks, by over-
coming a weak, morbid action, and producing agreeable and
healthy excitement of brain. Would not, adds Dr Rush, a dose
of laudanum have been a better remedy for the purpose? A
young gentleman was thrown from his horse, and fell upon his
head. For ten minutes after the accident he continued in a
state of coma. Since his recovery he has been subject to fits of
passionate excitement. These attacks are generally preceded by
severe headaches. His mental faculties do not appear much, if
284i ON SOME UNRECOGNISED FORMS OF MENTAL DISORDER.
at all, impaired, but lie continues to suffer from these morbidly
painful ebullitions of temper. Prior to the injury, he exhibited
the most extraordinary degree of self-control and equanimity of
temper. Dr Beddoes refers to the case of a lady, who, after
her recovery from an attack of brain fever, became extremely
irascible. This was the reverse of her natural disposition. She
made herself so offensively disagreeable to all her family, that
her husband, a most amiable and self-denying man, was com-
pelled to separate himself from her, and abandon his once happy
fireside.
A somewhat similar case I visited in consultation with Dr.
Webster. In this instance the lady was in the habit, during
her paroxysms of passion, of seizing hold of her husband's hair
and tearing it out by handfuls. This poor fellow has often come
to me in great distress, having a full assurance of his wife's in-
sanity, beseeching me to protect him from her acts of insane vio-
lence. She was clearly disordered in her mind, but neither Dr.
"Webster nor myself could detect, in our consultations with her,
sufficiently conclusive evidence to justify us in signing a medical
certificate authorizing her confinement. We both lamented that,
owing to a defective state of the law, we could not grapple with
the case; but in this, as in numerous anomalous instances of
disordered mind,we felt that nothing could be done, and matters
must be allowed to take their course.
I have referred to a certain morbid mental condition, exhibit-
ing itself exclusively in acts of cruelty and brutality. This form
of unrecognised disorder may exist unassociated with delusion.
There is much of this latent and undetected alienation of mind
in real life, producing, within the sacred precincts of domestic
life, great irregularities of conduct and a fearful amount of do-
mestic misery. It often coexists with great talents and high
attainments, and is compatible with the exercise of active philan-
thropy and benevolence. The ordinary actions or conversation
of those so affected, in many cases, would not convey to a stranger
an idea of the existence of such a sad state of the intellect.
Howard, the celebrated philanthropist, affords an unhappy illus-
tration of this type of disorder. He is represented to have
been a tyrant in his own house. His cruel treatment caused the
death of his wife. He was in the habit, for many years after her
death, of doing penance before her picture. He had an only
son whom, for the slightest offence, he punished with terrible
severity. He was in the habit of making this son stand for hours
in a prescribed grotto m the garden. The son became a lunatic,
as the result of this brutal treatment. Several similar cases have
been brought under my observation. In one instance, temporary
confinement was resorted to, but without positive advantage.
ISSUE
ON SOME UNRECOGNISED FORMS OF MENTAL DISORDER. 285
The paroxysms of ungovernable brutality returned immediately
after the patient's return home.
A lady, moving in good society, happily married, accomplished,
"well educated, of sweet temper, and with a mind under the con-
trolling influence of religious principles, manifested, at the age
of forty-five, an extraordinary change of character and habits.
She became irritable from trifling causes; was continually quar-
relling with her husbaud and servants; discharged her trades-
men, accusing them of acts of dishonesty; and offended many of
her most intimate friends and relations by her cold, and often
repulsive manner. This state of mind continued for two years,
during which period she played the capricious tyrant within the
sphere of the domestic circle. Her husband became nearly
broken-hearted; his friends and relations could not enter his
house without being insulted ; he neglected his business, and his
health became seriously impaired from constant anxiety. A new
phase of the malady, however, exhibited itself. ' She one day
accused her husband of gross infidelity. Proof was demanded.
She immediately produced several anonymous letters which she
had received, containing a minute, circumstantial, and apparently
truthful account of her husband's misconduct. These letters ap-
peared to substantiate, as conclusively as such documentary
evidence could do, the accusations. No person doubted the
genuineness of these letters. Her friends, however, refused to
recognise, even at this time, her actual morbid state of mind. She
subsequently had an epileptic seizure, followed by partial para-
lysis. I then saw the case. Her cerebral condition being then
apparent, she was removed from home. It was now discovered,
beyond a doubt, that this lady had written the anonymous
letters to herself, accusing her husband of infidelity,?had ad-
dressed and posted them, and had eventually become impressed
with the conviction that the letters were actually written by a
stranger, and contained a true statement of facts. They had,
as it afterwards appeared, been concealed about her person for
nearly six months!
Not many months back, I was requested to visit a lady, who,
after a painful ancl dangerous accouchement, exhibited, without
any adequate exciting cause, an inveterate feeling of hatred to-
wards one of her children. She treated this child with great and
systematic brutality; and to such an extent did she carry this
morbid and unnatural feeling, that her husband was obliged to
remove the child from the house, and to place it under the care
of a relative in a distant part of the country. I had no doubt
at the time that this person's mind was disordered. Such was
my written opinion. The idea was, however, repudiated by
nearly all the members of the family, who obstinately closed
286 ON SOME UNRECOGNISED FORMS OF MENTAL DISORDER.
their eyes to her sad and melancholy condition. The only evidence
that existed, at that period, of mental disorder, was her unna-
tural alienation of affection, and her brutal conduct towards one of
her children. This state of mind appeared unassociated with
any appreciable delusive ideas. Three weeks had scarcely elapsed
since my first consultation in this case, when I was informed that
this lady had made an unsuccessful attempt at suicide. It was
then obvious that she was not in a sane state of mind, and her
family no longer hesitated in placing her in a private family,
under close restraint. We occasionally observe evidences of this
morbid state at a very early period of life, and it is indicative of
an original organic defect in the constitution of the intellect.
I cite the following case from the Times:?Thomas Pepper,
fourteen years of age, a pot-boy, a clever lad, but of sullen
and morose disposition, committed suicide by hanging him-
self in an arbour ^ in his master's bowling-green. It ap-
peared from the evidence that the mind of the deceased was
peculiarly formed, his conduct frequently evincing a pre-
disposition to cruelty. ^ He had been frequently known to hang
up mice and other animals for the purpose of enjoying the pain
which they appeared to suffer whilst in the agonies of death.
He would often call boys to witness these sports, exclaiming?-
" Here's a lark ; he is just having his last kick." He had often
been known to catch flies and throw them into the fire, that he
might observe them whilst burning. He had also been observed,
whilst passing along the street, to pull the ears of the children?
lifting them off the ground by their ears; and when they cried
out with pain, he would burst out into a fiendish paroxysm of
delight at their sufferings. Witnesses deposed that about four
years previously, when only ten years of age, he attempted to
strangle himself, in consequence of his mother having chastised
him. He locked himself up in a room, and, when discovered,
life was nearly extinct. I refer to this as an illustration of a
type of mental disorder arising from a congenital mal-organiza-
tion of the brain and intellect. This morbid disposition may be
either connate, hereditary, or may be the sequelce of disease
affecting the healthy condition of the brain. It occasionally
supervenes upon injuries of the head.
Mr. Shute, surgeon, of Mecklenburgh-square, consulted me
respecting a youth whose whole moral character had become
completely changed in consequence of a severe injury that he
had sustained. This young gentleman, when of the age of
eighteen or nineteen, was attacked by fever. In a paroxysm of
delirium he sprung violently out of bed, and severely cut his
ankle ; considerable haemorrhage followed. After his recovery,
his whole moral character was found to have undergone a com-
IOOUC
ON SOME UNRECOGNISED FORMS OF MENTAL DISORDER. 287
plete metamorphosis. From being a well-conditioned boy, kind
and affectionate to his parents, steady in his habits, sober, of
unimpeachable veracity, he became a drunkard, a liar, a thief,
and lost all sense of decency and decorum! His intellectual
faculties were unaffected. He was clever, intelligent, sharp-
witted, but his every action was perfectly brutal.? This boy,
prior to his illness, 'was known to hang with endearinc affcction
round the neck of his mother; but after this sad change, I have
seen him attack her with brutal and savage ferocity.' This
patient was for some years in close confinement. He was subse-
quently sent abroad; but during a voyage to the East Indies he
mysteriously disappeared one evening from the quarter-deck of
the ship, and is supposed to have committed suicide bv jumping
into the sea. We occasionally meet another type of unrecog-
nised mental disorder. I refer to cases in which there appears
to be a 'paralysis of the moral sense. Such cases are not inap-
propriately termed moral idiots.
A young gentleman, who had been greatly indulged and
petted at home, exhibited, shortly after going to school, a morose,,
cruel, and revengeful disposition. He quarrelled with the other
boys?committed several petty acts of robbery, accusing others-
of being the culprits. He pursued his studies with intelligence,
and was generally at the head of his class. His conduct became
so systematically brutal, savage, and untruthful, that his father
was requested peremptorily to remove him. The gentleman
under whose care the youth was placed, was induced, by the
earnest persuasions of the father, to withdraw his request and
retain the boy. For several days he was noticed to be unusually
taciturn. He was perceived to be busily occupied one morning
in writing: being called suddenly out of the room, his letter was
examined, and it was found to contain the details of a plan he had
carefully concocted for the murder of one of the other boys, to-
wards whom he entertained feelings of rancorous animosity. 'His
letter was written to a boy who had left the school for miscon-
duct, and who appeared to be his confidant. He had procured
a long, sharp-pointed bodkin, which he intended, whilst his
victim was asleep, to drive into his heart by means of a hammer
which he had in his possession. In the letter, giving a minute
description of the contemplated murder, he says?" To-niglit I
will do for the little devil." This boy was immediately placed
under the care of his father, and at the advice of an eminent
provincial physician, he was, without loss of time, subjected to
close restraint. I am informed, that there is now no doubt of
his insanity. I did not see this case myself, but I obtained these
particulars from the father of the young gentleman who had so
NO. II.?NEW SERIES. U
?
288 ON SOME UNRECOGNISED FOEMS OF MENTAL DISCEDEE.
narrow an escape of his life. If this youth had committed
murder, what would have been the verdict of the jury ?
N. B., aetat. sixteen, of singularly unruly and intractable cha-
racter, selfish, wayward, violent without ground or motive, and
liable, under paroxysms of his moodiness, to do personal mischief
to others. He was not, however, of a physically bold character.
He was of fair understanding, and exhibited considerable acute-
ness in sophistical apologies for his wayward conduct. He made
little or no progress in any kind of study. His fancy was vivid,
supplying him profusely with sarcastic imagery. He was sub-
jected at different times to a firmly mild and to a rigid disci-
pline. Solitary confinement was tried, but to this he was im-
passive. He was sent to school, where he drew a knife upon one
of the officers of the establishment, and produced a deep feeling
of aversion in the minds of his companions by the undisguised
pleasure which he showed at some bloodshed which took place
in the town during a political disturbance. He manifested no
sensual disposition, and was careful of property. His conduct
became worse, and more savagely violent to his relatives. It is
recorded that, at the early age of thirteen, he stripped himself
naked and exposed his person to his sisters. I am indebted to
Dr Mayo for this interesting illustration of what I term moral
idiocy, or congenital depravity. W hen referring to this pain-
fully anomalous class of affections, the late Dr Woodward,
Physician to the State Lunatic Assylum of Massachusetts, ob-
serves,?
" Besides a disease of the moral powers there seems to me to be in
some cases something like moral idiocy, or such an imbecile state of
the moral faculties from birth as to make the individual irresponsible
for his moral actions. The persons to whom I refer have rarely
much vigour of mind, although they are by no means idiots in un-
derstanding."
A boy under Dr Haslam's care, only thirteen years of age,
appeared to possess no one of the moral faculties, and yet he was
conscious of his lamentable state; he often asked, " why God
had not made him like other men." Has not Shakspeare jjlaced
in Edgar's mouth a faithful portrait of this class of case ? When
delineating his own character, Edgar exclaims,?
" I was a serving man, proud in heart and mind,
That served the lust of my mistress's heart,
And did the act of darkness with her ;
Swore as many oaths as I spake words;
Wine I loved deeply, dice dearly :
I was false of heart, light of ears, and bloody of hand;
Hog in filth, fox in stealth, wolf in greediness,
Dog in madness, lion in prey."
ON SOME UNRECOGNISED FORMS OF MENTAL DISORDER. 289
A boy, in early life, was struck violently upon tlie head when
at school by a brutal fellow employed as usher. He was par-
tially stunned,^ but recovered from the effects of the injury.
When of sufficiently advanced age, he joined his father in busi-
ness. He became subject to attacks of headache, particularly if
exposed to much anxiety. Fox some months lie continued sullen,
was often absent from the counting-house, became the associate of
the lowest class of society, and was detected in abstracting several
large sums of money from his father's private desk. In this condi-
tion he remained for seven or eight months, no one suspecting the
morbid state of his intellect. One morning whilst sitting in the
counting-house, he suddenly seized one of the clerks *by the
throat and attempted to throttle him. A severe scuffle ensued.
Upon separating the combatants, it was discovered that tlie
gentleman's mind was obviously affected. He became suddenly,
as it were, demoniacally possessed. He poured fourth a volley of
filthy oaths, and an amount of obscenity appalling to those about
him. There appeared no impairment of the reasoning powers,
of the memory, or reflective faculties. He suddenly lost all per-
ception of truth, decency, and propriety. I saw this poor fellow
in several of his paroxysms, and must confess, if I were disposed to
believe in the possibility of demoniacal possession, I should cite
this case as one illustrative of the fact. I have referred to instances
of unrecognised monomania floating upon the surface of society.
I am acquainted with two existing cases of this form of mental
disorder where disease of the mind is not suspected. The affection
exhibits itself in unreasonable and morbid hatred to one member
of tlie family. One child, without any valid reason, is ostracised
by his mother from home, in consequence of her morbid hatred
of him. In the other case one out of a large family is treated
with great harshness, and occasionally with cold neglect, by his
only parent. In both these instances, I have no doubt some
monomaniacal idea exists, but is unrecognised. Having been
consulted in one of these cases, I have recommended the son to
whom, unhappily, the concealed delusion relates, to issue a Com-
mission of Lunacy, with the view of protecting his pecuniary
interests. On all other points, no mental infirmity can be de-
tected ; and with regard to her other children, her affections
remain intact. I feel quite assured that this lady has no ground
for this unnatural feeling. These latent and unrecognised attacks
of monomania frequently lead to overt acts of violence, crime,
brutality, and suicide, and very often to alienation of property,
no departure from healthy mind being suspected. A few years
back, I received a summons from Mr. Gilbert Abbott A'Beckett,
the police magistrate, to examine a case of alleged insanity. _ It
appears that a labouring man had committed several serious
U 2
?
290 ON SOME UNRECOGNISED FORMS OF MENTAL DISORDER.
assaults, and had consequently been arrested by the police, and
temporarily confined. This man was examined by a medical
gentleman, who pronounced him to be a lunatic, without being
able to assign sufficient specific reasons for such an opinion.
Mr. A'Beckett had, on more than one occasion, investigated the
case, and had taken the evidence of the medical man referred to,
but could detect no insanity in the man's appearance or conver-
sation. The medical gentleman asserted it to be his belief that
the prisoner was insane, but could give no satisfactory reason for
this opinion beyond the man's apparently unreasonable conduct
and mad acts of violence. I obeyed Mr. A'Beckett's summons,
and had to examine the prisoner publicly in court. It was
not until after the expiration of nearly half-an-hour that I ob-
tained any semblance of a clue to the actual state of the man's
mind. I subsequently discovered that he was unequivocally a
monomaniac. He believed that a strange person, having evil
designs upon him, was in the habit of placing daily a small pill
upon the mantelpiece of his bed-room ; that this pill (which he
was compelled to swallow) contained an ingredient that greatly
excited him, destroyed all power of self-control, and led him to
commit the acts of violence of which he stood charged. His
insanity then became obvious, and Mr. A'Beckett, without any
hesitation, signed a warrant committing him to an asylum. It
appears that this poor fellow had been severely punished on pre-
vious occasions for different acts of violence, no one suspecting
the existence of mental disorder. It was not until I had sub-
jected him to a close and rigid examination for nearly three-
quarters of an hour, during which the lunatic showed extra-
ordinary ingenuity in parrying my questions, that I could
establish, with satisfaction to myself, the presence of this mono-
maniacal idea. Let us charitably hope, that many extraordi-
nary and apparently unreasonable and motiveless acts of
brutality, violence, cruelty, passion, and crime, that appear to
result from trifling and inadequate exciting causes influencing
naturally weak, badly-organized minds, may have their origin in
some latent and concealed insanity, and arise from a morbidly
uncontrollable and unrecognised mental delusion. Is not the
sad history of crime fraught with illustrations of this kind ?
{To be continued.)
