On the Connexion Between Morbid Physical and Religious Phenomena
=================================================================

Aet. III. ?
No. 5 op a Series.
BY THE BEV. J. E. DENftAM, M.A., E.R.S., ETC.
The present paper will contain an account of those co-existing
morbid physical and religious phenomena which the writer con-
siders to have come under his notice, belonging to the depart-
ment of Remorse. His design renders it requisite,?(1) to ascer-
tain what is to be understood by genuine remorse; (2) to de-
scribe the characteristics of spurious remorse; (3) to adduce
reasons for assigning to them a merely morbid and physical
origin ; (4) to suggest means of prevention and cure.
(1) By genuine remorse, according to the definition of it given
by Clarendon, Bishop Hall, &c., and derived from the etymology
of the word, is meant, " the keen pain or anguish excited by a
sense of guilt; compunction for a vicious, or sinful act com-
mitted." Dr Thomas Brown describes it as " the dreadful moral
regret arising from the certainty that we have rendered ourselves
unworthy of the lore of man and of the approbation of our
God"?" the salutary influence of conscience, which, though it
cannot restore innocence itself, may at least, by the images which
it awakes, soften the mind to that repentance which is almost
innocence under another form,"?" that terrible voice which it
is impossible to fly, because it is with us wherever we may fly,
and which we can still only in one manner; by acting so as to
merit, not its silence only, but its applause."* St. Paul defines
it as the accusing testimony of conscience, involving both the
existence of the moral " law written in the hearts of all men,"
and the painful consciousness of having transgressed that law :t
* "Lectures 011 tlie Philosophy of the Human Mind." Edinburgh. 18S0,
pp. 428, 233, 633.
f Rom. ii. 14, 15.
40 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID PHYSICAL
as "godly sorrow, working repentance unto salvation not to be
repented of:*?literally, sorrow according to Gocl, "a sorrow
arising from causes out of which God would have it arise, and
which have the effects he wishes them to have/'f According to
these definitions, genuine remorse is not only painful, but is
also intelligent, pious, and curative, or promotes moral improve-
ment ; " is operative, diligent, and instrumental to caution and
strict walking?the mother of holy living."^ We must there-
fore (2) consign to the department of mere spurious remorse all
those feelings, &c., which though in the latitude, or through the
imperfection of language, commonly passing under the name of
Remorse, have not these qualities nor tend to these results; but
have only a distorted or inefficient semblance of them, amounting
only to a mere rue (rudo), and consisting only of indefinable " low
spirits," dread, anxiety, vexation, hypochondriacal grief and
woe; and attended with a general torpor or debility of the
judgment. The distinction between genuine and spurious re-
morse is intimated in the New Testament by the restriction of
the term /ueravoia, or reform, to the former, and fxerafxiXeia, a
mere sorroiv, to the latter; " because every one who reforms,
repents ; but every one who repents, does not reform."? The
Romans also called the former conscientia, pietas ; the latter
furice, morsus, emorsus. Horace thus describes a good re-
pentance.
" Scelerum si bene poenitet,
Eradenda cupidinis
Pravi sunt elementa; et tenerse nimis
Mentes asperioribus
Formandse studiis." J|
The prophet Hosea describes the subjects of spurious remorse
as " not crying unto God with their heart, when they howled on
their beds : as returning, but not to the Most High/'1[ the dis-
tinction being here made, as, in regard of the mere semblance
of virtues, elsewhere, " not unto me,"** having neither pious
motives, nor producing moral reformation.
(3) The following reasons are offered for assigning to the phe-
nomena of spurious remorse a merely morbid and physical
origin:?
I. It may be observed, generally, that spurious, or unintelli-
gent, irrational, and unimproving remorse in the abstract, or
when arising from even innocent causes, is never unassociated
with either positive indications of bodily disease, or with a morbid
* 2 Cor. 7, 10, 11.
t Bishop Jer. Taylor.
? Campbiell, "Diss." 6.
m Ch. vii. 14, 16.
+ Rosenmiiller, Schol. in loc.
Sermon 3, on Godly Fear. Part. i.
|| Carmen, Od. xxiv. lib. 3.
** Zech. vi/. 5.
AND RELIGIOUS PHENOMENA. 41
diathesis of the body, loose fibre, sensitive and imaginative
temperament, or at least, with a diminished state of physical
power. The mildest form of it is the penitential regret experi-
enced along with fatigue, arising, especially, from over-excite-
ment, or from an unusual degree of innocent enjoyment; as in
the evening or morning after " a day's pleasure/' or during the
homeward journey from a tour, or an excursion. It increases
with the increase of disease ; declines with convalescence : and,
except in hypochondriacal temperaments, wholly ceases with the
restoration of health and strength. In such temperaments it is
liable to be revived by whatever excites the nervous system. Its
exacerbations follow a full meal, are greatest at night and least
in the morning; are mitigated by cathartic medicines and other
means of alleviating hypochondriacal disorders.
II. Paroxysms of spurious remorse peculiarly follow the
grosser sins of the flesh; as when the transgressor awakes in the
morning, " ccena desurgat dubia,' and becomes conscious of the
excesses and irregularities of .the preceding evening, and has,
what in popular language are called, " the horrors/'?
" quin corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat una,"
is ashamed of himself; and vexed at the disability of mind, body,
and estate, which he has incurred. His desponding or excited
emotions are, however, all connected, either with the stomach,
which Haller justly calls "the conscience of the body/' or with
the heart, or with the brain; and generally partake more or less
of delirium tremens:?are alleviable, and, perhaps, for many
successive occasions, by alcoholic stimulants, and by other means
which indicate the merely physical origin and nature of such
emotions. Spurious remorse, indeed, in any violent degree,
rarely follows immediately upon any depravity wholly uncon-
nected with debauchery.
III. It is, also, seldom permanent until the physical powers
have become, by such means, permanently impaired. Valetudi-
nary sensualists have often remarked to me, that they experienced
only temporary and trifling visitations of what they called re-
morse, until their health had become seriously damaged or com-
pletely undermined.
IV. Spurious remorse, however intense, produces no lasting
reformation of conduct, gathers no improvement from religious
motives, or even from considerations of self-interest. Its ten-
dency is rather to weaken the moral powers and the judgment,
by occupying the mind's attention with the physical feelings.
Thus, the sensualist who, under the actual endurance of his
miserable "next morning" sensations, may make resolutions,
42 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID PHYSICAL
vows, promises?utter profuse self-condemnation and impassioned
prayers, may, nevertheless, too often, be found to incur, perhaps
in the evening of the same day, or at no distant period, a re-
newal of all his sufferings and humiliations, and thus to ex-
emplify the Proverb that " as a dog returneth to his vomit, so a
fool returneth to (margin, iterateth,) his folly:"* and to illus-
trate St. Peter's comparison of him to "the sow that was washed
and turneth to her wallowing in the mire."*f* The following case
of such fruitless remorse affords a specimen of an occurrence too
frequent in the observation of all ministers of religion. " A man
having upon his bed of sickness received in his own conceit the
sentence of death in himself; and being pressed to humiliation
and broken-heartedness, for he had formerly been a stranger and
an enemy to purity and the power of godliness, answered thus :
' My heart is broken and so broke out into an earnest confes-
sion of particular sins; he named uncleanness, stubbornness,
hypocrisy, &c. He compared himself to the thief upon the
cross. " And if God," saith he, " restore me to health again, the
world shall see what an altered man I will be." When he was
pressed to sincerity and true-heartedness in what he said, he pro-
tested that he repented with all his heart and soul, and mind,
and bowels, &c.; and desired a minister that stood by to be a
witness of these things between the world and him. And yet
this man upon his recovery became the very same, if not worse
than he was before."];
Y. Spurious remorse frequently evinces its morbid origin by
its being excited by the most trifling, absurd, and even imaginary
causes, and by its disproportion to the cause of it, and not un-
frequently by its being attended with an insensibility to real and
even heinous ill-conduct on the part of the subject of it. I have
met with cases approximating to that of the shepherd in Italy,
who in his confession in Lent expressed his concern, that in
making cheese, some of the milk had spurted into his mouth,
and desired absolution for it, but who, upon being questioned by
the priest whether he was not a party in those robberies and
murders which were committed in the neighbourhood on tra-
vellers, readily owned it, and added that this mode of enriching
themselves was not looked upon as criminal among his neigh-
bours^ A female of declining age, feeble health, uncultivated
mind,?the subject of vivid religious emotions, strictly temperate,
but guilty of ingenious cruelty towards a step-daughter, suffered
intense remorse, at times, till the day of her death, from having,
in haste, torn a leaf out of her Bible for the purpose of lighting
* Prov. xxvi, n. t 2 Pet. ii. 22.
J Bolton, "On Affliction of Conscience," sect. 2, Parti, ch. 8.
? Do la Roche, "Mem. of Literat. for 1712."
AND BELIGIOUS PHENOMENA. 43
a candle; feared that she had thereby " committed the sin
against the Holy Ghost/' &c. I find the following case of per-
verted remorse in my memoranda. A man aged nearly seventy,
of tall stature, thin habit of body, dark melancholic complexion,
sensitive, humane, intelligent, temperate, but living in cohabita-
tion?and having lived so for several years, was during many
months of his last bedridden illness in a narrow, dark, and un-
wholesome apartment, evidently suffering from deep-seated re-
morse. Upon being urged to " open his grief/' he said," I have, in-
deed, something on my mind. In my younger days I was a soldier,
and served in the West Indies. While we were there, the troops
thought themselves hardly used. Some of them mutinied.
One of them shot an officer, and was sentenced by the court-
martial to be hanged. An offer was made of thirty shillings
to any one who would act as executioner. I accepted the
offer, and since I have been lying here, the thought of it
comes into my mind day and night. I think I did wrong. The
recollection of it distresses me more than anything I ever did
beside." He repeated the name of the soldier very mournfully,
"Poor Joseph!'' It appeared to me that his mind had con-
ceived a mal-association with his deed, partly, at least, from the
similarity of the sum of money to that received by Judas Iscariot
for the betrayal of his master. He was much inclined to super-
stition, and told stories of what he considered to be retributions
of Divine Providence in hind, which he had witnessed, in which,
however, the resemblances seemed to be indistinct. Nor could
he derive lasting consolation from any moral reasoning offered
to him respecting the particular cause of his own mental
sufferings?could not be made sensible that he was living in
sin.
VI. The irrational and disproportioned nature of mere spurious
remorse is thus depicted by one of the most eminent Puritan
divines. " In all other adversities a man is still a friend unto
himself, favours himself, and reaches out his best considerations
to bring in comfort to his heavy heart. But in this he is a
scourge to himself; at war with himself; an enemy to himself.
He doth greedily, and industriously fetch in as much matter as
he can possibly, both imaginary and true, to enlarge the rent
and aggravate his horror. He gazes willingly in that false glass
which Satan (?) is wont in such cases to set before him, wherein
by his hellish malice he makes an infinite addition both to the
already unnumbered multitude and to the too great heinousness
of his sins, and would fain, if he will be led by his lying, cruelly
misrepresent to his affrighted imagination every gnat as a camel,
every mote as a molehill, every molehill as a mountain ; every
lustful thought as the most unclean act, every idle word as a
4>i ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID PHYSICAL
desperate blasphemy, every angry look as an actual murder,
every intemperate passion as an inexpiable provocation, every
distraction in holy duties as an absolute rebellion, every trans-
gression against light of conscience as a sin against the Holy
Ghost. Nay, in this amazedness of spirit and disposition to
despair, he is apt, even of his own accord, and with great eager-
ness, to arm every sin as it comes into his mind with a particular
sting, that it may strike deep enough, and stick fast enough, in
his already grieved soul. He employs and improves the excel-
lency and utmost of his learning, understanding, wit, memory,
to argue with all subtlety, with much sophistry, against the
pardonableness of his sins and possibility of salvation. He
wounds even his wounds with a conceit that they are incurable,
and vexes his very vexations with refusing to be comforted.
Not only crosses, afflictions, temptations, and all matter of dis-
contentment ; but even the most desirable things also in this
life, and those which minister most outward comfort; wife,
children, friends, gold, goods, great men's favours, preferments,
honours, offices, even pleasures themselves, everything: whatso-
ever is within him, or without him, or about him ; whatsoever
he thinks upon, remembers, hears, sees, turn all to his torment.
No marvel, then, though the terror of a wounded conscience be
so intolerable.'" * Can any one doubt whether the foregoing is
not a description of spurious remorse ? Nor is such a kind of
remorse confined to Christians. The Mahometan doctor, Malec
Ebn Ans, who is said to have "paid great regard to the traditions
of Mohammed," and was remarkable for the conscientiousness
of his instructions, was in his last illness found in tears, and upon
being asked the reason of it, answered, " How should I not weep?
and.who has more reason to weep than I? Would to God that
for every question decided by me according to my own opinion
I had received so many stripes! Then would my accounts be
easier. Would to God I had never given any decision of my
own !" f It is also worthy of remark, that professed sceptics,
even of the most intellectual order, have been equally liable to
the inroads of remorse. Thus the ancient Epicureans themselves,
who denied the intrinsic difference of human actions, all know-
ledge and concern of the gods about them, and consequently
any future rewards and punishments, yet have left us the most
graphic descriptions of remorse, as, for instance, Lucretius,
lib. 3, v. 1024; and Mr. Hume describes remorse as one of the
chief miseries common to all mankind.
VII. I have often observed spurious remorse to be a conco-
mitant of incipient insanity, and of mental and bodily decay. In
* Bolton, seot. 1. Partxi.
Sales, "Prelim. Dissert, to the Koran," sect. 8.
AND RELIGIOUS PHENOMENA. 45
many cases of this kind the patients have complained that all the
sins they ever committed, of thought, word, disposition, and action,
even from their infancy, seemed revived to their recollections,
and tormented their minds with incessantly repeated accusations.
In not a few of these cases, however, the absolute impossibility
of their having committed some of the sins which they said
distressed their conscience, was obvious to their friends. Such
sufferers have compared their sensations to a fire smouldering in
their vitals, and have by their own involuntary movements
pointed out the stomach, heart, liver, and liypochondrium as the
origin of their agonizing perceptions. In high states of this
affection, the patient believes that the supposed self-reproaches
of his own heart are the effect of divine agency; as did Job
when he complained to God, " Thou writest bitter things against
me, and makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth
and as did the Roman emperor Tiberius, who, in his celebrated
letter to the senate, attributed his remorse " to gods and god-
desses eating him/' In other, cases, the patient believes that
Satan or that demons are the causes of his wretchedness, holds
imaginary conversations with them, and, according, as it would
seem, to the variations of the physical disorder, believes his in-
fernal accusers to come or to go : for all morbid perceptions, or
rather the perceptions suggested by morbid states of the body,
have a tendency, in proportion to their intensity, to personify
themselves to the consciousness; and the mental visions so
created, may be even mistaken by the subjects of them for actual
impressions on the several senses.
VIII. Spurious remorse often greatly exercises its tyranny over
persons of fanatical, weak, and only partially cultivated mind,
and of feeble will; or whose judgment is not the invariable rule
of their ideas and conduct. Sir William Temple says, " An
ingenious physician told me, that in the fanatic times, he found
most of his patients so disturbed by troubles of conscience, that
he was forced to play the divine with them before he could begin
the physician. + Persons of this description, even during their
comparative healthy complain of " feeling as if they had done
something dreadful," or, " as if something dreadful was going to
happen to them;" are nearly always grieving and vexed about
something or other, are easily offended, suspicious of being
" slighted/' and evince other indications of undue self-conscious-
ness, or of inordinate attention to themselves. Their physical
symptoms are frequently hysteria, palpitations of the heart, and
hypochondriacal affections.
The last reason to be assigned for the merely morbid and phy-
sical origin of spurious remorse, is, that the subjects of it, though
* Job xiii. 20. + " On Health and Long Life." Works.
46 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID PHYSICAL
often conscious of its unreasonableness, rarely exert themselves
in promoting their own relief. " I know/' said one of the most
amiable of these sufferers, the late poet James Montgomery,
" that this is my own fault, and that I am an insane self-
tormentor." * It is plain, however, that such a state of mind is
not consistent with the natural effects and original intention of
pain, which are to induce the patient to adopt, or to co-operate
with, means for its mitigation. Neither do such states of mind
yield to the intellectual consolations afforded by the Gospel,
derived from its abundant representations of the infinite com-
passion of the Creator, and the perpetual and all-availing efficacy
of the atonement as the medium of pardon for all confessed sin.
Such sufferers, indeed, like the victims of morbid sentimentality,
seem unwilling to part with their distresses. The writer, then,
offers his conclusion from the foregoing reasons in the words
of a well-known psychologist, that "religious enthusiasm and
remorse, which often go hand in hand, are especially within the
province of the physician." f
The first practical inference from the foregoing observations
would seem to be, that owing to the possible morbid influences of
bodily states upon the mind, the attempt never can be otherwise
than precarious for any man to form a moral estimate either of
his own general character, or of the character of any of his par-
ticular actions. It was possibly for such reasons that St. Paul
considered " man's judgment of him a very small thing, and
avoided judging himself."j It would seem equally difficult, for
the same reasons, to form a correct judgment of a fellow-creature
from the account given of him by himself. The majority of
persons speak 011 all subjects beyond their immediate occupa-
tions, rather from their feelings than from a dispassioned judg-
ment founded on facts. When, then, we are listening to a per-
son's account of himself we are too probably listening only to an
expression of his present feelings, and which are most likely
more or less morbid, and certainly so in the case of every invalid.
I am happy to find that the same inference has been formed by
a writer of eminence, " On the Value of Feelings in Religion," in
the following words?" And now from all that has been said, we
can form no other conclusion than this,?that a man's feelings,
or his state of mind, in any circumstances of his repentance and
future religious life, possess no necessary and universal cer-
tainty. We might produce a number of passages from divines
of high respect in confirmation of our opinions."?
* Memoirs of, by Holland and "Everett, vol. ii.
*f" Feuchtersleben's " Medical Psychology." Sydenham Society, p. 136.
X 1 Cor. iv. 3.
? " John Joachim Spalding," translated by Evans, 1827, pp. 248, 249.
AND .RELIGIOUS PHENOMENA. 47
2. It seems needful to be on our guard against what I must call
the histrionic simulation by morbid feelings, of what are supposed
to be, whether rightly or wrongly, those emotions, states of mind,
' I!e?uhariy desirable and proper. Whenever the mind, and
especia ly of persons of excitable temperament, has formed to
itself the beau ideal of any such state as admirable in itself or
as worthy of imitation m others, the process of self-transforma-
tion into that state, by the minds of snch persons, is neither
tedious nor difficult. "Let me/' says a writer already quoted,
" discover unto you a mystery ; but it is of iniquity and horrible
hypocrisy. I have known some (would you think it?) who have
counterfeited trouble of conscience ; and made show without all
truth or true touch of sundry temptations and spiritual dis-
tempers incidental only te the saints, and have for that nurnose
addressed themselves with much industry and noise and had
recourse many times to some spiritual physicians, with many
tears, a heavy countenance, and other rueful circumstances ex-
pressing almost exactly the scruples, doubts, distrusts, complaints
of such as are truly grieved in spirit and true of heart. O ! the
wonderful depth which lieth hid in the confluence of man's
false heart! Such as these take upon them and lay aside
terrors of conscience, as players do their apparel and parts."*
I am emboldened by the foregoing statement to express my
entire conviction that the "extraordinary," that is, emotional
piety of children and of very young persons, and especially
their expressions of remorse, humility, &c., are of this imitative
character : and further, that it is too possible for persons of anv
age, of a peculiar temperament, and under especial physical and
social circumstances, to maintain an artificial character in plain
words?to act a part, even on the bed of death I do not
charge such children and dying persons with deliberate or svste
mane hypocrisy in the worse sense of the term, but I resolve the
phenomena exhibited by them into the fascination of their own
ideas, the flattery of their circumstances, and the influence of
disease combining with the all but infinite delusiveness of morbid
religious feelings. A popular instance of this kind though 0f a
melancholy aspect, may, I think, be found in the account of
Francis Spira, who, according to the narrative of his remorse lay
on his bed talking and descanting on his condition to the'by-
standers in the following language?" I tell you there never was
such a monster as I am: never was man alive a spectacle of
such exceeding misery. I now feel God's heavy wrath that
burns like the torments of hell within me, and affects my soul
with pangs unutterable. Yerily desperation is hell itself. The
gnawing worm of unquenchable fire, horror, confusion and
* Bolton, p. 222.
?
4S ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID PHYSICAL
which is worst of all, desperation itself, continually tortures me.
The truth is, never had mortal man such experience of God's
anger and hatred against him as I have. The damned souls in
hell endure not like misery, therefore I desire to die. Oh that
some one would let out this weary soul! My state is worse
than that of Cain and Judas." Yet the exciting cause of all
these phrensies, was his recantation of his peculiar theological
opinions from worldly considerations, for which opinions he had
been previously conspicuous. Do not his references to his bodily
sensations indicate that they were highly diseased ? Is it com-
patible with the nature of real mental anguish, even of an ordi-
nary kind, that the sufferer should describe it so eloquently ? His
sanity was indeed doubted by some intelligent observers at the
time ; but his ravings were considered by multitudes in that con-
troversial age, as they are to this day?to have been a foretaste of
the misery awaiting the apostate in a future state.
8. It must be inferred from the whole topic that much, to say
the least, of what is now too commonly supposed to be pre-
eminently a religious state of feeling, and the result of even
divine agency, has a mere physical and even morbid origin ; or to
use the words of a fellow labourer in this department, that " the
physical terrors of disease, the nervous anguish of a disordered
brain full of scaring images, are absurdly held by many to be
the actual sense and feeling of divine wrath, and the certain
signs of complete repentance. But the influence of the body on
the mind in such cases, and the consequent violent emotions,
are too well known to be denied, except by those who know
nothing of nature and its operations, and who choose to call
everything supernatural which is unusual." * " It is also to
be regretted, that many persons find it easier and even more
agreeable to cultivate feelings of any kind, than to engage them-
selves in the close but noiseless study of the heart with its con-
cealed impurities,?deliberate reflection on the great truths of
religion and their reasonable grounds, due calculation of the
gain or loss in our election between God and the present world,
strict and incessant guard upon the conscience, the affections,
and conduct,?these are too often smothered by the overwhelm-
ing sensations of enthusiasm ; yet these alone are indispensable
to true repentance, and violent emotions and excitements make
not any necessary or essential part of it. f " The mind is, how-
ever, always disposed to strong emotions, and finds it more con-
venient to indulge than to explain them. It is loth to part
with them, because it often has nothing with which to replace
them. That spiritual instruction and guidance likewise is most
welcome which gives least occupation to the thinking faculty,
* Spalding, p. 115. t Page 2G2, &c.
AND RELIGIOUS PHENOMENA. 49
and withal is held to be the safest. Natural temperament, weak-
ness and confusion of the mental powers, education, society,
example, all contribute to the same effect." * I take courage
from these confirmations of the preceding sentiments in this
paper to avow my belief that what is called "popular preach-
ing too generally, owes its charms to its suitableness to the
morbid susceptibilities of its admirers, and serves to alienate
their hearts and minds still further from the practice of virtue,
and from even the requisite attention to their temporal interests.
The faithful and learned pastor will ever bear in mind the
morbid condition of humanity, and avoid, above all things
awakening spurious remorse, agreeably to the memorable sayin^
of ancient times, "sadness is the greatest enemy of God's sei?
vants and will accordingly shun the inculcation of super-
human attainments, artificial duties, giving romantic loose or
inaccurate representations of repentance, and will patiently sub-
mit to the labour and self-denial which the observance of these
precautions will involve, in regard of the most arduous part of
his duties?the adaptation of the multifarious contents of the
Scriptures to the real wants and substantial interests of his
fellow men. It is important for all persons to beware of suppo-
sititious duties, because when once the sense of obligation is
established in regard of any sort of feeling or line of conduct
whatever, the moral faculty takes that sense of obligation under
its keeping, and unfortunately, in the case of too many minds
and temperaments, is too apt to embrace an erroneous rule more
tenaciously, and to enforce it more rigorously, than a rule that
is " holy, just, and good."
It now remains to offer some suggestions for the prevention
and cure of spurious remorse. The obvious means of prevention
is to make the development, and constant and inflexible exercise
of the reason and judgment in regard of all subjects, the primary
object of education, and to establish in the youthful mind a
supreme regard to practical rectitude of both inward and out-
ward action.
Children, too, should never be subjected to the influence of
enthusiastic preaching. From the services and offices of the
Church of England no danger can arise, for they all seem fitted
to prevent the creation of spurious remorse and of every other
morbid feeling.
It is also much to be wished that a knowledge of the evidences
of natural and revealed religion were made a branch of edu-
cation, and that the unrivalled works of Dr Paley should be
adopted as the text-book. Especially should the youthful mind
be early imbued with a belief in the infinite goodness, mercy
* Spalding, p. 254.
NO. I.?NEW SERIES. E
50 MORBID PHYSICAL AND RELIGIOUS PHENOMENA.
and reasonableness of the Creator in regard of all his dealings
? ? -| ? . ?
and intentions towards the human race, and of his requirements
from them, and thoroughly enlightened respecting the provisions
made by the atonement for the just and gracious exercise of
these dispositions in the Deity towards the children of men; and
carefully initiated into a firm and practical belief in the preva-
lence of confession of sins to God, as the immediate means of
pardon and consolation.*
I earnestly dissuade parents from allowing indiscriminate
religious reading to their children. Among the works to be
placed in the parental index prohibitory, I find myself com-
pelled by my convictions to name Doddridge's " Rise and
Progress of Religion in the Soul," Bunyan's " Pilgrim's Progress/'
and all other works which describe and inculcate a certain
religious process as necessary or even as desirable to be under-
gone, because children are often induced by the perusal of such
works to force their feelings into a conformity with the repre-
sentations they read; and because, "by such overstrained efforts,
the mind is sure to lose its proper balance in some degree; and
other contemplations are set aside, which would be of far more
extensive and lasting benefit." f
The cure of the morbid physical and religious phenomena of
Remorse, whenever apparent, depends primarily on the patient's
restoration to bodily health and strength by those means indi-
cated by his physical condition. During an appropriate course
of medicine and diet, the acetate of morphia, unless forbidden by
the especial circumstances of the case, is useful as an occasional
sedative, until the healthy action of the viscera and brain can,
by other means, be established. Mental remedies, or arguments
addressed to the mind, will only be available in proportion as
physical improvement advances. It seems advisable, as Dr.
Feuchtersleben remarks with regard to any " fixed idea," for the
attendants and friends " not to enter into it, by letting it pass
unnoticed, and not appearing to think it worth while to refute it,
or, when it can be done, pretending not to have heard or under-
stood the patient;" or, in the case of morbid remorse, to change
its direction by inspiring confidence in the infinite mercy of
God4 Should pride, which not unusually attends this, as well
as other forms of insanity, be suspected, it may be useful to lower
the patient's undue self-importance by some such an expostula-
tion as Elihu, misappropriate^ however, addressed to Job.?
Solitude and darkness should be avoided, and " occupation of
the soberest kind, alternated with cheerful recreation, out of
doors, and in a bracing atmosphere, must aid the direct religious
* 1 John i. 8, 9.? + Spalding, p. 261. + Pages 346, 347.
? Job xxxv. 5-7.
PUBLIC LUNATIC ASYLUMS OF SCOTLAND. 51
instruction which may be practicable/'* Since, too, spurious
remorse is like some other diseases, periodical, its natural inter-
vals and decline should be embraced as the most favourable
opportunities for the employment of preventive means. The
cure may be assisted by gradually drawing off the mind's atten-
^??./rom i e J11^' ,a engaging it in the more active duties
of life and especially those duties which awaken a rational sense
of self-interest. I subjoin below, more at length, the title of a
work already quoted, of great value on the general subject f
* Feuchtersleben, p. 347.
t " Thouglite on the Y^e o,ta ^
A-M^Bector of Colne fcc. London. 1827.
J E 2
