On Moeal and Criminal Epidemics
=================================

Art. VI.?
Whilst the science of teratology was still young and unreco-
gnised, Geoffroy St. Hilaire was one day told by a friend of a
wonderful foetal monstrosity which had just been shown him.
" Did you s6e at the same time/' asked Geoffroy, " the abortive
placenta and umbilical cord of the second foetus?" " Then you
have seen it?" asked his friend. "No; but these are the
necessary and inevitable conditions of an abnormal development
such as you describe."
The philosopher recognises no accident. To him, there is no
phenomenon without a cause, an antecedent adequate to its
production; no cause but such as is reducible to law. He sees
alike in the normal progress, and in the apparently exceptional
conditions of the physical and moral world, only illustrations of
law and order. The law may appear to be broken, nay, contro-
verted by irregularities; the order may seem to be disturbed by
disorders; anomalies may present themselves;?yet in all this
he sees but evidence of wider grasp and adaptability; of general
principles illustrated under conditions not yet investigated, yet
susceptible of being so: the anomaly he knows to be only such
in reference to his own finite powers and intelligence; he even
retains his conviction, a conviction which affords the only stable
foundation for all science, that similar elements, reacting under
similar conditions, will produce similar results; and his confidence,
that the same power which regulates the succession of day and
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 241
night, of seed time and harvest, is in operation to "guide the
whirlwind and direct the storm."
Does an earthquake spread ruin and devastation over a district
?does famine or pestilence exhale its baleful influence over a
continent?does a comet glare threateningly upon the earth for
a time, and pass away into illimitable space?does the sea
swallow up the dry land, or the land encroach upon the sea,?in
all this he sees, not the evidence of any new and unknown, but
the manifestations of the universal law, acting under conditions
as yet imperfectly known to him.
Lastly, does war decimate whole kingdoms, or a moral blight
pass over and corrupt a community or a nation ; he knows that
the passions, impulses, appetites, instincts, prejudices, and weak-
nesses of man are, as they ever were, the source of all moral
disturbances. The elements are constant, though their combina-
tions may be variable. Hence the history of yesterday is the
interpretation of to-day, the prophecy of to-morrow. With this
conviction of the constancy of the relation between cause and
effect ineradicably fixed in the mind, he boldly, yet cautiously,
sets about the investigation of these apparently irregular phe-
nomena, and the conditions under which they occur. He collects
and compares numbers of similar and analogous facts, lie con-
siders carefully the powers which are proximately operative in
their production, he separates the casual from the universal, the
essential from the adventitious, and analyses the whole on
strictly inductive principles.
And great is his reward! Not only are the irregularities
themselves reduced to system and order, but, in their turn, they
are made to contribute their quota to the knowledge and defini-
tion of the very laws themselves from which they seemed to err.
It was by observation on such principles as these of the abnormal
developments of animal structure, that Geoffroy not only con-
structed the science of teratology, but also laid the foundation
for the discovery and definition of the true archetype of the
osseous skeleton; it was by analysis of the irregularities of the
pendulum that the figure of the earth was determined; it was by
the observance of what were at first, deemed to be casualties, that
polarized light was discovered, and all the laws of optics defined
and advanced. But perhaps the most striking illustration of this
principle that the world has ever witnessed has been presented
durin0" the last few years, in the discovery of the planet Neptune.
Certain irregularities in the motions of Saturn and Herschel had
long been observed, which were of so peculiar a nature that it even
began to be conjectured that at the confines of our system laiu was
not so certain in its operations as near the centre. It was evident,
however, that this view, if received, would tend to sap the founda-
R 2
242 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
tion of all science; and men like Leverrier and Adams, who
were content to recognise no effect without a definite and suf-
ficient cause which would inevitably and invariably produce the
phenomenon, boldly hypothecated the existence of such a cause ;
and by pursuing a chain of inductive and mathematical reasoning
and analysis, which appears almost superhuman, they were
enabled ultimately to point their telescope to that part of the
heavens where the disturbing body ought to exist?where it did
actually exist, and so to extend the knowledge of our planetary
system twice as far into space as before.
The aspect of the present times leads us anxiously and ear-
nestly to inquire, whether some similar system of investigation
may not be applied with advantage to the solution of the start-
ling problems which are everywhere presented to us. The science
of Sociology is new and imperfect; yet we are sure that it will
afford no exception to the general rule which obtains in all; that,
if perfected, it must be through a careful observation of its ab-
normal, or exceptional, as well as its normal phenomena. Nothing-
is stronger than the contrast between mind and matter, as to
their essential nature; but, on the other hand, nothing is more
striking than the correspondence in their mode of development,
and in the laws which they mutually obey?such correspondence
perhaps arising in some measure from the fact, that mind is only
manifested through its connexion with matter, and also in many
cases from the overpowering influence which each in turn exerts
upon the other. As the body has its condition of health, includ-
ing many gradations of energy and power, so the mind has its
normal state, extending from the verge of imbecility to the in-
telligence almost godlike; as the body is affected by diseases of
excitement or depression, so the mind has its passions, its mania,
its melancholy; as plague and pestilence attack and hurry off
their thousands and tens of thousands at one time, so to an
equal extent does a more terrific blight than this pass over a
eountry or a continent, at variable and uncertain periods in the
history of man, changing the whole aspect of his moral nature,
and converting what was once the image and likeness of God
into the semblance of a fiend. At one time the spirit of (falsely
so called) religious controversy will arouse the most ferocious
passions of which human nature is susceptible, provoking mutual
persecutions, bloodshed, and wars; at another, an epidemic of
resistance to constituted authority will spread over half a world
(as in the year 1848) rapid and simultaneous as the most viru-
lent bodily disorder. Again is the collective character of mental
phenomena illustrated by an anomalous psychological condition
invading and dominating over thousands upon thousands, depriv-
ing them of everything but automatic action, and giving rise to
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 243
the popular opinion of demoniacal possession?an opinion in some
sense justified by the satanic passions, emotions, and acts which
accompany the state. At one period, the aggregate tendency is
to retirement and contemplation; hence the countless votaries of
monachism and anachoretism; at another the mania is directed
towards action, having for its proposed end some Utopian scheme,
equally impracticable and useless; hence the myriads who have
forsaken their kindred, their homes, and their country, to seek a
land whose stones were gold, or to wage exterminating war for
the possession of worthless cities and trackless deserts.
Less disastrous than these, in their influence numerically upon
the mass of mankind, perhaps much more so in their de-
moralizing results, are those cases in which, in the absence of
proper moral culture, the seeds of vice and crime appear to be
sown under the surface of society, and to spring up and bring
forth fruit with appalling rapidity and paralysing succession.
Here it is a forgery, bringing ruin upon thousands ; there a
suicide, the consequence and self-imposed penalty for other
crimes. Now a brother's hand is raised against his brother, a
son's against his father; now it is the mother who forgets even
her natural instincts, and lifts a murderous hand upon her child ;
and again, the nearest and dearest relation of life?that of
husband and wife?is violently severed by the administration of
secret poison. A panic seizes upon society; man is afraid "for
the terror by night," and for the " arrow that flieth by day," for
" the pestilence that walketh in darkness," and for the " sickness
that destroyeth in the noonday." He knows not whence the
next stroke may come, so unexpected, so unnatural is the source
of these crimes ; the foundations of all social and domestic confi-
dence are sapped by suspicion, and we think we hear again, as of
old, the pathetic lament,?
It is not an open enemy that hath done this thing, for then I could
have borne it; neither was it mine adversary that did rise up against
me, for then per adventure I would have hid myself from him; but it
teas even thou, my companion, my guide, and mine own familiar
friend. Wc took sweet counsel together, and ivalked together as
friends."
It is fearful to think how forcible an illustration of this kind
of epidemic is afforded us by the history of the last few months.
Crime succeeds crime with unparalleled rapidity, like the
monotonous strokes of a moral knell. The editor of the Tablet
bitterly observes that?
" England is fast becoming a hell upon earth. Pernicious teachings
are followed by pernicious practices. Thus the world is horrified
within one short month by the harvest of crime which mantles Gi'eat
Britain with its disastrous and funereal shadow."
244 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
More temperately, yet not less forcibly, others set forth the
state of society which we have imperfectly depicted. In the
English Churchman of February 28th, there occurs the following
passage, the commencement of a feeling and judicious appeal to
the church itself:?
" It is very difficult to refrain from the conclusion that we are, just
now, living in the presence of an increased accumulation of greater
crimes than has been before witnessed by the present generation. We
do not forget the notorious criminals of the first portion of the
present half century?the Thurtells and Fauntleroys of that day f
but there was not that fearful constellation of crime, as we may
term it, which we witness in these days, and which almost every
week increases, by some deed which either in the depth of the sin,
or the rank of the sinner, shocks and distresses the whole nation.
Murders, forgeries, suicides ? suicides, forgeries, murders ? to say
nothing of other sins?have come upon us alternately, with fearful
frequency, and in high places as well as low. jSfo sooner had one
case spread over the whole kingdom than another occurs to eclipse
it, or to dispute a place with it in the public mind. The legislature,
commerce, the race-course, the private family, alike contribute to swell
the list?the single apartment of the working classes and the stately
halls of the aristocracy are equally the scene of' lamentation, mourning,
and woe.' "
The following passage from the Christian Times of
January 25th enters a little more into the causes of the same
phenomena, particularly as to imitation :?
" An epidemic of murders seems to be raging just now. We can
hardly take up a daily paper without reading of some fresh murder of
more than usual atrocity, while the details of the great Eugeley case,
dragged slowly to light by the untiring and unerring ministry of
science, fill us with horror and amazement that such a series of such
crimes should be possible in the broad daylight of our nineteenth cen-
tury of civilization But the llugeley case is far from being the
only one which painfully occupies the attention of the public. During
the last weeks, great crimes?especially murders?have succeeded each
other with a rapidity which suggests and explains the title of our
article. ^ Crime propagates itself by infection, like fever and small-pox,
and at times it seems as if the infection came abroad into the atmo-
sphere, and exacted its tribute from every class and every district of
the country. The laws of moral infection, and the propagation of
moral disorders, are among the most recondite and difficult subjects
of contemplation; there is something fearful in the very thought
that man may so abdicate his moral freedom as to bring his will
and moral nature under the sway of laws as imperious and resistless
as those which sustain and balance the orbits of the stars. But we
cannot be blind to the fact. There is a large class of minds over which
great1 crimes, exert a kind of fascination ; and those who have never
trained themselves to exercise the responsibilities of moral freedom, are
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 245
liable to become the victims of the strangest delusions, and catch
readily the moral infection which is always lurking, and sometimes
raging, in the atmosphere of our world. Let a woman fling herself
from the top of the Monument, and the gallery has to be railed in
like a wild beast's cage, lest the contagion should spread, and Monu-
ment-yard should become the Tyburn of suicides. Let a particular
poison have been used with deadly effect in an ignorant and de-
moralized district, and it must be mixed with some alien substance
to colour it, lest it should become the instrument of systematic and
wholesale butchery. 'Man that is without understanding is like the
leasts that perish, said a wise one of old, and in nothing is he more
beast-like than in the facility with which he becomes the slave of
the laws he was set to govern, and buries his moral freedom literally
in the dust."
Whilst writing this very page, a report is put into our hands,
of an event which seems from its incredible audacity to put into
the shade all those to which allusion is made in these passages.
An independent gentleman, resident in^ one of our largest
northern towns, is supposed to have poisoned his young wife
with strychnine, actually administered before witnesses, in jelly
and other articles of diet; boldly persisted in, in spite of her
complaints of their bitterness, in spite of others tasting them
and confirming her statement. The details are not yet fully
known, and we would not prejudge the case; yet the evidence
seems so strong and so direct as scarcely to admit of doubt.
The last testimony which it is necessary to adduce as to the
actual existence, at this present time, of an epidemic of crime, is
part of the address of the Recorder, in the opening of the pro-
ceedings of the Central Criminal Court, on March 3rd. It is of
great value, as affording legal and official recognition of a most
important fact. He thus contrasts the state of England now with
its condition two years back :?
" He had before him a return of offences committed down to the year
1854, from which it appeared that, although undoubtedly there was a
considerable increase in the amount of crime that had been committed
down to that period, yet the increase was mainly in cases of ordinary
felony, of a trifling character, and was quite accounted for by the in-
crease in the population and the increased amount of property in the
country, and also by the improved condition of the police. As regarded
crimes of violence, such as murder, manslaughter, attempts to murder,
and other offences of that class, it appeared that during the same period
there had been a diminution of such offences to the extent of thirteen
per cent. It seemed, however, that it was the same in the history of
nations as of individuals, that there were certain periods of great cala-
mities without any apparent traceable cause. During the last twelve-
months, after having for forty years enjoyed the blessings of peace, they
had been familiarized with all the horrors of war, and there was no doubt
246 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
that during the same period the most heinous crimes had been com-
mitted by persons of high station, by persons also holding a high
position in the commercial and banking community, and also by
persons in a more humble position of life ; and in this court there
had certainly been a most unusual number of cases involving the de-
struction of human life. It was no part of his duty or that of the grand
jury to enter into any consideration of the causes that had led to this
state of things, nor whether it arose from any peculiar circumstances in
the state of the country or of the law ; but the subject was one that was
entitled to grave reflection, and it certainly ought to urge them all to
do everything in their power to extend education among the people,
and to improve their condition, as the most effectual means for the
prevention of crime."
For the investigation of this lamentable state of society, we
propose to make use of the same calculus which we have seen to
be of such signal service in physical science,?viz., to collect a
number of analogous instances, and to analyze the conditions
under which they occur, with a view to the ultimate solution of
these questions:?
1. What is the condition of mind most calculated for the
reception of morbid moral influences ?
2. What are the causes and source of this condition ?
3. What are the circumstances which directly excite and foster
these evil tendencies ?
4. As a corollary to these,?What are the moral hygienic
means to be adopted for the check or prevention of such,
epidemics ?
Were we only to examine the phenomena of disordered
action in man, we should get but a very imperfect idea of his
psychological condition in health and disease. The mind mani-
fests itself by thought, word, and deed; and its disorders are
shown* by erroneous ideas, by incoherent discourse, and by un-
reasonable conduct. These are respectively liable to become
epidemic, as in opinion, expression, and crime; and for the com-
plete comprehension of the latter, it is necessary to examine
instances of the other two forms. We shall therefore select a few
cases illustrative of each, giving the preference to those which
have been marked by the most striking psychological phenomena,
or which have produced the greatest effects upon the social and
political condition of man; only premising, that whilst disordered
opinion and action have a much stronger tendency to take on an
epidemic type than bodily diseases, their elements are less
complex, and consequently more susceptible of investigation ; a
position apparently paradoxical and fanciful, yet one which we
believe to be in accordance with experience, and which we hope
* Sir A. Morrison, M.D., on Insanity.
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 247
to illustrate afterwards. Many of the most remarkable epi-
demics, however, are compound, being complicated with physical
disorder more or less evident; and these are proportionately
more complex as to their elements, and present more difficulties
to the inquirer than either form taken separately.
Nations, like individuals, have their periods of insanity, excite-
ment, delusion, and recklessness.
" Whole communities suddenly fix their minds upon one object, and
go mad in its pursuit; millions of people become simultaneously im-
pressed with one delusion. We see one nation, from its highest to its
lowest members, with a fierce desire for military glory ; another as
suddenly becomes crazed upon a religious scruple; and neither of them
recovers its senses until it has shed rivers of blood, and sowed a
harvest of groans and tears to be reaped by its posterity."*
Pseudo-religion, opinion _ practical or speculative, life, pro-
perty, emotion, all become in turn the subject or the motive for
a maniacal epidemic. These collective or imitative tendencies
appeared very early in the world's history. According to Mai-
monides, the earth had not been peopled 300 years when all
turned with one accord to idolatry.. Though his account is some-
what fanciful, yet it affords a very probable theory of the origin
of the class of delusions which, in one form or other, have_kept
possession of mankind ever since.
" In those days the sons of Adam erred with great error, and the
counsel of the wise men became brutish; and their error was this:
they said, ' Forasmuch as Grod hath created these stars and spheres to
cjovem the world, and set them on high, it is meet that men should
laud and glorify and give them honour.' When this thing was come
up into their hearts, they began to build temples unto the stars, and
to offer sacrifice unto them, and to worship before them ; and this was
the root of idolatry. And after this they began to make images of
the stars, in temples and under trees, and assembled together and
worshipped them. And this thing teas spread through all the world;
so in process of time the glorious and fearful Name was forgotten."?
Maim. In Mishn.
Such was the first origin of idolatry and image worship. After
the flood the same tendency was quickly manifested, but under
circumstances which indicated a far greater moral perversion
and psychical deterioration than before; for this second falling
away was especially amongst a chosen people, who had witnessed
repeated instances of power which they knew could not reside in
wood and stone. " These be thy gods, O Israel," said one, with
the bitterest irony, " which brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt," pointing to the golden calf which he had been compelled
to"make. How severely were they satirized by their own pro-
* Mackay's " Popular Delusions."
248 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
phets ! Idolatry had now taken on its three typical forms?the
worship of imaginary powers, of carved images, and of the ani-
mate and inanimate objects of nature.
" I xoent in and saiv ; and behold every form of creeping things and
abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, portrayed
upon the wall round about. And there stood before them seventy men
of the ancients of the house of Israel, icith every man his censer in his
hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up. And he brought me to
the gate ; and behold there sat women weeping for Tammuz (probably
Adonis). And he brought me to the inner court; and behold there
were men with their backs to the temple, and their faces toward the
east, and they worshipped the sun."
The same tendency is indicated in Isaiah's withering sarcasm:
" lie planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it. Then shall it
be for a man to burn ; for he will take thereof and ivarm himself; yea,
he kindleth it and baketh bread; yea, he maJceth a god and worshippeth
it; he maketh it a graven image andfalleth down thereto. He burnetii
part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he roasteth roast, and is
satisfied. And the residue thereof he maketh a god; he falleth down
and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me, for
thou art my god
And to these imaginary deities they sacrificed their sons and
their daughters, causing them to pass through the fire. The
epidemic of speculative opinion, followed naturally by actual
crime, spread over the face of the whole earth; and in this general
falling away we find all the elements of the floods of crime
which at variable periods since then have well-nigh submerged
the moral world. What the condition of the earth was as to
general morals and tendencies just before the Christian era, we
may indicate by selecting the most refined and civilized of the
cities, Rome; and giving the impressions of their own writers,
and in their own language, for the vices alluded to are too gross
to be completely unveiled :?
" Cum leno accipiat mocelli bona, si capiendi
Jus nullum uxori, doctus spectare lacunar,
Doetus et ad calicem vigilanti stertere naso ;
Cum fas esse putet curam sperare cohortis,
Qui bona donavit praesepibus, "
And as to the reward of merit, and the mode in which public
trust was bestowed :?
" Aude aliquid brevibus Gryaris et carcere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquis ; probitas laudatur, et alget."
# * *
"? quando uberior vitiorum copia? quando
Major avaritise patuit sinus ?
But even under this thin veil we may not sully our page with
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 249
quotations illustrative of the special and universal vices of this
vaunted era.
In such a profligate time was Christianity introduced into the-
world ; and for once at least in the world's history the tendency
of the human mind to receive opinions collectively was directed
in a right channel. Promulgated by a few unlettered men?
opposed with all the violence of a corrupt priesthood and a pagan
court upholding doctrines which human nature felt to be
humiliating?persecuted even to the death?Christianity tri-
umphed, and became the religion of the civilized world. But it
was not for long that its purity was preserved; errors and heresies
crept in; and the doctrines which preached peace on earth and
goodwill towards men, were made the pretext for passions the
fiercest, persecutions the most diabolical, and wars the most san-
guinary that the earth has ever witnessed. There is no wrath
and bitterness equal to that which arises in (so-called) religious
controversy. Each opinion once promulgated spread like an
epidemic, and parties were found to murder each other in sup-
port of their respective views, with the more zeal and impla-
cability, the more incomprehensible and less important was the
subject of dispute. Ultimately the Christian and the heathen
could live without mutual persecution ; but the Monothelite and
and the Monophysite, the Pelagian and the Arian, ever viewed
each other with the most uncompromising hostility.
It would require a large volume even to mention the names
of the controversies which for centuries shook the church even to
its foundations; we can but briefly allude to a few events, re-
markable for their psychical characteristics, their rapid spread,
or their bearing upon epidemics of later times.
The Gnostics of the second century originated from the at-
tempt to combine the philosophy of the heathen world with the
faith of the Christian. This, as well as the sect of the Mani-
cheans, which arose in the third century, was chiefly remarkable
for the incredible rapidity with which it spread, and for its per-
sistency in spite of the severest methods used for its extirpation.
The fourth century is remarkable for the rapid increase of
superstition, the reinstitution of image worship, the adoration
paid to relics, and the many pious frauds, as they have been
termed, of the monks. At this time, too, originated that re-
markable and long-standing epidemic, which has ever since
exercised so powerful an influence over domestic relations and the
world generally?that of Monachism. Owing to the prevalence
of a certain mystical preaching, vast numbers of men and women
withdrew themselves from all society, endeavouring to live by
contemplation alone, and mortifying the body by hunger, thirst,
and labour. They were gradually reduced to system by Antony,
250 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
who prescribed rules for their conduct. Some, as the Ana-
cliorites, resisted all rule, lived separately, frequented the wildest
deserts, fed upon roots, and slept wherever the night overtook
them; and all this to avoid the sight of their fellow-creatures.
Other sects, as the Sarabaites, were guilty of the most licentious
practices, and were indeed profligates of the most abandoned
kind.*
The fifth century produced one of the most extraordinary and
ridiculous manias that can well be conceived. Simeon, a monk,
adopted, as a mark of especial sanctity, the singular device of
spending thirty-seven years of his life on the top of a high pillar.
" Seduced by a false ambition, and utterly ignorant of true religion,
many of the inhabitants of Syria and Palestine followed the example
of this fanatic ; and what is almost incredible, this practice continued
in vogue till the twelfth century."?Mosheim, jEccles. Hist.
The rise and spread of Mahometanism in the seventh century
is one of the most remarkable instances of the rapid propagation
of ideas and principles. Doubtless the terror of Mahomet's arms,
and his repeated victories, were very irresistible arguments ; but
at the same time his law was wonderfully adapted to the corrupt
nature of man ; its requirements were few and easy, its articles of
faith simple, and its promised rewards marvellously acceptable
to the manners and customs of the Eastern nations, and their
favourite vices. " It is to be observed," says Mosheim, " further,
that the gross ignorance under which the Arabians, Syrians,
and Persians, and the greater part of the Eastern nations,
laboured at this time, rendered many an easy prey to the arti-
fice and eloquence of this bold adventurer." When we add to
this the dissensions and animosities amongst the Greeks, Nes-
torians, and others, which filled the East with carnage, assassina-
tions, and other enormities, such as made the very name of
Christianity detestable, we may cease to wonder at the spread of
of any new religion. Will not an attentive consideration of these
reasons in the aggregate suggest to the reflective mind the
source of some of the remarkable heresies of the present day, as
our Mormonism and Socialism, and the German Apostolico-
Baptism ??The epidemic of the eighth century was a violent
contest, which overspread the whole Christian world, between
* Trench, in his "Lectures on Words," has some remarks on this point of great
interest.
"This is a notable example of the manner in which moral contagion, spreading
from heart and manners, invades the popular language in the use, or rather mis-
use, of the word ' religion.' In these times, ' a religious person' did not mean one
who felt and allowed the bonds that bound him to God and his fellows, but one
who had taken peculiar vows upon him. A ' religious' house did not mean in the
Church of Rome a Christian household ordered in the fear of God, but a house in
which persons were gathered together according to the rule of some man. What
an awful light does this one word, so used, throw upon the entire state of mind
and habits of thought in those ages !"
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 251
the Iconoduli and the Iconoclast?, concerning image worship,
as their names imply. The ninth century presents to us the
origin of the trials of innocence, which for ages continued so
popular?by water, by single combat, by the fire ordeal, and by
the cross.
The first is of great interest, as being afterwards so universally
made use of, in the detection of supposed witches. The person
suspected of any crime was thrown into water, the right hand
bound to the left foot; if he sank, he was esteemed innocent; if
he floated, it was evidence of guilt. In the trial by duel, the
survivor was considered to have proved his innocence. In the
fire-ordeal, the accused person walked barefoot on heated plough-
shares, or held a ball of red-hot iron in his hand ; if innocent, these
feats would be accomplished without injury. In the last form of
trial, that by the cross, the contending parties were made to
stretch out their arms, and he that could continue in this pos-
ture the longest gained his cause.* The universal belief in the
infallibility of these tests is not the least singular feature in the
mental aspect of these ages.
In the tenth century a strange panic seized upon men's minds,
and produced the most disastrous effects. They conceived that the
end of the world was close at hand, and vast multitudes forsook all
their civil and domestic ties, gave their property to the church, and
repaired to Palestine, where they imagined they should be safer
than elsewhere. An eclipse of the sun or moon was considered
as the immediate precursor of the end of all things; the cities
were forsaken, and the wretched inhabitants did actually hide
themselves in caves and rocks. Others attempted to bribe the
Deity, by great gifts to the church; others pulled down palaces
and temples, saying that they were of no more use. " In a word,
no language is sufficient to express the confusion and despair
that tormented the minds of miserable mortals on this occasion/'
Consequent upon this was perhaps the most extraordinary
epidemic into which fanaticism ever ran. We have said that
vast multitudes left their homes to go to the Holy Land : not a
meteor fell across the sky, but sent whole hordes on the same
delusive errand. The hardships they suffered on the way were
almost incredible; yet they were exceeded by those experienced
from the Turks when they reached their destination. Perse-
cution of every kind awaited them; they were plundered and
beaten, and not allowed in most instances to enter Jerusalem.
By degrees, this particular epidemic dread began to subside, and
some of these pilgrims returned to Europe full of the indigni-
ties which they had received. Amongst them was an enthusiastic
and eloquent, perhaps half crazy monk, Peter the Hermit, who,
* A different account of the test of the cross is given by many writers, but this
appears to have been the original one. \
252 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
on his return, convulsed Europe by his preaching and his story of
their wrongs. Then resulted a scene such as the world had never
witnessed. In the insane idea of wresting Palestine from the
Turks, countless myriads of fanatics left their homes, and tra-
versed Europe under circumstances unparalleled in the history
of man. Why should we dwell upon the details of the Crusades?
Hundreds of thousands perished on the way; the roads and fields
were heaped up with corpses; the rivers were dyed for miles
with their blood. Yet again and again schemes for the accom-
plishment of the same purpose were adopted: now the elements
were the lowest and vilest of the people?now the flower of
Europe's chivalry,?and again thousands of children formed a
separate crusade of their own. Millions of treasure were ex-
pended, and two millions of lives sacrificed, in the two hundred
years during which this disastrous moral epidemic prevailed.
And this ended!?the philanthropist would fain hope that such
a fearful convulsion would not pass without some purification of
the atmosphere.
Scarcely had the excitement of Europe subsided when another
scourge made its appearance. The great Plague, or Black Death,
of the fourteenth century, appeared in 1333 in China, and passing
over Asia westward, and over Europe and Africa, carried off about
one-fourth of the people. In Europe alone it is supposed that
twenty-five millions fell victims to this fearful pestilence.
All epidemic diseases have their moral aspect; and this one
was attended by a constellation of fanaticisms and delusions
such as man has never witnessed before or since. The belief in
witchcraft was already very prevalent, and there had been some
isolated persecutions directed towards it. But the specific moral
aberrations connected with this period were:?
1. The rise and spread of the Flagellants, or Whippers.
2. The wholesale murder of the Jews, on the suspicion of
having poisoned the water.
3. The dancing mania.
The compound aspect of these three has more than an ordi-
nary interest to the philosophic mind, arising from the fact, that
although the first two appear to be of a strictly 'psychical nature,
a somatic origin is indicated, from their extremely close con-
nexion with the latter, which was accompanied by the most
striking and uniform physical derangements, very analogous to
the phenomena of hysteria. The sect of the dancers, indeed,
seems to serve as a connecting link between mental and bodily
affections, and to lead by a natural transition to many of the
convulsive forms of religious worship with which the present
century is familiar, as the Jumpers, the Shakers, the preaching
mania in Sweden in 1842, &c.
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 253
The primary notion of the " Whippers" may be traced to the
fact, that for ages flagellation had been considered by the Church
the most appropriate punishment and atonement for vice. Horri-
fied by the ravages of the plague, in deadly terror of its advances,
the people thought to stop the vengeance (as it was supposed) of
Heaven by mortifications and penance. Almost simultaneously,
in many parts of Hungary and Germany, large masses of the
lowest orders of the people formed themselves into bodies, which
marched in procession through the cities, robed in sombre ap-
parel, covered with red crosses, bearing triple knotted scourges,
in which points of iron were fixed.
" It was not merely some individual parts of the country which
fostered them: all Germany, Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, Silesia, and
Flanders did homage to the mania. Ihe influence of this fanaticism
was great and threatening; resembling the excitement which called
all the inhabitants of Europe into the Deserts of Syria and Palestine
250 years before."?Hecker.
They performed penance twice a day, scourging themselves
and each other till the blood streamed from them; and this they
blasphemously said was mixed with the blood of the Saviour.
Flagellation was held to be superior to, and to supersede all
other observances; the priests were forsaken, and these "Brethren
of the Cross" absolved each other, and took possession of the
churches, where their enthusiastic songs affected greatly the
minds of the people.
As might be expected, all this speedily resolved itself into
licentiousness and crime. The Church and the secular arm com-
bined to put a stop to this universal phrenzy; veneration turned,
in many places, into persecution, and public burnings of the chief
instigators of the riots became common. During this and the
early part of the next century a constant contest was carried on
with them, but the sect was found most difficult to eradicate.
Simultaneously with these proceedings, was instituted a bloody
and barbarous persecution of the Jews. Amongst the other
absurd conjectures as to the source of the terrible pestilence
which was everywhere raging, the Jews were supposed to have
poisoned the wells or infected the air. They were pursued with
relentless cruelty?tortured, in many instances, into a confession
of crimes which had never been committed, and then burnt alive.
11 Whenever they were not burnt, they were at least banished; and
so, being compelled to wander about, they fell into the hands of the
country3people, who, without humanity, persecuted them with fire
and sword."?Hecker's JEpid.
In some places, driven to desperation, the Jews fired their
own quarter of the town, and so perished. At Strasbourg, 2000
254 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
were burnt alive in their own burial-ground. In Mayence, it is
supposed that 12,000 Jews were slaughtered by the Flagellants.
" At Eslingen, the whole Jewish community burned themselves in
their synagogue; and mothers were seen throwing their own children
on the pile, to prevent their being baptized, and then precipitating
themselves into the flames."?Hecker.
A singular feature presents itself in the progress of this epi-
demic persecution, as in that of witches, to be shortly noticed,?
viz., that after the rage had lasted some time, many confessed
voluntarily, and without torture, to the crimes of which their
countrymen were accused; and it even appears probable that
some actually attempted to commit them by putting certain
poisons into the waters. Apparently an irresistible impulse leads
to acts of this nature, from the constant dwelling of the mind
upon the accusations and reports on the subject. We meet with
analogous instances in all epidemics of crime, and it is not un-
frequent to meet with those who, from a morbid desire for
notoriety, will insist upon confessing crimes which have evi-
dently not been perpetrated, such as the murder of people still
living.
The humanity and good sense of Clement A' I. at last succeeded
in putting a stop to this wholesale butchery; but it was not till
after scores of thousands had fallen victims to the insane and
cruel delusion.
The Dancing Mania next claims attention. In his preface to
an account of this affection, Hecker makes some interesting
reflections, which we here quote :?
" These diseases afford a deep insight into the workings of the human
mind in a state of society; they expose a vulnerable part of man,?the
instinct of imitation,?and are therefore a ery nearly connected with
human life in the aggregate. It appeared worth while to describe
diseases which are propagated 011 the beams of light, on the wings of
thought, which convulse the mind by the excitement of the senses, and
wonderfully affect the nerves, the media of its will and feelings. It
seemed worth while to attempt to place these disorders between
the epidemics of a less refined origin, which affect the body more
than the soul, and all those passions and emotions which border
on the vast domain of disease, ready at every moment to pass the
boundary."
About 1374, at Aix-la-Chapelle, the singular spectacle was
presented, of groups of men and women, who would join hands,
forming a circle, and dance for hours together in wild delirium,
till they fell to the ground utterly exhausted.
" They then (says Hecker) complained of extreme oppression, and
groaned as if in the agonies of death, until they were swathed in cloths
bound tightly round their waists,?a practice resorted to on account of
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 255
the tympany which followed these spasmodic ravings; hut the by-
standers frequently relieved patients in a less artificial manner, by
thumping and trampling upon the parts affected."
It seems that in this and the analogous affections,?the
preaching mania in Sweden, _ the convulsive disorders in Shet-
land, and the convulsionnaires in Franee,?the most brutally
violent means were adopted for the removal of this tympany,
not only without pain to the sufferer, but with actual temporary
relief. Keferring to this last class, M. Littre says:
Ni les distensions ou les pressions a l'aide d'hommes vigoureux, ni
les supplices de l'estrapade, ni les coups portes avec des barres ou des
instruments lourds et contondans, n'etaient capables de leser, de
meurtrir, d'estropier les victimes volontaires." *
Many called out for heavy weights to be thrown upon them,
and for the blows to be administered with more force upon the
abdomen. A stone about thirty pounds in weight, called a pebble,
was in frequent use for this purpose.
This dancing mania rapidly spread over the Netherlands,
which were overrun with troops of half-naked dancers.
" At length the increasing number of the affected attracted no less
anxiety than the attention that was paid to them. They took poses-
sion of the religious houses, processions were instituted, masses were said
for them, and the disease?of the demoniac origin of which no one enter-
tained the least doubt?excited everywhere astonishment and horror.
They were much irritated at the sight of red colours, the influence of
which on the disordered nerves might lead us to imagine an extraordi-
nary accordance between this spasmodic malady and the condition of
infuriated animals."?Hecker, p. 89.
In this, as in all other epidemics, opportunity was found for
the wildest licentiousness; gross impostures mixed with the
real disease, and ultimately the resultant vices excited the in-
dignation of clergy and laity, who united to put a stop to the
disorders.
'? Meantime, the plague crept on, and found abundant food in the tone
of thought which prevailed in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
causing a permanent disorder of the mind, and exhibiting, in those
cities to whose inhabitants it was a novelty, scenes as strange as they
were detestable."?Hecker.
Nothing affords a more striking illustration of the tendency
which opinion, emotion, and action have, to take on a collective
aspect, than the subject of Witchcraft, whether considered as
to its millions of votaries, its tens of thousands of persecutors, its
myriads of victims, or the curious psychological phenomena de-
veloped by the mutual reactions of these.
* Rev. des Deux Mondes, February 15, 1856.
NO. II.?NEW SERIES. S
256 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
" Europe for two centuries and a half brooded upon the idea, not only
that parted spirits walked the earth to meddle in the affairs of men, hut
that men had power to summon evil spirits to their aid to work woe
upon their fellows. An epidemic terror seized upon the nations; no
man thought himself secure, either in his person or his possessions,
from the machinations of the devil and his agents. Every calamity
that hefel him he attributed to a witch. France, Italy, Germany,
England, Scotland, and the far North, successively ran mad upon this
subject?thousands upon thousands of unhappy persons fell victims to
this cruel and absurd delusion."?Mackay's Popular Delusions.
The summary of belief was something to this effect. At the
command of any one who would sell his soul, in exchange for
certain services during a stated period, there were innumerable
demons?Wierus says only 7,405,926?incubi and succubi, that
is, male and female, taking on various forms, according to the
circumstances required?but if human, always imperfect in some
respect.
They were bound to obey any order, except to do good, in
which case they disobeyed, and visited their displeasure upon the
offender. At uncertain intervals?generally on the Friday night
?there were meetings, called the " Sabbath," at which those who
in the intervals had done sufficient evil were rewarded, and those
who had not, received chastisement from Satan himself, who
flogged them till they could neither sit nor stand. New-comers
were admitted by the ceremony of denying their salvation, spitting
upon the Bible, and vowing obedience to " the master." Their
amusement on these occasions was a dance of toads?their ban-
quet, things too disgusting to mention. A general examination
was made to know if each possessed "the mark," by which they
were recognised as the " Devil's own." This mark was insensible
to pain. Those who had it not, then received it. When the
cock crew, the Sabbath ended, and all disappeared.
The persecutions on account of witchcraft were carried on from
various motives?political, as in the extermination of the Sted-
inger in 1234, by Frederic II., assisted by the Duke of Brabant
and others ; and in that of the Templars, accused of sorcery by
Philip IV. of France and burned; religious, as in the persecu-
tions of the Waldenses under this pretext; and superstitious, as
in the innumerable trials for witchcraft with which the middle
ages abound. It is computed that during the prevalence of this
epidemic, at least one hundred thousand persons were burnt as
witches or sorcerers.
Illustrative of the strange psychological phenomena manifested
in the votaries of this belief, and their collective character, we
quote some facts and observations from a profoundly philosophic
article in the Revue des Deux Mondes for February ] 5th, by
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 257
M. Littre. It will save repetition to remark, first, that there is
a singular uniformity in the confessions of those accused ; second,
that although many confessions were elicited by torture, and
many made through dread of torture, yet due allowance made
for all these, there remain many who confessed voluntarily, and
manifested pride in their supposed powers ; speaking with delight
of their enjoyments at ' the Sabbath," and longing to be burned
that they might constantly enjoy "the masters society"
Under the pontificate of Julius II., many thousands of persons
were burnt, who confessed freely, that in the form of cats they
were in the constant habit of destroying children.* M. Littr^
on this makes the following striking observations:
" In this fact, for which during many years the pile was constantly
erected, we remark at first one prominent phenomenon, i.e., its collective
character. All the sorcerers say that they were changed into cats;
and this in spite of the punishment which awaits them ; they accuse
themselves of homicides without number.^ In confirmation, the
mothers notice spots of blood on the dead children ; the fathers speak
of strangely pertinacious cats about the house, to all this tragedy,
so well attested on all parts?sealed by confession, certified by solemn
inquisition?there fails but one thing: in spite of the assassinations of
so many children, the mortality is not increased, nor the district
depopulated."
In the sixteenth century, the nuns of a certain convent were
all seized with a kind of hysterical affection. Naturally they
were bewitched, and victims had to be burned before they were
cured.
In Lorraine, from 1580 to 1595, about nine hundred persons
were burnt on this pretext. They all saw the Devil near them
even whilst the torture was being inflicted, endeavouring, in his
way, to comfort them. In Labourd, about the beginning of the
seventeenth centuiy, the confessions of the accused are still more
remarkable:?
" La plupart parlaient avec une expression passionnee des sensations
eprouvees au Sabbat; ils peignaient en termes licencieux leur enivre-
ment; beaucoup declaraient etre presentement trop bien habitues a. la
societe du diable pour redouter les tourments d'enfer; souffrant fort
joyeusement qu'on leur fit leur proces, tant elles avaient hate d'etre
avec le diable; elles s'impatientaient de temoigner combien elles de-
* The witch mania may be considered to have first fairly set in in 1488, when
Pope Innocent VIII. launched his terrible manifesto against them. In this cele-
brated bull he called upon all the princes of Europe to assist in extirpating this
crime, by means of which all manner of wickedness was wrought. He also
appointed inquisitors in every country, armed with little less^ than apostolic power,
to try and punish the accused. Naturally this crusade against a supposed crime
propagated it, and wonderfully deepened the belief in the minds of the people.
s 2
258 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
siraient souffrir pour lui, et elles trouvaient fort etrange qu'une chose si
agreable fut puni."
It is unnecessary further to multiply instances ; we have said
enough to illustrate the eminently collective character of these
phenomena?"seizing upon great numbers simultaneously, and
subjugating them to the same class of sensations and actions,
finally passing away, and leaving no trace, save the remembrance
of their singularity, and the difficult}7, of theorizing upon them."
We can scarcely persuade ourselves that some of the so-
designated " spiritual" manifestations of our own times are less
absurd or dangerous than those just quoted. In concluding this
branch of the subject, one or two general observations suggest
themselves which are both of speculative and practical interest.
1. The immense number of convictions and executions for
witchcraft are easily accounted for, when we consider the rules
and tests for the detection of the supposed crime. These, it is
well known, were so devised as to reflect no discredit on the
accuser in case of failure, but to admit no loophole of escape for
the accused.
2. In addition to the surprising uniformity of the confessions,
there is another evidence of the strength and persistency of the
delusion. When the mania for witch-extermination had begun
to subside, and men were more anxious to acquit than condemn,
there were found numbers who voluntarily accused themselves
of crimes evidently not committed, as of the murder of people
still living, and of having attended at the "Sabbath" during
nights when the strictest watch had been kept upon them, and
it was evident they had never quitted their room.
3. and lastly. The most remarkable consideration of all is this
?and it shows forcibly the inconsequence of the whole business.
These people, who could raise tempests, who partook of the power
of the Prince of Darkness, who could work their will amongst
the elements?they had neither riches, nor power, nor grandeur;
they, who could change their form at pleasure, could ride through
the air, and pass through keyholes and crevices, and up chimneys
at will?these very people could not preserve themselves from a
painful and ignominious death !
The epidemics of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth
centuries we can but name in passing. The sixteenth was emi-
nently reformative, and never, not even in the sixth and seventh
centuries, did polemic rage burn more hotly than during this
period : the specific fanaticism was that of the Anabaptists, who,
under the pretext of zeal, kept Europe in an uproar.
The seventeenth century in England and the eighteenth in
France present striking analogies to each other in their broad fea-
tures of resistance to authority. In each case, the entire national
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 259
mind, in all its manifestations, thought, expression, emotion, and
action, was disturbed to the very foundation. In each there was a
period of luxuriant literature, followed by deep thought amongst
the masses. In each, prolonged thought excited emotion; and this
in its turn produced action, reaction, violence, anarchy, despotism.
In each case, after peace was restored, there was another phase
of literature, remarkable for its immorality* The eighteenth
century also presented two of the most frantic commercial manias
that the world has ever witnessed?in France, Law's Bank and
Missisippi scheme; in England, the South Sea scheme. It is
impossible even to glance at the nature of these projects, or to
describe the excitement caused by their rise and progress?the
desperation and ruin consequent upon their failure. They were
instituted in the same year; the two nations went mad simul-
taneously; and in the same year, 1721, both broke down, reducing
thousands of families to beggary. Each gave rise to innumerable
other bubbles, none of which were too absurd to be adopted. At
one time, eighty-six of these undertakings were declared illegal
by the Committee of the House of Commons, and abolished
accordingly. Number seventeen jn this list will serve as a fair
sample of the credulity of the period. It was entitled: "A
company for carrying on an undertaking of great advantage, but
nobody to know what it is!" The projector of this cleared
2000?. in five hours, and decamped.
When remarking upon the mental aberrations of our own
century, the nineteenth, M. Emile Montegut observes:
" lis n'ont plus le fanatisme revolutionnaire de leurs peres, et ce
n'est pas eux qui demanderaient a etrangler le dernier roi avec les
entrailles du dernier pretre!"
True?and fortunate as true?our tendencies are not so rabid;
yet we take our part bravely in the insanities of our race. There
are few of the manias which have been already noticed that have
not their representatives in the present age. Penance, morti-
fications, and dancing?panic-terror, witchcraft, and commercial
speculation run wild?a revolutionary madness pervading an
entire continent,?we seem to be taking a resume of the world's
follies and crimes. But one morbid tendency stands out in bold
relief from the rest?that of spiritualistic fanaticism, as set forth
by jumpers, shakers, apostle-baptists, socialists, mormons, spirit-
rappers, and a crowd of other sects, each claiming exclusive
possession of the truth. Each one might well require a volume
to relate their history and doings. We will but briefly notice
1 * For an account of the causes of this state of literature in England, see Macau-
lay's " Hist of Eng." vol. i. p. 399, et seq. The corresponding condition in
France is alluded to in Alison's "Hist, of Europe from 1815 to 1852," vol. v.
p. 274.
260 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
two, which are remarkable for the strange social and civil effects
produced by them upon our transatlantic brethren.
Joseph Smith, the inventor of mormonism, which has now
its tens of thousands of votaries encamped in the valley of the
Salt Lake, was a man from amongst the lowest of the people.
His character is naively described by M. Montegut, as not
possessing precisely the innocence of a virgin! According to
the same authority, he was of licentious manners, an audacious
liar, a bankrupt, an adulterer, a murderer. The following
passage would lose by translation, and affords matter for pro-
found thought:
" Eh quoi! peut dire un sceptique, voila un homme notoireinent
connu pour le dernier des mecreans et des coquins; un homme d'une
education vicieuse, d'une intelligence mediocre, d'une ame rapace, et
grossierement sensuelle; un homme qui se recommande simplement
par un appetit solide, un front d'airain, des doigts croclius et agiles;
cet homme reussit, non pas a voler une compagnie d'actionnaires ou a
inventer un moyen subtil d'ouvrir les serrures, mais a fonder une reli-
gion, et a entrainer sur ses pas de grandes multitudes qui reverent son
nom! II publie une fausse Bible, on l'accepte pour vraie: il se donne
pour le prophete de Dieu, et il le fait croire sans trop de difficulty; il
etablit des dogmes qui blessent tous les sentiments de liberte des
Americains, et il trouve des Americains pour accepter ses dogmes; il
proclame la decheance de la femme dans un pays ou elle est plus veri-
tablement souveraine que dans aucune contree de 1'Europe, et il se
rencontre des femmes pour venir se remettre entre ses mains !"*
Add to this, that, professing to live in such sanctity and close
communion with God as to be able to raise the dead, his life was
one of the most open profligacy, with details too sickening to men-
tion, and that his followers are numbered by myriads,?and we
have a sufficiently curious yet melancholy example of the credulity
of large masses. The religion professed is eminently eclectic; each
previous one contributing that part which is most acceptable to
the appetites and passions of man. We cannot enter further
into detail; sufficient has been said to vindicate the collective
character of this delusion.
The next epidemic which we have to notice is still more ex-
traordinary in its psychological relations, and forms an appropriate
climax to this part of our sketch.
The Spirit Faith in America is computed to embrace two
millions of believers, and hundreds of thousands in other lands,
with 20,000 mediums. It appears that these include men in all
ranks of society, from the highest to the lowest. Many of the facts
related imperatively demand that we should consider this as a de-
lusion, not altogether an imposture, especially the consideration
* Rev. des Deux Moncles, F(5v. 15.
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 261
of the number who have gone insane on the subject. It is said that
amongst the lunatics confined in public asylums in the United
States, there are 7520 who who have become such entirely owing
to this " spirit faith." The spiritualist has no fixed creed, but
finds his " articles" as he advances. The fundamental belief is
in their communication with disembodied spirits through the
means of wiediuYYis?persons who are sensible of the presence
of these spirits, and can learn and interpret their will. There
are "rapping mediums," whose mode of action is sufficiently
well known ; there are the " writing mediums," who in a kind of
cataleptic trance write down the communications of the spirits.
There are also the " speaking mediums." On these last, M. Littre
has the following remarks :?
" Ceux-ci sont ties veritables pythonesses ; d'une voix souvent diffe-
rente de la leur, ils prononcent des paroles qui leur sont inspirees, ou qui
sont mises directement dans leur Louche. Cette passivete a ete notee
chez les convulsionnaires. Plusieurs parlaient comme si les levres, la
langue, tous les organes de la prononciation eussent ete remues et mis
en action par une force etrangere; dans 1 abondance de leur eloquence,
ils leur semblaient qu'ils dobitaient des idees qui ne leur appartenaient
aueunement, et dont ils n'acqueraient la connaissance qu au moment
ou leurs oreilles etaient frappees par le son des mots. ^ Une des pro-
phetesses disait, et ce qu'elle declarait s'appliquait a des milliers
d'autres?' Je sens que l'esprit divin forme dans ma bouclie les paroles
qu'il me veut faire prononcer. Pendant que jeparle, mon esprit fait
attention a ce que ma Louche prononce, comme si c'etait un discours
recite par un autre.' "
Interpreted by these three orders of media, the spirits give
information on all subjects upon which they are consulted,?
religious, social, political, or medical. They relate past events,
interpret present ones, and prophesy the future. It would appear,
however, that the spirits have not all the wisdom popularly attri-
buted to " ghosts, for they make frequent mistakes both as to
past and present, whilst their knowledge of the future is dealt
out economically and oracularly. Their religious instructions are
involved in a vague mysticism, and their social, domestic, and
political directions would, if followed, often lead to remediless
confusion. It is, nevertheless, a thriving trade, for the revela-
tions of the invisible world are made a matter of merchandise,
and as publicly advertised as any other quack medicine !
These phenomena are closely allied, on the one hand, with
those of trance and hysteria, and on the other with those of
witchcraft and demoniacal possession, of the prophecies of Ce-
vennes, the " preachings of Sweden, the apostle-baptists of
Oermany, and the convulsionaries of St. Mddard.
M. Littrd suggests an ingenious theory of their somatic origin,
262 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
which we shall endeavour to condense. He entirely disbelieves,
in the outset, in their spiritual origin,?first, from the smallness
and absurdity of the results produced ; secondly, because all the
manifestations are such as, in a sporadic form, are well known,
and recognised as the normal symptoms of certain pathological
conditions of the nervous centres.
These phenomena are all resolvable into disorders of the senses,
muscular actions, and intelligence; and M. Littre shows first
how these may all be affected by well-known physical agents,
producing certain definite physiological results. Thus illusions
of the eye may be produced by belladonna,?those of the ear by
large doses of quinine. The muscular system may be convul-
sively affected by the administration of strychnine, whilst a
general modification (or even aberration) of the intelligence and.
the emotions, is producible at will, by the use of opium, hachish,
and other narcotics.
These results are all physical,?they are likewise all special,
definite, and constant. Whence it may be considered as ascer-
tained,?
(1) That a certain physiological (or pathological) condition
of the nervous centres is connected with illusions.
But (2) it is well known that whatever subjective sensations
may be produced by external agency may also be produced by
internal changes,?i. e., changes in the organs themselves. Thus,
from congestion and other causes, the eye may perceive light,
the ear may perceive sound, without those being actually present;
and so with the other senses. Under similar circumstances, the
intelligence is troubled, creates strange associations of ideas, sees
visions, and appears abstracted from a real world to live in an
imaginary one. Here we have the same condition as that
. referred to above, produced spontaneously?yet the source is
somatic or physical.
But (3) we know that certain pathological conditions have a
tendency to become epidemic, influenced by causes not yet inves-
tigated, as glandular, bronchial, and gastric inflammation or irri-
tation, in time of plague, influenza, or cholera; and it is not un-
reasonable to conjecture that the morbid change in the nervous
centres, which we see in indivdual cases producing such visionary
results, may also become epidemic, and produce these aggregate
delusions.
On reviewing the foregoing details, we see how strong is the
tendency of opinion once promulgated to run into an epidemie
form,?no opinion, no delusion is too absurd to take on this col-
lective character. We observe also how remarkably the same
ideas reproduce themselves, and re-appear in successive ages.
We have now to examine those cases in which individual crime
operates upon masses of people to produce great numbers of
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 26$
imitations. We shall see that no crime is too horrible to become
popular,?homicide, infanticide, suicide, poisoning, or any other
diabolical human conception.
Crime of various kinds appears to be endemic in certain
countries, and even to be incorporated in the forms of religion
peculiar to them. Assassination was one of the principal obser-
vances among the subjects of the Old Man of the Mountain, a
sect which lasted nearly two centuries, and carried dismay and
terror into every Court in Europe. Infanticide is a part of the
religion of the Hindoos. It is stated in Buchanan's Researches
in Asia, that the number of infants killed in one year in
the two provinces of Cutch and Guzerat was .30,000. It is also
endemic in China; the number of children exposed in Pekin
alone is about 9000 annually. It is much the same in the South
Sea Islands, the Sandwich Islands, and Ceylon. Suicide appears
to be endemic in Hindostan ; many hundreds lay violent hands
on themselves each year?three-fourths being women. Robbery
is endemic in Italy; incendiarism and murder, we regret to
think, in Ireland. But though these seem to be the favoured
habitats of the special crimes mentioned, yet everywhere are the
seeds of evil sown deep under the surface of society, deep in the
corrupt moral nature of man, and their development is like those
curious phenomena so familiar to the observer of animal life in
its most elementary forms; where it only is required that the
proper nidus should be prepared, and countless millions of living
creatures crowd in, or originate from it, propagating themselves
with ever geometrically increasing rapidity?the germ ever pre-
sent?the conditions casually supplied.
So let the surface of society be disturbed, or its depths ploughed
up by influences of exceptional social, commercial, or political
events, as in times of speculation, panic, or war, then inevitably
will these seeds of evil works germinate, and their results will
be offences against order, property, and life, which for their
check will often require enactments as stern and unsparing as the
fiat by which the thistle and the poppy are eradicated from our
corn-fields. In epidemics of plague, cholera, or influenza, we
can trace those conditions of public hygiene which are calculated
to favour or retard their development; but the cause of the rapid
spread at that particular period remains a mystery. We believe
that the causes of the spread of crime are more amenable to
investigation than these ; that the imitative propensity, so
closely bound up with the constitution of man, his impulses,
weaknesses and vices, taken in combination with the special,
social, or political conditions of any given time, are amply suffi-
cient to account for our natural principles, and to reduce to some
sort of law these striking collective moral aberrations. We pro-
ceed to give a few illustrations of these aggregates of crime, with a
264 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
view to an inquiry into the causes concerned in their production :
(1) as to crime against property, (2) against person and life.
Mr. Macaulay gives a very graphic picture of an epidemic of
housebreaking and robbery, in the fourth volume of his recent
History. After alluding to the scarcity of grain, he says :?
" A symptom of public distress much more alarming was the increase
of crime. During the autumn of 1692 and the following winter, the
capital was kept in constant terror by housebreakers."
Attempts were made on the mansion of the Duke of Ormond
and the Palace at Lambeth.
" From Bow to Hyde Park, from Thames-street to Bloomsbury,
there was no parish in which some quiet dwelling had not been sacked
by burglars. Meanwhile the great roads were made almost impassable
by freebooters, who formed themselves into troops larger than had
ever been seen. The Oxford stage-coach was pillaged in broad day,
after a bloody fight. A wagon laden with 15,000Z. of public money
was stopped and ransacked. The Portsmouth mail was robbed twice
in one week, by men well armed and mounted. Some jovial Essex
squires, while riding after a hare, were themselves chased and run
down by nine hunters of a different sort, and were heartily glad to
find themselves at home again, though with empty pockets."
It seems that these robbers were by some suspected of being
Jacobites; but they showed the most laudable impartiality in
the exercise of their calling. The gang, consisting of not less
than eighty names, were ultimately betrayed by the confession
of one of their fraternity.
Another form of crime against property is that of Incendiarism.
History abounds with instances of this offence. We shall but
mention two cases, which will illustrate the mode in which the
propensity is propagated. M. Marc, in his " Annales d'Hygiene
Publique/' relates some particulars of a band of incendiaries, who
in 1830 (the date is significant) desolated many departments of
France. A girl, about seventeen years of age, was arrested on
suspicion of being connected with them. She confessed that " twice
she had set fire to dwellings by instinct, by irresistible neces-
sity,?a victim to the suggestions to which she was exposed by
the constant reports of fires, and the alarms from these scenes,
which terrified the whole country and excited her diseased
brain/' A boy, about eighteen, committed many acts of this
nature. He was not moved by any passion ; but the bursting
out of the flames excited a profoundly pleasing emotion,- which
was augmented by the sound of the alarm bells, the lamenta-
tions, clamours, and disorders of the people. ^ " Des que le son
des cloches annoncait rexplosion de Tincendie, il dtait force de
quitter son travail, tant son corps et son esprit etaient violem-
ment asit&s."
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 265
In all this we find nothing mysterious, though the epidemic is
strongly developed. A time of political excitement and change
(1830)?'men's minds agitated?revenge for real or supposed
injuries influencing the few?imitation and impulse inducing the
many to follow?hysterical girls?excitable and idle boys (for
most of the band were young)?we have here a sufficient number
of elements well known to exist, and ready to burst forth into
crime when the example is once set, and quite capable of them-
selves producing the entire phenomenon.
In De Quincey's curious and brilliant paper entitled " Murder
considered as one of the fine arts, he observes, with regard to
this class of crime, that " it never rains but it pours," and gives
some singular illustrations of its tendency to occur in groups.
He mentions that in the comparatively short time intervening
between 1588 and 1635, seven murders or assassinations of the
most distinguished characters of the time occurred. The first
was that of William I. of Orange; then Henry Duke of
Guise ; next to him, Henry III., the last of the Valois princes;
next, Henry IV., the first of the Bourbon dynasty. Then followed
the murder of the Duke of Buckingham, of Gustavus Adolphus,
and lastly of Wallenstein. It is not often in the history of man
that such a constellation of crime is met with; yet epidemics
numerically more formidable are constantly presenting them-
selves. One murder of great atrocity is constantly and (as it
would appear) inevitably followed by others vieing with it in
horror. Sometimes, also, a predominant delusion affecting large
numbers gives rise to many examples of the same crime. Thus
in Denmark, in the middle of the last century, a great number
of people were affected with the morbid notion, that by commit-
ting premeditated murder, and being afterwards condemned to
die, they would, by public marks of repentance and conversion
on their way to the scaffold, be better prepared for heaven. The
murders were generally committed on children.
As it was evident that capital punishment would not stop this
epidemic, it was ordered that the delinquents should be branded
on the forehead, confined for life to hard labour, and annually
publicly whipped. A midwife in Paris for some time was in
the habit of introducing an acupuncture needle into the brains
of new-born children, that they might people heaven !
Esquirol relates a curious case of homicidal monomania, which
created much excitement. He was within a short time called
in to many others, all of whom traced the tendency to this
original case :?
" Un monsieur lit un journal dans lequel sont rapportes les details
du meurtre d'un enfant; la nuit suivante, il est eveille en sursaut avec
le desir de tuer sa femme. Une femme coupe la tete a un enfant
266 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
qu'elle connaissait a peine, est traduite en jugement; ee proces a
beaucoup de retentissement, et produit par imitation un grand nombre
de monomanies homicides."
The acquittal of Oxford for shooting at the Queen was quickly
followed by the attempt of Francis to imitate him. The case
of Laurence, who in 1844 killed an inspector of police, was im-
mediately followed by that of Touchett, who, without motive,
save that of imitation, shot a stranger at the shooting-gallery.
A similar instance of succession, with its causes, is alluded to in
the following paragraph, extracted from the Medical Times :?
" It is known that Mallard, the pawnbroker from whom Wix pur-
chased the pistol with which he shot Bostock, his master, was the
shopkeeper from whom Graham subsequently bought the pistol with
which he shot the stranger, Blewitt. This fact, sufficiently striking
of itself, is made more remarkable by the pawnbroker's evidence, which
tends to prove that what looks like a mere coincidence was, in fact,
but the operation of a moral law, and that where the appearance was
an accident, the reality was a principle. 'Immediately,' says the
pawnbroker, ' after the assassination by Wix, I received a great many
applications for pistols, and now, within the last few days' (after the
second tragedy) ' several persons have applied to me for the same thing.
I am now determined, however, never to sell another.' Passing by
the very proper resolve adopted by this tradesman of mishaps, we lind
in the fact he records, a startling revelation of the mental condition of
a portion of that public authors and orators are so fond of bepraising.
To many of our London denizens there would appear to exist a fascina-
tion about the circumstance of murder. About us and near us, arrayed
in all the externals of common sense and charity, are persons endued
with a mesmeric sensitiveness to the horrors of homicide, from the
very intensity of whose abhorrence of crime arises an interest for it,
tempting and fascinating them to its commission."
The homicidal horrors of the French Revolution partook
strongly of the nature of an epidemic. Here everything co-
operated to propagate the slaughterous tendency: times when
political changes were almost of daily occurrence; distress amongst
the people; gradual loss of respect for human life in general;
self-defence, terror, emulation; morbid imitation ; mere sangui-
nary impulse;?all were in operation to produce scenes such as
man had never before witnessed.*
In general, when unconnected with national interests, the mere
homicidal epidemic must, for obvious reasons, be comparatively
* It is interesting to trace in these case3 the effect of any physical agent, how-
ever unable we may be to comprehend its modus operandi. Esquirol says: " Lors-
que le terrible klamsin souffle, l'lndien, arme du fer homicide, se prdcipite sur
tout ce qu'il rencontre." Similar to this is the " running amuck" of the Malay,
when drunk with bang, hachish, or enthusiasm.
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 267
limited in its extent. There are other forms, however, not less
criminal, where the same restrictive causes are not in operation:
the only one we shall at present notice is the crime of duelling.
In the year 1528, Francis I. sent a cartel to the Emperor,
Charles V.; and from this time the duel became a fashionable
vice?very shortly after amounting to an epidemic. In the reign
of Henry IV. of France, about 5000 were killed in ten years in
single combat, and 14,000 others were similarly engaged. All
France went mad upon the duel. Kings, popes, and bishops in
vain fulminated against it. ' At last/' says Lord Herbert, the
English ombassador, there was scarcely a Frenchman deemed
worth looking at who had not slain his man."
. Infanticide has a strong tendency to become epidemic, of which
we will mention one instance only. In one of the departments
of France, about the close of last century, a girl killed her ille-
gitimate child. The case created much excitement and interest,
as there had not been a crime for very many years of that nature.
Within twelve months, eleven others occurred in the same depart-
ment, very similar in details.
No individual crime seems to have so strong a tendency to
spread by example and imitation as Suicide.
" L'apparition epidemique du suicide," says M. Esquirol, " est un
phenomene bien singulier. Depend-elle d'une disposition cachee de
1'atmosphere, de limitation qui le propage, de circonstances politiques
qui bouleversent un pays, oa de quelque idee dominante favorable au
suicide ? II est certain que cette apparition subite et passagere, mais
en quelque sorte epidemique, appartient a des causes ditferentes."
Some of the illustrations which follow are extracted from
Dr Winslow's " Anatomy of Suicide," and also from M. Esquirol's
essay on Suicide in the " Diet, des Sciences Mddicales."
In the time of the Ptolemies, a stoic philosopher preached so
earnestly and eloquently contempt of life and the blessings of
death, that suicide became very frequent. The ladies of Miletus
committed suicide in great numbers, because their husbands and
lovers were detained by the wars ! At one time there was an
epidemic of drowning amongst the women of Lyons?they
could assign no cause lor this singular tendency?it was checked
by the order that all who drowned themselves should be publicly
exposed in the market-place. That at Miletus was stepped by
a similar device?the ladies chiefly hung themselves?and the
magistrate ordered that in every future case the body should be
dragged through the town by the rope employed for the purpose,
and naked. An ancient historian of Marseilles records that the
girls of that city got at one time the habit of killing themselves
when their lovers were inconstant!
268 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
The following passage is extracted from tlie "Anatomy of
Suicide?
" Sydenham informs us, that at Mansfield, in a particular year, in
the month of June, suicide prevailed to an alarming degree, from a
cause wholly unaccountable. The same thing happened at Rouen
in 180G ; at Stuttgard, in 1811; and in the Yalois, in the year
1813. One of the most remarkable epidemics of the kind, was that
which prevailed at Versailles in the year 1793. The number of
suicides within the year was 1300?a number out of all proportion to
the population of the town."
Suicide not unfrequently accompanies epidemics of a bodily
disease, such as pellagra. It is said that one-third of the victims
of this affection commit suicide. Nostalgia is also a very
frequent cause of this crime.
Closely connected with this subject is that of self-mutilation,
a singular instance of which was related in the Medical Times
some years ago ; it is entitled
" An Epidemic op Voluntary Mutilations.?In the month
of February, 1844, 350 men of the 3rd battalion of the 1st Eegiment
of the Foreign Legion were encamped at Sidi-bel Abbes, in the province
of Oran. A soldier mutilated himself by a blow upon his wrist with
the lock of his gun. Thirteen others inflicted a similar injury upon
themselves within twenty days. None of these men would admit that
the mutilations were voluntary ; but all affirmed, that they arose from
pure accident while cleaning their arms. It was not possible, in a
single case, to discover a plausible motive to explain so strange a
circumstance. The commanding officer, alarmed at this singular
epidemic', and supposing it might extend, removed the camp some
seven or eight leagues, to a place occupied by the 10th battalion of
Chasseurs of Vincennes, commanded by M. Boete. The astonishment
of the officer commanding the Foreign Legion was great, when M.
Boete informed him that eight of his men had mutilated themselves
in the same way, and nearly at the same time. The commanding
officer and the surgeon both affirm, that there was no communication
between the two camps. But even supposing that a communication
had existed, it affords another example of the force of imitation."
We have deferred till the close of our list of the vices and
crimes which disfigure humanity epidemically, that of Poisoning,
partly because of its close connexion with the aspect of the pre-
sent time, and partly because from its secret nature, the facili-
ties which are afforded for its commission, and the difficulties in
the way of its detection, it appears to us to exercise a more fear-
fully demoralizing influence upon society than any of those
already noticed, dreadful as is the aspect of many of them.
" Early in the sixteenth century," says Mack ay,* " this crime
* For many of the succeeding details we are much indebted to Mr. Charles
Mackay's account of "The Slow Poisoners," in his "Memoirs of Extraordinary
Popular Delusions," vol. ii.
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 269
seems to have gradually increased, till in the seventeenth it
spread over Europe like a pestilence." An attentive considera-
tion of the facts ay ill show that this rapid spread quite naturally
resulted from the well-known causes in operation?evil passions
originating the crime, which then became popular, by temporary
impunity, by impulse, by imitation, and by the publication of
details, leading the public mind to dwell upon the subject, and
gradually inducing a familiarity with the crime, and a propor-
tionate contempt foi human life. .iVXany of these influences are
even now rife, and the result is the harvest of crime which is
constantly thickening around us. If the history of the past be
the interpretation of the present, and the prophecy of the future
surely some useful lesson may be learnt by the accumulation of
the experience of past ages.
Sporadic cases of poisoning occur very far back in history;
but the first epidemic which we meet with is in Italy in the
seventeenth century. Lebret, in his " Magazin zum gebrauche
der Staaten Kirche Geschichte/' relates that in 1659, Alex-
ander VII. was informed by many of the clergy, that a number
of young women had confessed to having poisoned their hus-
bands, for various motives; no names were mentioned, but
the authorities were directed to look out for these events. This
caution resulted in the discovery of a society of young wives,
who met nightly at the dwelling of an old woman called La
Spara; and their business was to arrange the details of their
poisonings. La Spara and four others were hanged ; thirty
were publicly whipped through the streets, and a great number
were banished. Shortly afterwards nine others Avere hanged,
" and many more, including young and beautiful girls" (Mackay)',
were whipped half naked through the streets of Rome. To
these succeeded the notorious Tophania, the inventor of the
" Aqua Toffana," now generally supposed to have been a solution
of some neutral aisenical salt. Phis wretched creature carried
on her horrible trade for above fifty years, selling poison to those
who could afford to buy; but such was her sympathy, says
Lebat, with those who were tired of their husbands, that she
freely gave it to them, if they could not afford to pay. She was
ultimately detected and strangled, after having confessed her
crimes and her employers. The succeeding punishments for the
time checked the mania.
About the same time, or a little after, a similar epidemic
appeared in France. Between 1670 and 1680, Madame de
Sevign^ feared that Frenchman and poisoner would become
synonymous, so frequent was the crime. _ The horrible series of
murders perpetrated by Madame de Brinvilliers may be passed
over as being well known; but it is especially interesting to
270 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
trace their effects upon the public mind. We quote again from
Mr. Mackay :?
"During the trial all Paris was in commotion. La Brinvilliers
was the only subject of conversation. All the details of her crimes
were published, and greedily devoured ; and the idea of secret poison-
ing was first put into the heads of hundreds who afterwards became,
guilty of it. It was now (i. e., after her execution and confession)
that the mania for poisoning began to take hold on the popular mind.
From this time to 1682, the prisons of France teemed with persons
accused of this crime. We have already seen the extent to which it
was carried in Italy?it was, if possible, surpassed in France?dis-
grace was, in fact, entailed, in the eyes of Europe, upon the name of
Frenchman."
The criminals were detected ultimately, and many burned or
hanged in 1 679 ; but " for two years longer the crime continued
to rage, and was not finally suppressed till the stake had blazed
or the noose dangled for upwards of a hundred individuals."
Hitherto we have had in England no such fearful epidemic as
these, but are we not even now exposed to the droppings before
the tempest ? Do we not hear the growling of the thunder
before the storm breaks in all its fury ?
In the year 1845, a year memorable in our annals, the case
of Tawell the Quaker, which is too well known to need recapitu-
lation, excited much interest, and was the topic of almost exclu-
sive comment for some time, even in those days of commercial
madness. Poisoning was brought prominently before the public;
and the mere accident by which detection was brought about, sug-
gested to many minds the facility with which such crime could
be accomplished, and perhaps escape detection. Whoever will
take the trouble to examine the " Annual Registers" since that
period, will find almost constant reference to the great increase
of poisoning in Great Britain. Public indignation was greatly
excited a few years ago at the revelations made concerning the
burial-clubs : the number of the children that fell victims at
this time is not to be ascertained, but was certainly great;
and " we remember," says a vigorous writer in the Express of
March 14th,?
" The sudden revelation of poisoning practices among the neglected
poor in certain agricultural counties, where mothers had been taught,
by the operation of the Corn Laws, to believe that the most loving
office they could fulfil towards their children was to send them early
from the pains of life to be ' better off with the Lord.' None of us are
likely to forget that one very poor woman avowed, without any sense
of guilt or shame, that she had thus dismissed to ease and plenty eight
infants in succession by putting arsenic on her breasts.
We in 1856 seem threatened with the storm, of which these
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 271
were but the preliminary drops; the crime of poisoning is
brought prominently before us, it fills men's minds, and illustra-
tions of it crowd our daily and weekly papers. But we must
refrain?these cases are not yet matters of history?on the most
important amongst them, the laws of our country, administered
by those who rank amongst the wisest of her sons, have yet to
pronounce their verdict, and we will not, even constructively,
prejudge the matter.
The cumulative portion of our task is ended. To exhibit
mind in its coiitcic/ious aspect, we have passed in review not
only those conditions of aberiation which from their transitory
nature may most strictly be considered as epidemics, but also
those which having risen from small beginnings, have spread
rapidly, and ultimately exercised a permanent influence upon
the race. We have seen that in all its manifestations, Thought,
Emotion, Expression, and Action, mind has a powerful action
upon mind. The individual error or crime acts upon the mass by
suggestion?the mass reacts upon the individual by intensifying
every development of emotion. The tension of thought, which at
first leads to any delusion, may be but slight; but when it takes
hold upon numbers, each individual is affected by the combined
force of these numbers. It is like the addition of plates ^ to a
galvanic battery, and the effect is almost like it, numerically
proportionate. The man who timidly enunciates an opinion so
long as it is but his own, will die in its defence when strengthened
by the moral force of thousands. And this staunch adherence to
any given view, is quite independent of whether it may be right
or wrong, important or otherwise. Nothing can more strongly
illustrate this position, than the persistency with which, when
the witch-mania was fairly established, the victims of this delu-
sion persisted in dying in support of their belief.
Our catalogue of error, folly, fanaticism, and crime, has been a
long one; yet we have selected but a very small number from
those with which all history abounds,?may we not say, of which
almost all history consists ? This would, however, be a profitless
enumeration, if we could not deduce some general principle, as
indicative of the causes of all the singular phenomena passed in
review.
Granting the corrupt nature of man to be the primary source
of all crime, we cannot fail to see that its development is favoured
and fostered by the predominance of appetite and instinct over
volition,?of imagination and impulse over reason and judgment.
And what is this but the permanence of an infantile condition
of mind ? Children have appetites and instincts strong?reason
undeveloped?passion unregulated. A proper system of educa-
tion (strictly so called) has a tendency to substitute reason for
NO. II.?NEW SERIES. T
272 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
instinct, to develop the former, to hold in check the latter. If
this be neglected, or if it be misdirected, man will grow up a
child in all but its innocence and its inability to do evil,?his
appetites, impulses, and passions are strengthened by indulgence
and lack of any restraining influence, his reason and judgment
are null from disuse. In this state (and of how vast a majority
of our fellow-creatures is this the condition) he is an easy prey
to any class of ideas or emotions which may be presented to him
?he receives them, adopts them, and imitates them, because he
cannot analyze them?because they, perhaps, tend to the indul-
gence of the desire of the eye, or the lust of the flesh?because
they flatter his pride?but most chiefly because uncultivated and
uneducated man is essentially mimetic. Of the influence of
morbid imitation in producing crime, many instances have
already been given. Two very remarkable cases will be found
in our Foreign Department, under the head of " Suicide amongst
Children." Dr Winslow, in his " Anatomy of Suicide," relates
the following:?
" A criminal was executed not many years ago, in Paris, for murder.
A few weeks after, another murder was perpetrated; and when the
young man was asked to assign a reason for taking away the life of a
fellow-creature, he replied, that he was not instigated by any feeling of
malice, but, after having witnessed the execution, he felt a desire, over
which he had no control, to commit a similar crime, and had no rest
until he had gratified his feelings."
A similar instance occurred recently in one of our Northern
counties, where the only reason which the murderer could give
for cutting off the head of a child was, that W (mentioning
the name of another notorious criminal) had done so before him.
The following remarkable instance is also from Dr Winslow's
? ? y)
11 Anatomy of Suicide : ?
" Some years ago, a man hung himself on the threshold of one of the
doors of tlie corridor at the Hotel des Invalides. No suicide had occurred
in the establishment for two years previously ; but in the succeeding
fortnight, Jive invalids liung themselves on the same cross-bar, and
the governor was obliged to shut up the passage."
" Last week, a boy, who had witnessed tlie execution of Baker, at
Southampton, was found hanging by a rope from his mother's bed."?
Liverpool Albion, Feb- 18, 1856.
It is needless further to multiply examples; the imitative
instinct is perhaps the most powerful in our nature; and
" It is in homicidal mania that we look for the most striking illustra-
tions of this mysterious form of cerebral disease. The instances on record
of tlie dreadful exercise of thisperverted instinct,under circumstances the
mostpeculiar and afflicting, are numerous and well-authenticated, and the
law is now well established among cerebral physiologists, that to persons
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 273
thus diseased, the latent impulse?tlie lurking demon?is often forced
into resistless action by the influence of a striking or notorious example.
One startling and celebrated murder is the sure herald of several. The
notoriety attracts to a congenial crime the diseased minds of thousands ;
a morbid sympathy is created; there_is fascination in the gulph ; the
diseased propensity is stimulated, excited, and made to overwhelm both
volition and reason. The last agency wanted is supplied to make the
madness culminate."?Medical Gazette.
Love of notoriety is a strong incentive to crime.
" The man who was killed by attaching himself to a rocket, and he
who threw himself into the ciatei of JVtount "Vesuvius were no doubt
stimulated by a desire for posthumous fame. Shortly after the suicide
at the Monument, a boy made an unsuccessful attempt to poison him-
self ; and on being questioned as to his motives, he said, ' I wished
to be talked about, like the woman who killed herself at the Monu-
ment!"'
In the case of the man who cut the chile,! s head off, mentioned
above, a very striking feature was the desire for notoriety?the
contemporary press has the following article :
" While in the cell at the Town Hall, he was gratified when, by his
mimicry or other means, he could attract the attention of persons in
the office above. When being taken out on Monday, he anxiously
inquired whether there were a good many people standing outside,
intimating that he should shout out to them if there were; and on
finding nobody standing about, he exhibited much disappointment.
While'in the cab, and also, after being placed in the railway carriage,
he persisted in sitting close to the window, and seemed pleased at the
slightest notice. His utter insensibility to the awfulness of the crime
which he has committed, is, however, most strikingly illustrated by a
piece of shocking levity in which he indulged also on Sunday. The
attention of several of the police officers, who were in the receiving
office, was attracted by bursts of merriment from the prisoners, and
on looking in the cell-yard, the officers saw H? standing in a stiff,
upright position, slowly turning his head backwards and forwards. In
reply to an inquiry what it all meant, the prisoner said, ' I am only
showing them how I shall look in waxwork, next fair.' This perform-
ance he went through a number of times during the day, complying
unhesitatingly with every request to ' show them again.'"
Another powerful instinct is that of impulse. By this we mean
an apparently irresistible tendency to the commission of a certain
act, without motive, without any knowledge of the cause, but
that the necessity to perpetrate it is most urgent.
A very striking instance of this is mentioned by Esquirol.
A young girl, of unexceptionable morals and character, of mild
and amiable'deportment, acting as a nurse, one day met her
mistress coming in from a walk, and requested to be dismissed
the house. On being questioned as to hei reasons, she said that
T 2
274 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
every time she undressed the child, the temptation to kill it was
almost irresistible, apparently stimulated by the sight of its
white skin. This seems to ally this class of phenomena to those
animal instincts and passions which are aroused by the sight of
bright colours, as scarlet to the bull, &c.
The well-known case of Henriette Cornier, related by M. Marc,
was of a similar nature, with this exception, that she accomplished
her purpose, the impulse having proved too strong for her to
overcome?the child was one to which she had always professed
and felt extreme attachment.
All writers on the psychological relations of crime recognise,
that in an otherwise sound mind this strong and occasionally
irresistible tendency may suddenly occur, and depart again as
soon as gratified, leaving the intelligence and the moral disposi-
tion in every respect unaffected. Instances of it occur very
frequently after the public mind has dwelt for some time upon
any given crime?yet it is altogether different in nature from the
tendency to imitation, before noticed. Many of the subjects of
it have sufficient warning given, to enable them to request to be
restrained, or that the objects of their maniacal fury may be
removed.
" Une jeune dame qui s'etait retiree dans une maison de sante,
eprouvait des desirs homicides dont elle ne pouvait indiquer les motifs.
Ellene deraisonnait sur aucun point, et chaque fois qu'elle sentait cette
funeste propension se produire et s'exalter, elle versait des larmes,
suppliait qu'on lui mit la camisole de force qu'elle gardait patiemment
jusqu'a, ce que l'acces, qui durait quelquefois plusieurs jours, fut
passe."?Marc.
Without adducing further illustrations, we see plainly that a
great proportion of mankind are, so far as their reason and intel-
ligence are concerned, in the condition of children,?governed
by instinct, appetite, and passion,?uncontrolled by conscience
and judgment,?ready for any impression, prepared to tread any
path marked out which leads to any indulgence, bodily or mental.
The remedy for this is plain, palpable, and on the surface?diffi-
cult in detail, but ultimately practicable?a sound form of EDU-
CATION, secular and religious. Education, we say,?not Instruc-
tion !?nothing is more dangerous than knowledge to the mind
without the capacity to make a proper use of it; then, indeed,
it does but afford an additional facility for the commission of
crime. It is through not carefully distinguishing between in-
struction and that sound education which should consist in the
literal educing of the faculties of the mind, as a counteracting
agency to the instincts, that Sir A. Alison has adopted his singu-
lar and almost paradoxical notions on the direct ratio between
education and the increase of crime, as set forth in the following
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 275
passage, and also in the introductory chapter to his recent his-
tory, at greater length : ?
" Philanthropists anticipated, from this immense spread of elemen-
tary education, a vast diminution of crime, proceeding on the adage,
so flattering to the pride of intellect, that ignorance is the parent of
vice. Judging from the results which have taken place in Prussia,
where instruction has been pushed to so great a length, this is very
far indeed from being the case. _ On the contrary, though one of the
most highly educated countries in Europe, it is at the same time one
of the most criminal. On an average of three years, from 1st January,
1824., to 1st January, 1827, in Prussia, where the proportion of per-
sons at school to the entire population was 1 m the proportion of
crime to the inhabitants was twelve times greater than in France, where
it was 1 in 23. This startling fact coincides closely with what has
been experienced in France itself, where the proportion of conviction
to the inhabitants is one to 7285 ; and it has been found that, without
one single exception in the whole eighty-four departments, the amount
of crime is in the inverse ratio of the number of persons receiving in-
struction."?Alison's History of Europe, vol. v.
That a state-engine such as that of Prussia, little better than
an instruction-mill, should produce results like these, is not sur-
prising ; but all the statistics of our own country, when properly
analysed, show that crime and true education are perpetually in
an inverse ratio; and we have the concurrent testimony of
writers both upon psychology and crime, that it is chiefly defec-
tive or perverted education which is the source of mental aberra-
tion on the one hand, and of crime on the other. Mr. Hill, in
his work on " Crime/' places bad training and ignorance at the
head of his causes of crime. He says?
"The great majority of those (criminals) that have come under
my observation have been found to have been either greatly neglected
in childhood, and to be grossly ignorant, or at least to possess merely
a quantity of parrot-like and undigested knoivledge, of little real value."
?Hill On Grime, p. 36.
And again:?
" By direct education I need scarcely say that I do not mean the
mere capability of reading and writing, but a systematic development
of the different powers ol the mind and body, the fostering of good
feelings, the cultivation of good principles, and a regular ^training in.
good habits."?p. 48.
For much valuable information on this subject, we refer our
readers to Mr. Hill's very excellent work, chapter 3rd.
An education which merely instructs will encourage crime;
one which co-ordinates the faculties of the mind, which gives ex-
ercise to reason and judgment, at the same time that it represses
without ignoring the instinctive part of man s nature, will ele-
276 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
vate his position in the scale of creation, and turn those faculties
to the service of his fellow-creatures, which otherwise would be
employed to their destruction. If the emotions be constantly
trampled down, and invariably subordinated to reason, they will
in time assert their claims, and break forth in insanity or crime;
if they be constantly indulged, the result will probably be the
same. It is not by directing attention especially to them, but
by elevating those tendencies of the mind which counterbalance
them, that man will be brought nearer to the fulfilment of his
high destiny, and his moral constitution be rendered less liable
to those epidemics of folly and crime, upon which we have been
commenting.
Deeply as these considerations affect the individual and so-
cieties, there are others which as closely involve the interests of
the race ; and these are so well and forcibly set forth by a recent
writer in the Express, that we make no apology for quoting at
length from his very philosophic article :?
" There is always something startling in a rapid succession of cases
of the same kind of calamity or crime; and the witnesses of such a
disclosui'e are apt to forget, in the strength of their emotions, that the
experience of all ages should save us, on such occasions, from astonish-
ment and dismay. Not only is there always a tendency in the criminal
world, as in other worlds, to modes (to fashions based on sympathy
and imitation), but there is a deeper cause for the existence of modes
of suffering and of crime. . . . It is a fact, which has employed
the pens of some thoughtful physicians and moralists, that changes in
bodily functions and even structure attend on changes in civilisation,
and that every important discovery in science is followed by new and
strange human phenomena, individual and social. Very curious details
may he found in medical literature on the subject of the varying phy-
siological conditions which have attended the different periods of our
civilisation. We have never met with a medical man who could or would
say how it was that the women in Queen Elizabeth's time?the ladies
of her court, for instance?could live as they did, and keep their health
and attain old age. . . . The alimentary apparatus, with all that
it involved, was then the strong and the weak point; and the nervous
system is the strong and the weak point now. People could then
digest like ostriches; but the abuse of the power led to 'surfeits,'
fevers?inflammatory disorders of all kinds. People can now get a
great deal more out of brain and nerve than brain and nerve were then,
trained to yield; but the complement of the case is, that we witness
more nervous ailment and stranger phenomena of the nervous system
than were ever distinctly observed before. Science has helped to alter
the conditions of our life by a variety of new disclosures. Sir Charles
Bell's great discovery in the matter of nervous structure has brought
into light and prominence whole classes of diseases and liabilities; and
the all-important reforms caused by science in the study and dissection
of the brain have thus far thrown our practical methods of dealing
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 277
with disease and certain orders of crime into confusion, rather than
fitted us to treat them as wisely as the next generation may do. At
the same time, there has been a vast development of the science of
animal chemistry; and we are in the first astonishment at discovering1
how the curious mechanism of our bodies is sustained and kept going.
Our condition is precisely that in which abnormal nervous states are
most striking to us, and in which the subjects of food and poisons are
interesting to the greatest number of people. If a wise student of
history, secluded from the world, were told of the scientific and phy-
siological conditions of the time, he would probably declare us to be
liable to new and unaccountable manifestations through the nervous
system, probably to a fashion of poisoning by new methods, and cer-
tainly to an epidemic credulity and suspicion about poisoning."
The writer tlien proceeds at considerable length to argue from
these premises the necessity for taking these changes into consi-
deration in deciding upon the phenomena of the present times,
and urges most strongly caution in receiving prejudice as proof,
and assertion as corroboration of crime.
Profoundly involved in the mysteries of our nature, and in
those connected with the tidal progress of our race, these great
predisposing causes of delusion and crime only admit of indirect
influence by human agency.
There are others, of a more directly exciting character, which
are dependent upon our social and political institutions, and
which therefore admit of modification, if such can be pointed
out, as likely to influence the spread of moral contagion in society.
Our limits compel us to be very brief upon this most important
topic. The evils to which we refer originate from the Press, the
Pulpit, the Bar, the Legislature, and Science.
1. The great publicity given to the minutiae of atrocious crimes
in the public Press is undoubtedly a fruitful source of crime in
this and other countries. The evil is a great and an admitted
one : the remedy is yet to be discovered. There is always floating
on the surface of society a numerous class of persons of ques-
tionable moral sense, ripe and ready for every kind of vice,
eager to seize hold of any excuse for the commission of grave
offences against the person and property. This class is generally
more or less affected by the publication of the minute details of
murder, suicide, and other crimes. To them such particulars are
dangerously suggestive. They tend, as it were, to form the type
of the moral epidemic, and to give form and character to the
criminal propensities. Esquirol, and many others, complain bit-
terly of the effect of the public press in increasing the amount of
cases of maniacal crime. We will not^ multiply instances, but
select one only, as especially interesting in its evident origination
from the publication of the details of another case. The follow-
278 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
ing extracts are from the evidence given before the Coroner in
the case of Mr. Dove of Leeds, accused of poisoning his wife with
strychnine:?
"Mr John Elletson, a pupil of Mr. Morley, proved that on several
occasions he had had communications with Mr. Dove at the surgery.
On one of these occasions, about a fortnight ago, he hegan by talking
about Palmer's case. He said he believed strychnia could not be de-
tected after death. I said I thought it could, and mentioned some of
the tests. He asked me the effects of strychnia on man. The Coroner :
Was anything said about antimony? Mr. Elletson: I think he saw
the bottle, and said that was the poison that Palmer used.
" James Peacock said: I am surgery boy to Mr. Morley. I know
the prisoner by coming for his wife's medicines. I have known him
since December. I liave been present in the surgery nearly every time
he came. 1 was present about four or five weeks ago. Mr. Dove came
for his wife's medicine. He looked at the bottles, and said, ' Tartrate
of antimony,' and observed, ' I suppose this is what Palmer killed his
wife with.' On the same shelf was strychnia, and he said, 41 suppose
they can't test strychnia?' I said, 'Yes, they can.' He replied,
' They can test all mineral and vegetable poisons but strychnia.'
" Henry Harrison said : I am a dentist. I have known the prisoner
for sixteen or seventeen months. I remember having had a conversa-
tion with him two months since about Palmer's case, at the New Cross
Inn, South market. He sent for me about two months since. I read
aloud Palmer's case in the bar in his presence. He said, ' Could I get
him any strychnia?' I said, 'Not for the world.' I had another
conversation with him about strychnia at the same house, about half-
past two last Thursday. He sent for me to the same house, and I
went there. He asked me, ' If they could detect a grain or a grain
and a half of strychnia ?' I said, ' Why, have you given your wife
some ?' He said, ' No, but I have spilt some.' (Sensation.)"
Can anything more strongly illustrate the evil tendency of the
publication of scientific and other details? The particulars con-
stantly retailed, also, in the papers, as to the state of health and
mind, the deportment and general conduct of notorious crimi-
nals, are the strongest inducements to many weak-minded persons
to take the same means of acquiring notoriety. Add to this,
that not many days ago we met, in one of our most extensively
circulated papers, with a popular account of the 'precise method
of making strychnine, and we need say no more to show the
fearfully evil influence which an unregulated press is calculated
to have on society.
2. The influence which the Pulpit exerts is of two kinds, nega-
tive and positive?the lack of proper, and the actual existence
of improper, teaching. On the former point, we shall allow the
Church to s|3eak for itself:?
" It is impossible to doubt, or to conceal, that very much of the
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 279
preaching of tlie present day has been defective in those qualities which
the character, temptations, and sins of the times require. There has
been, in many quarters, plenty of vague generality, and semi-senti-
mentalism, but very little of definite practical teaching and intelligible
counsel. ^Vhat is called, par excellence, the preaching' of ' vital godli-
ness,' has dealt very little with the real life of men, women, and chil-
dren, in detail, day by day, and hour by hour. Conventional language,
conventional thought, and conventional feeling, have been excited and
cultivated ; but these are, in many instances, wholly ineffective, or in-
adequate for the real battle of life, with the world, the flesh, and the
devil, in all their varied and ever-varying disguises, temptations, and
deceptions._ To what purpose is it to preach, Sunday after Sunday, on
' imputed righteousness,' to the man who is contemplating forgery to
supply his extravagance; or upon 'justification by faith only,' to those
who are about to ruin their friends or neighbours in order to sustain
their own credit; or upon the ' errors ot Popery,' to those who are
knowingly selling adulterated articles, or using short weights and
measures; or upon the doctrine of Predestination, to those who are ill-
treating their wives, and bringing up their children like heathens ?
We fear that in many cases we have exchanged what was sneered at
as mere ' moral preaching,' for something which, in its practical effects,
allows a good deal of immorality to go on, unrebuked by the clergy or
by conscience."?English Churchman, 28th Feb. 1856.
With regard to positively improper teaching, it must be ac-
knowledged that there are few now, who, like that renowned
street preacher mentioned by Mr. Villette, who exhorted his
hearers to become like Jack Sheppard ; but perhaps the following
incident indicates a state of morbid craving after effect not less
objectionable. For obvious reasons wre mention no names, but
vouch for the correctness of the occurrence. A wretched man,
W , committed in cold blood a most atrocious crime, for
which he was afterwards executed. A minister visited him,' and
hoped that his counsels were not thrown away. On his return
home he assembled his congregation and preached, in a style of
by no means contemptible eloquence, a sermon upon the peni-
tence and paidon of "this poor erring yet suffering fellow-
creature depicted his tears and his sighs, and his reminiscences
of his young days when lie went to the Sunday School?the
manner in which their joint petitions had ascended from that
cold cell to the Throne of Grace; and all this, in a manner so
acceptable to his audience, that very many were taken out in
hysterics. It was not long before one of that district, if not that
very congregation, was tried for a crime similar in nature, and for
which he could give no reason, but that W had done so
before.
3. With great caution would we comment upon the influence
which the Bar may have upon the spread of crime. We are not
280 ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS.
prepared to suggest any remedy?our law recognises no man's
guilt until it is proved, and all are equally entitled to such defence
as the law allows. But knowing how powerful an incentive to
crime is the love of notoriety, let any one glance over the im-
passioned address of Mr. Kelly to the court, in the defence of
-Frost, on a charge of high treason?the glowing eloquence of
Mr. Phillips, labouring under the withering disadvantage of the
confession of Courvoisier's guilt?the pathetic appeal of Mr.
Robertson in favour of Alex. Alexander, tried for the crime of
forgery?or the thrilling and soul-stirring peroration of Mr.
Whiteside's defence of Smith O'Brien?and then let him consider
whether to be thus spoken of, would not be, to hundreds, a strong
incentive to go and do likewise.
4. The encouragement which the Legislature gives to crime
is derived from the uncertainty, and in many cases the insuffi-
ciency of pu nishment?from the publicity and notoriety encouraged
in such punishments (for it is a common saying, that one hanging
produces twenty)?and from the growing unwillingness to inflict
capital punishment even for the most atrocious crimes. On this
subject, a writer already quoted, after commenting upon the duty
of the authorities to repress and punish crime, has the following
observations:?
" While we are upon this part of the subject, we cannot forbear
referring to a very recent case in which, it appears to us, the Home
Secretary has utterly set at nought such considerations as these, and
the duty of increased faithfulness in punishing prevalent crimes.
Contrary to every principle of law and justice, and to general expecta-
tion, the man who murdered his wife at a friend's house in the
Minories, last Christmas, has been reprieved. Without impugning
the Royal Prerogative in this matter, we boldly assert that Her
Majesty lias been very badly advised?that it was a most flagrant
case, and that the lives of many wives will be thereby exposed to a
greatly-increased danger. The man was a simple murderer?nothing
more and nothing less?and as justly deserved death as nine murderers
out of ten who have been executed since the Divine sentence of death
for murder was first pronounced. A reprieve in such a case goes far
to make murder a mere lottery, as to the infliction of death as its
punishment. And this comparative impunity for wife-murder occurs
at a time when not only murders of all kinds abound in the land, but
when both secret and open brutality towards wives (and other women)
has arrived at a pitch which, we believe, has no parallel in the previous
history of this country. Mercy to man is murder to woman in such
a case."?English Churchman, 28tli Feb. 1856.
5. The uncertainty of Science, both mental and toxicological,
is a fruitful source of evil. 1 he public press teems with illustra-
tions of this position perpetually; we have scientific evidence
_IP?JJULC
ON MORAL AND CRIMINAL EPIDEMICS. 281
for the defence, and scientific evidence for the prosecution, almost
as formally as we have counsel. The Staffordshire papers an-
nounce that Mr. Palmer s defence is to be purely scientific ! On
one of the most important points now before the public?the
detection of a subtle and powerful poison?the most eminent
men are at variance. That they should differ amongst themselves in
the details of a science not yet perfected, is quite natural; but
that these things should be allowed to go forth to the world, so
that men may screen their enormous vices under the win^1 of
science, is a phenomenon so monstrous as to be scarcely credible.*
In the plea of insanity, also, the law is so vague, and the opinions
of psychologists are so at variance, that whilst one man, who is only
more accomplished in crime than his fellows, is acquitted as in-
sane, we have occasionally the sad spectacle of a maniac dangling
in a noose upon our gallows ! These things are a disgrace to
science, and these at least are susceptible of some alteration for
the better. If there be three men in the kingdom upon whose
opinion the nation and our rulers^ can depend, surely, if formed
into a permanent commission to inquire into the state of mind
of supposed lunatics, their verdict would be much more satisfac-
tory than that of a jury puzzled by the conflicting and desultory
statements of casual witnesses, medical or otherwise. ^ If there
be three men, who are capable of conducting an impartial
chemical investigation, how much more weight and conviction
would their unbiassed analysis carry to the minds of all men in
disputed cases of poisoning, than are attained by the present de-
fective and vicious system of professional evidence !
Our work is done. It is ever a painful task to dwell exclu-
sively upon the delusions and crimes of mankind; but it is in
the aberrations of intellectual and moral nature that (as in other
sciences) we must seek the clue to their normal laws. We have
attempted to trace these aberrations, and have here met con-
stantly with the conviction that man, who has an individual
responsibility, is the plaything not only of his own passions and
instincts, but through the laws of his being, also of those of others.
We have seen that through these same laws, and others of still
more profound and complex operation, large masses are likewise
subject to evil influence, from the caprices or vices of one. In
attempting to trace the causes of these phenomena, we have ven-
tured to intimate that our press has a liberty which amounts to
* A singular instance of scientific special pleading once came under our own
notice. A case of poisoning by arsenic was under investigation ; the poison was
found "in the stomach in a large quantity, but the chemist employed for the defence
asked the writer of this paper, if he had ever heard of the fumes of arsenic, which
had been used amongst the whitewash for the wall, acting as a poison, as he
intended to found the defence upon the opinion that the deceased did not die from
what had been taken into the stomach, but from that used upon the wall! !
?
282 ON SOME UNRECOGNISED FORMS OF MENTAL DISORDER.
license ; that our spiritual teachers are lax in their duties ; that
science is prostituted to evil purposes ; and that our legislature
is not entirely free from the imputation of adding its quota to the
encouragement of crime. All this forms a problem of vast im-
portance to humanity. Wise and thoughtful men are looking
earnestly into it, and attempting its investigation; and we, in
this imperfect sketch, have but wished to add our mite to the
endeavour, by inquiring into the history and conditions of the
past, which is indeed " the interpretation of the present, and the
prophecy of the future."
A /
