Autobiography Of The Insane
============================

Art. IV.-
{Continued from page 82.)
I AM dead. Like Seneca, I have been bled to death by my
persecutors, who each had a cupful of ray blood. I well remem-
ber that I have suffered death with resignation, and praying to
God that he would forgive me my manifold sins. My voice has
been heard ; but 1" am not yet worthy of being numbered among
the Elus. My good and bad actions during my lifetime are care-
fully weighed by our Supreme Judge; the latter are too nume-
rous, but my repentance at the hour of death is taken into con-
sideration. According to my belief, as a Roman Catholic, I am
doomed to pass a certain lapse of time in Purgatory. My mur-
derers have already been overtaken and struck by the justice of
men. They did not repent; they are damned for eternity.
In atonement for my sins on earth, and before I may obtain
the kingdom of Heaven, I must be put to the test, and tempted
by the Infernal Powers for several hours every night. I am,
therefore, carried into the dominions of Satan, who endeavours,
by a display of magic operations, to show me that his puissance
is too great to be resisted successfully, and that sooner or later I
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 203
shall give way. He also tries to persuade me that he can make
me more happy than I am in purgatory. He points to a number
of his subjects, among whom I recognise my persecutors, who
seem to enjoy their present position.
For the first time, I feel an invincible courage within myself.
I firmly answer that I despise him, his threats, and his promises,
and that, with my God s assistance, I fear nothing, and may defy
all the monsters in his dark kingdom. The room then assumes
a more gloomy appearance; it is vaulted like a cellar; a sul-
phuric smoke comes out of the fire-place, so thick as to conceal
many objects from my sight, and to stifle me. The walls are
covered over with grimacing, horrid monsters, at all of which I
now laugh fearlessly, saying that this is nothing compared with
what I saw many a time when I attended theatres. Now and
then, if I perceive that the attacks made against me are too
powerful, I am, as it were, inspired to have recourse to prayer.
I therefore repeat uninterruptedly, aloud, and in any language I
know, our Lord's Prayer, which i had nearly forgotten, together
with Glory be, &c. ; or I sign myself. I remark that no one of
the devil's attendants, or even himself, dare to touch me while 1
am praying. On the contrary, they seem to suffer a great deal
inwardly, and slink away, in uttering curses ; but they return to
the charge as soon as I leave off praying. After a long, a very
long struggle, I grow weaker and weaker; I can hardly speak
for want of a drop of water, which I would not, however, accept
from unholy hands. I am smothered ; perspiration flows down
my cheeks; my strength is exhausted ; the evil spirits profit by
my prostration ; I feel crawling about me and on me repulsive
reptiles or animals, such as serpents, toads, frogs, rats, mice, &c.
There are myriads of them. Their size is so large that I must
see them through a microscopic glass. Here my good angel
comes to my deliverance. I am carried back to purgatory. Now
I fall asleep.
I have slept until eight o'clock?three or four hours, I should
think. My head is clearer; I am not so restless; the noise in
my ears is lighter. The two other patients tell me that I had a
very bad night. My eyes were rolling in their sockets, like those
of a madman. I was very noisy. I seemed to fight for a long
time. I spoke sometimes in Latin, sometimes in English, but
mostly in an unknown language. The night-nurse wanted to
make me drink, but I could not, even with the assistance of the
cook (man). It was fortunate that I could not stir.
The doctor comes in, and finds that my pulse isdess agitated.
Notwithstanding the nurses report about my excitement of last
night, he orders that I should be free in my movements. _ The
strait-waistcoat and other couvroies are taken off. No visions
204 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
until niglit, when I fancy that Satan himself is lying by my side.
I also imagine that my persecutors have resumed their places in
the other beds. They say that it is a shame. I am sleeping
with the devil. They see his long flat feet hanging out of the
bed, and from which I try in vain to disentangle mine. In my
opinion, Satan has taken the shape of a wolf. His head is re-
markable by two short horns. The whole of the body, with the
exception of the two feet, which are as cold as ice, is covered with
long yellow hairs, emitting a most nauseous smell. He again
speaks to me in a threatening manner. I do not listen to him.
My only answer is, that I no longer fear his power, because God
is my protector. Then I commence to pray, sometimes in a low
voice, sometimes aloud, but always composedly, as if I felt quite
safe. I still hear the once dreaded voices ; but reason seems to
have returned?she tells me not to trust sounds.
This was, Monsieur le Docteur, the third night I had visions
since my admission into the infirmary ; it was also the last one.
From that time the visions completely vanished. It is true that
1 was still very far from being restored to health. My sight was
greatly impaired for some more days. My appetite did not re-
turn all at once, but by degrees, and accompanied by a good sound,
i sleep. I here must acknowledge that nothing was spared by the
medical gentlemen which was likely to accelerate my complete
guerison. They told me I had been very ill; and indeed I
think they entertained very little hope of my recovery. I left
the infirmary, when I asked for my dismissal towards the 20th
of February.
On my return to town, I felt much more inclined to live as a
Christian. I could not help believing that all the events, either
real or imaginary, had taken place through God's will for my
conversion. My first care was to consult the priest, and to take
his advice about marrying the girl, notwithstanding my gloomy
recollections concerning herself and her family. The reverend
gentleman owned that the connection was altogether unsuitable,
that it was a great pity, &c. But I had a great sin to expiate.
Marriage had become a necessity.
We were therefore married, although I had forgotten nothing.
I first wanted to quiet my conscience, and was very much like a
man who clings to any plank of safety, however rotten, to avoid
drowning. In consequence of my new connection, now openly
known, I lowered my usual charge, thus hoping that many pupils
would avail themselves of it to learn French. My business was
resumed without any loss of time. I abstained from any strong
drink, and should have most likely been enabled to maintain
my little family, had not my wife been badly advised by her
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 205
friends, who did not dare to come to my liouse, but whom she
visited.
For reasons I cannot explain to myself, they, without any
means of a livelihood, had taken up lodgings in Derry. I found
her several times, when she returned from those visits, in a state
bordering on intoxication. I then saw that the fruit of my
labours was again going the wrong way. I got discouraged?
disgusted with life. I drank again, lost my appetite, experienced
new fits of faintness (no visions), accompanied by diarrhoea, and
finally by want of sleep. My little money being gone, the pawn-
office was resorted to ; my watch and clothes were en^ao'ed,
piece after piece, until there was nothing left. Then I saw that
my only resource was to risk my return to France, after gather-
ing up two or three pounds remaining due to me for tuition. My
books, together with some furniture, were left to my wife, who,
it was agreed, would try to live with her family until I should
be able to get a situation, after my recovery, either in France
or in England. She did not look much annoyed at my de-
parture ; but it is not the less my intention to discharge my
duty as a husband as soon as Providence is pleased to give me
the means. I would now work for her and the child much
more than for myself. May this also be a lesson to her!
Having described to you, Monsieur le Docteur, what I call
the first period of my disease, I will now give you an account of
the second. When I left Derry, I had kept my room for two
or three weeks, being unable to go on with my lessons, though
the soundness of my mind was not once impaired again there,
but from mere exhaustion. I resume my diary:?
Left Ireland on the 26th of June, with some cakes and a little
bottle of whisky. For saving expenses, took the steerage:
could not eat; drank the whisky; no sleep during the passage;
very feverish; suffering much from diarrhoea. Arrived at Liver-
pool, 27tli; no food, but one or two pints of porter. I feel
very, very weak. For fear of being taken sick on my journey,
and placed in the impossibility of proceeding, I take the mail-
train, in order to get home sooner, there I have to pay 4s. 6d.
more than I expected. In the carriage I endure great sufferings
from vomitings. My stomach being empty, I expectorate nothing
but bile. I can hardly sit up. No more sleep than on the pre-
ceding night. On the 28th, arrived in London, with about 10s.
in my pocket. I am exceedingly depressed in mind, and wearied
all over my limbs. I want to apply, Portman Square, at a rela-
tion's temporary residence. I inquire of many persons about
my way. Their informations are very conflicting. At last I
reach my destination, after a walk of more than three hours.
206 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
The people of the house answer me, that my cousin returned to
Paris three weeks ago.
This sad announcement adds, if possible, to my despondency.
There is my last hope gone, as to the possibility of getting home
without a stoppage on my way. I can, however, through great
economy in my expenses of the day, manage to save eight shil-
lings for my passage to-morrow, on board the Boulogne steam-
boat. Once in Boulogne, I shall at least be in France, and, as I
carry about me my passport, my degree of A.B., with a great
number of excellent testimonials, I may hope to interest the
authorities in my favour, and to obtain from them the means of
proceeding on my journey.
I continue my walk for many hours, now and then stepping
into a public-house to take a glass of ale, or ginger-beer, when I
feel too thirsty ; but I do not taste any more substantial nourish-
ment. It seems as if my stomach could not digest it. Though
broken down with fatigue and hardly able to stand up, I very
seldom stop for a few minutes' rest. I feel that stopping is still
worse than walking; because the absence ol objects constantly
renewing deprives my mind of diversion, and makes it a more
easy prey to thoughts of despair. I therefore go on, uncon-
scious and unmindful of the direction I may take. In a narrow
and dark-looking passage through which I wander, a few French
words fall on my ears; I turn round and find that they come
from a man, in a small stall, who sells cheap ices at one penny
each. Being anxious to get a modest bed-room for the night,
and in the hope that the man can give me some information
about it, I enter the stall and ask for an ice ; then I beg the
permission of sitting on a chair; for, said I, I have been walk-
ing a great deal and feel very tired. The ice-dealer gives me a
chair ; he then inquires of me if I am a foreigner ; on my affir-
mative answer, he says that he is a native of Switzerland, but
knows France very well. He was there for several years. I
perceive that he does not speak English, or at least pretends not
to know it. I see in the stall two grown-up boys employed as
assistants, and with whom the Swiss converses in bad Italian. A
great many customers, mostly of the poor classes and of little
prepossessing appearance, come in and ask for an ice. Some
appear to be acquainted with the man, although he has just told
me that he commenced business this very morning. No suspi-
cions however strike my mind. I frankly confess my distressing
state; I should be very much obliged by his taking me to a
lodging-house where I may obtain a bed for the night; I want
to take the Boulogne steamer to-morrow, and I have just enough
for a bed, in a very modest lodging-house. The Swiss, after
much musing, takes me to a place where, he said, I shall be well.
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 207
Despite his assertions, however, I have no sooner set my foot
in the house than I wish I had never come. This is a most
miserable-looking place, situated in a neighbourhood which can
have no claim to respectability, from the number of rags and
repulsive individuals I have met on my way. I am conducted,
through a dark a ey, up to a kitchen on the first story. The
landlord and landlady to whom I am handed by the Swiss, in a
few Italian words, are not likely to restore me to confidence.
The former is a tall lean fellow, about fifty years, wearing
moustaches, and smoking a clay-pipe by the fire-place Were
I in France, I would take him for a coupc-jarret His wife is
an old woman whose face has been greatly injured by the small-
pox and the loss of one eye. I find her very ugly. There are
two young women in the kitchen engaged about I do not
recollect what. They certainly have bold looks. Several orgues
cle barbaric and grosses caisses let me guess the kind of com-
panions I shall have for the night, if I have nothing worse.
The old woman invites me to take a cup of tea. I decline
accepting of anything, and express my desire of retiring to rest
immediately, for I cannot sit up any longer, from weariness.
She leads me through a very steep and dirty staircase to a room
containing three beds. One of them I may have. Before
leaving, she wants me to pay in advance the usual charge,?.
sixpence. When I find myself alone, I take a survey of the
place. One table, the three beds, and a few common chairs
make up the whole furniture. I again observe a big drum on
the floor, which affords me another proof that showmen as well
as strolling singers are the customary lodgers of the house. No
sinister suspicions, however, throw my mind into distrust and
fear I address a sincere prayer to God ; I think, when in bed
of those I have left behind. I cannot help shedding tears ? but
I hope in better days So far as I can judge, it may b'e six
o clock. I have therefore been walking many miles since six
in the morning. Sleep soon overcomes me. I have no evil
dreams; but a noise in the room puts an end to my rest. I
awake abruptly, and look about to see what the matter is. The
night has come. I see the old woman holding a candle. She is
with a man and a woman, whom she leaves an instant after. My
two companions take one of the vacant beds. The woman looks
very much like one of the two females I sawbut the man is
not at all the same as the tea-dealer, although the landlady told
me, when I was conducted to this room, that he sleeps there
every night. Both begin to talk in a low voice. From their
conversation I perceive that they believe I am asleep. Imagina-
tion again arouses my terrors. I fancy that they speak some-
times in French, sometimes in English. I wonder how they
NO. II.?NEW SERIES. P
208 AUTOBIOGKAPHY OF THE INSANE.
have come to a knowledge of my language, especially the woman,
who expresses herself with great correctness and a truly good
accent. Then I imagine that she may be one of those French-
women, so numerous in London, whose existence is derived from
debauchery or theft. I think that this one, after acting her part
on the first stage, has now fallen into the second. In short, I
firmly believe that she is connected with a gang of robbers. They,
said I, intend to get rid of me, in order to obtain possession of
my few shillings. I suppose there is a weapon, such as a dagger
or a sword, concealed under their bolster. They seem to en-
courage each other in their murderous design. " How much
has he got ?" asks the man. " Only eight or nine shillings"
answers the woman. "It is a poor job; but tve must get it."
Moreover, there are my clothes, with a small parcel in which
they will perhaps find something better. After much arguing,
they at last agree to wait for the arrival of other friends who are
to sleep in the third bed.
Such is now the state of my mind, that I would swear my life
is actually in danger. I pretend to awake suddenly; I don't
appear to have overheard any part of their conversation. I
cough, and often complain of weariness. I keep myself in con-
stant fidgeting, as if it were quite impossible for me to sleep any
more. I thus hope to deter them from their criminal intentions,
and, indeed, I hear them uttering curses and imprecations because
I do not sleep again.
At a late hour in the night, there is a great noise below.
Many people, males and females, are uttering coarse jokes, or
singing and disputing. Decidedly, this is not a respectable
house. I-feel more afraid than ever. Two men come upstairs
with a girl. They talk such English that I cannot understand.
I suppose it is argot (slang). The girl stops at the door of
our room, and shows her two companions into it. Owing to
darkness, the countenances of the new comers are not to be dis-
tinguished. What I can perceive is, that one of them is very
tall, and the other of middle size. They enter into conversation
with the man and woman, but they use a language unknown to
me. This fact increases my fears. Should I be sleepy, I feel
that I must not sleep, because I am not in a safe place for rest.
After a long talk has been going on in a low whisper between
them all, except myself, they bid one another good night; but
I observe that they remain wide awake. I move about to show
them that I am not asleep either. They appear to be much
disappointed, and utter frightful oaths. At times, there is a
noise from the story above, as if produced by the fall of a piece
of furniture, or by the rolling of a bowl. Voices from outside
the door address my companions, urging them to have done,
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 209
"because the night is far advanced. I remark that these pre-
tend to snore, but never all together. There is but one snoring
at once, and each differently from the others. They alternate.
I moreover remark that the noise from outside takes place when
there IS no snoring at all. Agam, the said snoring ceases when
they imagine, from my immobility, that I am asfeep. I come
to the conclusion that they have agreed to lay hands on me
during my sleep. They will smother me with the bolster, and
in case of a noise on my part, will stab me in the bed T
hear that it will not require much time for them to di?- un a
grave in the yard. ? i
I give myself up as lost. I pray that the day may come. But
the night is still far from being at its end. A clock from a
neighbouring church strikes every hour. It ha<? ino*- ^ .. i
T, ? *i mu m Just struck one.
It seems as it it were a signal. I he silence of the night is sud-
denly interrupted. People in the street?men and?women?
raise their voices to a stunning pitch. They swear, sino- laugh
and dance. They shout out that it is quite time that^the 'cat
should be blccl. Then a mourning-tune (uii air de deitil) is
sent forth from an org lie de barb arte, and brings to my be-
wildered mind a most sinister recollection?the horrible assassinat
de Fualdes which occurred in the South of France some thirty
years ago, and during the perpetration of which, an accomplice
to the murdress was engaged playing airs on an orgue de
barbarie, in order to keep the attention of the passers-by from
the sanglant theatre. Though many years have passed since I
read of it, I can now remember the most insignificant par-
ticular. My memory serves me but too well, for such recol"
lections make me the more uneasy and incapable of reasoning
As if the boisterous scene in the street wanted any accom-
paniment, I near, on all sides, howlings, barkings, whistlings
It seems that all places around contain a swarm of ferocious
animals, who are well aware of what is to be done with Z
Rude angry voices often address the individuals I Xe room
to make haste, but every time the latter, however, reluctantly
give the same mvanable answer,-There's no go. At interval?
too, the rattling of a cart, like a tumbrel, passing and re-
passing at a furious speed over rough, hard stones, Contributes
its quota to that infernal concert, which, in my opinion is
made to drown any cries on my part. I ain first surprised that
there is no night-watch to put a stop to the disturbance. Butl
soon observe that whenever the approach of heavy footsteps is
heard, the gang receive information of it, and the noise is imme-
diately hushed, to be continued as soon as the sounds of the said
footsteps have died away.
My mind is thus tortured until daybreak, A faint hope pene-
P
210 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
trates into my heart. I cast stealthy looks about me. My com-
panions do not sleep, for they are very restless. I suppose they
have not yet given up their bad designs. I then examine care-
fully if there is no means of escape. Unfortunately, my examen
confirms the worst suspicions in reference to the house. On my
right, the window is secured by iron bars, and overlooks a small,
dirty yard, surrounded by nothing but walls. My eyes turn to
the other window, which is opposite a red tile roof, and so close
to it, that I imagine I might jump out on that roof, were not the
window exactly situated between the two beds occupied by the
other lodgers.
Being therefore convinced that all hope of escaping through
the windows is to be abandoned as chimeric, I resolve to defend
myself to the best of my power again,st the attack I expect every
minute. There are in the small parcel I brought with me two
razors and a penknife, in the pocket of my trousers. I take out
one of the razors and the penknife, which I open in silence, and
which I place beside me on the bed. My companions have per-
ceived these preparations. They seem to laugh in disdain at my
means of defence. I think they say that the struggle will not be
a long one. The idea of a longer weapon being in their posses-
sion, such as a dagger or a sword, again recurs to my mind. I
then venture to speak. In a most trembling and scarcely audible
voice, I say that I know their intentions against me, &c. I am
determined to sell my life dearly. Perceiving that my words do
not appear to produce any effect on my audience, I appeal to
their humanity. I entreat them not to steep their hands in my
blood, especially for such a trifling sum as eight or nine shillings.
I am to return to my country this very morning. If they allow
me to go, I promise to leave London without making any dis-
closures- about them and this house. Let them take my money,
if they like ; I shall not complain.
I go on for some time in the same strain; and at last, seeing
that all my supplications seem to remain unsuccessful, and that
the men will not alter their minds, I beg of them permission
to grant me only a few minutes as a favour. No answer. I
hastily slip out of my bed, fall on my knees by the bed-side,
and say a short prayer in a low voice. I feel a great deal more
composed. There is now so much resignation in me, that I no
longer fear death. I tell my companions that I am ready; they
this time say that they wish me no harm. Though I do not be-
lieve in their friendly protestations, my terrors are gone. Let
them strike me while asleep. This reflection does not prevent
my taking two or three hours' rest, until seven o'clock strike by
the church clock. The other men are still in bed ; one of them
gets up at the same time as I do, because, says he, the doors
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 211
below are not open. He leads me down the steep and narrow
staircase. I find myself in the kitchen I saw yesterday. My
guide is the tall man I remarked last night; he says he is the
landlord's son. He takes me to the street door, and accedes to
my request, when I express a desire to be put in my right way
to London-bridge. He therefore accompanies me for some
minutes, and leaves me in a wide street, saying that I have only
to go straight on. I forgot to mention that he handed me two
cards, to recommend the house to my friends, should any of them
come to London. Those cards I took, but without any intention
of ever using them as I was directed. They have been taken
from me at the house where I was before my being brought here.
The landlord's name is Cassanello (an Italian).
I have been told by my guide that London-bridge is about a
good mile off, and that the shortest way for me is to keep straight
on. I therefore forget my state of exhaustion, and walk at a
brisk pace in order to be in time for the steamboat which is to
sail at nine o'clock. I have already proceeded for not less than
one hour, taking great care to follow the same endless street.
There is, however, no London-bridge within sight yet. I venture
to ask a policeman about it. He informs me that I am three
miles at least from my destination, and points to another direc-
tion as the right one.
On this day, Sunday, 29th of June, disappointments succeed
disappointments. It seems as if London-bridge were moving
and retiring before me as I advance towards it. Despite re-
peated inquiries, I think I should never have reached it, had I
not at last and in despair given a little boy one sixpenny-piece
to take me there. It was twelve o'clock when I arrived; the
steamer was gone, and with her my last hope of leaving London
on that day.
I see everywhere people going to their places of worship. An
interior voice tells me that it would be right on my part to do
the same ; for I stand in extreme need of our Lord's assistance.
But on casting a look on myself, I feel ashamed of my wretched
appearance, and content myself with praying to God that He
may deign not to abandon me. I go on at random until the
divine service is over; then I enter a public-house for the pur-
pose of writing to my family, and apprising them of my being
detained in London by illness, and unable, for want of pecuniary
means, to proceed on my journey. When I have done, I re-
commence my wandering marche without interruption, without
food, until nkdit. I have been all day exposed to a scorching
sun:' I feel quite worn-out; but I continue walking, like a
machine, an automaton, without caring about any direction what-
ever. It is my intention to apply for lodgings to any police-
212 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
officer I may meet on my way, when the streets are getting deserfc.
I thus hope to obtain a bed in a respectable house.
At about ten o'clock, I find myself in a wide thoroughfare,
where I see thousands of promenaders moving along the foot-
paths. From distance to distance, the landlords of several public-
houses have placed rows of chairs and forms, with tables, in the
street. There sit many, many people, drinking beer and eating
cakes. I am very thirsty, but I would not take any beer, because
I am sure it does no good. I buy a cake, and draw a little water
out of a pump.
I then resume my walk for one hour perhaps; I perceive that
the streets are not so thickly filled with people now, that it will
soon be time for me to think of some accommodation for the
night. Were it not that my step is more unsteady, my voice
more trembling, my sight weaker, and my hearing subject to a
constant humming, I feel nothing which may induce me to be-
lieve that I am worse than I was this morning.
Presently, and all of a sudden, the real scene changes, so far
as people are concerned. This is the same street, indeed, with
the same buildings; but the promenaders, the women esj)ecially,
are no longer strangers to me : they have assumed forms with
which I am acquainted ; I shudder on recognising in two females
the faces of my wife and her sister passing and repassing beside
me; they are laughing a diabolical laughter; they cry out that
I am mad?yes, mad, and this time mad beyond recovery. I
shall die the death of a brute ; I shall be damned for eternity.
There is just, enough presence d'esprit left in me to think that
I am again the sport of a delirious imagination, and that I am
destined to suffer under new trials. Notwithstanding the un-
ceasing .threats I distinctly hear about me, I wont believe, but
at the same time I cannot help being more and more excited,
and in spite of myself I answer those menaces as if they were
real. It is time to apply to a policeman. After some minutes'
walk, during which I get no relief, I find one whom I beg to
conduct me to a decent lodging-house, in which I may find a
bed for the night. I am a foreigner, quite a stranger in London ;
arrived yesterday, but would not like to return to the same house
I slept in last night, because I think it is a bad one. I am ill,
very tired, &c. The officer kindly takes me to a place where he
is known. The people of the house, perceiving that I am unwell,
desire me to take something before retiring to rest. I decline,
and only drink a glass of ginger-beer. As soon as I am in bed
I feel very much oppressed. I can hardly breathe. My eyes and
mouth send forth sparks of fire. A stormy, hissing wind rages-
about my ears. All my body is in such a state of perspiration
that I put off my shirt. I fancy that a demon is on me, trying
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 213
to smother me by pressing on my throat. I struggle -with all
my might, and pray repeatedly. My prayers drive Satan from
me; but he is not far hence. I still see his hideous face in the
room. The latter part of the night passes away in visions of a
new kind. My memory has acquired a wonderful power of re-
collection. I see, in a succession of tableaux, as I should in a
panorama, the faithful reproduction of what I have done wrong
during my life. Many sinful deeds, never remembered before,
and which I believed to be for ever buried in oblivion, now
spring up one after the other, and defile before my eyes.
The day has long made its appearance, when I am able to
snatch a little rest. At breakfast-time I am still in bed. The
landlady has been informed, by two young men who slept in my
room, that I was very restless, without, however, being noisy
at all. She sends up to me a cup of tea and some toast. I take
the tea, with very little bread. I cannot eat. I bought last
night half a pound of meat, which remains untouched. When I
have got up, I stop for some time in the parlour below-stairs
with the landlady, to whom I sincerely confess my penury, and
the reasons which compel me to tarry in London until I have re-
ceived an answer from home. She happens to be a kind-hearted
woman, and sympathizes with my sorrows. She accepts the
money due for the bed, but refuses to receive anything for tea.
I then tell her that, if she has no objection to it, I shall sleep in
her house again, a proposal to which she readily consents. I
take leave of her, with the intention of taking a short walk, and,
in order to get rid of any incumbrance, I entrust her with the
care of a small parcel, containing, among other things, my pass-
port, my degree of A.B., and a number of testimonials. Although
I have avoided strolling too far away from the place, I vainly
endeavour to find it again. That the house is close to a railroad,
and I was able to see the trains from my bed, is all I can say;
for I have forgotten to ask the landlady for her name and the
name of the street. At last I discover a railway which is quite,
in its appearance, like the one I am looking for. Indeed, the
aspect of the adjoining streets, cut, as it were, into two halves,
makes me almost sure that I have come to the end of my anxious
rambles. Unfortunately, appearances were never more deceiving.
I walk over and over again through some twenty streets in the
vicinity of the railroad, all to no purpose. I give up, for fear of
being looked upon by the people as a suspicious character. I
have thus been on foot for at least five or six hours, being sus-
tained by nothing but ginger-beer, the only sort of drink I made
a vow last night that I should taste again.
In the hope that an application to the police may lead to the
discovery of my papers, I hurry on to the nearest station, where
214 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
I state the case to the best of my abilities; for I have very little
strength even to speak. After hearing my statement, the chief
officer tells me that it is very unfortunate, he can do nothing
unless I let him know at least the name of the street where I
met the policeman who took me to the lodging-house. I venture
to express my opinion that it would be easy to find out the said
policeman, by inquiring at all stations, which of the police con-
ducted last night, about 11 o'clock, a Frenchman to a lodging-
house ; but all my reasons are not listened to. I therefore sub-
mit to try if I can find the street again. The officer tells me
that I must come back as soon as it has been found, and assures
me that he will spare nothing to have my parcel restored to
me. I leave the police station, not at all despairing, in my
ignorance, to be able, by dint of turnings and windings about the
streets, to find at last the one I am instructed to look for, and
of which I suppose I have kept a vivid recollection.
I shall not weary you, Monsieur le Docteur, with a detailed
narrative of my new perambulations; I shall only beg to say
that, on that day, I did not even so much as sit down for more
than twelve hours. I had no kind of food whatever; thirst
alone compelled me to stand from time to time at a ginger-beer
shop, en plein air, where I had a glass of the refreshing drink,
and then on I went. I could not stop; it seemed to me as if
somebody were again pricking me from behind, or whispering
into my ears: Walk on, walk on. The objects grew confused.
I heard imaginary conversations held in French. They related
to me and my insanity. At times the prickings became so pain-
ful as to make me shed tears, and it was with the greatest effort
that I could help uttering cries. Towards evening I was
prompted, I cannot say by what invisible force, to go and give
an answer at the police-station as to the issue of my errand.
The difficulty was to get to it. It was very likely a good dis-
tance away. Frequent were my applications to policemen on
duty in the streets, but either I gave them a wrong name, or
they did not know the place. The fact is that I never obtained
the information I wanted. In fine, and, en desespoir de cause,
I called at the first station-house on my way, and asked to be
taken, if possible, to Finchbury station, (so far as I can re-
member), where I desired to speak to the chief officer. They
kept me waiting for a good while there, and it was dark when I
was requested to follow a policeman who, they told me, was
going to my destination.
Now, Monsieur le Docteur, I will relate at some length to
you the strange events, partly real, partly imaginary, that took
place on the night of the 30th of June, from the moment when
I left the station-house to accompany the policeman. I resume.
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 215
This officer looks angry with me, as if I were a malefactor.
I ask him if I have done anything wrong; he answers, Nothing
that I know of. We have not proceeded many yards out when
two ill-looking men come up and walk by my side. Their lan-
guage is most abusive ; they make threatening gestures at me.
They say they are going to the station along with me, and there
swear before the magistrate that I created a disturbance at
their house. I call the policeman to witness that the accusa-
tion is quite false: I entreat him, with tears in my eyes, to
disbelieve such a wicked report. The men I now take for two
of those who slept in my room on Saturday night. They must
be bad characters, said I, for they wanted to lay hands on me.
The officer does not pay much attention to my supplications;
on the contrary, he seems to be on very good terms with my
accusers. He soon leaves me in a street, and, on going away,
says that we shall meet again at the station, which is now within
a few minutes' walk. I have, says he, only to go straight on.
The two men are still by my side: they still abuse me; but,
notwithstanding what they have just declared, about their inten-
tion of having me brought before the magistrate, they also leave
me, and proceed 011 their way at a quicker pace. To my great
dismay, I hear them crying aloud?Here is the madman coming.
. . . Here is the madman. This appears to be un mot d'ordre
for every one. The two men are certainly new enemies. They
try to set up all London against me. Indeed, everybody is
standing at his door, laughing at the madman ; some speaking
with compassion, others asserting that he ought to be locked up
for the safety of all.
The unavoidable cry is repeated from distance to distance, as
if to invite the people who are in doors to make haste and look
out, for there is the madman. I cannot understand how people
may be so easily imposed upon by a set of slanderers, and thus
rise up against one who does not remember having done any
harm. I feel that resistance on my part would be great folly:
mj' only resource is to suffer with new resignation. I, therefore,
thinking it useless, throw the walking-stick which I carry over
a wall I pass by.
I now go on in a slow quiet pace, with my hands in my
pockets. 1 am entirely composed. Though I would swear to the
reality of whatever I hear about me, there is in me an invi-
sible adviser who commands me to bear up in silence against any
kind of abuse. Sometimes, however, I cannot help exclaiming :
Je vous reconnais bien la, M. Diavolo; encore un de vos tours
contre moi ; mais je ne vous crains pas; je vous dejie ; car je
suis sur que le boil Dieu est pour moi? and many like sen-
tences. Once, thirst obliges me to enter a tavern for a glass
216 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
of ginger-beer. There are three men sitting on a bench in the
bar-room; I imagine they speak of me, for I have caught
the word madman. I complain of their behaviour towards a
helpless foreigner, who is only guilty of being poor. They
politely answer, that I am under mistake. I am not at all the
subject of their conversation. I then apologize for my blunder,
and walk away with the conviction that every one has been
roused against me. A little further on, I feel inclined to buy a
penny loaf; but it seems as if all the bakers' shops were now
closing on purpose, and that no one will sell me the food I am
in need of. This universal bad feeling I ascribe to Satan's power;
but I have full confidence in God,?I pray on fervently, being
assured that I shall not be abandoned. How long did my walk last,
through hundreds of streets, it is difficult to say exactly. Most
of the shops had already been shut for a long time; the thorough-
fares are no longer crowded with promenaders. It is very late.
How is it that I am neither weary, nor cold, nor hungry ? To
these questions I know of no other answer than that I am under
the care of Divine Providence.
I meet many persons whom I take for acquaintances of mine.
They have come to be present on what I call my Passion.
There is a master whom I knew at Foyle College. He passes
by without speaking. There is my brother-in-law, whom I have
just passed. I know him well. He has a brown over-coat on,
and smokes a cigar. There he is again. He wont leave me;
lie says he has come to have done with me at last. I presently
hear his voice exciting every one to throw me into the river.
I defy all in a loud tone ; but at the same time, I wonder what
interest my brother-in-law has in my death?what benefit he is
likely to derive from it. I also feel much surprised at his
uttering filthy words, mixed with oaths and blasphemies. This
was not his habit. He is extremely excited. He says, that
since Satan has got his soul, he must likewise get mine.
On my side, the excitement becomes greater; I speak aloud
to the crowd. The meaning of my speech being, that I fear
nobody; that God is with me; that I am proud of having re-
turned to better sentiments. I feel quite able to fight against
Satan himself, because I am assured that I shall have an all-
powerful assistance, already made manifest by the total absence
of fatigue, fear, and want of food.
Whilst I am talking in this strain, my eyes fall on a damp
place in the street or lane. The said place is much darker
than the rest. (Water had probably been spilt there.) I fancy
that it has the shape of a large hide. It is the devil's skin. I
am told that my prayers and my faith have triumphed over
Satan. I repeatedly trample on his remains, and only leave off
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 217
to address the multitude around me. Fortunately my harangue
is in French. They perhaps do not understand what I say;
but they well enough perceive that I am not all right. A public-
house is hard by, in which I hear music and songs. The airs
are French. They are interrupted only by the voice of my
brother-in-law, who exclaims that they must have my life, be-
cause he is sure I am not yet in a proper state for salvation. A
young man comes out of the tavern (I perfectly recollect this
incident), and offers me a glass of porter, which I decline to
accept, because, said I, I have promised to my God henceforth
to abstain from fermented drinks.
Some others among the crowd are not so kindly disposed in
my favour. They would perhaps handle me somewhat rudely
for my incomprehended discourse, were it not for the timely in-
terference of a policeman, who has doubtless been enabled to
perceive that if noisy I am not a dangerous character. In answer
to his questions, I inform him that I am the sport of the infernal
'puissance, who want to get possession of my soul, and who have
caused me to be hunted down in this city like a malefactor, a
madman. The officer shows me much kindness. He endeavours
to prove that I have nothing to fear ; he sees that I am a
stranger, and would the less on that account let me be insulted.
I then say that I am homeless, without one single acquaintance
in London, but with money enough to pay for a bed. The
policeman asks me if I should have no objection to sleep in a
poor-house. On my reply that I have none whatever to any
place in which I may pass the night, he takes me to the sta-
tion, to communicate with the chief officer about what is to be
done with me. Here, too, I receive a good accueil; but the
chief officer cannot take upon himself to send me to the poor-
house ; I must sleep in a lodging-house. I am, therefore, con-
ducted by the policeman, who has brought me to a decent place,
where I am recommended to the landlord. Before proceeding
any further, I shall here state that several times in the streets,
and especially whilst in the police-station, I most distinctly heard
again a ringing of bells, as if coming down from above. The
sound was sweet, harmonious, and seemed to be produced by
silver bells. Another strange particular-, the sky appeared to be
illuminated by immense and innumerable round lamps, while
there was now and then something like the noise created by the
fall of hailstones.
I ask what o'clock it is. They inform me that it is nearly
one. This is an eating-house, for many persons are at table,
taking some food or a glass of beer. I should believe that they
are carriers. I am told that the house keeps open all night, on
account of the customers coming from the country. The room to
218 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
which I am conducted is very spacious, and of neat appearance.
It contains five beds, three of which are already occupied. I
am scarcely in mine when I hear again from outside the voice of
my brother-in-law more threatening than ever. He will not let
me sleep. With Satan's assistance, he will get into the room;
he will torment me to death. Then I fancy that he is in the
yard, creating the same rattling noise as I heard once, by furiously
driving an empty tumbrel round a circus. He stops now and
then; but it is to laugh a sarcastic laughter, to call me hypocrite,
to defy God, or to indulge in an obscene discourse. This lasts
until after daybreak. E am still wide-awake, though I have not
been in the least afraid ; for there are two other voices close to
my ears. They whisper to me that I have defensors, before
whom Satan himself trembles. On my left I am addressed by
my guardian angel, who informs me that I have been left to his
care by our Lord. He says that I know him; that we were great
friends; for he is the son of a neighbour of ours, with whom I
used to play in my infancy. He died before he was ten years of
age, more than twenty-five years ago, and became an angel in
heaven. From that time he has been directed to watch over my
actions. Had he been allowed to speak to me before, he would
certainly have given me good counsels. For a number of years
he has seen that I was running to eternal ruin, and he could do
nothing but weep over my disorders, and pray that my eyes
should be open. I have many friends in heaven, many relations
who also interceded for my salvation. But ivhat ivas written
was written. I was destined to rush headlong to the very brink
of destruction.
I then ask my guardian angel if he was not with me already,
when I lay on a sick bed in Derry. He says he was ; but he
did not speak to me. I was then addressed by my full cousin, a
young man of about twenty-seven years when he died, and who
was a priest. To my question whether I shall be saved, my
guardian angel gives no answer ; but I hear, on my right,
another voice, which says that I shall.
This voice is clearer and more distinct than the first. It is the
voice of God Almighty himself, who deigns to communicate with
me. I listen in awe and silence to the revelations that are . being
made. They generally relate to the destiny of my family and
friends in the world to come. Parents, brothers, sisters, uncles,
aunts, &c., all have the secret of their respective fates unfolded be-
fore me. Every life is minutely reviewed one after the other; every
action, good or bad, carefully weighed. It is incredible how there is
nothing forgotten or overlooked ; it seems as if an every moment
account-book had been kept, not only concerning the deeds but
the thoughts and intentions of each. Most of them are doomed
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE, 219
to suffer for ever ; some for a certain length of time, and one,
only one, is to obtain the kingdom of heaven. Then do I re-
collect a passage of the scripture, which I thought I had forgotten :
Multi enim vocati, pauci verb electi.
It is a long time since the men have got up, I am still listen-
ing. Sometimes I presume to venture a question as to my future
line of conduct. Every time I receive kind instructions for my
guidance. Lastly, my imagination carries me to a scene hitherto
unknown. I behold a sea of fire, into which an invisible hand
precipitates the sinners, who have all preserved their human
forms. As they appear one by one before the Supreme tribunal,
I hear these redoubtable words from the Almighty : Allez,fils
de Satan, allez bruler dans lefeu de I'enfer. Although free
from fear, I cannot help exclaiming more than once : " 0 onon
Dieu ! que votre justice est terrible !" I feel that I should
like to sleep now ; but I do not dare, for fear of displeasing God.
The voice lets me know that I can rest myself after a short
prayer. I therefore pray until I fall asleep. It -must be at least
five o'clock.
My sleep lias been quite refreshing, not at all troubled by
bad, terrifying dreams. It is breakfast-time when I get up. The
voice on my right is gone ; but my guardian angel is still here.
He says he will not leave me. After dressing, I kneel down by
the bed-side and say my morning prayers. My mind is much at
ease. I have more confidence in myself; but no arguments
could persuade me that the many events of last night are not
real; everything must be true.
When I have done praying, I come down stairs. There are
people engaged in breakfast. I ask for a cup of tea, with toast.
They also bring me a little slice of ham, which I leave untouched,
because I have no appetite to taste it. The rain has been falling
a part of the night. It is not over yet. I wait in the room
until it has abated. Then I resume my random strolls. I ima-
gine that everybody knows what took place last night. Again
the cries of There is the madman reach my ears. Whatever
way I may go, they follow me ; I cannot get rid of them. After
several hours passed in moving about, like a mere machine, I
find myself out of town, in the open fields, with only a few
scattered houses in sight. Here I hope that I shall be more
quiet. Although I was very thirsty, I had not dared to step
into any place for refreshment, because I feared to be recognised
as the madman of yesterday. My guardian angel, whose advice
I ask for, tells me that I may take ginger-beer, but nothing else.
The sky has cleared up; I sit down on the grass to rest myself a
little. The place I have chosen is in the vicinity of a railroad.
A train is coming, and, as it runs by, I distinctly and repeatedly
220 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
hear the same annoying cry, There is the madman, as if all the
passengers were acquainted with my history. I am extremely
tired; I should like much to stop a little longer; but an invisible
force bids me leave the spot and move on. I thus continue on my
feet for some more hours, listening to the voice within me,
and at times answering half aloud. I bend my steps back to
town again, whither I am accompanied by the unceasing cry, to
which I now submit with less reluctance. It must be late in
the afternoon. The sky is overcast. I begin to be anxious about
a place of rest. At last I find a chapel, and sit down at the
door. I remain there for some time. The sudden idea strikes
me that I am about to die; indeed, I feel something like two
lobsters creeping up inside my chest. They are sucking my
blood; and a voice tells me that I have but a few minutes more
to live. This frightens me. My conscience is not in a right
state yet: I am afraid to die. I go on in search of a chemist's
shop, where I hope to obtain some relief. When I have found
one, I complain of exhaustion, and ask for any strengthening
medicine. The chemist gives me a cordial composed of?I don't
know what,?which I swallow in the utmost confidence. I feel
a little better, but not so well as to drive all fears of an im-
minent death away. My wishes are now to get to a Catholic
chapel, and there to apply to a priest for confession. I there-
fore inquire about the nearest place of Catholic worship; I am
directed to one about two miles off. Thither I direct my totter-
ing steps: I find the door open, but no priest in. An old woman,
whom I ask for him, says that she cannot tell me where he is.
I leave this chapel to look for another: new wearisome stroll
of nearly one hour. There is the object of my search, at last;
but the entrance-door is locked : no possibility for me to get in.
What to do ? It is growing dark. The rain falls in large drops;
I have no shelter, and I would not step into any public-house
for fear of being at once recognised as the madman, and, as
such, exposed to the abuse, perhaps to the blows, of the people.
I come to the conviction that there shall be no rest for me until
I have found out the inn in which I slept last night. I ima-
gine that I shall be able to find it, and it is only after much
time lias been spent in walking at random that I perceive my
presumptuous mistake. During all the time, the harassing cry
of There is the madman has not ceased to sound by my ears.
I again see and hear my persecutors beside me ; now and then,
too, the voice of my guardian angel keeps me up, as well as the
silvery chime from above: this especially takes place when I
have been praying fervently. Meanwhile, the rain has not
abated ; I am wet through ; it is a late hour in the night, for I
see lights nowhere except in very few public-houses. I have
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 221
made repeated applications for a bed?all in vain. There was
no accommodation. My resolution is now to pass the night out,
and, as the rain prevents me from sitting down, to walk on
until daylight. I reach a sheltered place, where, for want of a
seat, I have been standing up for some time, when a policeman
passes by. He asks me how it is that I am there at such a
late hour. I tell him, that I could not find any lodgings, &c.
He can see by the gas-light that my clothes are very wet, and
I appear to be extremely fatigued. He wishes to afford me a
shelter for the remainder of the night at the police-station. I
follow him ; but the head_officer cannot allow that I should stop
in, because, says he, there is no charge against me. On the kind
request of my guide, he, however, consents to send me to a
workhouse, and writes a few words to that purpose, which he
hands to the policeman. On our way to the poor-house, my
imagination again works on^ my mind. I fancy that we are
closely followed by an evil spirit, under the shape of a wolf, and
with a human voice. I often complain to the officer that there
is a demon behind us, who throws at me the same white-coloured
liquid from which I formerly suffered so much.^ The dreaded
shower burns all my body like boiling lead; it is accompanied
with imprecations and fits of laughter from my pursuer. We
arrive at the poor-house. They give me a bed, in which I soon
fall asleep.
This first night has been quiet. When I awake in the morn-
ing, I expect that they are going to dismiss me ; but I must
wait for the doctor's visit. The medical gentleman easily per-
ceives that I am not so well as I think. He cannot grant my
discharge, unless I have a place where to go to. I feel quite
surprised at the answer. I give way to despair, and reason leaves
me altogether. The sight and hearing, so much impaired
already, may now be termed mere organs of delusions. Besides
mine, there are five beds in the room. In one of them I see a
miserable victim, like myself. The four others are occupied by
infernal spirits of the first order. They are the rebellious angels
who presumed to revolt against God Almighty. Here, also, I
shall meet with new attacks from my brother-in-law. I don't
see him: I hear his voice and oaths as if he were in a room
below. He said that it was himself who last night pursued me
with the burning liquid, when on my way to the workhouse with,
the policeman. I shall not so easily escape now; for I am shut
in, and he has powerful friends with him,?he means the evil
spirits. He then discloses to me the secret and uncomprehended
motives of his unceasing persecutions. 1 have done him no
harm whatever; we ought, therefore, to be still on the samo
terms of good friendship as we were formerly. All this he cannot
222 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
deny. However, lie hates, he abhors me, and will only be happy
when lie sees me a corpse. My death must be the sinner's death.
There must not be any time left for repentance; because, non-
content with selling his own soul to Satan, he has likewise disposed
of mine. The condition imposed by the Prince of Darkness is, that
I shall die in my present state of sin. It appears that Satan
sets a great value upon my soul. My brother-in-law informs me
that ] 5,000 francs are the terms of the agreement in which I
am, unknown to myself, so seriously concerned. I wonder much
how my soul may be so eagerly sought for by the Evil One. My
brother-in-law's soul fetched only 80/. Is mine any better? I then
learn that God has decreed, in his inscrutable wisdom, that I
shall obtain a place in the kingdom of heaven. Satan is aware
of it. He also knows that, after a life of sins, I am destined to
endure great sufferings, and to show sincere repentance before
departing this life. He therefore gives here another instance of
his well-known presumption; though he is obliged to confess
that his own power cannot prevent the accomplishment of my
destiny, he wants once more to try if he will be able to surprise
the divine vigilance.
During the first days my fears of a sudden death are extreme.
Twice or three times I escape from my bed, because I fancy that
one or two of the boards of the floor are lifted up to give passage
to my brother-in-law, whose face I don't see, but whose threats I
hear. He will shoot me with a pistol. He has received from
Satan the power of changing his natural form into a small
animal, and to resume it as soon as he has got into my room. I
also imagine that the melted lead is poured over my body from
above my bed, through a small tube worked by Satan himself.
I see liim. He has taken the form of a black rat with red flaming
eyes ; he laughs at me, and says, he must have my soul. At
night I behold frightful scenes ; the men, whom I suppose to be
evil spirits, assume horrid shapes ; they are in perpetual motion,
and all throw at me the burning liquid. The other patient to
whom I have alluded as a victim has, like myself, to struggle
against the same tormentor. He is possessed of extraordinary
patience ; I remark that he never swears, and if he does not
pray, his frequent exclamations, such as " Lord have mercy upon
me," show that he is a true believer. I become interested in his
favour; I cannot help taking his defence (in words) whenever
the Infirmier and another who styles himself the Doctor beat
him in order to reduce him to silence.
(I have since recognised that patient in Andrews, who is now
in this establishment.)
I have no rest: a voice tells me that prayer alone shall bring
relief. I therefore pray for hours, for days and nights without
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 223
interruption, except when I cannot go on from exhaustion. I
wont take any food. Everything is loathsome to me, and besides,
the food which is presented to me is the usual nourishment of
the devils ; it would be poison for me. Now and then I drink
a drop of water, but every time after praying that it should be
changed into a wholesome beverage. The conduct of my co-
patients is not calculated either to alter my opinion in their
respect. One of them especially has nothing but oaths or filthy
words in his mouth. _ The injirmier himself is not better.
Whenever I make a noise he abuses me in a low lanouao-e, and
even strikes me with his fist. Their imprecations and ill-treat-
ments, far from compelling me to silence, only tend to redouble
my excitement. Unlike to Andrews, I often upbraid them for
their rudeness ; I say that I don't fear them. They are demons,
I know ; they may kill me ; they shall have my body; but my
soul, never. I am resolved to suffer and to forgive. I exhort
them to repentance by repeatedly saying, Repentez-vous, re-
pentez-vous ; civ le royaame cles cieux est pvoche, &c.
My prayers and exhortations, being expressed aloud and in
French, produce on my hearers no other effect than that of irri-
tating them the more ; for sleep has become quite impossible.
From the beginning, I have been tied up, head, hands, and feet,
in my bed. One would think that all movements are impeded.
I however keep in constant fidgeting; it is truly surprising how
I may still have so much strength. Every morning I am untied
that I may wash myself; but as soon as the process of washing
is over, I am generally bound again, with the difference that my
head and hands are left free. At times, myriads of white flies
are sent into my bed ; they stick to my skin like leeches ; they
suck up my blood, and their stings create considerable pains.
Every night the room is changed into a kind of infernal labora-
tory. Ihere is Satan writing cabalistic characters on the wall;
there is one of his suppots standing by my side, and keeping
under my nose a sulphuric match which he forces me to inhale.
This unearthly being's stature is gigantic. There are other
demons in various shapes moving or crawling about. I see toads
and frogs of enormous size. They torment the patient Andrews.
There are black pigs intended for devouring my feet, as they
were once by a dog. I expect new tortures, but in a spirit of
resignation; the break of day generally causes my visions to dis-
appear. I then fall into a kind of sleep of very short duration.
As soon as I am awakened, I commence praying again, and only
leaving off doing so when I am too much exhausted. For many
days and nights I have thus prayed for?1st, my family and friends;
2nd, for mere acquaintances ; 3rd, for even those whom I suppose
to be my enemies. My mind is not only occupied in praying;
NO. II.?NEW SERIES. Q
224 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
God again unfolds to me the destinies of the many persons
with whom I am acquainted. I am very inquisitive; I wish
to know the fate of the most celebrated personages about
whom I have read in history, and especially of the Frenchman
who acted the most prominent parts in our first revolution.
I learn that all the kings of France have become the subjects
of Satan, except a single one, Louis XVI. As to the Ter-
rorists, they are in hell, along with our greatest writers, such as
Voltaire, J. J. Rousseau, &c. Many, many persons whom I
expect to be saved, are not; and a few are whom I have
looked on as Jesuits. If in my prayers, any worldly thought
crosses my mind, I immediately hear the voice say, Encore des
idees d'orgueil, or else, Encore de I'envie ; encore I'amour des
richesses. All this must be made away with before I can enter
the kingdom of heaven. Sometimes I am commanded to say a
prayer which I have forgotten. Then my cousin prays for me.
Almost every night I see a window where I know that there
is none. There I behold Almighty God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, such as they are represented in Catholic pictures. Christ
intercedes for me ; I distinctly notice a tear falling down his
cheek, as if he were weeping on my sins. There also come
two children, whom I take for the Infant Jesus and John the
Baptist. Their mothers are with them; they all want to im-
plore God's forgiveness in my favour. The sky outside is now
bright, now it assumes a lurid appearance, according as my
prayers come from a contrite or a doubtful heart. Towards
the latter end of my confinement in the house I am informed
that I shall be admitted into heaven. My trials are over ; I
need not fear or doubt any longer. I am to be taken to the
celestial palaces in God's own chariot. I feel very happy.
Shortly after, the voice tells me that my soul is gone. My body
is now only animated by a souffle. I cannot well understand,
but I believe. ? Now, too, I fancy that God reveals to me the
future destinies of the world. The kingdom of Heaven is at
hand : mankind shall perish within a few days by a general con-
flagration. The plague is raging in London and many cities on
the Continent. In Franee the demon of murder and suicide
exercises his sway over the whole population. Last revolution
in Paris; the soldiers are fighting against the people, then
against each other, until there is but one man surviving, who
shoots himself. Many times I imagine that I hear a sinister
voice in London : it says, " Visited such, such, and such streets;
all dead: may God forgive us I" &c.
Such were, Monsieur le Docteur, the strange thoughts by which
my mind was engrossed when I was removed from the poor-
house. The gentlemen who came for me did not surprise me in
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE. 225
the least on announcing that I must get up, for they were to
take me away. I firmly believed that I was dead, and likely
about to be admitted into Heaven. Nothing, in my imagination,
could be expected. On our way hither, I saw houses, trees,
carriages, passengers, all as it is on earth; but I would have been
averse to the idea that they did not belong to another world, a
kind of medium between earth and heaven.
When we alighted here, I came to think that I was to be shut
in for a limited space of time. This was the last expiation for
my sinful life. I kept in sullen silence, because it was my belief
that TYLiittSTYb was the condition, sine cjucc non} for my speedy
ascent to heaven. The attendants and patients with whom X was
placed, I considered as new temptators, whose attacks I should
have to resist. Thus I fancied that my duty was to walk up and
down the gallery with the least possible rest, and taking care
always to tread on the same boards. I also considered it my
duty to obey the attendants whenever they said, 1 will. In
the yard the trial was of another kind. " I must not," said I,
"let any one make his way on the same path as I do ; I must,
drive him away by constantly walking around him, and sur-
rounding him with invisible lines, as the spider weaves his nets
around flies/'
Once, I recollect, they retired to the shed. I took up my post
right against them, and stood up for a long time there, moving
three steps backward and forward. It seemed to me that I was
ordered to do so some hundred times before allowing myself any
rest. On the three or four first nights, you may remember,
Monsieur le Docteur, that I was in an excited state. Indeed,
you were so kind as to lend me a French book, which I did not
dare to peruse, for fear it should be a snare set against my soul.
In my room I used to pray and speak aloud, as I had done in
the pauper-house, for ^ I felt convinced this establishment (the
purgatory) was swarming with invisible beings, some in need of
my prayers, others of my exhortations. Any person coming at
that time to invite me to be quiet, was sure to be taken for a
temptator, at whom I threw the malediction, Vade retro,
Satanas. Fortunately, I soon was enabled to see things in their
proper light. But to what causes shall I ascribe my quick re-
covery, if not to God s mercy first, and then to you, Monsieur le
Docteur, to the Rev. Mr. Murray, and to the attendants of your
choice. Had I been so roughly treated here as I was in the
poor-house, my firm belief is that I should never have recovered.
Your constant kind attentions to me, your willingness to grant
me whatever I may desire, such as books, newspapers, extra
diet,?these are titles to my gratitude, which I shall never forget.
In my present helplessness, I can only say what many others
Q 2
226 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
will repeat after me : May you, Monsieur le Docteur, and your
family, enjoy the happiness which you deserve so well!
I forgot, Monsieur le Docteur, to mention to you the fact that,
during my stay in the poor-house, the state of my bowels was
always that of costiveness, and that my water was of a red
colour. Now I feel as well as I can possibly be, were it not for
the itchings which I still feel now and then, and which disturb
my sleep to some degree. I suppose that they will disappear in
time.
I have given you many tedious details; you will find many
inconsistencies, perhaps, in the course of my narrative; but you
know that I had only to write down the ideas of a delirious
brain. There can be no logique expected from such a source.
My only endeavour has been to relate the truth, and nothing
but the truth, a condition which my vivid recollections made
quite easy. I sincerely wish, Monsieur le Docteur, that it should
meet your approval.
L. D.
