A Clinical Demonstration of Superior Children
===============================================

:Author:  Mildred Loring Sylvester, Executive Officer, Psychological
Clinic

University of Pennsylvania

As a part of the program of the nineteenth annual Schoolmen's
Week1 held each year at the University of Pennsylvania, a clinical
demonstration of five superior children was given, March 12, 1932,
by Dr Lightner Witmer, Director of the Psychological Clinic, assisted by Dr Miles Murphy, Chief of Clinic.
The interest of this Clinic in superior children has developed
concurrently with, although less intensively than, its interest in
the feebleminded, the intellectually deficient, and the modal child.
There has been a Pre-School Class for Superior Children conducted
in this Clinic over a period of years, with a minimum eligibility
requirement of 140 I.Q.

In 1911 Witmer collaborated with Van Siecle and Ayres2 on
the general subject of provision for exceptional children in public
schools, in which article cognizance was taken of the problem of
educating the talented or unusually bright child in a public school.
It was stated that there was indication at that time, based on school
statistics and Binet Examinations, that " about 4 per cent of the
entire school membership may fairly be rated as exceptionally
bright or talented," . . . "who are born with exceptional endowments, and go through the public schools with greater than average
ability and rapidity." However, "that these unusually able children have been given scant attention in our public schools is shown
by the fact, that at the present time only five cities are known to
have special classes for exceptionally gifted children."
The following year, 1912, Witmer was abroad, studying pedagogical methods for exceptional children, both in England and on
the continent. He returned in time to conduct a small class of
bright children in the Psychological Clinic in connection with the
Summer School Session.

In 1919, "Witmer discussed again the need for special consideration of bright children in the public schools. In his opinion '' it is
only by accident and not by foresight or interest that a very bright
child ever gets the training he needs." Bright children must not
be hurried forward in the curriculum, their training should be extensive, increasing "the range of their knowledge, power, skill,
alertness and efficiency.''3

During Schoolmen's Week for many years there have been demonstrations of superior children who have been examined by this
Clinic and continued under its observation. In the current demonstration, five young children were shown, four boys and one girl,
ranging in age from 5 years, 3 months, to 7 years, 8 months, and
in Intelligence Quotient from 138 to 166.
Elizabeth
C.A. 6-2; M.A. 10-3; I.Q. 166.
Memory span: Auditory 5, visual 6, reverse 4.
School proficiency: Reading (mechanics) adult, (comprehension)
5th grade; spelling, 4th grade; writing, poor (uses typewriter);
arithmetic, IB.
Performance tests: Superior to 50 per cent.
Elizabeth was brought to the Psychological Clinic by her mother
for educational guidance, because of her accelerated intellectual
status. Her father is a teacher of violin, her mother is a librarian.
The ancestry is Scotch, English, Irish and German. At the age of
three, Elizabeth was placed in a small private one room school for
one year, with children of various ages and proficiencies. While
playing in the kindergarten group, she listened to older children
being taught to read, and without formal instruction being given
her, she picked up the mechanics of reading. During that year she
read a Primer and a First Grade reader. Since then her reading
has progressed, entirely under self-teaching, so that now she has
read more than forty books, including "Alice in Wonderland,"
"Anderson's Fairy Tales," "Heidi," and others. Upon examination she was able to read all material presented to her, including
s Witmer, Lightner, "The Training of Very Bright Children." Psychol.
Clinic, 1919, 13, 88-96.
Galton's '' Inquiry into Human Faculty''; her reading comprehension is at least 5th grade.
Demonstration: (Excerpts from dialogue)
M.?Can you tell these people your name? Can you talk loud
enough for them to hear?
E.?I guess so. I'll tell you all my whole name?Elizabeth Carolyn Douglas.
M.?Did you ever go to school ?
E.?Not to a big school. I went to Kindergarten for one year.
M.?When was that?last year?
E.?No. I don't know exactly what year it was. All I know
is I just went to kindergarten.
M.?Did you like it ?
E.?Yes.
M.?Suppose you read that for me. You had better stand up.
E.? (after reading selections from several readers, increasing
in difficulty) That is all the further I can go.
M.?But you said on Thursday I could not find anything too
hard for you to read.
E.?"Well?all right. (Reads from "Clinical Psychology."
Studies in honor of Lightner Witmer.)
M.? (after Elizabeth reads "mathematician") What is a
mathematician ?
E.?Well, I think?it is a person who knows mathematics.
M.?Well, what are mathematics?
E.?I don't know that.
M.?(To audience) I first saw this girl on Thursday. I first
gave her a first reader to read, as I did today, and proceeded until I got the hardest thing for her to read I
could. She has just read from the memorial volume to
Dr Witmer, from an article on the relation of intelligence to efficiency. This girl has the tool of reading.
She does not understand this which she has read, but
that does not distinguish her from a good many people.
M.?(To Elizabeth) What books have you read?
E.?"Alice in Wonderland" is one of them. "Pinocchio"?
M.?Tell me about Pinocchio in the book.

E.?He is alive, and can do things. He is a very disobedient
marionette. He runs away from home, he steals. He
disobeys people?well, like the good fairy, by not coming
back to her.

M.?Do you have other books?
E.?Yes. In "Alice in Wonderland" I have two books in one.
M.?Do you know who wrote "Alice in Wonderland"?
E.?Lewis Carroll.
M.?Is that his real name?
E.?I don't know.
M.?That was not his real name. He was a famous mathematician. What other books have you read?
E.??1 Children's Classics.''
M.?Can you spell words? Can you write on the board for us?
E.?I can write and I can print.
M.?Well, before you do that, will you read that story you
wrote? (Reads original story about the oysters in the
cove. See below.)
M.?When did you write this story ?
E.?You mean what date, or what month?
M.?Oh, not the exact date, but about how long ago?
E.?I think it was in 1931. That's all I can tell you.
M.?You wrote it on the typewriter, didn't you? Did you spell
the words by yourself?
E.?Some of them, and some of them I had to ask my daddy for.
M.? (to audience) She has written it correctly for the most
part?you see it is typed in the form of verse, although
prose. "Let's" she has typed "lets".
E.?(interrupting) Well, I knew what was supposed to be
there, but you see I didn't know all the keys on the
typewriter when I wrote that story and I didn't know
where to find the right thing to put in there, but I knew
what it was supposed to be. I know all the keys now.
I made a mistake. I know what to press down now. I
didn't ask Mother or Daddy what to press down; I made
a mistake, you see.
"The Oysters in the Cove"
dick as he wanderd along the seashore
looking for shells and seaweed
he had found nine shells allready
it was a pleasant summer day the oeacaen
was a deep blue dick was a boy seven years
old he was goeining to spend the summer there
and in the fall he was goining back to
the city but he did not know this
because his mother and father did not tell
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
him because they did not want him to
know it well he had good luck
in finding shells and seaweed and he found five big
coves but they were empty finallay he came
to a great big cove he said I will be busy
for a whilee exploreing this cove so
he and another little boy that happned
to be there too started to make freinds
dick said let.s explore this cove allright
said the other boy well they had made
freinds dick ran home for his flashlight
for it was rather dark in the cove
then they got torn work at last they got to
the back there they found a brand new
chest then dick ran back home for his dady
then the two hurried back to the cove
then a 11 three were at the cove so they
set to work all pulling together
very soon they got it out in the light
then they opened it and inside they
found big pile of oysters then they
closed it again then dicks father told
the other little boy him and dick
then dick and his father went home
and got and old blue cart to put
the chest on and wheeled it back to
the cove then they put the chest on it
then they wheeled it back home
when theier mother saw what wa3 inside
she asked them then they what
she asked them how yeht
got them then they told her all that I
have told you b ut I didn't tell you
that the other little boy told dick and his father
that all the coves were full of oysters
overjoyed at this news their mother hugged and
hugged dick over and over again and said to him
that must have been hard work for you honey
but he said oh no not so very hard
for it really was't wasn't you s ee and
then dick and his father went out again
to find some more oysters in the coves
the first cove they came to was filled
with nothing but oysters then
went back to the house for an other cart
but this was stronger and bigger
then they piled all the oysters on it
and went back home with the oysters
and all the rest of the day they kepet
b
DEMONSTRATION OF SUPERIOR CHILDREN 119
Dr Murphy: This girl presents a very definite problem. What
are you going to do with a girl of that sort? She is six
years old now. I haven't had her read these things
because I think she understands them, for she doesn't,
but to illustrate to you the extent of her verbal analysis. In meeting new words, hard ones, she may misconstrue them slightly, but she has the tool for attacking
them. Once she has heard the word pronounced correctly, she will not forget how to say it. She has an
extraordinary talent for self-education.

Richard
C.A. 7-3; M.A. 11-8; I.Q. 161.
Memory span: Auditory 6, visual 8, reverse 5.
School proficiency: Reading (mechanics) high school, (comprehension) 4th grade; arithmetic 3A; spelling 4A; writing 4A.

Performance tests: Superior.

Richard is the son of intellectual parents, both of whom are
chemists. The father holds a Ph.D. degree, the mother an M.S.
degree. He is in the 3rd grade of a private school, doing very good
work. When first examined in this clinic at the age of six, he obtained a Stanford-Binet I.Q. of 142. Without having received any
previous formal instruction, he demonstrated 4th grade proficiency
in reading, 3A proficiency in spelling, 2A proficiency in arithmetic,
and only 1st grade proficiency in writing, due to the fact that he
prefers to use the typewriter. He knew his multiplication tables
through the seven table and had been able to read the clock at
three and one half years. It was recommended at the time of his
first examination that Richard be taught at home for one year, and
entered in a private school at seven years of age. This recommendation was followed and Richard, one year later, was placed in
the 3d grade.
Upon reexamination at the age of seven years, three months, he
obtained an Intelligence Quotient of 161, an increase of 19 points
in one and one half years. He has a well-adjusted personality, and
shows a wide range of interests and accurate information on many
subjects, especially geography, history, and current events.
Demonstration: (Excerpts from dialogue)
M.? (pointing to the map the boy had made) What is this?
R.?That is a relief map. It's made of paper cloth.
M.?What did you use as a model?

R.?I didn't use anything except I took a road map of United
States, and made the outlines of the United States, put
in the rivers, then I made the mountains the way they
should be from the picture on the lid of my puzzle box.
You put some cloth in a pan, then mix some glue in it,
and let it stand for a couple of days. Then you spread
it on the board, lumping it up for the mountains, and
pressing down for the rivers.

M.?How did you get the outline from the puzzle box?
R.?I took a piece of paper and traced it.
M.?Could you tell us about the rivers and mountains?
R.?These are the Alleghenies; the Rockies are here. This is
the Hudson; this is the Delaware. This is the Mississippi. Here is the Arkansas River; here is Lake Michigan. This is Salt Lake.
M.?What makes the lake salt?
R.?The water in the ocean.
M.?How does it get there ?
R.?Through the sewers.
M.?They tell me it is easy to swim there. Why is that ?
R.?Because of the salt. It holds you up.
M.?Have you seen Salt Lake?
R.?No. I have not been further west than St. Louis.
M.?Where is St. Louis?
R.?Just across the Illinois line.
M.?What are you going to do when you grow up ?
R.?I think I '11 be a doctor, because my grandfather is a doctor.
He is a doctor in a little village near St. Louis.
M.?How do you know it is little ? How many people live there,
do you know?
R.?Twelve hundred.
M.?Do you read?
R.?I like to read the magazines. I am pretty much interested
in the patents?my father marks down all the things
with petroleum in.
M.?What are you studying now ?
R.?Geography, history.
M.?What are you reading about now in history?
R.?I am reading about 1700.
M.?What was going on in 1700?
DEMONSTRATION OF SUPERIOR CHILDREN 121
R.?I am reading about the Revolutionay War.
M.?When was it?
R.?In 1780.
M.?Who was fighting ?
R.?George Washington. And in the south, General Bell. The
British tried to beat him but he beat them.
Here Richard read the following somewhat "geographical"
story which he had composed.
The Fairy Redbird's Adventures
Once upon a time there was a fairy redbird, and he lived in Delaware. He
changed into a robin but he still acted like a redbird, and that made the other
robins mad so they chased him into Pennsylvania. There he changed into a
sparrow but still acted like a robin. He built a nest but he soon found out
that he was in the same tree with a woodpecker. Just the thought of this
chased him into Ohio. Here he changed into a bluebird. But he still acted
like a sparrow. Then he got himself a wife. But she wanted to live in
Indiana. So they flew together to Richmond, Ind. There they both lived until
they decided to take a trip to Illinois. On the way they were lost in the woods.
Then a kindly eagle came and said "Bed Bud Illinois is the place for you
for they have planted 1500 red bud trees around the town which beautifies it
very much indeed. Since you are a fairy redbird, why don't you change your
self and your wife back into redbirds and live among the red bud trees in
Red Bud?" The redbird concluded that that was a very good plan.
Leopold

C.A. 7-5; M.A. 10-2; I.Q. 138.
Memory span: Auditory 5, visual 6, reverse 3.
School proficiency: Good 3d grade.
Leopold is the son of parents born in Latvia, and was brought
to the Psychological Clinic for educational guidance in connection
with his exceptional musical ability. The father was formerly a
teacher of violin, moving from Latvia to Palestine, thence to France
where Leopold was born, and thence to the United States. He
showed musical ability from the time he could walk and talk, composed a march to Lindbergh at three and one-half years, and
started taking lessons before the age of 4. He has perfect pitch
discrimination, can analyze chords or discords of considerable complexity on hearing them, a gift which not all great musicians have.
He has played before many famous musicians.

Leopold was brought to the attention of the Clinic by a teacher
in the public school which he attended, who recognized his superior
intellectual as well as musical ability. It was recommended that
arrangements be made for a shortened school day, which because of
his intellectual superiority will suffice. This will give him time for
normal boy's play without interfering with his musical studies.

Demonstration: Leopold played first a Haydn Sonata, followed by
a Mozart Rondo.
Dialogue:
M.?This boy possesses absolute pitch. Most of you know this
talent is very rare. (With the aid of a student, the
boy's talent for pitch discrimination was tested.

Single notes were first played on the piano, then chords
of increasing complexity, and the boy correctly named
all the notes struck.)
M.?Leopold, how long have you been playing?
L.?Four years.
M.?This boy began taking music lessons at the age of four.
He has composed music of his own. Will you play
something you wrote yourself, Leopold.
L.?I don't remember anything I wrote.
W.?Does it make you tired to play ?
L.?No.
Dr Witmer: People think that children like these, if taught
reading, arithmetic, music, earlier than ordinary children, will
necessarily exhaust themselves. This is not so in children who
really are superior. They will not exhaust themselves if they have
real talent. It is easy to see that this boy is not in the least fatigued from the playing he has done. These children follow their
talent as easily as the bird sings. They don't look exhausted;
they aren't; and you cannot stop them.

Charles
C.A. 4-7; M.A. 6-7; I.Q. 143.
Memory span: Auditory 5, reverse 4.
Performance tests: Qualitatively good.
School proficiency: Reading, 2d grade; spelling, superior; arithmetic, counting only.
Charles was brought to the Psychological Clinic by his mother
for educational guidance. His parentage is American, the father
is an engineer. At the time of the examination, his mother reported
that he had a spelling vocabulary of 300 words, could read, write,
and print, all self-taught. Upon examination Charles demonstrated
a school proficiency which would justify his placement in 3d grade.
Intellectual development was considerably in advance of motor
control and emotional orientation. His acceleration was confined
to spelling, reading, general information, and memory span. He
demonstrated his ability to write and spell " National Geographic
Magazine," "corporation," "Haddonfield, New Jersey," "psychology," "Pennsylvania," "Ledger," showing good discernment
and retention of form, good visual imagination. In comprehension
on the Binet he is about modal for his age. Socially he is somewhat infantile for his age. The educational problem here is to
attempt to place the child in school, such that he will be satisfactorily adjusted with regard both to this superior intellectual ability
and to his emotional orientation which is that of a four year old
boy. At the time of this demonstration Charles was six years and
five months of age.

Demonstration: Dialogue:
M.?This boy can spell extraordinarily well. He is in the first
grade. Charles, can you write "University of Pennsylvania" for me?
C.?I'll print it, I'll make the first letters big, and the other
letters small. That is how I print in school. (Result
correct, printing beautiful.)
M.?Can you write "psychology" for us? (Correctly printed.)
What is this thing ?
C.?A microphone.
M.?How did you know it was a microphone?
C.?I heard you say so.
Dr Witmer?Write "expedition" for us. (A word the boy has
never heard of?prints correctly.)
Samuel
C.A., 4-6; M.A. 6-3; I.Q. 144.
Memory span: Auditory 6, visual 8, reverse 3.
Performance tests: Good qualitatively.
Samuel is an only child of Jewish parents. He is particularly
gifted in intellect and language ability. He has a pleasing personality, his behavior is well-conformed, and he is well adjusted
toward other children. He has been enrolled in the Pre-School
124 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
class for Superior Children in the Psychological Clinic, where he
has demonstrated the competency estimated at the time of examination.
Demonstration: At the time of the demonstration, Samuel's chronological age was 5 years, 3 months. In his own words, he told an
imaginary story of the donkey and the robbers, in which he displayed a marked sense of humor, emotional poise, and superior
facility with language.
Excerpts from the Remarks on Demonstration of Superior
Children
By Lightner Witmer
Superiority is both quantitative and qualitative. There is only
one measure of superiority and that is relative superiority in producing what is demanded in a number of competitive events.
Every test on the Binet-Simon scale is a competitive event, a competition. To say that a child has a Binet-Simon I.Q. of 140 means
relatively little unless we know that children having an I.Q. of 140
or more are superior to 99 per cent of other children. Such a child
is one in a hundred. A child who is one in a thousand is even
more superior. This is quantitative superiority. Qualitative superiority is determined for us by what we happen to value or what
we think worth while. The fact must not be overlooked that the
Binet-Simon test has been constructed by men who have thought
certain tests worthwhile. They happen to have included for the
most part tests which measure intellectual ability more than anything else. The boy who played the piano here has an I.Q. of 138,
a little below 140. That puts him in a group of 9 per cent superior
to 90 per cent and inferior to 1 per cent. But playing the piano
is not a part of the Binet-Simon test. If it were, his I.Q. would be
more than 138. It may be that washing dishes or windows, or doing
carpentering work, or spelling, should be in the test as well as the
elements already there. When you get a Binet-Simon I.Q. you
have only a partial measure of a child's superiority.
I would caution you as to the use of the term Mental Age.
Elizabeth has an I.Q. of 166, a chronological age of six and a mental
age of ten. She is not a ten-year old girl; in mental age she may
be ten, but first of all, she is a six-year old girl,?a six-year old
girl able to do the Binet-Simon test as well as a ten-year old, but
that does not mean she is ten years old. She is not ready to be
taught with ten-year old children. There are sixteen-year old girls
with mental ages of ten years. It is ridiculous to think that a girl
of six and a girl of sixteen, both with a mental age of ten, can be
taught together.

People today are inclined to use the word genius in relation to
superior persons. Today we have not shown you one genius child.
"We must distinguish between genius and talent. No child can get
into a group of 1 per cent superior to 99 per cent without having
great talent; perhaps some of those in the one per cent group also
have genius. I consider the greatest element in genius to be the
ability to solve new problems. That distinguishes what is called
intelligence. All these children have intelligence, but have they so
much that they will get into the genius class ? That depends partly
on the quantity of their superiority and the quantity of their
energy.

I make certain discriminations which I think are important
when we come to study superior children. There are, in my opinion, six important but very differentiated categories of performance: (1) A group of performances that we think display intellect,
defined by quantities of knowledge; (2) performances that display
intelligence, defined by the ability to use knowledge and everything
else in novel ways. These two are entirely different. A child may
do well in school and college and yet not have superior intelligence. (3) We have mind. Intellectuality is defined by knowledge ; intelligence is defined by the novelty of performance; mentality is defined by discernment, discrimination. (4) We have
mechanical efficiency. All these children seem to produce not only
with great intelligence and discernment and at a high intellectual
level, but also with great efficiency. Two other categories, the two
most ancient ones are (5) motivation and (6) will. Both motivation and will are extremely important in measuring children.
Some people make a great success because they have will, some because they do not have will. Motivation is the ancient category of
the soul. The only way I can tell if a person has a soul or not is to
say whether he behaves in such a way that people say he has a soul.
