Testing the Ocular Dominance of Infants
========================================

By Norma V. Scheidemann
University College, University of Southern California
and
Gladys E. Robinette
Director and Teacher of Child Development, John Muir Pre-School,
Pasadena, California
The normal individual by nature is either right or left-sided.
One side of the body seems to be used in preference to the other
so that the individual is dextro-expert in regard to hand, eye, foot,
ear, nose, and so on, or he is sinistro-expert.1 The native dominance
of one of these factors may, then, be considered an index to the
native sidedness of an individual. Of these various factors, native
eyedness is the one most readily discoverable and the most reliable,
since it is not affected by training. Handedness often is influenced
by extraneous conditions and is subject to training hence cannot
be taken as an index of native sidedness. The discovery of the
dominance of other factors entails too much labor to be practical.
Clinical diagnosis often requires the determination of an individual's native sidedness, and at present the simplest way of
determining this is to determine ocular dominance. Several commercial tests for ocular dominance are on the market, but the paperhole test is much simpler and is wholly satisfactory since it comprises the principles underlying the commercial tests. This test is
no more than a sheet of paper in which a small hole (about onehalf inch in diameter) is cut. The paper is held about fifteen or
twenty inches from the eyes of the subject, and the subject is required to look through the hole at a small object about twelve inches
on the opposite side of the hole. When the subject has fixated the
small object the subject's head and the paper are held steady while
the subject's right eye is covered. If the subject then fails to see
the small object, he is right-eyed; if he still sees the object, he is
left-eyed. With a little practice the experimenter will be able to
observe which eye the subject uses in fixating the object.
When the writers found this test wholly satisfactory in testing
1 Gould, G. M., Right-Handedness and Left-Handedness, J. B. Lippincott
Company, 1908, pp. 18-20.
G2
OCULAR DOMINANCE OF INFANTS 63
kindergarten and pre-school children, they wondered whether it
would be possible to discover the eyedness of infants. After some
experimentation a satisfactory method of procedure was developed
that seemed to be satisfactory for infant testing. A large cardboard with a small hole in it was first placed in the child s hands.
Usually he proceeded to stick a finger through the hole. The experimenter then took the cardboard and tried to induce the child
to play "peek-a-boo" through the hole or asked Where s the
block ?'' while holding a brightly colored block at some distance in
back of the hole. In some cases the child's attention was attracted
to the hole and cooperation was initiated by projecting a pencil
through the hole and then withdrawing it slowly while the child
watched it. A small pocket flashlight proved to be the best stimulus
and was especially satisfactory in a dimly lighted room. A rattle
was used for variety when there was difficulty in obtaining the
child's attention. When the child succeeded in fixating the object
behind the hole it was possible to observe which eye he used from
the position in which he held his head.
This general procedure first was carried out with a child twentynine months of age. Attempts on two days were unsuccessful, but
on the third day the child's fixed attention and prolonged gaze
through the hole that permitted the use of only one eye was taken
to indicate that the light was fixated. In this case the child used
his right eye. At varying intervals nine more trials were made;
in each the child used his right eye.
Work with a twenty-seven months old child proved successful
after the attempts on two preceding days were unsuccessful. In
this case the child used her left eye. Repeated trials on three succeeding days found this child always used her left eye. She also
reached for the light with her left hand, and tried to brush the card
away with her left hand. When the mother was informed of this,
she said that the child eats with her left hand and shows preference
for it in many ways.
Efforts with infants twenty-four, twenty-three, and twenty-one
months of age respectively proved to be successful, but no results
were obtained with infants sixteen, twelve, and six months of age.
At what particular age it is possible to obtain a child s attention
so that this experiment may be successful is not known, but undoubtedly the age would vary with individual children. The work
in this study shows that ocular dominance can be tested at a much
earlier age than commonly is supposed to be possible. This fact
may be found to have practical implications.
