Concerning the Dynamics of Crime
=================================

By Alice E. Johnson, M.D.
Psychiatrist in the Municipal Court of Philadelphia
It is an accepted dictum of the mental hygienist that mental
disease begins in childhood. In the same way, and in an equal
degree, it is true that criminality has its beginnings in the very
earliest years.
The criminal and the neurotic show the same deviation from the
normal in the developmental process. In both there is a failure of
the integrative forces in the personality. Whether we assign the
cause of this failure to a defect in the germ plasm, to vitiated bio-
chemistry, or to untoward influences in the external environment,
or to all three, the dynamics of the failure is the same in all cases.
In the neuroses psychiatrists pretty generally understand that
there is an energetic conflict between the various instinctive trends,
and that these forces mutually inhibit each other to such extent
that no adequate action can be produced by any amount of energy
that may be expended.
In the well-developed neurotic state none of the instinctive
wishes get satisfying expression, and the psychic tension produced
by the pull of one wish against another causes the distress of that
mental state. The condition, then, of the neurotic is character-
ized by the absence of direct action towards the satisfaction of
desire. Such action as is achieved appears erratic and "queer";
it is mainly symbolic, a mere gesture. All his fighting is shadow-
boxing. For his most imperious appetites the patient can find only
a Barmecide feast. To every "Yes" in his mind he opposes an
equally powerful "No." Unless a compromise can be effected that
will satisfy both sides the struggle may go on indefinitely, with no
relief except such as those gestures called symptoms afford.
In a person who is called antisocial, misdemeanant, or criminal,
the energy in one of his instincts does get into direct action, at the
expense of the others. The impulses which would naturally oppose
the action are beaten back, and for the time, at least, cannot offer
the resistance that would inhibit or modify the action.
Such conduct is sure to be "bad" for the individual, because any
196
THE DYNAMICS OF CRIME 197
action is bad when it can be accomplished only by withdrawing
energy that is needed in another direction. "Excess" is always
destructive. Any organism is in a state of dysfunction when a
part is stronger than the whole. But from the standpoint of soci-
ety there is a more important reason why it is bad. It is the self-
serving instinct that is supreme in the beginning, since this is the
greatest need of the infant. In order to swing some of this energy
into the channels that will serve his other developing needs the
organism must have some endurance of stress. Training is against
the line of least resistance. In those who can not or do not accept
training the purely egotistical impulses retain their supremacy.
In the event of conflict between the impulses in such a case there
can be no doubt which will win out and determine the action.
Since this conflict takes place, as a rule, below the threshold of
the person's own awareness, he is, often enough, surprised and
puzzled by his own conduct. He is speaking with truth when he
says he did not mean to do it, does not know why he did it. It is
not quite so true when he claims he did it against his own will.
And yet the struggle here is not one between abstract "good"
and "evil." The instincts are nature's expression of the organic
needs of the individual. As Spinoza says, "Every instinct is a
device developed by nature to preserve the individual or the spe-
cies." Since they are all necessary they must be good. We can
not with truth speak of "high" and "low," "good" and "bad"
instincts. It is only when they are dissociated and one gets an
undue advantage of another, only when there is an unfair distribu-
tion of energy between them, that evil results. It is not desirable
that this energy be distributed equally among them at all times,
but that it be accessible at any time to whichever one will best serve
the whole personality under the existing condition.
The difference in personality make-up of the neurotic and of
the criminal lies in their differing ability to bear stress, that is, in
the ease with which the character elements will become completely
dissociated. The criminal does not bear stress well. He is consti-
tutionally incapable of sustained effort or strain. He must do
something at once to get relief.
Since there is every degree of this power of endurance, it occurs
that people with strongly conflicting desires may be neurotic up to
a certain point, and with a little added pressure, may break out in
unsocial action. Comfort and relief are actually attained by this
outbreak. A sense of freedom and power takes the place of stress.
198 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
So long as he can continue to express his energy along this channel
the criminal is not unhappy. It is a mistake to believe that evil-
doers are miserable. They are so only when they are driven back
on their neuroticism by obstruction to action. In confinement
where they have no freedom to action that will satisfy their egoistic
strivings it is not unusual that actual psychosis develops. An
example of this is the mental state called prison psychosis. It is
doubtful if this could occur in a so-called "innocent" man. It
certainly could not happen in one who had no neurotic conflicts
in the background. Nobody wants to go to jail, yet we have his-
torical examples of people who have been very happy there.
In any case, for the criminal, so long as his instinctive trends
are dissociated, the alternative to crime is not the good life of the
normal person, but neuroticism. He, in fact, escapes from neuroti-
cism into criminality, and if he is to '' reform,'' it will be necessary
for him to go back through the neurotic state of stress to reach the
normal condition of balanced forces.
This is not a new idea. We have heard before of the primrose
path, and the straight and narrow way; and the earliest folk-wisdom
seems to have held the concept of "penitence." But when we think
of the problem in terms of its dynamics we can more readily under-
stand why so few of the inmates of penitentiaries?alleged places-
of-penitence?actually reform, and why so many come back.
The newspapers have recently carried a story of a man who
committed a forgery several years ago, escaped, and now volun-
tarily comes back and gives himself up?a dramatic story, but
not surprising to the initiated. It is a natural action for one who
escapes from his neurotic stress by a criminal action, only to be
thrown back to his former state when threatened with arrest and
disgrace. The crime and the surrender represent two efforts to
escape from unbearable tension.
Effective effort to reduce the incidence of crime and the number
of criminals must be directed to the prevention of excessive tension
in the individual. This means that the work must be done for lit-
tle children, before tension arises.
A child can not be taught what he needs most to know by com-
mand or by argument directed to the intellect, because his reaction
patterns are formed long before the critical faculties are developed.
He must learn through his senses. Moral precept can not teach a
child the meaning or value of right conduct, unless at the same time
he is made to comprehend through his own experience the relation
of an act to its consequences. If he is allowed to believe the un-
THE DYNAMICS OF CRIME 199
pleasant consequences of his conduct come only from the dis-
approval or punishment of his parents or teachers he may change
his conduct in order to avoid such punishment, but this sort of
training in itself can not balance his instinctive wishes. His moral-
ity, in such a case, will remain second-hand, and will be dependent
upon the action of others. Criminals and neurotics have plenty
of second-hand morality. They all "know" what is right and
wrong.
An individual with first-hand morality sees the consequences
of an act as inherent in the act itself and by no possibility to be
avoided. He has therefore an inner compulsion to act as well as he
can. This is the only kind of moral teaching that can inhibit bad
conduct without producing some degree of neurosis.
Since the demand for right conduct comes to a child in the
first place from an external source he is slow to identify this de-
mand with his own need. It does not seem to be his own will but
that of some external authority. It is somebody else's idea.
It is just here in his development that the dissociation of per-
sonality begins. It is the antagonism between '11 want'' and '' they
want." And this failure of identification is, I believe, the origin
of the "evil" in human nature.
Rightness has an absolute sanction. Parents, teachers, police-
men, judges, various people, are in a position of authority in rela-
tion to a child; they are not the source of authority. The natural
law itself is the original source of all authority?not civil laws, nor
rules of conduct, nor moral codes, nor public opinion, but a uni-
versal law of which these may or may not be authentic expressions.
It is this law which '' never lets you down and never lets you off.''
An individual must be in relation to the source of authority if
he is to be safe from neuroticism, misconduct and unhappiness.
This law is not against any natural impulse but includes them all.
From infancy a child may be taught, little by little, and in various
ways, when he may exercise any impulse and to what end, and when
not, why. It is only thus that the conflict between good and bad,
between the social and the egoistical instincts can be kept at a
normal level of intensity.
In our clinic at the Municipal Court in Philadelphia where each
year we examine thousands of children, adolescents and adults, the
common denominator of all our delinquents is found to be a marked
dissociation between the egoistical desires and the individual's own,
but second-hand, idea of right. We have dozens of children
brought in on a complaint of incorrigibility who are quite willing
200 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
to admit the fact of their misconduct, and equally willing to admit
it is wrong, but hardly one has any idea why it is wrong. " Be-
cause you will get pinched," "You will be put away," "It don't
get you anywhere"; these are the stock answers to the question,
Why is it wrong to steal, or run away from home, or set fire to a
house, or play truant? None of these cases has any feeling that
the action originates in his own wish. 11 The other kid made me do
it," or "I got in with bad company" is to them a perfectly satis-
factory excuse. The parents of these children give these same ex-
cuses, and the children, with no critique of their own, have no
doubt of their truth.
A boy of twelve with normal intelligence and no appreciable
physical defect comes into the consulting room with a look of a
happy martyr. To a question as to the nature of his trouble, he
answers glibly, '' I steal everything I can get my hands on." It is
just as if he said, "I break out with hives every night." To his
mind it is some misfortune that has befallen him from causes wholly
outside himself.
A girl of eleven runs away from home, sleeps on door-steps at
night. She shows an exaggerated interest in sex play with both
girls and boys. Why? "I suppose I must be bad." The exam-
ination bores her. The affair has no relation to herself.
A boy of sixteen is arrested for shoplifting. "I wanted some
money to go to the movies." He had been given a job, and left it
after two days. "I didn't like that sort of work." Oh, yes! it is
very wrong, he thinks. What do you mean by wrong? "It is
what you get punished for."
In all cases of this kind there can be found environmental and
emotional determinants. These are important for the purpose of
treatment. But the way they determine is by energizing certain
wishes and increasing the tendency to dissociation.
We can not say of any one of our children that he will certainly
develop into a criminal. Many of them are still young enough to
be amenable to the good training which we try to get for them.
Some, however, have definitely the set-up for a criminal career,
with the two elements necessary for habitual misconduct, intol-
erance of stress and instincts so far apart as to make stress inevita-
ble. The first of these elements is due to the natural constitutional
make-up of the child, although proper early discipline could in-
crease to some extent the tolerance. The other element is depend-
ent upon the child's acquired idea of the meaning of right and
wrong.
THE DYNAMICS OF CRIME 201
A man need not be insane or feeble-minded to commit a crime.
And he need not be an all-around bad citizen. Our Court dockets
are crowded with cases that prove this is true. One need only-
have his instinctive goals so far apart that he does not function as
a whole at any time. Our laws do not recognize any such condi-
tion. And if they did, what could they do about it?
No laws and no conceivable administration of any law will cure
crime. Indeed, this is not the function of law. Its function is to
'' safeguard society,'' and what it does to the criminal is incidental.
Dealing with the problem of crime is society's own business, and it
can not be delegated to any one group. The most insignificant
citizen has as much to do with it as has the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court.
The first step toward an effective program is a complete change
of attitude toward the whole matter. The problem can not be
solved by emotion of any kind. The hatred of society for the
criminal is itself but a neurotic gesture. Sentimentality and cyni-
cism alike are ways of evading the issue. To make any progress
toward our goal it will be necessary to adopt the objective, imper-
sonal, patient attitude of the scientist in the laboratory and field.
So far there has been a woeful lack of this objectivity in our
work on the subject. We think of men as good and bad. We talk
of the freedom of the will, and of absolute responsibility. These
terms have no more meaning in fact than the evil eye or the influ-
ence of the stars on human destiny.
I believe we must stop thinking about trying to make people
"good," and concentrate on developing ways of integrating them
into whole, harmonious personalities, with each instinct as free as
the others will allow. If this is done we will certainly have good
human beings.
In our approach to this endeavor some of the subjects which
present themselves for immediate study are: better eugenics; early
training that will recognize the absolute right of a child to the devel-
opment of a well-rounded, self-reliant personality; adequate nour-
ishment and facilities for play for every child, regardless of his
family's social or economic status; education that will fit a child to
think for himself, whether he can learn from books or not; a ra-
tional sex morality based on the individual's physiological, psycho-
logical and social needs. If in trying to develop these things we find
it necessary to revise our long accepted ideas of the function of the
State in relation to its citizens, then let the change be made.
