Almost Feebleminded
====================

By J. L. Rosenstein, M.A.
Assistant Director, The Herman H. Young Foundation for Research in Clinical
Psychology, Indianapolis
Too often the apparent exactness of quantitative scores in psychological examinations causes the examiner to interpret these
scores uncritically. In our work at this Foundation we insist that
Intelligence Quotients and percentile scores on various tests are
relatively of minor importance even if they are exact. They represent a quantitative measure of what the individual has done but
give no index as to how he went about earning his Intelligence Quotient or his scores on other tests. These quantitative measures give
no indication of the cause for low scores nor do they indicate the
possibility of developing the individual's capacities. Certainly an
Intelligence Quotient of 89 will not tell us that the child is unstable
and performed in such a way that he could be diagnosed as a
psychopath. Nor does the 20th percentile on a test, or the time of
153 seconds required to complete a test, give any idea whether the
child moved slowly and carefully with great planfulness, or whether
his was a trial and error type performance. We are interested in
whether the child has adaptability, poise, trainability, and conformity, whether he is observant, shy, easily disturbed emotionally,
persistent, or easily defeated by a difficult problem, and a host of
other qualitative items. In other words, we are interested in items
which can not be measured but which must be inferred and for
which we can obtain no score for statistical treatment. The method
is psychological, rather than psychometric. Here are presented
three cases in which superficial examination would have resulted
in a diagnosis of feeblemindedness but in which such diagnosis was
later found to be incorrect after a period of training and diagnostic
teaching.
Henry
"Henry, four years and three months of age, was brought to
the psychological clinic, while an in-patient of the hospital, because
he could not speak. I found him shy and withdrawn and had to
coerce him into doing anything at all. He usually sat looking on
126
ALMOST FEEBLEMINDED 127
with a faint pinched smile, his hands in his lap. After being shown
how to put a block away in the Witmer Formboard, instead of his
reaching for it, I had to lift his hand, put the block into it and
show him the proper recess for it. After several trials he could
put away one or two blocks, but no more. His method was trial
and error. He could not or would not build a Pink Tower after
instruction, but seemed to show comprehension of what was expected of him.
"At no time did he make a sound, not even a grunt, showing
approval or disapproval. He did not, after a long period of instruction, give me a duplicate of the color block in my hand, although he did give me a block. The child urinated, and sat through
the rest of the examination without giving the slightest indication
that he knew what his condition was. The whole picture seemed
to be one of mental retardation and a conclusion that he was close
to the borderline of feeblemindedness was made, the lack of speech
being felt to be only of minor importance. The prognosis seemed
unfavorable. It was felt that he would always need supervision,
and speech training was not recommended."
The above are excerpts from the report of the first examination
given Henry by the writer. He had been sent not only as a speech
case but to verify the conclusion of the physician in charge of the
ward where Henry was a patient, that he was feebleminded.
Later investigation showed that two physicians in Henry's home
town had concluded that the child was feebleminded and that nothing could be done for him, and the mother had accepted this diagnosis about a year before, and had gone on her way taking this as
another one of her burdens, which must be borne, along with widowhood and privation.
There was something, however, in the quality of Henry's performances, or lack of performance, which interested the examiner
and which forced him to insist on a re-examination the afternoon
of the same day. It was deemed advisable to see what the child
could do with material when left alone to his own devices. He was
placed in a closed room with Pink Tower material and the Witmer
Formboard with the blocks laid out for the first trial. There was
also a box of color cubes. All this material was placed in different
parts of the room, on the floor. About an hour later, the observer
returned to find that Henry had replaced all the blocks of the
Witmer Formboard into the proper recesses; that he had made a
long train of the color cubes and that he had begun playing with the
128 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Pink Tower material. These results made the examiner feel that
the case merited further research. The conclusion was changed
from borderline to deferred and it was felt that it might be best
to bring the mother and child back at another time. The whole
picture was one of a shut-in personality and the problem in the
observer's mind was to find out whether there was something inside
the child worth looking for, or whether he was simply feebleminded.
Due to economic conditions and the distance required to travel
the mother did not bring Henry back for about five weeks. At this
time she told us that he did make other sounds besides "no," but
that these sounds were not intelligible. On reviewing the case, the
examiner felt that the urination was possibly part of a temper
tantrum situation in response to being forced to do certain things.
When his mother was asked concerning discipline at home it was
found that no disciplinary measures were ever employed and that
because she had several other children to take care of, the child
did not get the attention which should have been given him by his
mother. The mother felt that discipline might do some good but
that she could not provide it. At the psychological clinic, corporal
punishment is very rarely, if ever, employed, but in this case it
seemed worth a trial. With his mother's permission it was decided
to try the experiment. The child was asked to make the sound
"ah." He did not. He just stood looking on. I asked him to
give me his hand; he did not comply. I then told him to do as
I asked and unless he would obey me, it might be necessary to
spank him, and that I would spank him if he did not follow my
instructions. I then again asked him for the sound "ah." There
was no response. I gave him a light slap across one cheek; urination and temper tantrum involving kicking and screaming followed. I waited until this display was ended and asked him for the
sound "ah." Again the temper tantrum and urination followed
but without my having to slap him. It was then decided to alternate the slap and the " ah " until a sound was gotten, approximating
the one desired. After about six such combinations of "ah" and
a slap he gave me the sound clearly and distinctly. I then tried
"ee" and he gave it. Then I asked for the "oo" and he gave it.
I then tried these three sounds with an initial letter of b, s, t and m
and he gave all the sounds correctly the first time asked for.
This made the examiner feel that the previous conclusion might
be wrong and that it was influenced by this extreme negativism
which could not be broken through without forceful measures.
ALMOST FEEBLEMINDED 129
Henry was given these sounds as speech exercises together with
several others and was to return a few weeks later.
On returning for his speech lesson two weeks later Henry cooperated beautifully and gave all the sounds, "ah," "ee," and
"oo" with the initial sound of b, k, d, g (hard), j, 1, m, n, p, r, s, t
and w. He had also learned to say his name "Henry." He also
said "yes." He was no longer the shut-in individual; he smiled,
and was willing to play and took a walk with the examiner and
there was no sign of temper tantrum or urination. The speech
work was continued for several months and the mother commented
each time on the great personality change in the boy; that he
plays with other children; that he uses and acquires words by himself and seems to be an entirely different boy to such an extent
that neighbors comment on the change. Henry has not been seen
for several months, and within the last few days a letter was received from the mother saying, "concerning Henry's progress in
speech, it is great. I am sure you would not think him the same
little boy. There is not very much he doesn't say," etc.
Ruth
Ruth, three and a half years old, was referred to the clinic by
the physician in charge of the Out-Patient medical service with
the statement that there was nothing wrong with her physically,
and that she was probably a psychological case rather than a
medical case. She was brought in because she had never walked
or talked. According to the parents the family physicians had
given the diagnosis that she could not, because of physical conditions, support her own weight.
I attempted to establish rapport with the child. During the
first hour and a half she displayed crying and temper tantrums
involving kicking and attempts at slapping the examiner and spitting. Then after about a half hour of attempting games with colored cubes and a tray of toys I decided it might be more efficient
to experiment with walking. I raised her from behind by her
arms so that all her weight was on her arms with her feet just
about to touch the floor. The child resisted the attempt to force
her to stand on her legs in such a way that I felt certain she could
carry her weight if insistence were made on it, and so for about
an hour and twenty minutes there was a battle between the examiner and the child, who was constantly in a temper tantrum.
130 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Finally she tired of resting on her arms and placed her whole
weight on her feet and after several unsuccessful attempts to catch
me napping she finally gave up and supported herself on her legs.
Her mother was then called into the room and the child was so
anxious to get away from me and reach her mother that she had
no difficulty in walking twelve or fifteen feet to reach her. The
experiment was tried over again and the child again walked
toward her mother. This was done several times to prove definitely
that it was not merely a chance performance.
An attempt was then made to get Ruth to speak. Believing
that she might want a drink after crying for so long a time the
examiner brought a glass of water into the room and drank some
of it. It was then placed just out of her reach. She made signs
asking for it. The word "drink" was then introduced and after
several unsuccessful attempts to get the glass accompanied by my
repetitions of the word "drink" and "say drink," she finally
came through with the word "drink" and got the water. After
she had taken a mouthful, the glass was again removed from her
and insistence was made that she say "drink" before she got it
again. She did so. Because of her temper tantrums and the
amount of time that would be necessary to make her go through a
psychological examination, no attempt was made to estimate the
child's mental abilities. However, from the general performance
it seemed reasonable to infer that she was not feebleminded.
Recent report from the county nurse in charge of the case states
that because of the parents' lack of cooperation and because they
themselves feel that it would be a waste of time to come to the clinic
regularly the child has not gone beyond the results obtained in
the clinical experiment described above.
Donald
Donald, just past five years of age, was brought to the clinic
to verify the opinion of the medical examiner that he was a '' spastic
idiot." The case was seen by the late Herman H. Young, Director
of the Psychological Clinics, and he decided to defer his conclusion
with the tentative diagnosis that the boy was not lower than low
normal mental ability, based upon the qualitative performances on
mechanical tests and some of the Binet-Simon questions in which
he could give responses by moving his hands. He was almost a
classical picture of the proverbial "vegetative organism." He
ALMOST FEEBLEMINDED 131
could not sit up, nor balance himself; apparently all he could do
was lie on his back and await attention. He could not swallow, except when his head was held back until the reflex took place and he
could not talk because of the extreme spasticity which affected his
entire body; he drooled continuously and copiously.
It was decided to begin working with him on speech and after
twenty-three lessons, extending over a period of two years, he was
given a Binet examination and attained a Binet Test Age of six
six years which with a chronological age of seven years, four months,
gave him an Intelligence Quotient of 81. He was started with
simple sounds like "ah," "ee" and "oo," which were combined
with consonants and he improved rapidly so that at the end of
two years he could speak well enough to be understood. In the
meantime work had been begun on his walking and with graduated
physical exercises and physiotherapy he could walk with assistance
and did not need to be carried. The problem of his education was
taken up and with the cooperation of the mother the child was
taught reading and arithmetic and is now able to handle fifth grade
reading material and fractions satisfactorily.
In 1930 he learned to swallow, and after another year and a
half of concentrated attention on his walking he is able to make
his way alone for a distance of about fifty yards. The problem of
permitting him to walk alone involved not only the mechanics of
walking but also the problem of raising himself up from the ground
when he fell. This took a month of intense practice and now he
can lift himself to his feet, balance himself and start from where
he left off.
His condition at present is still one of extreme spasticity; however, because of the results obtained over these several years of
work with him, it is felt that with continued and patient effort and
training he can be helped much further along the road toward
normality in his physical condition. From a previous diagnosis of
spastic idiocy and a tentative diagnosis of low normal mental ability,
it is now felt that the tentative diagnosis should be not lower than
average normal mental ability, with the definite conclusion as to
the ultimate possibility of developing his abilities being deferred.
At the Herman H. Young Foundation clinics we are now working with five spastic individuals, one of them a college student, the
others under ten years of age and we have seen enough improvement in these individuals since the inception of our work with them
to warrant the belief that there is a need in this country for an
132 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
institution especially equipped for, and designed to specialize in
work on such persons.
The above three cases taken from our files containing several
thousand records of case examinations are not the only ones which
should indicate to the patient worker in psychological research
that extreme care and deliberation be exercised before a decision
is made that nothing worth while can be accomplished without
spending many hours of intense and trying etfort in improving
and developing the individual's mental, physical and educational
status. Our position in the clinics has been, that regardless of
how low the upper limit may be, it is our duty to do our best, to
develop all the abilities of the individual to their maximum if his
problem may be approached by the techniques of the psychological
clinic.
\
