School Maladjustments of Some Mentally Superior Patients in a Psychiatric Clinic
================================================================================

By E. L. Schott, Ph.D.
Psychologist, Division of Neuropsychiatry,
Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit
In recent years since the development of standardized intelli-
gence tests has given educators a means of classifying their students
according to mental ability the individual of superior mentality
has become the object of considerable interest and special study.
One of the earliest results of the studies in this field was the
discovery that the ordinary school routine, being adjusted to the
needs of the average pupil, fails to meet the needs of the superior
pupil in the best way. Some of the resulting maladjustments of
students with superior intelligence have been defined and analyzed.
A recent article by Leta Hollingworth1 has called attention to
certain forms in which these maladjustments are likely to appear
and explains them on the basis of a combination of intellectual
superiority and immaturity in other phases of development. Va-
rious correctional programs have been advocated, but efforts in
this direction have left in the school population many gifted pupils
who are sufficiently maladjusted to cause them to be referred to
a psychiatric clinic for individual guidance.
For this study we took in alphabetical order from our test files
in the Division of Neuropsychiatry of the Henry Ford Hospital the
records of 400 patients who had been examined at various times
during the last five years. Three criteria were set in choosing
these records. We included only those which showed that the pa-
tients were above age six, that they had had a complete examination
* This study, which was reported to the Psychological Sub-Section of the
Michigan Education Association, October 30, 1931, has been made possible
through the cooperation of Dr. Thos. J. Heldt, Physician-in-Charge, Division
of Neuropsychiatry, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, and the writer is indebted
to him and to Jack H. Schott for assistance in revising the manuscript.
i Hollingworth, L. S., The Child of Very Superior Intelligence as a Special
Problem of Social Adjustment. Ment. Hyg., 1931, 15, 3-16.
202
SCHOOL MALADJUSTMENTS 203
with the Stanford-Binet Test and that they were listed as "in
school" at the time of their study by the clinic.
Of the 400 patients thus selected 241 are boys and 159 are girls;
that is, of the group approximately 60 per cent are boys and 40
per cent are girls. The I.Q.s of this group show a moderately
normal distribution ranging from 33 to 149 with a median I.Q.
of 96. The number of mentally superior patients with I.Q.s of
110 and higher is approximately equal to the proportion reported
by Terman2 and others for the school population as a whole. In
our group we find 77 patients, or 19.25 per cent of the entire
number, with I.Q.'s of 110 and above. Of these, 46 are boys and
31 are girls, the ratio between the sexes remaining almost exactly
the same as in the larger group (60 to 40). They ranged in age
from 6 to 25 years, the median being 11 years, and in school place-
ment from the first grade to the senior year in college, with the
median at the sixth grade.
Although of school age and of the same general range of intelli-
gence these patients are not strictly comparable to the school popu-
lation as a whole because selective factors are operating in bringing
them to our attention. An analysis of the sources from which they
were referred shows that only 20 per cent of the 77 mentally su-
perior patients are referred by social agencies and schools; 12 per
cent are referred by other departments of the hospital; over two
thirds, approximately 68 per cent, are referred to our division as
private patients by their families, by the patients themselves or
by their private physicians. This indicates that on the average
the group is superior in economic status to a group with similar
intelligence in the general school population.
In this group of 77 mentally superior patients we find 48 cases
(62 per cent of the 77) with school maladjustments prominent
among the complaints made about their behavior. In a group of
176 mentally average patients (with I.Q.s from 90 to 110 as de-
termined in our clinic) the number with school maladjustments is
estimated to be about 40 per cent.
Since we found that our mentally superior patients became in-
volved in school difficulties about one and one half times as often
as our mentally average patients we were interested in discovering
what types of school maladjustments are characteristic of these
superior individuals.
In a recent report on behavior problems studied in the Institute
2 Terman, L. M., The Measurement of Intelligence. Houghton Mifflin Co.
1916, p. 78.
204 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of Juvenile Research in Chicago, John Levy 3 lias stated that, re-
gardless of economic status, personality problems generally increase
while social problems decrease as intelligence rises. For purposes
of comparison with Dr. Levy's findings we grouped the school mal-
adjustments of our mentally superior patients in categories similar
to his classification of behavior problems as follows: (a) Personality
and emotional problems include all deviations in which the pupil
has difficulty in getting along with himself or other people. His
difficulty in getting along with himself is expressed in brooding,
excessive worry over school status, morbid fears of nervous break-
down, etc. Difficulty in getting along with others is expressed in
temper tantrums, negativism, sullenness, stubborn "streaks,"
" smart alecky" hehavior, etc. (b) Problems of delinquency con-
stitute social problems and include resistance to organized authority
as seen in truancy, lying and deceit, stealing and destruction of
property, (c) Sex offenses are placed in a separate category. (d)
Academic problems include failure in school work or marked de-
cline in scholarship and special disabilities. (e) Physiological
problems are those related to the individual's own body, such as
tics, habit spasms, hysterical and epileptiform seizures, encephalitis,
chorea, etc. In patients showing more than one type of maladjust-
ment, each type is tabulated separately; hence the total number
of maladjustments exceeds the total number of maladjusted pa-
tients. For example academic failures as well as physiological dis-
orders are often directly traceable to emotional conflicts.
In our group of 48 mentally superior patients with school mal-
adjustments we find personality and emotional difficulties pre-
dominating. They are three times as frequent as academic diffi-
culties, five times as frequent as physiological disorders, and ten
times as frequent as delinquency. We had only two cases in which
sex problems were known to be factors in school maladjustment.
These findings are in general agreement with Levy's conclusions
mentioned above. That is, in our mentally superior patients, per-
sonality problems have increased markedly over social problems.
Levy suggests that personality problems are a more mature ex-
pression of maladjustment than resistance to organized authority
in the form of delinquency and other social problems. Another
possible explanation of the difference noted above is that the more
intelligent individual realizes the folly of overt resistance to the
3 Levy, J., A Quantitative Study of the Relationship between Intelligence
and Economic Status as Factors in the Etiology of Children's Behavior Prob-
lems. Am. J. Orthopsychiat., 1930-31, 1, 152-162.
SCHOOL MALADJUSTMENTS 205
demands of society and he stops short of delinquency in seeking
emotional outlets. In other words he knows much more accurately
than the less intelligent individual how far he can go without in-
volving himself in serious trouble with constituted authority. For
this reason he is likely to be a more baffling school problem than
the delinquent because he seldom commits an offense serious enough
to warrant extreme measures of correction (such as expulsion or
the filing of a delinquency complaint) but he keeps up a series of
minor resistances that are exasperating to the teacher and demor-
alizing to the class. His behavior is often inconsistent and often
his offenses are interspersed with periods of good behavior.
In attempting to eliminate such problems of mentally superior
pupils, the school has two useful programs: first, that of testing
general intelligence, special abilities and achievement so that the
superiorities as well as the deficiencies of the individual may be
recognized and evaluated; and second, that of special education
for the guidance of certain groups. Undoubtedly recognition and
special attention have effected adjustments in many cases of men-
tally superior pupils who otherwise might have reached a psychi-
atric clinic eventually. Our study contains two extreme cases in
which the school's attempt at adjustment aggravated the problem
instead of alleviating it. One was a patient with an I.Q. of 136,
who, after failing in the fifth grade of a suburban school, was placed
in a special class for subnormal children, his superiority entirely
unrecognized. In contrast to this we note the case of a seventeen
year old boy who had reached the tenth grade when he was brought
to our clinic after truanting successively from public school, a
private school, and a military academy. To us he explained that
when he was in the sixth grade he was told that his score on a
"mental test" placed him "in the genius group" and therefore
he was expected both by his teachers and his parents to achieve
as a genius should, and nothing less was acceptable. The patient
complained that he was subjected to constant pressure and sur-
veillance and he was so antagonized by the efforts to force him
to achieve perfection that he revolted and truanted constantly.
These are exceptional cases and here the school maladjustment
constitutes the major problem, which is comparatively simple.
A more typical case of general personality maladjustment is
that of an adolescent girl whose superior intelligence (I.Q. 123)
was in large part responsible for her impatience with the more
formal and superficial demands of society. Her earlier gestures
of defiance so frightened her mother that the relationship between
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
them became strained. While both felt the situation keenly, neither
would make advances to restore the bond of affection and confidence
which previously existed. The patient's attitude of defiance gradu-
ally carried over from the home to the school where she became
a severe problem by reason of her refusal to comply with the simple
routine requirements of the school system although she was always
able to pass examinations successfully. She developed an exalted
opinion of herself and at times was argumentative and outspoken
to the extent of openly insulting her teachers in class. Frequently
she became sullen and stubborn in her reactions to everyone. By
the time she was brought to the clinic her mental reactions were
becoming definitely morbid. After the parents and school authori-
ties were contacted and the patient made several visits to the psychi-
atric clinic, sufficient adjustment was brought about to enable her
to carry her high school work to completion.
The individual aspect of most personality problems suggests
that in many cases of mentally superior individuals presenting
school problems the school maladjustment is only one manifestation
of a general personality disorder which is more likely to have its
roots in the home situation than in the school. However, it is very
difficult to demarcate the responsibilities of home and school in the
etiology of such cases. Apropos of this question it is interesting
to note that 33 per cent of our mentally superior maladjusted group
are "only" children and 21 per cent are first born with younger
siblings, a total of 54 per cent whose ordinal position may predis-
pose them to development of personality disorders in the home, even
before the individual reaches school age. This preponderance of
first born and "only" children is less significant for our group
than for an unselected cross section of the school population because
in the economically superior classes from which most of our patients
are drawn, families probably are generally smaller than the average
for the city.
These considerations may have some bearing on the question of
why the school's efforts in the direction of individual analysis and
special education, over a number of years, have failed to eliminate
problems of maladjustment in mentally superior pupils. The ex-
planation may lie, at least partially, in the school's inability to
control the home situations. To educators this view is more consol-
ing than encouraging. It implies that the cause of such malad-
justment is not primarily in the school, but is probably where the
school can hardly reach it. In such cases educators may appeal
SCHOOL MALADJUSTMENTS 207
to the psychiatric clinic, which offers a neutral ground for the reso-
lution of family conflicts and the reshaping of parental attitudes.
Summary
The study of these 400 neuropsychiatric patients who were
drawn from the school population shows a moderately normal dis-
tribution of intelligence quotients with approximately 20 per cent
of the entire number rating as superior (I.Q. of 110 and up). Of
these mentally superior patients 62 per cent have school malad-
justments prominent among the complaints made about their be-
havior. The type of school maladjustment which predominates
among them is personality and emotional difficulties. These are
three times as frequent as academic difficulties; five times as fre-
quent as physiological disorders; and ten times as frequent as
delinquency. Sex offenses as factors in school maladjustment are
negligible in this mentally superior group. The roots of the prob-
lems which predominate in this group often are to be found in the
home situations where the school can not reach them. Hence it
becomes necessary to appeal to some neutral agency such as the
psychiatric clinic for help in resolving family conflicts and for
direct constructive work in parent education.
