Certain Phases in the Psychology of Psychologists 
===================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1932, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XXI, No. 2 June-August, 1932

:Author:  Henry E. Starr, Ph.D.

Bead of the Department of Psychology and Director of the Psychological and
Mental Hygiene Clinic of Butgers University
Many of yon are aware of tlie fact that there is a strong feeling
among certain members of our Association that the time has come
for a new psychological association, an association neither the Association of Consulting Psychologists nor yet the American Psychological Association, an association which would foster the application of scientific principles to psychological problems. There is a
growing feeling that the orthodox academic psychology of today is
singularly futile and that a too close inbreeding of systems has resulted in mental sterility. Meanwhile in consultant psychology,
our critics say, there is an absence of scientific principles, an attitude of compromise with pseudo-science and, throughout, the manifestation of an inferiority complex.
Now, as many of you know quite well, these critics are not
"outsiders." They are, many of them, serious psychologists of
high standing in both the A. P. A. and the A. C. P. A number are
individuals who have not restricted their studies to the narrow
field of accepted psychology, but have sought to keep abreast of
the times in other sciences, at least maintaining an intelligent interest in such natural sciences as chemistry and physics. As such,
they feel that they have a more nearly adequate perspective of the
field than is possible for others whose purview is more restricted. I
for one freely grant both their ability and their right to criticize.

And I grant it the more readily because I venture to differ with
them in their suggested solution of the problems involved. I do
not believe that those of us who are sympathetic with the development of psychology as a science need be called upon at this time to
support a third national psychological association. I have frankly
stated my views in conference with some of those who are eager to
see such an organization come into being and I do not feel that I
am violating any confidences this afternoon in thus flushing the
quarry, so to speak, with this paper. I think that it would be in
the nature of a catastrophe were such an organization to be launched
at this time. If launched?and sunk?its organizers would appear
ridiculous. If launched and successful, it would mean a depletion
of the psychological organizations now functioning. Furthermore,
I do not think that it has yet been conclusively proven that a psychologist can not apply his scientific principles and encouragement
of the scientific attitude within the bodies of the already established
associations at least as effectively as through the medium of a new
and untried society. It is quite evident, however, that we should
seriously consider the present state of psychology and psychologists in order to ascertain something of the factors which have led
many superior individuals within our ranks to register such despair
as is indicated by a '' third party'' movement.

First and perhaps foremost, the bane of many of us is the curse
of credulity. Most of us have discarded the dogmatic theology of
the past. Somewhere, probably during relatively early adolescence,
we entered upon the period which Goethe denominated that of
"Sturm und Drang." It was rather exhilarating, for a time, to
see one rather decayed timber after another swept away from beneath our very feet, as it were, until we found ourselves plunged
into a rather choppy sea of general doubt. Now under such conditions, one may sink, swim, or for a time merely flounder. If a
stray plank happen to float toward us, we may seize it in a panic
and cling to it with the intensity and rigidity of tetanus. We want
something to cling to, even if it be but the proverbial straw?or a
straw of proverb. And so, emancipated from the Old Gods, we
become the slaves of the little godlets of the schools. It is so very
much easier to do so than to keep swimming with the steady stroke
of a truly scientific agnosticism. Yet such is ofttimes our blindness that, while chattering of "scientific freedom of thought," we
become worshippers of a narrow creedal system, whether of Freud,
Watson, Pavlov, Kohler or another. And we accept the utterance
o the godlet with the blind and slavish obedience of a bigoted
zealot at the feet of his high priest.

Now I would in no manner or degree, seek to belittle the contributions to a science of psychology made by any of the individuals
I have named. Freud has given us an appreciation of the importance of sexual libido, Watson has done the same for animal
psychology, Pavlov for the conditioned reflex and Kohler for configurations. Each of them has, of course, done much more. But
even were their contributions limited to those I have just cited,
they would merit the appreciation and esteem of all interested in
psychology. The point is, that we must be able to take the significant contributions of each and not become entangled in the dogmatic creedal system of any.
Let us consider a brief illustration from the cult of the conditioned reflex. The discovery of the conditioned reflex was unquestionably an event of major importance. It demonstrated that the
principles of the English Associationist School were largely applicable to the physical, as they were already known to apply to the
mental. Thus the reflex salivary secretion of a dog was found
amenable to certain of the familiar old so-called "Laws of Learning. '' In many text books, however, one finds the situation reversed
and the application of the principle of the conditioned reflex or
conditioned response to mental phenomena is presented as if it
were a very novel idea?a brand new contribution of behaviorism.
Even an elementary acquaintance with the literature of our science
shows that what was subsequently reported as "the application of
the principle of conditioned response to mental phenomena" was
implicit and indeed largely explicit in the writings of the British
Associationists of last century. Nevertheless, the "discovery" that
'association" holds in the mental as well as in the overtly physical
realm is brought out as a new thing?with all the pomp and flourish of a stage magician taking a rabbit from a hat?in which it had
been reposing beforehand in full view of the audience.

It is this sort of thing which makes us appear as credulous dupes
to our critics. This ignorance of what has been done in psychology
by previous generations! As if nothing were worth consideration
if more than ten or twenty years old. True, we must avoid the
equally credulous superficiality which would measure truth 01
sanctity by mere age. Nothing is true simply because it is old. But
let us not overlook the fact that, even if old, it may be true. Age
argues not greatly one way or the other in this connection and "\ve
can at least know something of what has been done in our science
before our little day if we familiarize ourselves with such splendid
summaries as those given us by Murphy and Boring.

There is another danger for which the creed of the conditioned
reflex can serve as a warning. We need to realize that a given scientific principle may serve splendidly to explain certain phenomena
without necessarily being applicable to other equally important
phenomena. This is a warning which Pavlov himself has sounded.
Yet in the closed system of the ultra-behaviorists it would appear
that if certain phenomena of human behavior can be explained in
terms of the conditioned reflex they are so explained, but if other
phenomena of human behavior can not be so explained the fact
should not be admitted, but the latter class of phenomena should
be regarded as non-existent and excluded from all consideration.
The attitude appears to be?if the conditioned reflex can not explain it, it isn't so! One wonders how analytical chemistry could
have developed if but one reagent or a single precipitant were religiously insisted upon to the exclusion of all others, and if the
filtrate after its addition were immediately discarded as containing
nothing more. Such an attitude suggests monomania rather than
science.

Simple chemical analogy may throw light upon yet another unscientific dogma in certain psychological sects. The dictum has
gone forth with pontifical unctuousness that "Whatever exists,
exists in some amount and can be measured." Perhaps so. Perhaps the imponderable is necessarily the non-existent. It has not
yet been proven so, however, and for the present such belief is but
an article of faith. Furthermore, reverting to chemical analogy,
qualitative analysis must precede quantitative analysis. It may be
that after we know what is present in a given chemical compound,
we can then proceed to determine its percentage composition. Frequently the most that the analytical chemist can do is to report
this or that element or substance as present to the amount of a
"trace." Ofttimes the "trace" is of the utmost importance.

Some day, perhaps, analytical psychology may be as exact a science
as is analytical chemistry. One would hardly insist seriously that
such is as yet the case. Nevertheless, the dogmatic edict above
cited was enunciated with such a ponderous air of finality that it
was readily subscribed to by many and it appears to have been no
small factor in the subsequent unleashing of packs of mental testers
and a veritable epidemic of rabid insistence upon quantitative
studies. Measurements are carried far beyond the decimal point
and the resultant numbers studied by abstruse statistical methods.
And between such sets of figures, minute coefficients of correlation
are laboriously calculated. But?just what is it that is measured?
By all means let us measure. But let us first know something of
what it is that we would measure?and why. Or at the least, let
us not assume an attitude of smug superiority toward those of our
critics who would have psychologists learn something of scientific
technique from such natural sciences as chemistry and physics?
even by analogy.

Turning now somewhat more specifically to consultant psychology, it is evident that we need to employ tests which will be of
genuine value in aiding us to understand the individual whom we
are examining. In each individual case we need familiarity with a
wide range of tests in order to be able to select those most applicable
to the immediate problem. One reagent will not suffice for all solutions. No single battery of tests is all sufficient. And we must not
allow ourselves to be so ensnared by our penchants for certain
artificial criteria that we remain ignorant of other useful tests which
may not qualify in terms of such criteria. For example, there has
recently appeared a portly tome presenting data on a new battery
of clinical tests of a specific type. A famous animal psychologist
supplies a most enthusiastic foreword in which he states that he
finds it hard to speak of such excellent work without emotion, etc.
Now I believe that the book and the battery of which it treats will
be quite useful. I expect to use them and to find them good. But
the book which so stirred the emotions of the writer of its preface,
emphasizes the value of the test as indicated by its '' stability.'' It
would appear that it will give the same results with the same person day after day. But is that invariably an asset to a test ? Under
certain conditions, do we not rather need a flexible test?one which
varies with the individual and fluctuates as he fluctuates? One's
aptitude for many things varies from day to day?pari passu with
the condition of his digestion, to cite a single factor frequently important. And so if the clinical study of an individual is to be
thorough, should the examiner not have flexible as well as stable
tests?

Another catch-word in connection with the tests just mentioned
is employed when they are described enthusiastically as being
validated.'' A careful study of the data supplied in the book,
however, indicates that the "validation" is simply a matter of correlation with subjective estimates. No new thing in our "quantitative science." But let us recognize it for what it is?an exceedingly
questionable procedure.

If you ask me how the makers of the test could have bettered it,
I shall not pretend to say. The purpose of this paper is simply to
point out a few phases of the psychology of psychologists that
appear a bit too stuffy and which should be ventilated by the wholesome breezes of scientific scepticism.
Just as the consultant psychologist may be unable to make an
adequate study of an individual case because of lack of proper test
material, or unfamiliarity with such tests as might be useful, so the
research psychologist in the laboratory may be unable to study
certain problems of mental phenomena because they are not amenable to present laboratory technique. Obviously, this does not
mean that he is thereby justified in minimizing the importance of
such problems, or, as might be illustrated by several cases in point,
in blandly and stupidly asserting the non-existence of the problems.
It is so easy to react to a feeling of inferiority by the assumption of
an air of infallibility. And personal infallibility is always questionable. We can learn much from the attitude of the leading
physicists of today. A few weeks ago, in an able address before
the Rutgers Chapter of the Sigma Xi, the Head of the Physics Department of Cornell University, who is also the Dean of its Graduate School, discussed the dilemma of modern physics which finds
matter now corpuscular and again wave motion, while energy is
found to be now wave motion and again corpuscular. Pointing out
that matter thus acts as if it were corpuscular on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and wave motion on Tuesdays, Thursdays
and Saturdays, he concluded with the admission that the behavior
of an individual electron is absolutely unpredictable. Statistical
laws of probability may hold for the general reaction of a few billion electrons acting together, but the behavior of no single electron
in the group can be predicted with any degree of certainty. It was
a most wholesome admission and quite characteristic of the better
class of modern physicists. May we as consultant psychologists
not make ourselves ridiculous by insisting upon our ability to predict the behavior of every individual who comes to our clinics.
The physicist frankly admits his inability to predict the behavior
of an electron even in his laboratory under experimentally controlled conditions. Yet many a psychologist feels inferior because
he can not always predict with 100 per cent accuracy the behavior
of some client out on the highways of life.

The same sort of shamefaced attitude is also in evidence with
many when it is necessary to refer to phenomena suggesting certain
of the older problems of psychology. You are no doubt familiar
with the trite and hackneyed expression that '' Psychology first lost
its ' soul,' then lost its ' mind' and is now rapidly losing ' consciousness.' " True enough, in its way. But one of these days, some
bright youngster doing his bit for the American Mercury or some
similar journal of cleverness, is going to point out that the "soul"
has returned to psychology. And he is going to do this not by
pointing to such an obvious place as the writings of the Zurich
School, but by referring to various "hard-headed" American studies of "personality." Turn back to some, not merely old but even
ancient, writings on the "soul," substitute therein the word "personality" for "soul" and see if it doesn't make sense. Although
I '11 not promise that it will make any more or any better sense than
did the original unaltered passage. Similarly, turn to American
made modern books on "personality" and substitute therein "soul"
for "personality"?and they will frequently sound like the writings of a medieval saint. It seems that certain ideas persist through
many changes of fashions of speech.

At all events, we need not be ashamed to be familiar with the
old writings. Human nature is not a new thing and its observation
was, perchance, as carefully done by certain of our predecessors as
by ourselves. Not all of our ancestors lived in the tree tops. Some
of them designed the Pyramids of Egypt. And others built them.
Someone must have understood something of human behavior in
those days. Something of psychology might be found in the records
they have left us. And even hieroglyphics may be deciphered with
patience and perseverance.

Finally, many of us have a definitely mechanistic, materialistic
bias. "We need to be sceptical even of that, if we would avoid this
curse of credulity in the omniscience of the latter day godlets. It
may prove as dangerously blinding as was the gross superstition of
the justly termed "dark ages." Jung sounds an important warning lest by our habits of concretistic, sense-conditioned, passive
thought, we become incapable of more actively apperceptive thinking with more intellectually synthetic mental processes. The truly
scientific mind possesses great mental celerity. It questions all
things however impressively they may be presented. Indeed the
more impressive the presentation, the greater the need of scientific
questioning. It is only a system conscious of its own weakness or
error which opposes free investigation of itself, whether that system
be the creed of a group or the complex of an individual. The truly
scientific mind is not too credulous even of the reports of the sense
modalities. If we, as psychologists, can and do maintain this attitude of open-minded and wholesome scepticism toward the unproven, characteristic of the natural sciences, our critics will have
little to urge justly against us. And instead of a third national
psychological association being founded and perhaps foundered,
both the Association of Consulting Psychologists and the American
Psychological Assocation may indeed function as centers for stimulating genuine scientific research along psychological lines wherever the trail may lead.
In conclusion may I thank you for having assisted me today in
conducting a psychological experiment on psychologists. That a
paper such as this was placed on today's program and that you
have listened to it, apparently with interest and certainly with
patience, may be taken as evidence, I think, that the Association
of Consulting Psychologists itself may serve our critics as a forum
and an avenue for what they term "scientific encouragement."
You have demonstrated, I believe, that a third national psychological association is not necessary.
