Psychological Diagnosis and the Psychonomic Orientation of Analytic Science an Epitome
=======================================================================================

The Psychologifcal Clinic
Copyright, 1925, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XVI, Nos. 1 & 2
Jan.-Feb., 1925

By Lightner "Wither, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
Man's progress toward what we consider enlightenment and
culture has come through the refinements of analytical discrimina-
tion. Though civilization, even in western Europe and America, is
of romantic origin, successful thinking is predominantly analytic.
Religion is a romantic emotion, but theology, like every other branch
of learning is analytic, and the differentiating catechisms of the
Christian churches are the joint product of romance and discern-
ment. Mysticism struggles toward truth without analysis. Its
measure of success is the prevalence of the pre-analytic generaliza-
tion?what Kant called a "synthetic judgment a prioriand which
many women fondly idealize as "intuition."
Greek thought is the first to turn resolutely away from roman-
tic and pre-analytic generalizations of Eastern origin. European
science and art, in consequence, are successful in proportion as they
follow the Hellenic trail to such perfection of judgment as may be
evolved from discerned and discernible knowledge.
*Read in part before the Section on Clinical Psychology^ ^annual
meeting of the American Psychological A880^D^^ method of psycho-
is the prologue to a formal exposition of The * <<change> Superiority,
logical diagnosis-in theory and practice Ch*P 'ti >, and Chapter 3,
and Preference," Chapter II, "Originality and ^ ^ ^ ^
"Novelty and Order," will appear in following n
The Psychological Clinic.
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Whenever I think of the dead weight of obscure words defining
mystical metaphors, like "the group mind,"
whenever I consider the often equivocal sociological statistics
which pass current as "educational psychology," or which impose
I. Q.'s with a soothsayer's finality upon the ignorant and undis-
cerning, and
whenever I contemplate the mountainous labors which produce
the usually ridiculous mouse called "a coefficient of correlation,"
I pray for all the guidance necessary to avoid futility and
dullness?enough analytic discrimination to make clear a few ideas,
and the artist's choice of the best words in which to clothe them.
"Orthogenics," "diagnostic teaching" and "clinical psychol-
ogy" are three terms which I introduced into the literature of
psychology and education?not without reluctance, for a novel
terminology seldom makes new ideas more acceptable. These terms,
however, I thought necessary in order to differentiate the personal
examination of clinical psychology and the orthogenic treatment of
diagnostic teaching from the group tests of statistical psychology
and the class teaching of our public and private schools.
What passes current as educational psychology is for the most
part a statistical psychology, from which the collective character-
istics of conventional groups may be discerned, but not the dis-
criminated characteristics of individuals, which are the concern
of clinical psychology, diagnostic education, and orthogenics. Math-
ematical technique and the results of group tests have small value
for orthogenic diagnosis in either psychology or education. They
may serve administrators of instruction for the organization of
tentative groups of pupils defined by relative ability to make prog-
ress through the grades, but a clinical diagnosis is always some-
thing more?it is an interpretation of observed behavior, and re-
quires much insight and more experience, a few tests and only a
little figuring.
Mass education will endure of economic necessity, for no one
can give individual educational treatment to more than one person
at a time. Strictly speaking, however, class instruction conforms
and trains, but can not educate. It does little more than offer
opportunity to those in the group who have the ability to profit
by it.
A civilization is defined by the collective behavior of a group
of people, but culture is personal, the product of intelligence and
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS 3
skill, control and motivation, knowledge and discernment. Educa-
tion is always self-education. It is defined by the individual's au-
tonomic control and use of the differentia or acquired knowledge.
The general outcome of my research and educational practice
is an analytic procedure in the diagnosis and treatment of human
behavior?the clinical method in psychology and the diagnostic
method in education. Clinical psychology is derived from the
results of an examination of many human beings, one at a time.
The analytic method of discriminating mental abilities and defects
develops an ordered classification of observed behavior by means
of post-analytic generalizations. Diagnostic education is the ortho-
genic treatment of human beings as individuals, in order that each
may realize his indicated potentiality of performance. The psycho-
logical clinic is an institution for social and public service, for
original research, and for the instruction of students in psycho-
logical orthogenics, which includes vocational, educational, correc-
tional, hygienic, industrial and social guidance.
In due course of time, psychological and educational statistics
will be derived from the differentia and criteria of clinical research
in orthogenic guidance. The premature formulae of group tests,
educational psychology, and mental pathogenies, including psycho-
analysis of Freudian origin, will then give way to the analytico-
synthetic descriptions of clinical diagnosis.
The word "clinical" I borrowed from the field of medicine,
employing it to designate a method of research and instruction in
psychology. "A clinic," says Gould's Medical Dictionary, "is a
gathering of instructors, students and patients for the study and
treatment of disease." The medical clinic is defined by the differ-
ential diagnosis of disease, the prescription of drugs and an examin-
ation of the immediate and remote effects of therapeutic treatment.
It is conducted, as far as possible, in the presence of patients and
students for the double purpose of curing demonstrated symptoms
of disease and giving instruction in the science and art of medicine.
The psychological clinic is a gathering of instructors, students
and those needing orthogenic guidance for the study and treatment
of mental abilities, deficiencies and defects. It is defined by the
post-analytic diagnosis of human competency, the recommenda-
tion of orthogenic treatment, and the examination of the immediate
and remote consequences of all kinds of orthogenic guidance. The
distinctive method of examination in clinical psychology is diag-
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
nostic teaching. The so-called "intelligence test," for instance, is
a test of teachability on a minimnm of instruction. The purpose
of a clinical demonstration in the presence of students is to increase
the ascertained ability of those examined and to give instruction in
the science and art of psychology.
A psychological diagnosis is an interpretation of the observed
performance of human beings. Relative ability is defined by rela-
tive superiority in competition, and the relative superiority of
human beings is defined by whatever is thought to differentiate the
relative superiority of successful performance from the relative
inferiority of failure. The most precise diagnosis of relative su-
periority affirms the existence of a specified number of inferiors
and a specified number of superiors. Thus an "ordinary" person
may be defined for diagnostic purposes as one who belongs to a
group of sixty per cent, superior to twenty per cent and inferior
to twenty per cent. The diagnosis of human abilities and defects
is a differential classification of men, women and children, derived
from a differential generalization of the effects of performance.
What some call "general intelligence," I shall denominate
competency?it may be either personal or social?and I define it
as the ability of men, women and children to succeed in the com-
petitive events of a lifetime. A logical definition?the denotative
and connotative verbal definition?is in form a pre-analytic gen-
eralization: i. e., an interpretation originating in a pre-analytic
orientation, and involving a pre-analytic exploration, which is ob-
servation without analysis. The scientific definition, on the other
hand, is a post-analytic generalization derived from the observed
results of an analytic exploration. A numerical description is the
most precise form of post-analytic generalization.
The object of analytic science is to reduce pre-analytic gener-
alization to relative insignificance, and at the same time to make
post-analytic classification, and especially numerical description,
relatively more significant. Nevertheless, categories of behavior in
every science involve generalizations of pre-analytic interpretation
as well as generalizations of post-analytic description. The theory
of the conservation of energy, for example, is a pre-analytic
generalization called an "assumption," acceptable to science be-
cause, so far, analytic exploration seems to justify it. In this,
as in every other sphere of thought, faith is "justified of works."
Scientific diagnosis is prophetic utterance. A diagnosis of ability
or defeat is always a prognosis of behavior.
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS 5
"He is intelligent" and "She is graceful"?these are pre-
analytic generalizations, fashions of speech maybe, not calling for
scientific justification. Feeble-mindedness, insanity and criminality
are defined by what I call an '' ethno-dramic" diagnosis, originat-
ing, in the first instance, as the public opinion of unorganized
groups of human beings, and confirmed ultimately by '' due process
of law," which represents the collective opinion of organized society,
expressed through the medium of judge and jury. Public opinion,
the ethno-dramic diagnosis, is a pre-analytic general diagnosis. Ex-
pert opinion is a private judgment which is, or ought to be, a
post-analytic general diagnosis, justified by observation, test and
measurement. Feeble-mindedness, insanity and criminality are not
defined by expert opinion but by a socio-legal procedure. The final
diagnosis is the verdict of a jury in a criminal court, accepting or
rejecting the plea of "not guilty" because of feeble-mindedness or
insanity. The verdict differentiates those who are legally non com-
pos mentis from those who are legally responsible for their criminal
acts. In many states, two physicians may commit persons thought
insane or feeble-minded to an institution, but only the verdict of
a jury can hold them there, if the propriety of the commitment is
challenged.
A definition of human competency will involve a pre-analytic
interpretation of personal and group behavior which has been made
to conform to the post-analytic generalizations of numerical and
qualitative description. This conformity of pre-analytic orienta-
tion and scientific description I have been trying to achieve, as
those sufficiently interested may discover if they will consult the
pages of The Psychological Clinic, for the past few years.1 The
differential diagnosis in clinical psychology is a quantitative diag-
nosis which puts the individual in the group to which he belongs,
and defines the group in terms of a number of inferiors and a
number of superiors. It is usually a qualitative diagnosis also, for
it will affirm that one is more intelligent, intellectual or feeble-
minded than another.
1Witmer, Lightner. The Analytic Diagnosis. PSYOT. Clinic, ,
1922, p. 129. Intelligence?A Definition. Psych. Clinic, X , , Per[
Training of Very Bright Children. Psych. Clinic, XIII, , P-
nc ^ ^ vtt 101 CI n 145 Efficiency and Other
formance and Success. Psych. Clinic, XII, 191 J, P- "
Factor, of Success. Psych. Clinic, XII, 1919, p. 241. PrMem of EducaM-
ity. Psych. Clinic, XII, 1919, p. 174. The delation of Mergence ,o Effi-
T. n ' , ',5 C-, Whnt I<s Intelligence and Who Has
ciency. Psych. Clinic, IX, 1915, p. 61. What is y
It? Scientific Monthly, August, 1922.
6 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The more differentiating the diagnosis demanded, the less likely
is a pre-analytic diagnosis to satisfy. It is easy enough to differ-
entiate feeble-minded children from those who are normal?in most
cases, at any rate. It is not so easy to affirm that a child's compe-
tency is to be defined by the proficiency of one in a thousand,
superior to nine hundred ninety-eight in a thousand, and inferior to
only one in a thousand?a differential diagnosis recently made at the
Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania.2
A > X < Y
This is the formula of relative ability in competition. "A" is
one person or a group of persons. "X" and "Y" are groups of
persons used as differentiated grades of relative superiority in com-
petition. Competition is an estimate of potential ability, ex-
pressed as superiority to a group, class or grade of inferiors. The
larger the group of inferiors defining relative superiority, the
higher the standard of excellence defining competency. What, for
example, is the numerical measure of the relative superiority of
genius?Aristotle, Plato, Descartes, Dante, Shakespeare, Beethoven,
CaBsar or Napoleon? A list of a thousand persons will comprise
those whom the world distinguishes with the name of "genius."
The measure of their proficiency is to be defined by the superiority
of one in many millions, and the diagnosis is only tentatively made
in a man's day and generation. Talent is discernible in the lifetime
of one possessing it, but genius, only after it has ceased to exist.
Genius in childhood undoubtedly exists, but how demonstrate or
prove its existence? It is more likely to be found before the bar
of a juvenile court than at the top of a proficiency scale defined by
the Binet intelligence test.
A child who is above average is superior to 50 per cent and in
the best half of his age group. If he is superior to 75 per cent, he is
in the best quartile. Superior to 80 per cent, he is in the best quin-
tile; to 90 per cent, in the best decile; to 99 per cent, in the best
centile; to 99.9 per cent, in the best millile. Dr. Jones has just
completed an investigation of the competency of one hundred twenty
superior children, belonging to a group defined by the proficiency
of 1 per cent superior to 99 per cent. These children are in the best,
or one hundredth, centile grade.
Competency C.G. 100=Proficiencyl per cent> 99 per cent <0 per cent
aMade possible by Dr. Alice M. Jones' investigation of one hundred twen-
ty superior children, reported in this number of The Psychological Clinic.
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS 7
As Dr. Jones divides the whole group of one hundred twenty
children into ten groups, or deciles, the best 10 per cent of her
group is the best or one-thousandth millile of all children?a group,
the competency of which is defined by the proficiency of .1 per cent
superior to 99.9 per cent.
C.M.G. 1000 = P .1 per cent > 99.9 per cent < 0 per cent
An intelligence quotient or a mental age is a measure of the
effects of a particular performance?a post-analytic description,
but it is also a pre-analytic interpretation. The "quotient" and
the "age" are numerical descriptions of observed facts. The "in-
telligence" and the "mentality" are not descriptions of observed
facts; they originate in the pre-analytic orientation of the group
tester.
The arithmetical mean performance of the children of a desig-
nated age group is called the mental age. Used as an average for
purposes of comparison, it has value in comparing groups, one
with another, but it has relatively no value for clinical diagnosis,
which is a differential classification of individual men, women and
children. The mental age or an intelligence quotient is a clinical
diagnosis only insofar as the average performance enables us to
put a particular man, woman or child in either the superior fifty
per cent or the inferior fifty per cent of designated age groups.
Proficiency is the name I give to relative superiority demon-
strated in a number of competitive events. Any well trained psy-
chologist can secure measures of proficiency in the competitive
tests which are used as steps to reach the vantage point of knowl-
edge from which all the findings of an examination are surveyed
and interpreted. A clinical diagnosis is an interpretation of the
behavior of one individual human being?it is uno-analytic. A
statistical diagnosis is an interpretation of group behavior it is
ethno-analytic. A differential diagnosis in clinical psychology, at
any rate in doubtful cases, demands of the diagnostician that he
be more than a good psychologist, more than a good teacher, more
than a good physician. He must have had clinical experience of
the varieties of human superiority and inferiority, and he ought
to have demonstrated his own proficiency as a diagnostician in the
field of clinical psychology before he is considered qualified to make
just estimates of the total relative ability of those whose partial
relative ability almost any one may adequately observe, and psy-
chometrists may precisely measure.
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Proficiency is relative superiority in competition, observed and
if possible measured. Competency cannot be measured?it can only
be estimated. The estimate of competency may be derived from
ascertained measures of proficiency, but competency is relative
ability defined by potential superiority in all the competitive events
of a probable lifetime. Every performance must therefore be criti-
cally examined and judicially interpreted, by one who has insight
and experience enough to give his interpretation the weight of
authority. The ascertained results of observation, test and measure-
ment constitute the problem of clinical diagnosis. The judgment
of the diagnostician in clinical psychology begins to operate at
the very point where psychometrists and group testers cease to
function.
Psychonomic is a word which denotes what is in conformity to
a fundamental or universal law of thought. The orientation of
the clinical psychologist is, or at least ought to be, psychonomic.
I hope to prove, in a forthcoming consideration of the clinical
method of psychological diagnosis, that the psychonomic orientation
at which I have arrived is the orientation of thought and behavior
implicit in the pre-analytic generalizations of all analytic science.
Psychonomics is the body of fundamental laws or axiomatic
truths involved in the psycho-analytic interpretation oil, human
behavior. This new term is more inclusive than the word '' psycho-
analysis" which in its Freudian orientation is a particular form
of inquiry too much concerned with sex and the pathology of sex.
Psycho-analysis of more general orientation has been for many
centuries an organized procedure of investigation in introspective
psychology, aesthetic criticism, medical therapeutics, the Roman
Catholic confessional, and the criminal courts?wherever, in fact,
inquiry is made in order to ascertain the motivation controlling
the behavior of persons, whether as individuals or in groups.
The psychonomic analysis of human behavior is concerned with
what is considered normal and orthogenic, and only by way of ex-
ception with what is considered non-normal and pathogenic. The
Freudian psycho-analysis, on the other hand, is concerned with
what is non-normal and pathogenic, and only by way of exception
with what is normal and orthogenic.
Psychology is not yet taught in the medical schools of this
country, for one reason because professors of medicine think they
can make psychonomic as well as psychopathic interpretations of
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS 9
human behavior without having had instruction in the psychological
diagnosis of normal mentality, personality and will.3
The curriculum of the preparatory and professional courses in
medicine might lead one to suppose that the graduates of medical
schools were being prepared to practice medicine on animals, and
not on beings having human emotions, will, intelligence and intel-
lect. "Grandmother's medicine" is now in full retreat before the
advance of vaccines, antitoxins and serums, but "grandmother's
psychology" lingers on in the medical clinic, and is much in evi-
dence wherever psychiatrists are gathered together to give expert
testimony before judge and jury on both sides of a question in-
volving the differential diagnosis of insanity, criminality or feeble-
mindedness. That instruction in the psychology of the normal
mind counts for something, even in the science of mental pathology
and the practice of mental therapeutics and hygiene, may be in-
ferred from the fact that the psychological method which enabled
Kraepelin to transform the science of psychiatry was not learned
at his mother's knee nor yet in a medical school, but in the psycho-
logical laboratory of "Wilhelm Wundt at Leipzic.
There are always some members of the medical profession
ready +o oppose every advance in medical research and instruction,
not excepting the introduction of stethoscopes, antisepsis, clinics,
hygiene and social service. Medical teaching, however, has achieved
relative freedom from the intellectual primitivism of the "educa-
tor, '' who continues to think that text books can teach science. This
opinion the educator shares with the publisher of textbooks?the
resulting co-operation being mutually profitable. There are uni-
versity schools of education, as well as normal schools, which ven-
ture upon instruction in clinical psychology and diagnostic educa-
tion without providing demonstration and research clinics, without
attempting to secure instructors experienced in clinical diagnosis.4
8 At the University of Pennsylvania, on motion of Dr. William Pepper,
experimental psychology was offered as an elective to fourth-year students in
the Medical School from 1896 to 1901.
4 At a meeting of the Clinical Section of the American Psychological
Association, December 30, 1924, those who were gathered together to discuss
methods of research and instruction in the field of clinical psychology resolved,
with not more than one or two dissenting voices that, in the opinion of those
present, the professional qualification of the clinical psychologist ought, for
the future, to be set at not less than a Ph.D. from an approved graduate
school, in which the professional training ought to equal in comprehensiveness
the four-year course in a Class A medical school, and include at least one year
of clinical practice in psychological diagnosis.
10 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
A psychological diagnosis is of psychonomic origin when the
pre-analytic orientation and exploration of personal and group
behavior, called an "interpretation," is matched by the post-analy-
tic description called a "scientific explanation." Teleological cate-
gories of interpretation prepare the necessary foundation for the
etiological categories of descriptive explanation. A psychonomic
diagnosis is the pre-analytic generalization called "experience"
and expressed in general or teleological language, confirmed fry
the post-analytic generalization called "science" and expressed
in more specific etiological language. Thus we go to war, saving
civilization?then we ask, "What was it we did?" Or, we kill the
mad dog, hand Socrates the hemlock, and then begin to wonder,
"Was the dog really mad?" "Was Socrates a menace to morality
and religion, or a guide to spiritual perfection ?'' The chosen hero
of man's highest aspiration is the moral adventurer who rises again
from the ashes of an auto da fe.
Orthogenics in the field of human psychology is defined by
whatever is considered normal in the development of human per-
sonality and character. The orthogenic treatment includes any
agency known to science likely to develop, preserve or restore
personal competency. The potential abilities of children are given
educational treatment, in consequence of which new abilities are
developed through the organization and differentiation of old
abilities. Efficiency of operation is increased through training.
Character is conformed to acceptable patterns of behavior by cor-
recting defects. The orthogenic teacher is one who tries to promote
the normal development of personality by means of education,
mental discipline and the transformation of character. The gen-
eral aim is culture, skill and conformity of purpose. Vocational
guidance, in order to deserve its name, must be orthogenic guidance,
based on the analytic diagnosis in clinical psychology. This is true
of educational guidance, also, for educational guidance is only one
kind of vocational guidance. Only a little knowledge of psychology
is needed for occupational placement, but those who give or sell
vocational and educational guidance without having made a per-
sonal examination and without the training, knowledge and insight
of the clinical diagnostician belong to the numerous, and often suc-
cessful, tribe of charlatans, even though they be known profes-
sionally as a council of mental hygiene, or the faculty of a school of
education.
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS 11
A clinical diagnosis in psychology is the coherent product of a
personal examination, a detailed individual and family history, the
report of a social visitor on environmental conditions, an ascer-
tained measure of school progress, an adequate medical report, the
measured results of a number of psychological tests and anthropo-
metric measurements, and finally, the sound judgment of an
experienced diagnostician. A statistical diagnosis is a psychological
diagnosis which arrives at the differential classification of human
performance from the results of group tests. When the purpose
of the psychological diagnosis is to provide orthogenic guidance, a
statistical diagnosis may do more harm than good.
The normal development of human behavior is discerned from
the record of man's progress in civilization and culture from a be-
ginning in pre-historic times. The orthogenics of behavior and the
orthogenics of thought are co-terminous. Every form of thought
is a form of behavior and every hind of performance is a form of
thought. A formulation of the laws of the normal development of
thought is attempted in philosophy, logic, mathematics, science
and art. The outcome of my research in clinical psychology is a
discovery, perhaps only a re-discovery, of the orthogenic pattern
of human progress toward the perfection of thought, and, con-
sequently, the perfection of all behavior. Man is discerned as a
group of animals, differentiated from other animals by the trend of
performance toward a preferred perfection. The glutton tries to
eat the most possible, without discrimination; the gourmet fastidi-
ously chooses the best. The creative artist "man" produces and
then perfects diverse patterns of behavior: the saint, a performance
having '' merit''?the philosopher, a thought?the scientist, a fact?
the hero, a victory in the face of adverse odds?the martyr, an eter-
nal life in the memory of man. Human psychology is an examina-
tion of man's spiritual nature. The unit of observation is a per-
formance, but the unit of consideration is personality, defined by
the perfeptability of behavior, which is measured or estimated in the
units of progress which men make toward the perfection they pre-
fer. "Man's soul," says Stevenson, "is in the journey. Happi-
nesses are but his way-side campings." If it is human to thirst
after pleasure, it is no less human to find the perfection of life in
self-renunciation. Men, no doubt, display the instincts of the herd.
At times they will even behave like a pack of wolves, or again, like
a flock of geese. But the psychology of man is not to be defined by
12 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
the observed resemblance of human behavior to the behavior of
other animals, but rather by some differentiating character or char-
acteristics. The "ethnos"?a group of human beings, large or
small?is defined by whatever differentiates the behavior of men
in groups from the behavior of everything else in nature. It is not
a "petting party," for example, which differentiates the sex be-
havior of man from the sex behavior of the monkey, but the surge of
ethnic and personal motivation which eventuates in the "law and
order" of organized society and which is expressed, so far as sex
is concerned, in formulated customs relating to marriage and di-
vorce. As men grow in spiritual enlightenment they make more
perfect, or at any rate somewhat less conflicting, the patterns of
diverse perfection they first originate in imagination and then
strive to realize in fact. This is the orthogenic law of human and
personal progress. Behaviorism is the psychonomic orientation of
interpretive diagnosis?not the crude behaviorism of animal or-
ganization, "the conditioned reflex," for example, nor yet the be-
haviorism of a dynamic system called "mechanism"?but the
behaviorism of spirituality, man's competency for progress, which is
the ability ta move in the right direction, i.e., toward perfection
oriented and defined by an aspiration for more of what is surely
good. The pursuit of perfection is man's effort to realize a spiritual
ambition: philosophy, religion and art, an attempt to make the
dream of aspiration come true: civilization and culture, the out-
come of adventure. History displays man asserting competency,
often enough unreasonably, but presently demonstrated in the
successful outcome of a projected event. Psychology is defined by
the perfeciability of nature, and human psychology by the per-
fectability of man in nature. If death is but the beginning of a
superior life, supernatural perfectability is a component part of
human competency.
My thought is that man's ability to move toward a preferred
perfection must be estimated from demonstrable progress in six
directions. We live, as it were, in a room, enclosed by the floor,
ceiling and four walls. The room is spacious enough?it is the
whole universe?and yet it is limited in every conceivable direction.
The best we can do is to explore, differentiate and measure progress
as an advance from a chosen point of orientation toward discernible
goals?up and down, right and left, forward and backward?three
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS 13
pairs of contrasting opposites?three dimensions, defined by the
ultimate ends of perfectable behavior in six diversities of direc-
tion?a system of coordinates, the common property of the analytic
sciences.
The form of a room in the ordinary house is a cube. It has
six boundaries or sides?all of them rectangular in pattern. When
any portion of space is oriented and explored, whether in imagina-
tion or in observation, as "extension" referred to a system of
rectangular co-ordinates, and bounded by six planes of equal ex-
tent, the "form" is a cube. Every portion of space may be oriented
as "form" and explored as "extension," a unit complex of par-
ticulars, defined by six boundaries also having form and extension,
and described in numbers by reference to three constants of direc-
tion?the three dimensions of Euclidean geometry and physics.
Every form is one individual and indivisible form and also
six coherent and component forms?a unit-complex?seven forms,
defined by the criteria of pre-analytic orientation and exploration.
Every item of behavior, every element of personality, every
performance, is a form of thought and behavior, oriented and ex-
plored as one individual unit-form, and also from six different
points of view?hence seven universal categories of personality,
thought and behavior.
The pre-analytic forms of thought and behavior provide cri-
teria of analytic exploration from which are derived the post-
analytic categories of scientific classification. Every form of thought
is a kind of performance, and every hind or class of performance
is a form of thought. A post-analytic generalization of observed
behavior implicates a pre-analytic generalization of interpreted
behavior. The etiological explanation is woven into the mesh of
teleological interpretation.
The universal room in which we live is a world of three dimen-
sions defined by six oppositions of direction, and referred to a
system of rectangular co-ordinates, because human thought is a
form of three coherent forms, called "dimensions," defined by
reference to six coherent but contrasting forms, which are the
"criteria" of six universal categories of behavior.
All of man's discernible ability is a number of differentiated
abilities, call the ability what you may?"general intelligence or
"mechanism," "intellect" or "mentality," the "will" or the
"soul." Analytically, every ability is a number of coherent abili-
14 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ties, as large a number as we have the ability and time to dis-
criminate. The multiple diversity of nature, however, is not chaos
but order?the order of discerned and discernible knowledge?an
intellectual order?a scientific order. This order is defined by a
fundamental law of thought?it is a psychonomic order of psycho-
nomic origin. Everything is one thing differentiated by the unique
criterion from other things and it is also a number of things?
a tri-une unit of orientation and a sextuple unit of exploration?a
multiple unit of three dimensions, each dimension defined by the
contrast of two opposites?the six universal criteria of plural unity.
This is the psychonomic formula of pre-analytic orientation arid
scientific observation. I have derived from it a psychonomic plan
of clinical analysis, called the Analytic Diagnosis Chart, which
serves the Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania
for the perfection of the psycho-analytic diagnosis.
My seven universal and general categories of behavior are
categories of pre-analytic interpretation. Every unit of considera-
tion in psychology is a single unit-complex of orientation and also
six complex units of pre-analytic exploration. Human ability in
general, what some call "general intelligence," I call perfectability.
It is the ability of men, women and children to make progress
toward a preferred perfection. It is also the unit-complex of
observed behavior?a differentiated performance measurable in
one, two or three dimensions.
"General ability," i.e. perfectability, measured in only one
dimension, I shall call conf ormability. It is defined by a constant
of determination, and a variable of motivation, two categories of
behavior differentiated as control and value, the criteria of judg-
ment and appreciation. They are familiarly known in the history
of science and literature as the "will" and the "soul," "character"
and "personality."
"General ability," measured in two dimensions, I shall call
trainability; it is defined by a constant measure of conformity, and
by the potentiality of origination in one directon and the probability
of operation in an opposite direction. These two categories are
also called originality and repetition, initiative and efficiency, and
are familiarly known as "intelligence" and "mechanism."
"General ability," measured in three dimensions, is educa-
bility. It is defined by constant measures of conformity and effec-
tuality, and by minima of differentiation and maxima of organ-
ization. These two categories are also called discernment and com-
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS 15
prehension, and are familiarly known as "mind" and intellect,
'' enlightenment" and " culture
Competency is the name I give to ability considered as a unit
complex of pre-analytic generalization. It is a unit-complex of
seven discernible abilities. Competency is relative superiority in
competition, defined and measured whenever possible l>y relative
superiority in seven differentiated fields of competition.
The pre-analytic categories of human behavior include one
pre-analytic category of orientation,?otherwise known as spirit-
ual perfection," the differential of which is superiority and the
criterion preference?and six categories of pre-analytic explora-
tion:
I. DETERMINATION ?Control ?Judgment ?Will
II. MOTIVATION ? Value ? Appreciation ? Soul
III. ORIGINATION ?Novelty ?Initiative ?Intelligence
IV. OPERATION ?Quantity ?Efficiency ?Mechanism
V. DIFFERENTIATION ? Particularity ? Discernment ? Mind
VI. ORGANIZATION ? Order ? Comprehension ? Intellect
In the first column are the preferred names of the six univer-
sal categories of pre-analytic exploration. In the second column
are differentia of performance defining these categories; in the
third column, criteria of personality providing pre-analytic gen-
eralizations of human behavior; and in the fourth column, conven-
tional synonyms in current usage. Philosophers who affirm that
there must be only one universal category of behavior do not
agree which is the one. For some, it is the "will," for others, the
"soul." Some consider it to be "intelligence," others, "mechan-
ism. '' Some call it'' mind,'' and others, '' intellect.'' If my point
of view is the right orientation, there must be seven universal
categories of behavior defining human nature in general or in par-
ticular, whether it be oriented as a spiritual entity aspiring to
perfection, or as a machine producing work.
From these universal categories of pre-analytic generalization,
I derive a psyehonomic plan of thirty-six analytic categories
behavior at the first level of specification, and a muc a^?r
number, two hundred sixteen, at the second level. ^ An ana
diagnosis chart comprehending the psychonomic items o an
analytic diagnosis at the first level of specification is m use a e
University of Pennsylvania.5 The total number of ana y ic 1 ems
6 Cf. The Psychological Clinic, "Vol. XIV, Oct.-Nov. 1922, The Ana
. -r. , ___. inn 7fi<ts Inconsistency, Alice M.
lytic Diagnosis, Lightner Witmer, p. 129, and ?
Jones, p. 138.
16 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
necessary to complete a psycho-analytic diagnosis will be at least
thirty-seven?how many more will depend upon the exigencies of
orthogenic guidance and the analytic discrimination of the diag-
nostician.
Science, striving to be analytic, is pluralistic. Primitive
thought, accepting pre-analytic generalizations as the whole truth,
is apt to be romantic and monistic. Pluralistic monism is the psy-
chonomic orientation in every science, including Christian theology.
The doctrine of the Trinity is pluralistic monism in the field of
religion. The conflict between religion and science is defined by the
opposition of those who are romantic without analysis, and those
who are romantic with discrimination. Religious men are not
necessarily theologians, for theology is a science. Theological, politi-
cal and scientific truth is less likely to be proportional to the vehe-
mence and intolerance of advocates than to their wisdom and
discernment.
Thought is a form of behavior which the relative novelty of
performance differentiates from the kind of behavior which is
called habit. The world of habit and tradition in which we live is
a conventional universe of three dimensions because thought has
three dimensions. If we shall ever be able to escape into a more
comprehensive universe of more than three dimensions, the trail tq
this adventure will be blazed by those who use their creative imagi-
nation and the symbolic language of mathematics to rise superior
to the present limits of human competency, determined as it is in
one direction by the novelty of performance and the free initiative
of the performer, and in the opposite direction by conformity and
habit.
Culture is more than a discipline of habit, more than con-
formity of preference and will. The educator is a perfectioneer.
Orthogenics defines the aim of normal development, which is prog-
ress toward the perfection of preferred superiorities. Diagnostic
teaching is the method?the orthogenic treatment of all the possi-
bilities of personality. Clinical psychology establishes the differ-
entia and criteria of behavior which make diagnostic orthogenics
possible.
My method of thought is the outcome of personal experience,
research and reflection. The best I can say for it is that it fits the
PSYCHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSIS 17
results of clinical research and the requirements of orthogenic
guidance. I am not aware of any large indebtedness to the current
literature of psychology,6 though I owe much to those with whom I
have been intimately associated: my teachers, Francis A. Jackson,
George S. Fullerton, Edmund J. James, John B. McMaster, J.
McKeen Cattell, Wilhelm Wundt and S. Weir Mitchell; my col-
leagues, Edwin D. Cope, John A. Ryder and Simon N. Patten; the
friend to whom I owe most, Joseph Collins; my wife, Emma
Repplier, and not a few, both men and women, without whose
intelligence and co-operation my life's work would have been vain
endeavor?of whom, in justice, and with grateful emotion, I name
my first assistant in the Department of Psychology at the Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania?Edwin B. Twitmyer.
A Psychological Clinic has been in operation at the University
of Pennsylvania since March, 1896. The following summer, I
demonstrated, in the presence of my students in psychology, the
abilities and defects of a number of children who began to make
more nearly satisfactory progress in school work only after an
analytic diagnosis had been made and diagnostic teaching had been
prescribed and undertaken. At this time, clinical psychology gained
its first adherents from the field of education: Oliver P. Cornman; a
supervising principal of a Philadephia school, who later organized
the orthogenic classes of the city; George W. Twitmyer, who made
the first clinical examination of the children of a public school
system for the purpose of perfecting the educational guidance of
a city superintendent; and Mary E. Marvin, a talented teacher of
deaf children, who organized and conducted, for the Department of
Psychology, in 1897, the first of a number of demonstration classes
for the teaching of mentally exceptional children.
8 Among those who, not being clinical psychologists, have contri u e
to the original sources of clinical psychology are: Plutarch, St. ugus ,
Cardanus, Vesalius, Leonardo da Vinci, Descartes, Berkeley, Sha ?sPe:* '
Racine, Swedenborg, Voltaire, Pereire, Rousseau, Gall, Pestalozzi, '
Seguin, Montessori, Darwin, Huxley, Galton, Warner, Fechner, e m o ,
Wundt, Broca, Janet, Kussmaul, Kraepelin, Freud, and in this coun ry,
Whitman, Henry James, S. Weir Mitchell, William James,^ . an ey . ,
J. M. Bice and Adolph Meyer. At the moment, '' The American erc^ y
making best use of the clinical method of psychological diagnosis n
of general literature.
18 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
In December, 1896, at the annual meeting of the American
Psychological Association, I announced my discovery of a method
of research and instruction which I called the Clinical Method in
Psychology and the Diagnostic Method of Teaching, and I sketched
a program of practical work in orthogenics,7 some part of which I
have been able to realize in the course of a life's work at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. Eleven years later, in 1907, when I began
the publication of the results of my clinical research in a journal of
orthogenics which I called The Psychological Clinic, but one
psychological clinic existed?the one which I had founded. Since
then, many clinics have been established, some of them called psy-
chological clinics, others educational, orthogenic or child guidance
clinics, in such number, indeed, that it would consume much time
and patience to discover and name them all. Thus, it appears, I
have received from my professional contemporaries that most sin-
cere tribute?imitation, often enough without acknowledgment.
Venturing upon prediction, I challenge the future with the
assertion that what will be called " modern education" after 1950
will be derived, for the most part, from the results of clinical re-
search and diagnostic guidance.
About the middle of the last century, what was then the new
science of physiology transformed medical theory and practice.
Today another science renders a similar service?the chemistry of
metabolism.
Modern psychology was evolved as an experimental science
from the technique* of astronomy and physics. It was first called
"physiological psychology" because it shared, with physiology, the
domain of animal behavior. The etiology of personality is now
being sought, and ultimately will be found, in the differentia of
metabolism.
Young men and women?would you dedicate yourselves to
original research in a field of science most likely to be distinguished
above all others for discoveries of importance during the latter half
of this century, make ready, then, in the laboratory of physiological
chemistry for work in clinical psychology and diagnostic ortho-
genics.
TWitmer, Lightner, The Organisation of Practical WorTc in Psychology,
The Psych. Review, 1897, IV, p. 116.
