Design Blocks
==============

A Description of a Simple Clinical Test

Francis N. Maxfield, State Psychologist, Harrisburg, Pa.

The publication by Kohs1 of a standardization of his blockdesign test as Part II of his Intelligence Measurement has suggested that it might be opportune to publish a brief comment on
this test material, which was prepared in 1917 under the above title.
Owing to the fact that no careful standardization had been made it
was not published. The writer, however, with the assistance of a
group of graduate students had given the test to several hundred
unselected children (sic) so that the relative difficulty of the designs
used seemed to be fairly well established.

Since the publications of Kohs' standardization, the writer
has used that method, which involves the use of cards, with a fair
number of subjects. He has not yet overcome his prejudice in
favor of; a straight imitation method, though he occasionally uses
this material as a memory test. Some comment in the light of more
recent experience will be added after the earlier statement which
was as follows:
During the past two or three years (1914-17) this design block
test has been in frequent use at the Psychological Clinic of the
University of Pennsylvania, and has apparent diagnostic value as
a performance test.

The test material consists of cubical blocks, one inch on the
side, each painted in colors in the same manner. Four surfaces
of each cube are of solid color?white, blue, red, and yellow,
respectively; the other two surfaces are painted in two colors
divided diagonally, one side being painted half white and half red,
and the other half blue and half yellow. These blocks are manufactured under the name of Color Cubes, and are sold in toy shops
and by Milton Bradley and Company.2 They are sold in boxes of
sixteen, or thirty-six, or more blocks, thei smallest boxes being the
1 Kohs, S. C., Intelligence Measurement, A psychological and statistical
study based upon the design tests, Macmillan and Co., New York, 1923, pp.
39 ad -fin.

2 Sold more recently also> by C. H. Stoelting Co., Chicago, J. L. Engle,
Beaver, Pa., and other school supply houses.
most convenient for clinical purposes. They have been used to
some extent in kindergartens and special classes for backward
children, but this does not seem to interfere with their use as test
material.

These blocks are used as a "performance test," no verbal reaction being required of the subject, and the verbal directions of the
examiner are reduced to a minimum. They may be used as an
imitation test, a memory test, or a learning test. In each case the
examiner arranges a number of the blocks to form a design or pattern, which is to be copied by the subject, who is given at the same
time an equal number of the blocks. In the imitation test the examiner 's pattern or design is allowed to lie on the table in view of
the subject, who copies this with the blocks given him, the examiner
noting his method and taking the time of his performance with a
stop watch. For the memory test, the procedure is the same, except that, after the subject has observed the design until he feels
sure he can remember it, (a maximum of fifteen seconds), the examiner covers or removes the model. For observation of the subject's ability to learn, the examiner notes the reduction in time or
improvement in method in execution of the same design in different
color combinations, copied by imitation or from memory; or he
notes the subject's increasing ability to execute more difficult
designs. As generally used for diagnostic purposes, a combination of these methods is desirable.
A series of designs of increasing difficulty is used. The examiner should begin with a design which, in his judgment, can be
successfully executed by the subject. If failure results, he changes
to an easier design. If the subject succeeds, the examiner sets a
more difficult task by using a more difficult design, or by requiring
the subject to work from memory rather than from imitation. The
series most convenient for work with children of early school age
or under, or with adults suspected of mental deficiency, is as follows:
(1) A solid color square of four blocks: '' solid color square.''3
(2) A checked square of four blocks in two colors: "checked
square.''

(3) A four-block design having a square of one color inscribed in a square of another color: 1' inscribed square.''
3 A still simpler form is a straight row of blocks set with the same color
in each case; this can be used with very young children.
(4) A four-block design having a diagonal stripe of one
color on a ground of another color "diagonal stripe."
(5) An eight-block design having a zigzag pattern of one
color on a ground of another color "double chevron."
In testing intelligent adults, the examiner may require the subject to place the blocks back in the box so that one of the designs
shown on the cover of the box is formed on the bottom of the blocks.
In other words, the arrangement is made so that when the box is
inverted upon the table and lifted off, the design then on top is
like the copy chosen.

No hard and fast standardization of the method of giving the
test, or of the quantitative results has been worked out (1917).
From the writer's standpoint, the qualitative aspects of the subject's performance are more important than the mere fact of success
or failure or the time taken, although these facts are, of course,
recorded. The following procedure has proved successful.

Method of Procedure

Begin by having the subject make a design with which he may
be reasonably expected to succeed. This success insures the certainty of his comprehension of the task set, and makes further detailed oral directions unnecessary. Let us suppose the test is being
used with a fourteen year old boy in the third grade of school.
The examiner will begin with design 3, the inscribed square, given
as an imitation test. He places before the boy four blocks, with
only one of them having the correct face upward. He takes four
blocks himself and says meanwhile, "Now you take these four
blocks and I'll take these." He then forms design 3 on the table
before the boy, saying, "Now put your blocks together to make a
square that looks just like this on top. Turn your blocks over so
that the colors will be just like mine. Make your square look just
like this." Here the examiner pushes his square slightly toward
the boy, tilting it slightly if necessary, to keep the boy's attention
on the design on top and not on the sides of the blocks. The boy
looks and gives a nod of assent and usually begins at once. If he
starts to form the design in different colors, repeat, "Turn the
blocks over so that the colors will be just like mine.'' Time is taken
from the moment he touches his first block. Failure is counted if
he does not succeed in three minutes, or if he is satisfied with an
incorrect result. The examiner does not question an incorrect
result if the boy himself seems satisfied, but proceeds instead
to a new color combination in the same design, or to the next
design. If the boy succeeds, the examiner proceeds as before, but
sets a more difficult task, requiring the boy to copy the same design
in other colors from memory, or using a more difficult design. If
the boy fails, the examiner proceeds as before, but sets an easier
task, using* the imitation method, if memory was used in the first
trial, or using an easier design. It is essential to have the boy complete one design successfully and recognize his success so as to be
sure that he understands the task. It is seldom necessary to '' show
him how," though this may be done without invalidating the test.
The examiner should not only note the time of performance and
the degree of success or failure in the difficult scale, but must give
close attention to the qualitative aspects of the performance. He
must take into account the planfulness or the hit-or-miss method of
the boy, his motor co-ordination, his quickness in noting which
block requires adjustment, his persistence, and his energy. In this
opportunity for observing the boy's '' mind at work,'' lies the chief
value of the test.

Some remarks on the quantitative aspects of the test may be
made. The time of the performance is lengthened by poor method,
lack of motor co-ordination, and by lack of interest or concentration. Generally speaking, any success requiring over thirty seconds
is poor. Success merely by trial and error, even where the right surfaces are chosen, is not frequent for designs 3 and following. The
adult, or child over ten years, who fails with design 3 from memory,
or with designs 4 and 5 from imitation, is almost certainly mentally defective; Barr's middle grade imbeciles (the low grade
morons or high grade imbeciles of Goddard's classification) rarely
succeed easily with design 4, even by imitation. Intelligent children of seven or over usually succeed with all of the designs from
imitation, though a few fail on design 5 because they work slowly.
Success from memory is more variable.

If success with any design requires over thirty seconds, it is
well to repeat the same design in another color combination.
No hint, either verbal or by gesture, is to be given during any
trial. The subject should, however, be encouraged as in all mental
testing. His interest may be aroused by allowing him to watch another boy work with the blocks.
The advantages of this test for clinical purposes, whether in
diagnosing cases of suspected mental deficiency or precocity, or in
making a mental valuation and analysis of a presumably normal
individual, may be summarized as follows:

I. The examiner may be sure that the task is comprehended.
In many tests the examiner is uncertain as to whether failure is
due to lack of comprehension of the directions, or to inability to
perform the task set. This failure may be significant as showing
lack of ability in language, but this may be due to lack of ability in
the English language rather than to any lack of potential language
ability. Once a boy has copied one of the designs correctly and has
recognized his success, the examiner may be fairly certain that the
task is comprehended and that no more verbal instructions are
necessary.

II. The language element is reduced to a minimum. No verbal response is required of the subject. The test is therefore useful
for hearing children who do not talk, for deaf children, and for
children who do not speak English. Deaf children, and children as
well as adults who understand no English, comprehend the directions nearly as readily as hearing or English-speaking subjects.
They appear to get the idea from the examiner's gestures and from
seeing his execution of the design. Along with other performance
tests this test supplements the findings of the Binet series and other
tests in which the language factor is important.

III. Shyness and self-consciousness are readily overcome and
interest aroused. As in the formboard and other performance
tests, shyness and self-consciousness are more readily overcome
where the responses required of the subject are manual rather than
oral.

IV. The test presents a graded series of a fairly wide range of
difficulty. The examiner not only observes failure or success, but
the degree of success. The test consists of a series of increasingly
difficult tests, with the possibility of making any one of them still
more difficult by changing from the imitation of a copy set before
the subject, to a memory performance.

Y. A test may be repeated without increasing its intrinsic
difficulty. Those who have used the Healy construction puzzles A
and B, or any of the Knox construction puzzles, as for example,
the Knox Moron Test, have recognized the advantage of repeating a
test to see whether the subject has learned how to do it, or must
solve the puzzle over again. The time required for this second trial
is particularly" significant. In giving the Binet ten year drawings,
the examiner often wishes that he had standardized drawings of
equal difficulty so that he may observe the ability to learn a task
of this kind. In these design blocks it is possible to give the same
design in new color combinations, a task of approximately the
same intrinsic difficulty, yet seeming to the child to be a new task.
VI. The apparatus is simple, inexpensive and easily portable.
VII. The test can be given to two or three subjects at the
same time. If the examiner is giving the best to a very young child,
he may arouse his interest by having an older brother "show him
how." This does not invalidate the test, since it is fundamentally
an imitation test, and alternative designs of equal difficulty may
follow. Or he may excite interest by stimulating rivalry between a
dull boy and his brighter younger brother.

VIII. Most important of all, the qualitative aspects of the
test method (planfulness, persistence, quick recognition of success, etc.)?may be observed and at the same time the objective
standards of success or failure and time of performance may be
expressed quantitatively and standardized. The qualitative aspects
are more in evidence than in many of the other performance tests
in common use because the examiner can observe in most cases a
range of performance from easy success to failure, or at least to a
difficult success.

It is probably true that in all our performance tests these
qualitative aspects are more important than the time of performance, although it is obvious that the time of performance in
the formboard, for example, may be lengthened by poor method or
lack of concentration. In most performance tests, and in the case
of these design blocks among them, a new problem or task is
presented to the subject. The examiner can therefore justifiably
interpret success or failure in terms of intelligence or mental
ability, rather than in terms of training or habit. "When performance
ranges from easy success, as in drawing a square, through difficult
success with the diamond drawn from copy, to failure with the
ten-year Binet figures drawn from memory, the examiner has a
better basis for interpretation, mental analysis, and diagnosis, than
in single tests which offer no such graduations of difficulty, in that
success or failure in the latter is absolute rather than relative.
Examiners find the tests which recur at different age levels in
the Binet series particularly significant, on this account. In any
of our so-called intelligence tests we get a result which is a performance level. In order to interpret this performance, the qualitative as well as the quantitative aspects of the performance are
significant, whether the results are to be used either in planning an
educational program for the child on the basis of our findings, or to
secure a mental analysis for the purpose of prognosis and direction
in social or industrial efficiency.

A few cases may be given to illustrate the usefulness of the
design block test.

Language Difficulty.

X. N. Polish woman of twenty-four. Speaks practically no
English and understands little. Reported to be mentally dull and
inefficient since suicide of husband. Mental deficiency suspected.
Physical examination negative. Mental Examination: Witmer
formboard, first trial forty-three seconds, second twenty-eight seconds, no confusions. Healy construction puzzle A, first trial ninety
seconds, second sixteen seconds. Knox Moron Test, first trial
thirty-three seconds, second fifteen seconds. Witmer cylinders,
first trial sixty-five seconds, second fifty-five seconds, few false
moves, no final errors. Woodworth-Wells color-naming chart, in
Polish, seventy seconds, no errors. Binet weights, compares correctly in each of three trials after watching examiner do this once.
Design blocks, design 3, imitation, thirty-seven seconds; same design,
other colors, memory, fourteen seconds; design 4, imitation, eightytwo seconds; same design, other colors, memory twenty-six seconds;
design 5, memory, forty-five seconds, no failures.

In a case of this kind, many of the tests ordinarily used are
out of the question. The result of these performance tests is convincing, particularly when qualitative aspects are emphasized.
Although brought by a social agency because feeblemindedness was
suspected, there can be little doubt that however illiterate or
ignorant she may be, X. N. must be rated as having a fair degree
of intelligence.

Case 2224, C. H., Polish woman of thirty-five, mother of two
illegitimate children by two fathers. Brought by a social agency
on account of suspected mental deficiency. Understands no EngDESIGN BLOCKS 105
lish, and either cannot or will not understand the interpreter
brought by the social worker to assist in the examination. History previously obtained showed that C. H. had never attended
school; had been employed as a farm laborer in Europe; emigrated
to the United States in 1912 ? in this country had worked at berrypicking, house-cleaning, etc.; reported to be good laundry worker,
a steady worker when employment is found for her, but not capable of finding work for herself. Physical examination: negative:
no pronounced "stigmata"; expression lacking in intelligence.
Mental Examination : Draws square and very poor diamond.

1Vitmer cylinders, in three minutes places fifteen of the eighteen
cylinders, but only six of these are correct; on second trial in
128 seconds places all but one, though only seven are correct; instruction given by examiner, C. H. correcting all misplacements
under his direction; third trial, all cylinders placed, only 2 errors,
128 seconds. Healy construction puzzle A, first trial 240 seconds;
second trial twenty seconds. Woodworth-Wells color-naming chart,
in Polish, 146 seconds, three errors, self-corrected. Goddard adaptation board, poor performance, correct for three turns; fails frequently on four or five turns. Design blocks: design 1, imitation,
fails on first trial and is shown how to do it; design 1 in another
color, imitation, ten seconds; design 2, imitation thirty-nine second ; design 3, imitation thirty-five seconds; design 4, imitation, no
success in four minutes, method little better than trial and error;
design 3, imitation, success in forty seconds; showing task was certainly understood and that failure on design 4 was due to lack of
intelligence. Diagnosis: middle grade imbecile (Barr classification), (low grade moron, Goddard classification). Binet Test inconclusive because of language disability.
Case E. X., an incorrigible, happy-go-lucky, adolescent colored
girl of fifteen and one-half years; unmarried mother. Borderline
case, backward and socially malconformed, and probably feebleminded. Left school at fourteen years in four A grade; attendance
regular. Mental age score (Binet 1911), 10.6 years; auditory
memory span, seven digits. Reads from third reader with fair expression ; reproduction of silent reading shows excellent verbal
memory but meagre comprehension. Witmer cylinders, first trial
sixty seconds, with seven final errors; completed correctly in 119
seconds; second trial sixty-five seconds, no final errors. Ilealy construction puzzle A, first trial 153 seconds, second trial twenty sec106 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
onds. Gives seventy words in three minutes; reconstructs sentence,
solves problems from several facts, etc. Design blocks, all trials
given as imitation tests; design 3, eighteen seconds, design 4,
failure in three minutes, but success in 204 seconds; design 4 in
other colors, success in seventy-four seconds; design 5 not given.
Deaf Child. H. N., an American born boy of seven and one-half
years, the child of Welsh parents; "Welsh spoken in home, although
parents can speak English. Has been in a school for the feebleminded. Makes effort to talk, but uses only a few words, which are
difficult to understand. Does not form sentences. No school
progress.

Mental Examination: Witmer formboard; normal reaction
thirty-nine seconds. Witmer cylinders, first trial failure, cylinders
being placed with reference to diameter only; second trial, after
watching examiner place them, ninety-three seconds with only two
final errors. Draws square and diamond. Matches but fails to
name colors. Design blocks: design three, imitation, forty-seven
seconds; same design in other colors, imitation, forms design in
colors previously used, but turns blocks over readily when his attention is called to color; design 4, imitation, failure, has three
blocks in correct position, but fails to use the solid color block.
This is a case of a partially but not totally deaf child, with
whom tests involving language are impracticable. Diagnosis:
Deaf-mutism, otherwise will probably prove to be mentally normal.
Prognosis, under special instruction for deaf mutes, favorable.
Wide range of application. It affords a scale of increasing difficulty with very simple and inexpensive material. It can be used
to advantage with children as young as two years and is significant
when given to adults.

Case W. N., two years, four months; normal mentally but not
talking. Witmer form-board: (had been given four trials with this
three months earlier, but had no practice in interim) seventy seconds. Second trial 139 seconds, third trial 112 seconds. Witmer
cylinders proved too difficult. Matches color readily, but does not
know color names. Does not distinguish between 1 and 2. Second examination before class at two years and six months. Witmer
form-board: first trial 176 seconds; second trial eighty seconds;
larger board (Goddard) with ten blocks, forty-four seconds. Witmer cylinders; between this and previous examination he had
access to these cylinders as play material at intervals during one
day; first trial (allowed no wrong placements to remain) 220 seconds. Discriminates and matches color, but does not know color
names; distinguishes "one" and "two" from other numbers in
giving blocks on command. Design blocks: a continuous solid
color row, red; succeeds in this for four blocks, and then adds two
yellow surfaces. Design 1, red; copies readily; Design 2, blue and
white, uses blue and red, and places colors in adjacent rather than
diagonal position.

Case 1902, D.D., girl of six in public kindergarten; mental
deficiency suspected by teacher; idio-imbecile (Barr classification). Physical examination shows that she is a mouth breather
with crowded teeth; very much contracted palate; of about average
weight and height.

Mental Examination: Mental age score (Binet 1911) 3.3
years; repeats 2 digits; fail to copy square and to count up to 4.
Enumerates objects in picture and speech development is fair.
Witmer formrboard: first trial, 220 seconds; second, 110 seconds;
third, ninety-six seconds. Method little better than trial and error.
Discriminates and matches color, but does not know color names;
idea of numbers limited to two. Design blocks: Continuous solid
color row, red, places eleven blocks, nine of which are red. Same,
white, performed correctly; design 1, red, arranges four blocks in
form of letter L, incorrect colors; examiner calling attention to
color, D changes all to red but keeps L arrangement. Examiner
showed her how to complete square. Design 1, blue, after thirtyfour seconds has three blue and one red arranged in form of square.
Examiner: "Is that all blue on top?" D. at first said it was, and
then corrected. Design 2, red and white; chooses three red and
white diagonally divided surfaces and one yellow and blue surface.
Is satisfied to arrange these in square.

New problem is presented to the subject. The chances that the
subject has learned to perform this test are remote since, even if he
has played with these blocks as a toy, it is unlikely that he has tried
these particular designs.

Case 1890, M.E., a girl of six, brought to clinic because of certain babyish and silly actions noticed by parents. Proved to be of
normal mentality. Physical examination negative. Had been one
year in kindergarten, and three months in first grade.

Mental Examination : Witmer formrboard: first trial, normal
reaction forty-seven seconds; second trial, confuses triangles, sixty108 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
six seconds; Witmer cylinders, first trial, all correct in 184 seconds ; second trial 133 seconds. Auditory memory span five digits.
Mental age score (Binet 1911) 6.6 years. Design blocks: Design 1,
red, ten seconds; 2, red and white, sixteen seconds; 3, blue and
yellow, thirty-six seconds.

Case 1962, N. 8., American woman of twenty-seven, illegitimately pregnant three times in the last five years, and each time
by a different man. Middle grade imbecile (Barr). Has worked
irregularly in domestic service. Not a prostitute. Able to give
fairly connected account of her history. Left school at fourteen
in fourth grade. Physical examination shows her a woman of low
stature and medium build, without marked "stigmata." Facial expression not intelligent. Apparently unconscious of her limited
mentality, and fairly complacent even when obviously failing in
mental tests.

Mental Examination. Witmer cylinders first trial, five
correct placements out of eighteen. Instruction given by examiner;
second trial completed correctly without suggestion in 140 seconds.
Auditory memory span 5 digits; reads readily with good expression from second or third Reader. Aussage test, meager description with enumeration of objects in pictures; no interpretation.
Fails to arrange Binet weights correctly. Cannot make change in
sums over ten cents. Design Blocks: Design 3, red on white, fortyseven seconds; blue on white, twenty-six seconds; Design 4, white
on red, chooses four identical surfaces, red and white, and
five successive times comes to arrangement as in test 3; no success
in 200 seconds. Instruction given by examiner; 4 repeated;
chooses correct surfaces, but places at random to form square in
fifty-four seconds.

In general the results of these tests with the design blocks are
in accord with the data of other tests. Sometimes a high grade
feebleminded subject will succeed readily in this test and occasionally a subject of normal mental ability will fail. The following case is given as an illustration of the former.
Case 2016, E. D., attractive, adolescent, high grade feebleminded girl of nineteen and one-half. Diagnosis given largely on
basis of school and social history rather than clinic tests. Physical
examination negative; health excellent; menses at thirteen; no
"stigmata." Is being allowed to take first year high school work in
Domestic Science; spent two terms in nearly every grade, and then
was promoted "on age." School conduct excellent, attendance
regular, enjoys school and does not realize her limitations.
Mental Examination. Witmer cylinders: first trial, 123 seconds; second, sixty-two seconds; third, forty-seven seconds. Compares Binet weights correctly; fair performance in Trabue language
completion test. Auditory memory span seven digits. Healy Construction puzzles, A, 21 seconds; B, incomplete at four minutes,
hut finished readily on slight hint from examiner. Making change:
(coins used) 10 -f- 4 == 6; 25 ? 6 = 19 (gives dime and nine pennies) ; 25 ? 11 = 14; 50 ? 37 = 13; 50 ? 63 = 7, but gave orally
as "eight" and added one cent. Asked how she got this result
changed to 13. 50 ? 72 = 22; 50 ? $1.25 = 75. Woodworth and
1Veils controlled associations: performance excellent. Reversal of
hands of clock, 2:56 = 11:15; 8:08 fails. Design blocks: Design 3,
fourteen seconds. It will be observed in this case that the performance of most of these tests is good, except for the suggestibility
shown in the making change test. Result with the design blocks is
excellent and this case is given as an example of an instance in
which this test did not point to the true diagnosis of the case.
This test is particularly recommended in cases where there is a
language difficulty; cases of deafness, children not yet talking, illiterate adolescents and adults, and all subjects whose mother tongue
is not that of the examiner.
