Another Mary
============

Margaret C. Brooks
Executive officer of the Psychological Clinic,
University of Pennsylvania
There are story book Marys including "Mary, Mary, quite con-
trary"; historical Marys, including the Magdalenes and queens,
Marys of the legitimate and illegitimate stage?an endless proces-
sion of them, sometimes masquerading as Mary Annes, Mary
Elizabeths, or Mary Louises. It was one of the latter who recently
challenged our interest?first incidentally, then temporarily, and
finally permanently. Figuratively speaking, this Mary now has the
whole Clinic staff waiting upon and salaaming to her for, in spite
of her many deprivations and handicaps, she has charm with a
"capital C," and is feminine from head to toe. "Charm" and
"feminine" are pre-analytic generalizations which never have been
successfully interpreted post-analytically,?that is, scientifically.
Mary Louise, aged six years, came to the clinic with her foster
mother who desired her mental status with a view to adoption. She
was taken before a class for her clinic tests and in short order had
the attention of the entire group?a very mixed one?riveted on her
every reaction. Before going further, it is appropriate to add that
Mary Louise is not a fair, golden haired child, with a pink and
white complexion; in fact, she is neither blonde nor brunette,
rather nondescript hair, which regardless of exact shade, is very
straight with just an ordinary bob. Her skin is pasty and rather
sallow, and to make matters worse, she has lost her front teeth.
But Mary Louise doesn't need curls or rosy cheeks or front teeth,
for she has a certain something in the guise of personality, charm
and femininity which functions independent of things physical.
She is graceful, cheerful, interested, generous, self-reliant, and
above all else?friendly. Not the brand of friendliness which makes
itself heard, but the kind which is mute and dog-like?the kind
that seeks your hand or a place beside you without any verbal ex-
pression?never obnoxious and always unostentatious.
This attractive Mary has a very unsavory family history,
necessitating a protracted period of institutional life for her, where
the great numbers of other unfortunates made it impossible to cater
tc. much else than physical cleanliness and appetites. No chance
for individual attention; no opportunity to exercise initiative; no
198 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
adequate outlet for the imagination; in short, no real, constant or
personal encouragement from anyone.
When she first came to the clinic, she had been in the foster
home six months, and even though much underweight and height,
te change has been marked. The foster mother had set about to
improve her physical condition in lieu of all else?and with that
program underway, wisely sought expert advice concerning her
mental health.
She solved the Witmer Formboard with much trial and error
and little plan. According to the standards at her age level, this
performance placed her in the poorest 20%. She failed the Witmer
Cylinders, showing trainability on the second trial, after teaching,
but she seemed to forget the method on the third trial, making
many errors?and doubling the time.
Her Intelligence Quotient on the Stanford Revision of the
Binet-Simon Scale was 83?largely referable to lack of comprehen-
sion and inability to cope with problems of likenesses and differ-
ences. Her auditory memory span for digits was five, but she did
not get the concept of the reverse digits. No visual span was ob-
tained as she is unable to read figures. Her auditory span placed
her in the 40% group?inferior to 30%, and superior to 30%.
Her responses to the test material did not seem an index to her
native ability, but the picture is rather one of infantilism, due
largely to neglect. Consequently, she was placed in the Clinic
school with a half dozen others of her same age for observation. At
present, her status is that of the average child for the median group.
It may be too late to break Mary Louise of one especially bad
habit, and she may not respond normally to academic material be-
cause of her babyhood history, but one thing is reasonably predic-
table?namely, that, wherever Mary Louise is placed, if the sur-
roundings are only fairly propitious, she will earn her way into
the hearts of her elders and playmates because of that indescribable
undefinable something labeled "charm."
