Notwithstanding a High "I. Q."
===============================

Zoe I. Hirt, B.S., Erie, Pennsylvania
In the fall of 1920, Albert was enrolled in the ninth grade of
the junior high school. The big husky looking boy was always by
himself, going about with his head down and a little to one side,
usually taciturn, and often sullen, among his classmates. He came
to school late two or three mornings each week, and soon his at-
tendance became very irregular. He was resentful, and sometimes
impudent when the teachers found fault with his irregularities.
On January 13, 1921, when he was exactly fourteen years and
one month old, he was given the Binet-Simon Test?Stanford Revi-
sion. He succeeded in a superior way with every task required by
the scale, beginning at the XIV year level and going through the
XVIII year, or Superior adult tests. This gave him an intelligence
quotient of 138. His score was 83 in the vocabulary test.
In three performances with the Witmer cylinder test he took
ninety seconds for the first, fifty seconds for the second, and fifty-
four seconds for the third. The tremor of his fingers caused him
to fumble the blocks and thus lose a good deal of time in adjusting
them in their recesses.
At the close of the examination, the examiner expressed sur-
prise that one who seemed to have so much intellectual ability was
accomplishing so little in his school work, for he was not making
passing grades. He frankly confessed that he smoked all the cig-
arettes he could get hold of, and that he masturbated. He said
that he had indulged in the latter practice since he was eight or
nine years of age, at first only occasionally, but now, he said, he
was "going it pretty hard," having convinced himself that no
harmful effects were produced. When asked how he knew that he
was not being harmed, he replied that he weighed 126 pounds?
more than most boys of his age and height?that he was gaining
steadily in height and weight, and that he had never yet seen a
puzzle or problem that he could not solve if he cared to. He said
that he was failing in his classes in school simply because he was
not interested and he considered it a waste of time to do the work
assigned. He said that he saw no sense in doing things that he
knew he could do?that it was only when he was in doubt as to his
NOTWITHSTANDING A HIGH "I. Q." 129
ability to do a thing that he found it interesting and worthwhile
to attempt to do it. Asked whether he had any plans for the future,
he replied that he had always thought he would like to be a
''tramp," but of late he had been thinking of becoming a natura-
list.
The student counsellor of the school called at Albert's home
one evening and gleaned the following facts from an interview with
his parents:
The father and mother were distantly related to each other,
and both had been school teachers before their marriage. The
mother boasted that she was a '' Daughter of the American Revolu-
tion" with "four bars on her pin." The eldest daughter, seven-
teen years old, was a college freshmen; the eldest son, sixteen years
old, was a high school senior, ranking among the brightest in his
class; the son next younger than Albert, age thirteen years, was a
high school freshman, making high grades in all of his classes; the
youngest son, ten years old, was doing good work in the fifth grade.
The parents were both working in the large general electric plant
near their home, hoping from their combined earnings to lay aside
the funds necessary to send all of their children to college. The
father and two of the boys spoke with a decided, but not a serious,
stammer.
Until quite recently, the family had always lived in the coun-
try. Albert had been a "cross" baby and a very poor sleeper. The
father used sometimes to carry him out for long tramps through
the country to put him to sleep at night.
One day, when Albert was between eight and nine years old,
while he was at play on a hillside near his home, he was accident-
ally shot by a neighbor man. The bullet entered Albert's back
after it had passed through the head of a woodchuck. The child
had to be kept under ether for a couple of hours before the physi-
cian could locate the bullet which had entered close to the spine
and passed into the abdomen. After the boy recovered from his
wound and returned to school, he began to have trouble with his
teacher who used severe methods of punishment. She charged the
boy with "making faces" at her; a little later it was discovered
that he had chorea which affected the nerves of his face. Then for
nearly two years the child was unable to attend school.
One evening when Albert was two months less than thirteen
years old, his father found stored in the cellar of his home a large
130 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
amount of plunder?there were many pounds of meat, dozens of
eggs, several pounds of butter, and many bottles of milk, besides
several pairs of rubber boots and a heap of automobile repair tools.
The man knew at once that this was the hoard of the marauder who
had kept the neighborhood in a turmoil for several months. Albert
finally confessed that he had left his bed night after night, when
all the rest of the family were asleep, and burglarized the back-
porches and refrigerators, and the garages in the community. His
father reported the facts to the police department at once (a spec-
ial officer had been on duty for weeks trying to catch the thief) and
then he made restitution to his neighbors as far as possible.
A few days later Albert removed money from a pocketbook
which his mother was carrying in a knitting-bag upon her arm
while she had him and his younger brother with her on a shopping
tour to town. She left the two boys outside examining something
of interest in the window while she went into a store to make a pur-
chase. When she went to pay her bill she found that her pocket-
book was empty. Only one boy was waiting for her when she
stepped outside of the store; Percival did not know when Albert
had left his side or where he had gone. Several hours later the
truant arrived home and he confessed that he had taken six dollars
out of his mother's pocketbook and had spent it all. Then the
father appealed to the Probation officer of the juvenile court for
advice, and Albert was placed in a farm school for boys. It was
after the nine months' period of detention in that institution that
the boy was enrolled in the junior high school.
The parents realized that Albert was becoming an increasingly
serious problem, and they readily consented to his being taken to
the mental clinic conducted by an experienced psychiatrist and
neurologist of the city. A few days later the boy was examined and
the following report was returned:
Moist rales over apex of right lung.
Pupils equal, large, regular, react well to light and accommodation.
Patellar reflexes decreased.
Marked tremor of fingers and hands, station normal, no ataxia.
Wasserman, 4 plus.
Recommendation was made that Albert be required to take
only those subjects in school which interested him, and that he be
given as much freedom as possible. He was to report to the clinic
doctor at least every two weeks. The school attempted to carry
NOTWITHSTANDING A HIGH "I. Q." 131
out all of the doctor's recommendations, but Albert's delinquency
increased. Sometimes he would start out at school time in the
morning and nothing more would be seen of him, either at school
or at home, for several days. On one occasion he was gone for five
days, returning home at 1:30 a. m., his clothes dripping wet from
his all-day tramp in a pouring rain.
In the spring the doctor advised permitting Albert's with-
drawal from school for the rest of the semester. He was encouraged
to make a garden, and his father provided a camping outfit for him
in the big yard back of his home. In June, the clinic report showed
most encouraging improvement in Albert's condition. In July,
work was secured for the boy on a farm within four or five miles
of his home, and all of his friends were sure that the problem had
been solved. Everything seemed to run smoothly for two weeks,
and then, without a minute's warning, Albert appeared at his home
one evening, saying that another boy had been trying all the while
to get his farm job and had finally succeeded.
The next morning Albert left home saying that he was going
back to the farm to get his clothes. That was the last that was
heard of him until, five days later, his mother received a letter from
him, mailed in a town nearly a hundred miles away, asking that
she send money to him to pay his fare home. The mother did not
send any money, and several days later the wanderer returned
home, ragged and dirty, and smelling as if had been living in
stables. He could not give a clear account of where he had been or
what he had done.
An investigation of the cause that had led to his discharge
from the farm revealed the facts that he had remained only one
week, that after the first or second day he had proved himself
utterly unreliable, that all he had wanted to do was to eat, sleep
and read, and that he had been insolent when reproved.
Soon after Albert's return from his "trip," he stole money
from his sister's trunk while she was at home from college on her
vacation. A little later, at the opening of school in September,
1921, he returned to high school, but he came only a day or two
each week. Sometimes he would go into the school library and sit
there with a book for hours at a time, giving no heed to the bells
that called him to his classes. One Monday morning his mother
telephoned that he was too ill to attend school. She said that he
had been at home alone on Sunday ? evening, and when she came
132 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
home she found fifteen cigarette "butts" on the table beside him,
and she thought this was the cause of his illness.
Finally, one day late in October, 1921, the newspapers told
that detectives had arrested Albert on suspicion that he had stolen
the quantity of silverware that he was trying to pawn. At the
police station he confessed that the silver was the property of his
mother. The physician who had been observing Albert for nearly a
year, now classified him as a "constitutional psychopath," and
recommended to the judge of the juvenile court that he be sent to
a correctional institution, to be transferred later to an institution
for the insane if his condition warranted the change. Up until this
time the doctor in charge of the mental clinic had frequently con-
sidered the advisability of placing Albert in a training school for
the feeble-minded. The juvenile court finally committed him to the
Pennsylvania Training School at Morganza.
Two months after Albert's commitment the chief parole officer
reported that the boy was making an effort to conquer his habit of
masturbation, and that his improvement was encouraging in other
ways. On July 5, 1923, he was paroled from the institution at
Morganza with a record of obedience and good work. He is now
leading his class as a freshman in high school. His mother says
that his conduct is entirely satisfactory in every way.
