The Theory of the Constancy of Intelligence
============================================

By William Stern
Translated by Heinrich Kliiver,
University of Minnesota
The concept of the intelligence quotient (IQ) has been intro-
duced1 with the view to find an expression of the degree of intelli-
gence characteristic of a certain individual: this means a kind of
intellectual constant which is independent of the variation in the
actual intelligence performance as it takes place with increasing
age. This concept, therefore, supplemented Binet's measure of the
"mental age" (MA). The MA expresses the existing status of the
intelligence in terms of the age level whose normal status the indi-
vidual has reached. The IQ, however, relates the MA of an indi-
vidual to his chronological age (CA) :IQ = MA/CA. On each age
level, this value must be = 1 with reference to normal intelligence.
For intelligence below normal we have < 1 and above normal > 1.
The question whether, and in what sense, it is possible to speak
of such an intellectual quantitative constant is of no slight theo-
retical importance; the further question whether the above men-
tioned value proves to be empirically constant to such an extent as
to warrant not only diagnostic but also prognostic statements may
become of great significance in practical and psychological respect.
Both questions already have been discussed in my book concerning
intelligence.2
Psychological work in Germany in recent years has not been
concerned with the above questions, due to the fact that the scale
of Binet and his successors no longer continued to be the chief
object for investigation. The problems presented by the selection
of gifted individuals made iti necessary for one to try, again and
again in each case, to devise new tests. While these tests were
* Compare W. Stern: Neue Beitrage zur Theorie and Praxis der Intelli-
genzpriifung. Pp. 146-155. Hamburger Arbeiten zur Bcgabungsforschung.
No. VI. Leipzig: Joli. A. Barth, 1925. Pp. XII -4- 193. The translator.
1W. Stern: Die psychologischen Methoden der Intelligenzpriifung. Be-
richt iiber den 5. Kongress f. exp. Psychologic, 1912.
2 W. Stern: Die Intelligent der Kinder und JugendlicTien (third edition).
Leipzig, Barth, 1920. Pp. 143, 171, etc.
CONSTANCY OF INTELLIGENCE 111
standardized with respect to different localities and compared with
Regard to their results, no effort was made to relate them to a
standardized scale comprising different MA levels. Now the basic
deficiency of all scales is to be sought in the fact that they have to
use a rigid set of tests which makes it impossible to exclude the in-
fluence of previous knowledge and coaching. It has never been
quite clear to me how the American psychologists have been able to
overcome this difficulty.
On the other hand, the advances made by these psychologists
by means of standardized scales in the field of intelligence exam-
inations are of such significance that we have every reason to con-
sider them most seriously. Terman submitted the Binet scale to
a revision and extension which has been known as the "Stanford
Revision."3 Recently its importance and usefulness has been
proved by results based on a large amount of data. It seems as if
in America the epoch has passed in which "Binet testers" by means
of dilettantish and mechanical examinations discredited the test
method: examinations performed in conformity with Terman's in-
structions seem?so far as it is possible to pass judgments from
afar?to meet the requirements of scientific method. At the same
time, they have a bearing on every day problems of school life. No
special emphasis is laid upon the testing of subnormal children;
the great mass of school children, and especially the gifted ones,
are also successfully examined.
In the succeeding presentation the results of the Stanford ex-
aminations are used to support a theoretical consideration dealing
with the constancy of mental development.
"W. Peters, in a critical discussion of my book about intelli-
gence, was concerned with the problem of the constancy of develop-
ment and its measurement.4 He is inclined to consider the problem
of the constancy of the IQ essentially as a mere "imaginary prob-
lem": for this constancy is for him presupposed in every properly
constructed scale.
His argument runs somewhat as follows: a scale is properly
constructed only when one places at each specific age those tests
which correspond to the normal ability of this age. The individuals
'Compare e.g. Die Intelligenz (3rd edition) p. 136. Further: Stern-
Wiegmann: Methodensammlung. p. 215.
* W. Peters: Das Intelligenzproblem und die Intelligemforschung. Zscli.
/? Psychol., 1922, 89, 1.
112 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of this age level who are above or below average surpass or fail to
reach this performance in approximately equal degrees and fre-
quencies. Having a sufficiently large number of unselected indi-
viduals at a certain age level, the average of all values must be
therefore MA = CA; if this does not hold, it is necessary to shift
the tests from one level to the other until the equation is fulfilled.
Since this is true for each age level, the average IQ will be = 1/1
everywhere; therefore it is constant?independent of age. The
fact that the application of the scale leads to the average constancy
of the IQ merely proves, therefore, the efficiency of the standardizer
in placing appropriate tests at specific ages. It does not, however,
prove anything concerning the children examined, or throw light
upon the mental development of the non-average child.
Peters' statements are indeed entirely adequate with reference
to averages obtained from group investigations, and those investi-
gations carried on in America or elsewhere, which consider this
statistical constancy of the IQ something more than a criterion for
the standardization of scales, are on the wrong track.
But it was not this constancy, however, which led to the intro-
duction of the IQ. It is back of this methodical constancy that the
problem of psychological (or, better, psychogenetic) constancy be-
gins. This is an mtfra-individual problem. The question is: in
what sense and within what limits may the IQ of the same person,
at different ages, be considered constant? This question certainly
cannot be answered by group investigations which are carried on at
the same time with children of different ages; it is when identical
individuals are examined again and again in the course of longer
periods that a solution of the problem is possible.
A priori it would be quite possible that there is a methodical
(inter-individual) constancy. Suppose the same unselected 1,000
children were examined in four successive years. If the tests are
appropriately chosen and the children represent a naturally dis-
tributed group, the average of all MA's for each year will be equal
to the chronological age. In spite of this fact it might be possible
that the IQ of the individual child would vary considerably from
year to year, in some children irregularly, in others always in one
direction. It may be possible also that the IQ would gradually de-
crease, e. g., in the case of subnormal children, and increase in the
ease of supernormal children. Furthermore, there could be the
possibility that there exists a far-reaching individual constancy,
CONSTANCY OF INTELLIGENCE 113
considerable deviations from which could be found only in some
children. That would mean that the characterization of a child
gained by means of the IQ has great prognostic probability. In-
deed, these problems as to constancy are not imaginary problems.
They represent extremely important research problems which can
?nly be solved on the basis of extensive empirical material obtained
from children who have been frequently re-tested.
Concerning this psycliogenetic problem, Peters also holds a
very definite view to which I may refer very briefly. The constancy
the IQ has been sometimes regarded as if the intellectual devel-
opment of the child were a uniformly progressing development. In-
deed, in the case of the constancy of the IQ the graphic represen-
tation is a straight line (abscissa axis = CA, ordinate axis = MA)
which, for instance, for IQ = 1 ascends in an angle of 45?. Peters
again is right in pointing out that this straightness cannot be con-
sidered asj proof of a uniformly progressing development since it
^presents an essential characteristic of the system. However, he
is not satisfied with this negative statement, but adds the positive
assertion that according to exact findings now available the mental
development shows a gradually decreasing rate.
Such a thesis seems to me no more justified than that of the
Uniformity of the rate of development, for I do not see any possi-
bility at all of reaching objectivity as to the absolute form of the
curve of development. It is, of course, possible to get intuitively
^e "absolute" impression that during certain periods of youth
the general mental development is accelerated (e. g., in puberty
compared with childhood), but an exact measurement is altogether
^possible. Where are we to find this measure?
Peters, in his very brief statements, seems to point to the fact
that the examination of one circumscribed and isolated achievement
(e- g. completion of missing elements) does not reveal a uniform,
but a decreasing rate of development. Dauber5 had based his thesis
the decrease in rate of general mental development on this argu-
ment. But this special decrease lias, after all, nothing to do with
the general tempo of development but merely with the well-known
fact of differential psychology that the more the psychic functions
vary the more they involve difficulties. So far as a definite per-
BJ. Dauber: Zur Entwicldung der psychischen LeistungsfahigJceit-
Fortsch. d Psychol., 1918, 5.
114 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
formance is concerned, the younger children for whom the solution
is difficult vary in their achievements to a greater extent than the
older children; and still older children show hardly any progress at
all since the performance has now become too easy. Is it, however,
justifiable to speak of an arrest of mental development at this
stage ?
Progress in development, considered as the total process of
growing individualities can never be understood by the juxta-
position of part developments. This progress is something quali-
tative : each age level is characterized not only by a " plus-perform-
ance" in fields formerly dealt with in a less successful way, but
also by the appearance of novel achievements which did not exist
up to that time (e.g., understanding of abstract concepts) and by
qualitatively new aspects of the former kinds of achievements.
This explains the fact that the different age levels in the scales of
Binet and Terman do not contain only identical problems whose
difficulties increase, but also qualitatively different tasks. This
fact is not to be considered as a deficiency of the method preventing
exact comparison of the different levels, but it is, on the contrary,
a necessary and spontaneously found adjustment to the above
mentioned qualitative change in mental development, an adjust-
ment which has not yet been made sufficiently. Primarily, the
fundamental intellectual change occurring at puberty has not found
adequate recognition in the scales now in existence. The fact that
the tests which were adequate before puberty and which now reveal
less progress in development during puberty should not lead to the
conclusion "that the absolute rate of the development of intelli-
gence during puberty decreases in comparison with the rate in the
pre-pubertal period."
Therefore, the absolute measure mentioned by Peters (p. 28)
does not exist at all as an exact expression of the rate of mental
development. The different levels in the scales of Binet and Ter-
man are "equally distant" only with reference to the specific age
to which they correspond (e.g., with reference to a non-psycho-
logical moment) ; it is, however, meaningless to state that from the
tenth to the eleventh year the achievements differ psychologically
less (just the same: or more) than from the sixth to the seventh
year. It is merely a methodical device if one considers these steps
as '' equally large'' and thus represents the average achievement by
means of a straight line ascending from one age level to the other.
CONSTANCY OF INTELLIGENCE 115
This methodical construction, however, furnishes us with a
measure relative to which the actual course of development of dif-
ferent individuals or of specific groups (e.g., the feeble-minded)
may be exactly determined. These relative measures form the real
Problem for the empirical investigation of the development of in-
telligence. The question whether the curve of an individual devel-
ment shows a constant relation to this measure or a bent form
(e. g., whether it shows that the rate of development decreases or
increases with increasing age) now becomes meaningful. In the
first ease, the IQ remains constant, in the second it decreases, and
the third it increases.
Peters also develops a definite thesis with reference to these
relative curves of development. According to him, they show the
same form as the curves representing absolute development, namely
decreasing steepness. "As long as experience does not prove the
opposite, we shall assume that the mental development of the back-
ward child first increases rapidly; then by and by more slowly
until finally it almost ceases."
The data to which Peters refers can apparently be interpreted
in different ways; since they led me to the conclusion that the IQ
remains practically constant6 while Peters believes there is a tend-
ency to decrease. Today it is no longer necessary to discuss those
very limited data since the investigations of American psycholo-
gists which have become known recently places at our disposal a
material of far greater range and exactness. This material?
which the following paper will report in detail7?confirms our as-
sumptions and disproves the hypotheses of Peters.
The most important results so far as they have a bearing on
the foregoing discussion may be summarized:
I. Re-tests of the same children show that the IQ varies with-
in certain limits which are, however, in most cases so narrow that
Practically one can speak of constancy. The probable range of
variation of the IQ of a child is 10 points (5 points up and 5 points
down). The chance that the IQ will either increase or decrease as
much as 15 points is only 1/20.
8 Of course, this holds only for a limited period. It goes without saying
that during the time preceding the complete cessation of intellectual develop-
ment a considerable retardation of development takes place which expresses
itself in a decrease of the IQ. Compare: Die Intelligent (3rd edition, p. 144.)
'Compare: Neue Beitrdge etc. p. 156. The translator.
116 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
(The American psychologists do not state the normal IQ as =1
as we do, but as = 100, according to the formula IQ =MA 100.
CA
There is a chance that the IQ of a child who tests at 85 (according
to our computation as .85) will fall within the range between 80
and 90 in re-tests. In the totality of cases investigated, the range
of five points has been exceeded as often as not reached.)
II. Considerable intra-individual variations occur now and
then especially in the case of psychopaths. But neither superior
nor feeble-minded children show a constant tendency to change the
IQ in certain directions. There is especially no verification of
Peters' assumption that the IQ of feeble-minded individuals is
liable to decrease with increasing age.
III. Changes to such an extent that pronounced subnormal-
ity becomes normality or normality becomes supernormality, or
vice versa, hardly ever occur.
But what do these findings mean?
While we had to emphasize their positive importance against
attempts to deny them it is no less essential to show the limits of
their importance.
The American psychologists tend to a certain extent to an
over-evaluation, assuming that the IQ furnishes a kind of general
formula for the total mental status of man. This view cannot be
held. The IQ merely expresses the degree of the reactive, general
intelligence, that means the capacity to handle definite objectively
determined tasks for thinking. The constancy of the IQ makes it
probable that the degree of this capacity belongs to the native and
permanent characteristics of the individual; we are then justified
in assuming in the case of the individual a level of mental alertness
and adaptability which is characteristic for him. But: level is not
personality! Original impulses, spontaneous interests, special
talents, qualitatively determined tendencies, and volitional traits
contribute to the formation and development of the intellectual
side of the individual in a way which does not necessarily affect
directly the achievements in an intelligence examination. Some of
these traits may also be submitted to experimentation, but not to
the kind of experiment that is represented by an intelligence ex-
amination (in this connection one may think of examinations for
vocational fitness) ; other traits cannot be subjected to experimental
CONSTANCY OF INTELLIGENCE 117
methods at all, they can be appreciated only by general observa-
tion. Thus the individual and irrational structure and the unpre-
dictable development of every personality remains a fact even if
we succeed in finding a rational and quantitative index for some of
its aspects, especially for its level of mental reactivity.
From this there result certain limitations of the prognostic
value of the IQ. In the first place, it makes possible negative pre-
dictions of high probability, namely the determination of the schools
and professions for which the individual in question is not fitted,
since they presuppose a higher mental level than that which is char-
acteristic of the person. The IQ, however, seems to be of less im-
portance for the positive prognosis as to school and profession, for
the mental capacity of a man is strongly determined by the above
mentioned personality traits in such a way that the mere determina-
tion of the level on which his achievements take place does not
allow us to picture his future in a clear-cut way. The same motive
that is operative in Hamburg in supplementing the intelligence ex-
amination by other criteria in the case of selection of pupils should
also be effective to exclude the use of the IQ as the only prognostic
index. Especially in the case of the selection of gifted individuals,
the IQ involves some difficulties which, as it seems, have not always
been mastered in America.8 The IQ designates those individuals
in the mass which have the strongest reactive intelligence; but it is
not certain at all, it is not even probable, that these versatile and
"clever" individuals are always the ones who possess the greatest
creative and productive qualities.
The positive value of the IQ seems to me a fourfold one.
I. It gives us a quantitative measure for the mental level of
adjustment of an individual which can be readily used and inter-
preted.
II. It is?on account of its clearness and independence from
the chronological age?an expression easily handled in comparative
statistical studies, e.g. in comparing children of different origin, of
different social levels, of different school achievements, etc.
8 Questions of this kind arise when we hear that in California the intel-
lectual leadership of the next generation is to be identified by means of the
IQ. In a group of 250,000 children in the larger cities, the 600 most intelli-
gent ones (only children with an IQ of 140 or more) have been located; the
goal is to observe them psychologically in the future, and to give them all
possible educational opportunities. This is thought to be the best way of
getting a properly selected intellectual leadership.
118 TEE PSYCEOLOGICAL CLINIC
III. As to negative prognoses, the IQ renders valuable service
supporting (but not establishing) our judgments concerning the
degree of feeblemindedness, the unfittedness for certain school sys-
tems and school classes, for training in certain professions and for
the professions themselves.p It also is of value in the determination
of responsibility with respect to criminal proceedings, etc.
IV. As to positive prognoses and conferences, the IQ fur-
nishes a preliminary orientation which, however, must be con-
trolled, supplemented and corrected by other psychological
methods.
But even these more limited tasks are important enough to
justify our endeavor to turn the attention of German investigators
to these long neglected problems. In the first, place, it would be
necessary to arrive at a desirable German scale. Though Bober-
tag's revision of the Binet scale was full of merit, it does not meet
modern claims. The tests must be selected and standardized in
taking into consideration the newly obtained results in the field of
intelligence investigation. A more far-reaching emancipation from
Binet's sketchy and poorly arranged list of tests must be achieved.
