The Bliss of Madness
=====================

:Author: Richard Jamson

Most people think of mental illness
as a terrible, destructive experience,
filled with doubt and gloom. Sadly,
in many cases, it is but, strangely,
superlative happiness can be diag-
nosed as an illness too, and, when this
happens, 'madness' can be bliss for
the person concerned.

When anyone says to me, 'I hear you were in a mental
hospital?I am sorry', I tend to wince. I maintain
(and that is why I'm writing this) that it was fun to
be mad?in fact, a good deal more fun than being
sane. At the moment I am positively bored by my own
normality: before I was sensually liberated and had
a glorious time.

Don't think that I'm not grateful to be thoroughly
normal again: it's just that life is so predictable. I
Pop along to work every day, get through the office
routine and then thankfully hit the pillow at night.
I'm humble. One of the world's workers. A little grey
man.

Contrast this with life when I was off my rocker! I
was God, in a world where miracles were possible.
Everybody I met was somebody famous in disguise.
I was part of an enormous Plan which was unfolding
daily and bringing happiness undreamed of to the
human race.

My condition was diagnosed as being 'too high'. It
is a strange clinical fact that what seems to you super-
lative happiness is, in fact, an illness. In this ecstatic
state I was talking freely to people in a way that I find
difficult now. I wouldn't have the nerve. And I was
doing things which my natural caution would now rule
?ut completely.

For instance, I once jumped on a train in London
not knowing where it was going and landed up in a
very posh police station halfway across England,
where I was treated to a cup of coffee in an elegant
lounge before being transferred to the local loony bin.
All I wanted, I said, was to meet the Queen and shake
her by the hand!

I look back with nostalgia to those days of absolute
liberation. None of the conventions mattered. None of
the scruples. Life was a glittering ball to play with?
not a drab lane to follow day by day. People were
extraordinarily kind; but they realised by talking to
me that I was unhinged and this usually led me back
into hospital.

My problem was to calm down and lose these
delusions. Nobody came up to me and said 'You're
not God. Life is not an ecstatic dream. And inciden-
tally, I'm not Annigoni!' I wonder whether it would
have made a difference if they had? Anyway, I was
left to calm down on my own and pretty well work it
out for myself.

There is nothing more alarming than having to con-
vince doctors that you are well. Of course it depends
on the doctor, but I spent months of patient discussion
before I could convince anyone that I was sane. In
the end I was set free and sent to live in a hostel with
a lovely, kind housemother in Abbey Wood.

I was so deliriously happy to be free that I stayed
up all night one night, bought practical jokes for the
home (including an exploding mustard pot) and had
a high old time. Within five days I was back in hos-
pital. They didn't think I was 'ready for society yet'.
It was heartbreaking, but it had to be.

Eventually I was transferred to another hospital and
from there I went out to earn my living. I don't know
how long I've had in hospitals, but it's a good slice of
my life. And I look back with joy at the fascinating
people I met, the good treatment and the wonderful
staff.

Now I'm out in society again. No delusions. No
fantastic dreams. Just a desire to keep my head above
water in the rat-race of living. But I've learned some-
thing from my past experiences?that extreme joy is
possible, that there is room for romance and pure
poetry in everyday life. And if I can achieve my old
happiness with none of the delusions, then my life
really will have been worthwhile.
