Andrew Crowcroft
==================

8CMI
Going through a crisis of identity
?Who am I? What am I doing herei
Where do I belong? ?has become \
fashionable psychological concep1
recently, especially among America'
college students. Is it really a crisis oi
an unremarkable facet of all our lives'?

Psychiatry has an evil genius for inventing too many
terms - sometimes it seems that there are more words
being bandied around than there are ideas to justify
new terminology. Add to this the point that many
psychiatrists dislike giving diseases a specific name
and, at times, we almost end up with adjectives and
no nouns, and no realistic idea of a mind or brain that
could possibly contain them. Criss-cross the whole
field of such 'knowledge' with fashionable terms,
suitably undefined or at best poorly defined, and we
end up with a minor branch of literature, inferior to
the novel and tenuously attached to science (if not
actually anti-scientific).

In my view, many Freudian psychoanalytic
theories have remained partially formed ideas rather
than becoming part of our store of knowledge because
of a kind of intellectual confusion. Not enough of the
non-rational has been considered in a calm rational
moment. If Freud had examined the non-rational he
would have rejected it.

Let us take the term 'crisis of identity' as an
example. It was introduced into psychiatry by Erik
Erikson and refers to his basic idea that as infants and
children we develop and mature by meeting a series of
crises - weaning, toilet training, separation and so on.
It is by successfully meeting and solving such crises
that we grow. In our childhood we are helped through
these crises of growth by the 'sameness' and continuity of our inner and outer worlds - firstly by a caring
mother, then by both parents, later by the family and
later still by society.

But, Erikson asserts, in adolescence all the 'sameness' and continuity relied on earlier in childhood is
questioned again - because of the rapid body growth,
and the beginnings of sexual maturity. He talks of the
crisis in puberty in terms of the ability or inability to
integrate previous internal experiences, so that an
adolescent is able to match what he means to himself
with the meaning he has for others. He contrasts this
ideal state of integration with other states of mind in
puberty, wh^n the meaning of 'one's self for one's
self' and 'one's self for others' is a 'bad match'.
Secure identity

When the match is good, this is secure identity,
when it is bad, he talks (or seems to talk) of 'identity
diffusion'. He emphasises the importance of peer
groups during puberty, the need for leadership and
the need to be led. He also makes some remarks about
'ideological perspectives'.

The beginnings of sexual maturity itself, he sees as
a psychological stage in which a young person 12
oscillates between intimacy on the one hand and
isolation on the other. He reflects upon some psychoanalytic - and quasi-literary - ideas about 'losing and
finding oneself in another'. In a more American way,
he borrows from Margaret Mead and other social
anthropologists, throwing in the themes of competition and co-operation in adolescence.

I have always been puzzled by Erikson's reputation.
His main ideas have always seemed to be no more than
Freud restated - but much less clearly. His various
developmental stages are awfully hard to paraphrase
without their either vanishing or becoming unintelligible. It is easy to mistake a rather obscure style for
Profundity.

Among philosophers, I find him not unlike Kant,
in the sense that in the end I often do not know what
fie is telling me - or I knew it already, or I disagree.
It is perhaps absurd (or is it?) to compare Erikson
to Kierkegaard. Working at Kiergkegaard (surely,
reading him amounts to work) one is inevitably
changed. I never doubt that any difficulties are not
nierely stylistic, but are found in the depths the
reader is led to - areas where there are indeed hardly
any words that could be used. But with Kierkegaard
the reader is led to the abyss beyond words - but not
beyond meaning.

When I had to lecture on Erikson recently, I
returned to his books alter 20 years when, among
others, I first read his Childhood and Society. It was
just after the Second World War, which was fresh in
my experience, and re-reading the book I was
reminded of my original resentment over the slick
generalisations about different nations - the Germans,
the Russians, the Americans. I challenge anyone to
predict, on the basis of Erikson's chapter 'Reflections
on the American Identity', the obscenity of Vietnam.

It is easy to see how psychoanalysis has such a
reputation for immense (and dangerous) powers
apparently to explain the past; it has so many
descriptive terms, it can make such drama out of
relationships - but we should also expect a science to
have a predictive value. Reading the pages in Erikson
devoted to folksy John Henry, a Negro railroad
construction worker in the days of the opening up of
the American West, one arrives at this:'... he will not
commit himself to any identity as predetermined by
the stigma of birth; and he leaves to become a man
who is nothing but a man before any attempt is made
to provide him with what he has demanded.'

In fact, those who should provide John Henry with
an identity, in the context of Erikson's sentimental
tale, are John Henry's relations. These relations are
absurd, stereotyped 'Uncle Toms', institutionalised
in underprivilege. When Erikson calls his whole
account a 'thoroughly American story', and humorous, he demonstrates why the liberal attitude is
defunct in America. Behind the apparent childishness
and quaintness of the Southern Negro (that American
identity) there was always despair and rage, open
enough now for all to see. Seen with the eyes of the
seventies, it is a long, sentimental Mark Twain
passage.

We could not predict from these pages, the
historical necessity of the rise of the Black Panthers,
of the Civil Rights Movement, of riots, massacres by
State police, the bankruptcy of the American liberal
attitude, the despair of the American Negro turning
towards revolution.

In other words, the endless discussion of 'mindstuff', the ghost-in-the-machine, the generalised
person who 'contains' and categorises periods of
history, cannot in fact exist in the here and now of
actual history. Nothing in Erikson's schemes allows
for the positive acts of men who change history now.
They are only seen as patients lying on couches,
mixing facts with fantasies, passively responding to
events.

In a study of the kibbutzim in Israel I met no one
who could recognise themselves and their 'identity' as
described by Bruno Bettelheim in his book The
Children of the Dream, particularly where Bettelheim
uses Erikson's way of describing adolescence.

When I saw the film Klute in Hampstead, I was
particularly struck when one of the characters in the
film, making a confession, said something like, 'It was
a couple of years ago, I had this crisis of identity....'
The Hampstead audience laughed. It sounded so
slick, false, fashionable. If he had said, 'I was depressed' or 'anxious' or 'had had a breakdown', this
audience would have sympathised and not responded
with derision.

Same kinds of people
--------------------
Across the graves of all the wars, our 'national'
problem is to see we are all the same kinds of people
on either side of frontiers. Depressive anxiety, feelings
of persecution, de-personalization, the loss of a sense
of reality, are common to all races. They are not
'fashionable' experiences. They are yet commonplace.
I would agree that the schizoid have problems with
identity. Touchy, uncertain, seeing the world as split
into the good and the bad, making others feel their
feelings, the schizoid deny that all this is their
problem. Let us not agree with them that it is ours.
We are nearly drowning in our psychiatric terms
without all that too.

