A Kestrel Film
================

sponsored by the Mental
Health Film Council

This film,* sponsored by the Mental Health Film
Council, is based on a brief by James Loring, Director
of the Spastics Society. Centred around two spastics,
Margaret and Willie, the film is a plea for the rights
of all handicapped people?the right to emotional and
sexual fulfilment, the right to relationships, the right
to marry.

Margaret and Willie are lucky; they live in one of
the Spastic Society's mixed-sex hostels where their
love for each other can express itself freely. They have
the privacy where they can talk together, eat together
and sleep together.

Others who appear in the film are not so lucky.
Beryl has been engaged for ten years with little hope
of ever being able to marry. As this film shows?
handicapped people have the same emotional and
sexual needs as everyone else. Those who appear in
this film speak for all the handicapped when they ask
society to understand these needs and give them the
chance of a fulfilled life.

*'Like Other People' is a Kestrel film, directed by
Paul Morrison and produced by Irving Teitelbaum.
It is available on hire from Concord Films Council,
Nacton, Ipswich, Suffolk; hire charge: ?3.50. Print
purchase: ?90.
12
Extracts from a review of
'Like other people':
. . This is documentary at its best, with real
people describing and acting out their actual
lives...

To make Margaret and Willie?who have
virtually no co-ordinated movements and whose
speech is in the borderlands of comprehensibility
?into romantic lovers in the tradition of
Abelard and Heloise is an achievement indeed,
built up from scenes which include the two
wheelchairs moving into the setting sun, the
ataxic washing of each other's hair, the clumsy
caressing of the body and the (presumed) con-
summation ...

This film, together with a report (A Right to
Love? by Ann Shearer) which has just been
Published should help to change people's atti-
tudes to this subject; love, it cannot be said too
?ften, is a thing one cannot have too much of.'
(Richard fox, writing in The Lancet of 20th
Ma^l972)
