A willingness to bt
=====================

When a report of a mental hospital enquiry is published, the public is all too rea0<
another side to the story of the Farleigh Report and decided that only throuQj
of the problems of our large mental hospitals.

(The joint writers of this article first met after the
Farleigh Enquiry (1970). Their close association
during the succeeding period has led to the present
project. The description is written from two points of
view: that of a member of staff at Farleigh, whose
ideas inspired the growing support of outsiders; and
that of a technical college lecturer committed to the
theory that social problems are best understood by
involvement.)

Subnormality nursing, with all its attendant difficul-
ties and frustrations, has, for as far back as I can
remember (and I have been nursing subnormals for
the past 37 years), been the Cinderella of the profes-
sion. That being accepted, it must be appreciated how
conditions in the subnormality field have been allowed
to deteriorate into the sorry mess which we hear of
so often.

It is too easy to lay blame at any door?so many
are involved that countless time could be, and is,
wasted on this type of exercise. Those hospitals for the
subnormal which managed to follow a programme of
upgrading their antique facilities, and of raising the
standard of care for those in their charge, know only
too well the sustained effort that had to be made
against overwhelming odds, which at times appeared
too immense to be overcome.

Farleigh, itself, under the guidance of its Chief
Nursing Officer, followed a series of five year plans
(which has spanned the last 19 years) to upgrade all its
wards and amenities in order to give the patients in its
care a much fuller life than they had ever known
before. Because of limited finance, and the operation
of an irritating procedure of priorities, there is still a
tremendous backlog to be tackled and the twice-
damned system of priorities still has to be battled with
(a tenacious adversary this Priority fellow).
Farleigh staff have always recognised their limita-
tions?not of their own making, but limitations that
have been thrust upon them by many influences. Of
all these influences, not the least is a narrow-minded
A ground plan model of the indoor playroom involved Arthur Owen and David Gordon
condemn and recoil. A college lecturer living in Bristol realised that there had to be
actical help and involvement could the public ever come to understand something
and prejudiced public (the community), who have
ignored so righteously the 'there but for the grace of
God go I' attitude, which has perpetuated instead the
'oui of sight, out of mind' fallacy.

This fallacy has been exposed time and time again,
clearfy shown by the so-called public conscience sway-
ing to and fro like a leaf in the wind: 'lock them up',
if one of those less fortunates should do some wrong;
'lock them all up?we must be protected'; 'let them
all out', if it becomes apparent that a person was put
away without obvious cause.

How fickle is Public Opinion!?but it is to this
fickle public conscience that we, who care for the
subnormal, have to answer. We are not too well
served by the creators of public opinion?the press,
radio, TV and other mass media?who, though lack-
ing in knowledge, can (and do) present situations to
their audiences in ways which inflame the public,
swaying the public conscience out of all proportion to
the facts (and, let us not forget, thereby helping to
sell the communicating media concerned).

After being subject to the most rigorous investiga-
tions, by more than a few authorities, insulted and
degraded time after time, quoted as 'bullies, liars',
etc., one could have expected the members of the staff
of Farleigh to be resentful. On the contrary, what they
have felt is anger, and some considerable pity for a
public which allows itself to be fooled, and which
refuses to find out for itself. By allowing the neglects
of the past to be perpetuated in its name, without
accepting its share of the attendant responsibility,
scapegoats are found who have to suffer for the many.
Who can say that nurses of the subnormal are not
justified in viewing with suspicion the present public
attitude of apparent conscience-stricken activity,
when they have seen it all before? But this time they
are wondering when 'the wind of change' may come
or when the pendulum of public opinion will swing
the other way.

New relationships have opened up since the 'long
haired non-conformists' of Bristol Polytechnic and
Brunei Technical College, and the student fraternity
of Redland College, have become aware of the resi-
dents of Farleigh. It is to these activists in voluntary
community action that we look, to remind the public
of its constant responsibility: in ensuring that each
individual who is 'put away' receives his or her funda-
mental rights?to be treated as a human being at all
times, with that human's rights and privileges> given
without dissent.

As an exercise in community relationship, the
public could well emulate our residents within the'
hospital?always a friendly approach, always a spirit
of sharing, minor squabbles and differences settled
rapidly and no resentment borne?in other words, a
community spirit that is sadly lacking in present day
society.

An 'open arms' policy has been adopted by Farleigh
for as many years as I can remember, but how many
The former junk shed at Farleigh, now being converted into
the indoor playroom
of our conscience-stricken public have ever put them-
selves out to visit us, to see just what it is all about? It
is left to those 'long-haired layabouts' to set an
example, and, seeing their involvement progressing,
putting to shame those who have so strenuously con-
demned and decried them for what they certainly are
not.

Through the sustained and quite voluntary efforts
of the students, Farleigh is developing an outdoor
adventure playground which will cause spirited
activity for years to come; and, together with the very
carefully planned indoor adventure play-room which
is nearing completion, will allow an all-the-year round
physical activity.

This must be the basis for further progress,
and surely will help us to develop the progressive
therapeutic community which has been evolving at
Farleigh for some time.

(ARTHUR OWEN)
The Press used and abused the events at Farleigh. It
made sensational reading. For the hospital staff, there
remained the bitterness of being exposed in this way,
of suffering together with those who stood trial. For
the general public, there has been a surfeit of mental
hospital reports which are still coming in.

There are no easy answers to the problems which
have been aired ad nauseam. There is, however, an
uneasy feeling that public outcry will release just
sufficient funds to stop the sensationalism?to tidy up
the squalor where it exists, to concentrate, above all,
on the physical environment. The Farleighs will dis-
appear from view: they will no longer be newsworthy.

It is for an entirely different reason that I plead for
Farleigh to remain in the public eye. The trauma of
events has been weathered by the staff, and they have
come to terms with their past, learning from it, not
grieving over it. The work has always been difficult,
not easily categorised as general nursing, but, rather,
as pastoral responsibility. Violence was a major factor
in the conditions in the wards, and it remains a worry,
although it should be emphasised that by far the
greatest number of incidents have concerned a patient
doing violence towards himself, with violence towards
property occurring to a lesser extent, and violence
towards others being relatively uncommon.

Drilling work on the indoor climbing frame which will be a
major feature of the playroom
of our conscience-stricken public have ever put them-
selves out to visit us, to see just what it is all about? It
is left to those 'long-haired layabouts' to set an
example, and, seeing their involvement progressing,
putting to shame those who have so strenuously con-
demned and decried them for what they certainly are
not.

Through the sustained and quite voluntary efforts
of the students, Farleigh is developing an outdoor
adventure playground which will cause spirited
activity for years to come; and, together with the very
carefully planned indoor adventure play-room which
is nearing completion, will allow an all-the-year round
physical activity.

This must be the basis for further progress,
and surely will help us to develop the progressive
therapeutic community which has been evolving at
Farleigh for some time.

(ARTHUR OWEN)
The Press used and abused the events at Farleigh. It
made sensational reading. For the hospital staff, there
remained the bitterness of being exposed in this way,
of suffering together with those who stood trial. For
the general public, there has been a surfeit of mental
hospital reports which are still coming in.

There are no easy answers to the problems which
have been aired ad nauseam. There is, however, an
uneasy feeling that public outcry will release just
sufficient funds to stop the sensationalism?to tidy up
the squalor where it exists, to concentrate, above all,
on the physical environment. The Farleighs will dis-
appear from view: they will no longer be newsworthy.

It is for an entirely different reason that I plead for
Farleigh to remain in the public eye. The trauma of
events has been weathered by the staff, and they have
come to terms with their past, learning from it, not
grieving over it. The work has always been difficult,
not easily categorised as general nursing, but, rather,
as pastoral responsibility. Violence was a major factor
in the conditions in the wards, and it remains a worry,
although it should be emphasised that by far the
greatest number of incidents have concerned a patient
doing violence towards himself, with violence towards
property occurring to a lesser extent, and violence
towards others being relatively uncommon.

Students doing construction work on the climbing frame
Incontinence makes work that tries the patience of
staff. Each day is too often an attempt to start again
from the beginning with the patient?there is no
memory of yesterday, so that to dress is a new skill,
to eat is the discovery of means to get food to the
mouth. Cleaning, washing, changing patients, feed-
ing them, administering medicine where needed?
these are part of the daily routine.

Nothing so far described is very different from
looking after other handicapped groups. What
emerges as different on any day is the difficulty of
communicating, of being recognised, of occupying the
long day actively and happily. These are children in
men's bodies, and very small children at that. Few
can speak, and even the one who talks most fluently
converses in endless loops of words, and phrases which
repeat.

At first sight?a hopeless task. The more sensitive
reporters have touched our sympathy; most have re-
cognised the dedication of the staff. But too few have
recognised the signs of hope, the determination to learn
from the past. Some of the credit for helping Farleigh
to change must go to the student body in Bristol.
Starting at the time of the enquiry (which followed
the trial) a dialogue was sustained which led to the
present project?the adventure room.

The basic exploration of ideas sprang from the
simple belief that there must be another side to the
story, and that some outside help could be offered.
Youth, energetic and direct, received a qualified
acceptance. After all, the Press has often presented
the student as little better than a long-haired non-
conformist, too young to be taken seriously?and the
hospital staff had, as yet, no reason to doubt this de-
scription. (It has been interesting to see the mood
change?from initial scepticism, to surprise that the
same faces reappeared regularly, bringing more each
time; to a genuine trust that the involvement was both
sincere and practical.)

Youth persisted and a project was born. In that first
year (1971) an adventure playground was built, in a
part of the vegetable garden. For normally active
children it has become increasingly recognised that
conventional playground equipment, in dreary wire
compounds, satisfies the imagination of the young to
less and less extent. Farleigh has a few swings and a
see-saw, in occasional use. Our group brought know-
ledge of 'junk' playgrounds, and we were now asked
to adapt these ideas to the 'men-boys' at the hospital.

One of the patients on a swing in the outdoor playground
All the materials were found and bought by the
students, and structures erected, including a solidly
built tower. It is of minor significance that the play-
ground had faults?the tower too hard to climb, the
wooden box 'hide aways' too flimsy, too little low-
level activity. What was important was the steady
involvement over many months by a great variety of
students, both men and women.

The originators came from the new disciplines at
the Polytechnic?Business Studies, Advertising and
Marketing, Economics. Others came from Town
Planning, Surveying, Computer Studies. From Brunei
Technical College came Printers, Caterers, Carpen-
ters, even Bakers. All gave time which once would
have been channelled towards chasing a football, or
wielding a hockey stick. The writer's involvement was
one of re-discovering farming skills, learnt in the years
before teaching?adapting the work to the materials
available.

If we had come to Farleigh solely to construct, we
could have been seen as escapists only. Instead, we
worked beside North Ward (the lowest-grade patients)
for whose benefit the playground was built. We were
able to see the patients, with their handicaps; we
talked to them, played with them, or watched them
wandering rather aimlessly in their small compound.
Then we chatted to the staff, went into the wards to
find them, drank tea in their rest room, and they came
out to see us at work.

The lasting impression in that first year was of the
astonishing openness of Farleigh to the visitor. Insti-
tutions are notoriously controlled, yet here was one
where there appeared to be nothing to hide. It took
some time to appreciate this atmosphere, and to be
reassured that the hurried visitations by reporters had
missed this essential. (I have tested this on many
occasions, seeking out staff on duty in remote corners
of the hospital.) Comparing this experience with visits
to similar institutions, where one is carefully steered
away from the less presentable aspects, or asked with
aggressive politeness 'Can I help you?', I can only
marvel at Farleigh's courage in offering the whole
place to the outsider's curiosity. The offer must not
go unnoticed, as it is an offer of participation in the
exciting changes taking place.

Last autumn a new stage was reached in our rela-
tions with Farleigh. Apparently convinced by the
commitment already made, and anxious to progress
with our help, the hospital board suggested a major
scheme?to convert an empty building into an indoor
adventure room. Apart from the faults in the outdoor
structures which I have outlined, there remained the
problems of bad weather, and the long winter months.
Boredom, hyperactivity, insomnia due to lack of
exercise, could be matched by the staff's feeling that
their work was so often just child-minding, lacking in
purpose.

The powerful drive to change this inertia came
largely from two of the hospital's own staff. Mary
Carter, the consultant psychiatrist, came, by sheer
coincidence, after the original uproar. She has a life-
time's experience of children and is applying the same
principles to Farleigh's 'men-boys'. She believes
firmly in the idea that progress is both possible and
recognisable?it is only the degree of progress which
is debatable. One of her pointers to success is the case
of the over-mothered sixteen-year-old, who arrived at
Farleigh in a wheel-chair, and has since learnt to walk.
The other personality is Arthur Owen, a senior
charge nurse, whom we first knew as responsible for
the most handicapped patients in North Ward. To

The adventure playground at Farleigh Hospital
him is due the change from excessive use of suppres-
sant drugs, to a policy of team involvement with the
patients, backed by subtly chosen piped music, which
has a soothing effect. Arthur is a radical thinker, with
the assurance to convince and support the younger
staff, on whom change must ultimately depend.

Both Mary Carter and Arthur Owen encouraged
me to explore the new idea, for which there was the
princely sum of ?1,500 set aside. The building chosen
had been used as a junk store for years?long and low,
roofed with red Bridgwater tiles, alongside a spacious
grassed area. It has the look of a Somerset farip shed,
of distinctive character with its stone walls and pillars.
The roof leaked, but has recently been handsomely
restored.

This is the building now being presented to the out-
side world in its new form. I venture to suggest that
the project is unique?where is there such a room for
normal children, let alone mental patients? Where
else has a student body been recognised as worthy of
such an investment? An area of 60 feet by 20 feet
under a pitched roof 13 feet to the ridge, will incor-
porate every combination of tactile and visual and
physical experience which can be devised. The over-
riding principle is one of adventure and exploration.
Having already accepted the general principles of an
adventure playground, it is essential to retain these
principles inside.

Briefly, there will be areas each with a different
purpose, yet inter-related. A strenuous climbing area
has ladders, platforms, tunnels, varying in difficulty.
A cat-walk leads to a long slide, which lands the
patient in an area of softness or springiness, or leads
him to bump his way in and out of soft canvas bags.
Materials will be hard or soft, cold or warm, metal,
wood, plastic. Colours and lights will change the
atmosphere. And an additional small room at one end
will provide places to hide away, to be individual, to
explore objects that revolve or move.

To achieve this standard of design and to match the
generosity of the Hospital with our own resources, I
have had the good fortune to convince the Polytechnic
Art College that it shtmld provide the expertise. As a
result, three students from the construction depart-
ment, in their last year, have been wholly responsible
for the work now emerging, and have been able to put
forward the project as part of their course work. Mike
Sorenson, Bob Redman, and Peter Daw, have pro-
duced the designs now on show at Farleigh. They have
spent hours talking to the staff of North Ward, to
Arthur Owen, and some time with a busy Mary
Carter. They watched the patients move, noticing the
additional physical handicaps; they have seen the
limitations of the outdoor playground, and have then
returned to College to discuss the whole project with
the technical experts.

Perhaps the most exhausting, but most profitable,
intense preparation was achieved during one after-
noon, when the staff most closely involved were con-
fronted by this group of outside idealists. During the
course of several hours the ideas ranged from the
stark, clinical, authoritarian concept of a gymnasium
on to a stage of criticism of the outdoor playground,
and finally to a measure of agreement to the principles
which both sides wished to see. (Without this exhaust-
ing experience there could not have developed the
degree of mutual trust we have since experienced.)
Whilst waiting for the roof to be repaired, much of
the woodwork for the interior structures has been pre-
pared in the college workshops. At the same time, the
donkey-work has proceeded quietly, with many
groups of students clearing away mounds of rubbish
and rubble, cleaning walls and woodwork, and, finally,
completely clearing the interior. As in so many other
projects in the city, I have been amazed at the willing-
ness of students to involve themselves in utterly filthy
jobs.

We await the final stages when the whole design
takes shape. When completed, in the next few weeks,
there will then be a long and interesting involvement
with the Farleigh 'men-boys'.

No-one expects this to be the final answer. On the
contrary, it is hoped that all of us will learn from this
project, will alter it, and create better ones elsewhere.
What is important is to have made an effort so
memorable that it will encourage the general public
to believe that all is not despair and disaster in this
twilight world of mental hospitals. From the safety of
our normal institutions (University, Polytechnic,
Technical College) we should be stimulated to think
that we have something to offer the less fortunate.
Instead of the uncertain image which Farleigh now
presents, it is hoped that the local community will
come to accept their handicapped neighbours.

In our own medieval heritage (and in modern less
'civilized' societies) the simple soul was the symbol of
innocence, uncorrupted, untouched by materialist
values. This may be the reason why puzzled, anxious
'modern man' has so far hesitated to destroy his
uneconomic, deformed?even ugly?brother. The
experience for so many of us at Farleigh has been to
examine ourselves, to realise that our outward nor-
mality may hide an inward ugliness far greater than
that which we see there. We have learnt compassion,
but equally we have learnt that we can give practical
support, and accept Farleigh back into the community.

(DAVID GORDON)
