A Fragile Its Stuart Whiteley
==============================

Wethinkof Charles Manson and
his 'family/responsible for the
Sharon Tate and Bianca murders,
as a fearful extreme of
abnormality and fantasy which
resulted in meaningless tragedy.

Yet how many 'normal' people
could become overwhelmed by
their fantasies given an emotional
and environmental setting in
which deviant behaviour could
flourish unchecked ? Was
Manson really uniquely evil or
did he just have unusual scope to
express hisderanged philosophy ?

The saga of Charles Manson and 'the family' is a
horror-comic story come to life. The book by Ed
Sanders, a novelist, poet and bookshop-owner, is a
terrifying statement of the events leading up to and
following the Sharon Tate murders in the summer of
1969. So awful are the scenes described, not only
relating to the murders but also in depicting the
sordid, violent and disordered background'to life in
California at that time that one can hardly recom-
mend the book to anyone to be read purely out of
interest or for enjoyment.

The events took place and had to be documented
and this is all that Sanders attempts to do. He makes
no pretence of calling this a definitive study of the
affair but some analysis of the baldly stated facts
would have leavened the horror. Initially the book goes
at a frenetic pace leaping from weird scene to weirder
happening in the wake of Manson and his tribe of
teenage female followers. The author keeps up a slick
patter of odd asides and hippy jargon, the very
weirdest events being followed by the onomatopoeic
warning note: lOo-ee-oo\
Manson, in penal institutions from the age of 13 to
21, had only an eighteen-month period of freedom
before being sentenced to ten years' detention on a
smallish fraud charge.

He passed much of the time in prison reading and
learning about alternative ways of life through witch-
craft, hypnosis, Satanism, Scientology and the like and
seems to have survived the incarceration because of a
certain, not unlikable, Puckish quality in his person-
ality.

For instance, we are told how he would broadcast
hypnotic suggestions over the prison radio system to
his fellow cons dutifully sleeping with their earphones
on the bed-head. He suggested they applaud his per-
formance in the talent competition at the prison
concert, and he not only won but got a standing
ovation!

Leaving prison in 1967 at the chronological age of
32 Manson arrived in San Francisco at the peak of
the hippy flower-power era and the mood of un-
reality and fantasy was a perfect fit for his immature
personality.

Described as a 'glib, grubby little man with a
guitar, scrounging for young girls using mysticism
and guru babble?a time-honoured tactic on the
Haight'?Charlie was in his element.
He found it easy to relate to young teenage girls,
mostly runaways from wealthy middle-class homes
and experiencing LSD, marijuana and free love for
the first time.

Soon he had a permanent following of young
people, mostly girls, and some of these followers were
to stay with him throughout the events to come. The
girls were often not very attractive physically and
indeed when they were despatched once to earn a
'quick buck' as topless waitresses they failed in the
task because apart from a certain skinnyness?con-
stitutional or due to malnutrition?some were hardly
pubescent and as yet had no top to bargain with!
When the San Francisco scene soured, however,
with the influx of pimps and pushers and other
criminal agencies Manson and his group of twenty-
five or so pulled out and indeed warned off other
would-be seekers for the truth from what San Fran-
cisco had now become. All was still love.

The next significant step was when, after a period
of roaming the coastal strip in a school bus, the family
moved in on the Spahn Ranch, a disused movie lot.
It was as if the make-believe setting of the Western
ranch strengthened the group in their fantasies of a
different world. Manson talked of an uprising of the
blacks from which all who survived would flee?
Helter-Skelter?to the desert. He picked up an Indian
myth of a hidden city beneath the crust of the earth to
be entered through a secret hole and expeditions went
out to search for the hole, map the escape routes and
build dumps of food, gasoline and motor spares ready
for the day.

Contacts with the real world became increasingly
savage. Houses were broken into just for the thrill of
'creepy-crawling' through an inhabited house without
detection. Sorties went out to raid supermarket
garbage dumps for food or to steal cars for the desert
battalion. Dope-dealing was a source of income and in
an argument over a fraudulent deal Manson shot a
Negro?although he did not kill him as he thought he
had done and was next to meet the man face to face
in gaol!

It was after another argument over a dope fraud
that some of the family tortured and finally killed
Gary Hinman, a lapsed 'family' member.

Manson was increasingly suspicious, even paranoid
now, about people who came to look at the ranch. He
feared a Black Power invasion and took to walking
about with a sword threatening and slashing out at
anyone who displeased him.

A week later Manson sent a group of one man and
three girls out to a house in fashionable Los Angeles
where a former associate of the 'family' had lived but
since Manson called at the house some days previously
it is inferred that he knew that this person was no
longer there. It was to be a 'creepy-crawl' with murder
as an added feature and the result was the senseless
and cruel slaughter of three men and two women?
one was the pregnant Sharon Tate.

Sanders gives three possible motives for the killing
?a reprisal for a fraudulent dope deal, something to
do with pornographic movies or a paid assassination
for business or personal reasons. Another possibility
advanced was that it was intended to deflect attention
from the previous murder committed. Although one
of those killed could have had associations with one of
these motives, none of the reasons given hold much
strength, especially as the first victim was a youth just
leaving the residence after visiting the caretaker.

The very next night Manson led his group out him-
self?this time all high on acid (LSD) and after a
torturous back-and-forth drive through the Los
Angeles suburbs pausing at certain houses, considering
them for a 'creepy-crawl' and then giving them a miss
they arrived at the Bianca residence. They had no
prior knowledge of this wealthy middle-aged couple
it seems and just tied them up and took part in a stab-
bing holocaust?leaving a knife and fork in one of
the bodies?apparently as some distorted allusion to
the Beatles' song, 'Piggies'. They knew what they
were doing and took steps to wipe finger-prints and
cover their tracks on leaving.

Next a ranch-hand at the Spahn movie lot was less
ritualistically and more systematically disposed of
because he had been talking to police about goings-on
at the ranch.

The final act was coming up. The family took to
wandering and camping farther into the Death Valley
desert region because the ranch was becoming too
harassed by police on the look-out for the stolen
vehicles, drug-trafficking and runaways.
Many of the family were now in real fear of
Manson and there were one or two escapes or attempts
to escape from his clutches. Badly fed and housed
they lived in primitive squalor but curiously they
kept bringing themselves to the notice of the authori-
ties. They set a forestry vehicle on fire and damaged
and plundered buildings and Government property,
so that increasing attention was directed on to them.
A forestry warden commented?'you could drop the
Empire State Building in that desert and it would not
be found'?but somehow Charles Manson did not
want to be lost.

He similarly had a curious interaction with a former
'family' member, Crocket, living and prospecting in
the desert. Crocket was leaking increasing information
to the police about Manson and Manson repeatedly
threatened to kill Crocket, raided his shack, or
attempted to disarm him yet he, who had without
qualms removed lesser obstacles, didn't kill Crocket,
who continued to pose a danger to him.

The nuisance that the family was making of them-
selves finally brought a police invasion and about half
of the family were arrested on stolen vehicle charges.
Manson was away on that day but the next day he
returned to the scene and, of course, was picked up
in a follow-up sortie. Why return? He could have
faded out as others did.

It was only when the family were in their respective
gaols on relatively minor charges that any connection
with the murders was suspected. One of the girls
simply chattered to cell-mates who used the informa-
tion to secure their own future. The police then began
to pressure others connected with the family and
similarities between the two slaughter scenes and
connections between people associated with the family
and with the man already under arrest for the Hinman
murder were pointed out to the various police squads
pursuing different investigations. The link man who
tied up these loose ends was Sgt. Whiteley.

Speculation as to the reasons behind this dreadful
rampage is left to the bewildered reader. One thing
we know is that former college boy, Tex Watson, the
lead knife man in the two massacres, showed a severe
drop in I.Q. level on psychological testing suggesting
that he was brain damaged due to the drugs he
habitually took, particularly a certain leaf containing
belladona which he chewed.

There is no suggestion that anyone killed in a drug-
induced automatism or psychosis and some of the
family girls not directly involved in the killings were
interviewed by Sanders when respectably back at
high school and one whilst grooming customers at a
dog beauty parlour! The past was behind them. No
madness, satanic power or other mysterious force is
revealed.

Manson, for all his paranoid attitudes, is never
presented as psychotic. Rather we get the picture of
someone who from adolescence was deprived of a
normal social learning process and drifts into deviance
as a way of life, seeking alternatives to the life-styles
and careers others follow and on which he had 'missed
out'.

Imaginative, creative in his way (he very nearly
had a folk guitar disc issued and repeatedly tried to
gain acceptance as a pop composer and performer),
forceful in personality, he is only able to relate com-
fortably to youngsters who are themselves working
through pubertal and adolescent crises.

His repeated clashes with organised society in
escalating acts of violence could be explained as
demands for acknowledgement of his existence and in
this the man Crocket served as a curious go-between.
Similarly his insatiable violent and perverted demands
for sexual recognition from the girls.

The more Manson drifts from the real world both
in his imagination and in his actual physical environ-
ment the more established and self-contained the
fantasy life becomes. Killing the 'pigs' who have what
he has not and who, if they continue to exist in
actuality, are indisputable evidence that his way of
life is a fantasy, can be understood then as a natural
sequence of events.

Elements of the same reasoning can commonly be
seen in many 'psychopaths', infamous or inadequate,
and the divide between reality and fantasy becomes a
fragile line.

Indeed the frightening thing about the whole
Manson story is how close many others in all walks of
life were to him in his meanderings, without them-
selves taking his ultimate fateful step and how near
many 'normal' people may be to such 'abnormal'
behaviour, given the emotional and environmental
circumstances conducive to the development of alter-
native or 'deviant' behaviour and the reinforcement of
followers who seem to readily accept that what the
leader proclaims has validity.

The Family by Ed Sanders, published by
Rupert Hart-Davis at ?2.50
Four young women members of the Manson 'family', their heads shaved, keep a vigil outside the Hall of Justice where
Manson'strial is taking place.
