Warning Note
=============

:Author: Peter Laurie

A new book chronicling the life and death of an American teen-age girl who became
enmeshed in the drug sub-culture does not ring true to this reviewer. He suspects that the
book is taking an example and using it as 'a sort of sociological "pornoganda" ' and finds
that it takes a hard, puritan view of life.
This is a rather dreadful book. It's diarist heroine
confides :

Confidentially, diary, I still care. I guess I'll always
love him, but maybe just before we leave and I'm
thin, and my skin is flawless and petal smooth and
clear, and I have clothes like a fashion model he'll
ask me for another date. Shall I turn him down or
stand him up, or will I?I'm afraid I will?
weaken and go out with him?

Such mawkish passages recur with numbing
frequency through this record of eighteen months in
the life of an American, white, middle class, midwest
girl who is fifteen when the book begins. Her father
is the unnamed Dean of an unnamed American
University; they live in a lovely Spanish style house
with walls of thick dark wood and two steps down
into a sunken living room. One can imagine. Her
mother, an immaculate lady, but a nag, adjures her
to respond to events 'with an attitude that will determine my altitude.'

On good days she bakes orange rolls for her
respectable swains; on bad ones she wears moccasins,
beads and tassled leather skirts. When she says 'man'
her father roars with rage. She must have been an
irritating child.

Most diaries have a characteristic disconnectedness : for us the whole thing is in the past, we expect
connections between earlier and later passages that
the writer, for whom the next entry is always in the
future, cannot make.

This diary is not like that. It has a story line of a
consistency one meets only in novels. Alice's parents
move to a new university and a new home. She goes
to a new school, is ignored, puts on weight, suffers
crises of self confidence. Then she makes friends,
gets a job in a little boutique where they sell hippy
gear. The other assistant gives her pills for depression. She meets others who use them. She goes to a
coca-cola party where half the bottles have been
laced with LSD: the kids who don't get those
'baby-sit' the others as they trip.

A minor pusher
--------------
She becomes a minor pusher in school to finance
her experiments, and has a twinge of conscience
about selling acid to nine year olds. The boy who
wholesales her drugs seduces her and they have sex
only when they're both high?and then not very
often. She doesn't like this; still less when she finds
he's a homosexual, tells the police about him and runs
away to California with her friend where they start
a little shop of their own. The business prospers, but
they are drawn into a corrupt set of minor film actors
who use them as sexual toys. After a last spree, she
realises that the 'dirty sons of bitches had taken turns
raping us and treating us sadistically and brutally.'
The two girls go home to an ecstatic Christmas.

She repents, and writes:

Now I can sing with the others, 'Oh come all ye
faithful, joyful and triumphant' for I am triumphant this time, really I am!
But within a month she's smoking substance again,
runs away once more. No shop this time, but dirt,
hunger and dope in the company of such as these:
A fat girl with stringy blonde hair is getting to
her knees on a green on green upon purple robe.

She's got a guy with her and he has a ring in his
nose and multi-coloured designs on his shaven
head. They keep saying 'love' to each other. It's
beautiful to watch.

In the end she rings her parents again:

I can't understand how they can possibly love me,
but they do! They do! They do! They were glad
to hear from me and know I was alright.
It seems a good strategy to run away.
She starts a new diary. Gran and Gramps fly in,
lined with suffering?caused by her thoughtless escapades. Her mind goes wonky, but she resists the kids
in school who want her to start in on drugs again.
They call her Nancy Nice and Mary Pure. 'It's
terrible not to have a friend.'

Gramps dies, but she meets Joel a serious, religious
university student, working his way through college.
Her father starts manoeuvres to get him a scholarship. But the kids in school resent her dropping out
of the drug set and shop them to the police. They
plant joints in her handbag, threaten to do the same
to her father's car. Gran dies.

Finally she's kindly baby-sitting and eats some
chocolate-covered pea-nuts lying on a table. They're
laced with acid: she plunges into a wild trip, but
all the time thinking about the baby's safety through
her wild hallucinations. She comes to in a locked
asylum room, tattered, hairless, lacking fingernails.
Her best friend in the ward turns out to be a thirteen year old baby prostitute. She gets out and starts
leading the kind of life her parents approve. She has
'Joel and my new super straight friends, and they'll
help.'

She gives up her diary and three weeks later is dead,
killed we are to assume, by a drug overdose, though
this isn't spelt out and there is notextural evidence
to connect her early demise with her adventures.

I've sketched the plot and style of this book in
some detail because it arouses my suspicions. The
sequence of events is too ordered, the style of writing
seems to me to be just how a teenager involved in
these scenes wouldn't describe them, but how a
fairly imaginative Reader's Digest-type right wing
writer might. Look again, for example at the 'Fat
girl with stringy long blonde hair' passage. It may
have been beautiful for Alice to watch but it certainly
isn't described in a way that conveys that feeling. The
style of description is designed, surely, to make
Alice's mother throw up.

When one reads it again, the sequence of events,
the skeleton of the story, stands out in a way that
doesn't strike me as being the least lifelike. Consider:
she gets a job in hippy shop, which leads to pills, to
pushing, to sex with queers. She runs away \rom
home, falls into bad adult company. On her return
she is tricked by her apparently respectable schoolmates into renewed drug use. She runs away again
because of her parents' nagging, but this time sinks
low, doesn't eat, doesn't wash, agrees to bizarre sex
to get her fix, doesn't even put dates on her
diary entries (which are no less full or lucid than at
other times). But, even after her second return and
real determination to give up drug use, she is powerless, assaulted from without and within. Her mind
cracks under the abuse she's given it, her evil little
friends are determined to get her into police trouble
(and with some reason). She is committed to a state
mental hospital. She dies.

Hard view of life
-----------------
Spelt out like this, it is a textbook story of what
happens to youngsters who break out, even in the
slightest detail (those moccasins), from their parents'
culture. It is a hard, puritan view of life: repent as
ye may, evil deeds will catch up.

This is not to say, of course, that exactly this
sequence of events may not have happened to a girl
called Alice who lived and died wherever this one is
supposed to have. But one sees the diary as construction?propaganda rather than even fiction?and
not as the true record of another human being's
experiences in this not very pleasant world, it
looses all interest. We know after the first few pages
how it will run, and it is entirely unnecessary to read
James Hemming's 'Psychologist's Comment' at the
end. He tells us that any young person may become
a drug user if allowed out of the home. Alice's parents
were at fault because they made her feel inferior and
unwanted, in contrast to her younger but more lovable siblings. They had a fatally moralising attitude,
no good today for dealing with the young. On the
the other hand we should be neither too prim nor
too slack. And so on.

Doubtless, all good stuff, but the text of the sermon
is found to be spurious. Go Ask Alice is an odd
mixture of relentless Jehovadom and modern liberal
flim-flam, a sort of sociological 'pornoganda' rather
than a serious and useful work.

Go ask Alice, Anonymous, published by Eyre Methuen,
?1.50
30
