Nothing to Lose But your Career Structures
============================================

TIM GAUNTLETT
When looking at graduate unemployment, too many people blame it on the
economic 'barometer' and a lack of suitable jobs. A large number of students,
however, are finding their degree courses unrelated to the traditional career
structure. Increasingly they regard work as not just a way of earning money
but a chance to create a particular life-style.
'Uncareers is about the whole idea that you may be
able to do something full-time (or at least most of the
time), that you want to do, that you enjoy, and see
some purpose in!' This is how the 'Directory of Alter-
native Work' introduces itself. Uncareers, which
produces and distributes the Directory, provides an
information service on work to be found outside the
conventional job/career system. It is a response to the
fact, that by assuming a certain set of values, Univer-
sity career centres have not realised, or provided ser-
vices for, the work potential of all students.
Work is about activities, about people interacting
together, creating a particular life-style. It does not
require the participant to be 'realistic' and recognise
his material contributions, or to structure a career
based on status and reward. Full-time work can mean
community action projects, community-based social
work, co-operative workshops, drama improvisation
and street theatre, radical education, the underground
press, communal living?alternative job roles which
are not covered by the 'normal' information and em-
ployment agencies.
At Birmingham University Ann Link has provided
an informal meeting place, where people can exchange
ideas and information about 'fion-careers'.
Ann Link was a science student at Birmingham
University. She obtained her degree, and by rights,
should have found employment in industry. She
didn't, but instead took up part-time work in a labora-
tory to pay for her food and rent but, more important,
she built up the connections made at university and
established 'Uncareers'. Originally it was to provide
an information service for students like herself, who
had degrees, found a traditional career unacceptable,
but were uncertain and uninformed about their next
moves. Here was a demand created by a student
population who wanted to know about 'alternatives'
which necessitated an information service. Ann worked
from her own office/bedsitter and compiled the
'Directory of Alternative Work',* a document about
imaginative and direct projects.
There are two aspects which are worth discussing
at this stage?the students' search for an 'alternative'
and, second, graduate unemployment. Two branches
which I believe to be part of the same tree. University
Appointments Boards would explain the unemploy-
ment in terms of graduates developing unrealistic ex-
pectations, of large firms cutting down on their
graduate intake, and of the necessity to revise con-
cepts of graduate employment. This recognises that
graduates must pay lip service to the 'industrial em-
ployment barometer' and that they are tied to a market
situation.
The problem of graduate unemployment is not in
fact as serious as certain other factors: ?
Employment of new graduates 1970 and 1971 {as at
31st December)
1970 1971
No. % No. %
Still seeking employment 2,429 5.4 3,703 7.9
Not known 3,790 8.4 4,533 9.7
Entering U.K.
employment 17,229 38.1 16,300 34.9
Others (including
further study) 21,788 48.1 22,175 47.5
TOTAL in survey 45,236 100 46,711 100
Source: University Grants Committee.
As in all sectors of the economy, the jobs have not
been available and many large companies have
deliberately cut down on their graduate intake. (This
applies equally to arts and science graduates.) And
18
although graduates should be the most informed of all
groups in society, their isolation means that they rely
heavily on information filtering through University
Appointment Boards.
However, this ignores the possibility that graduate
aspirations develop in fields of activity outside in-
dustry and commerce, based upon graduates' own
ideas and involvements. It is here that the expectations
are not so much unrealistic as unrelated to the work of
UABs.
This denies the existence (not necessarily problem-
atic) of unrelated expectations. These expectations
can be due to a variety of reasons:
* the nature of student studies, with curriculum
development and community related studies
* the physical isolation of universities. The newer
universities tend to find themselves outside the
perimeter of their respective cities
* the lack of informed guidance for graduates
(none of the University Appointments Boards
meet the Heyworth Committee's standards of
staffing?one officer to 150-200 job-seeking
graduates)
* the continuing universities' expansion with in-
sufficient thought being given to graduate
appointments.
These are only possible reasons, but what must be
positively recognised is that we can no longer assume
that graduates must adapt themselves to the man-
power needs of a technological society. For with the
external 'devaluation' of a first degree, there has been
the parallel development of internal pressure for its
revaluation.
Graduates will have to respond to the recruitment
drives of the police, banking, insurance, local govern-
ment and the executive grades of the civil service (jobs
conventionally filled by those entering directly from
school).
But equally it cannot be ignored that a significant
number of graduates do have well-formed ideas and
ideals about work about which they are not prepared
to compromise?to the extent of accepting periods of
unemployment, or living on Social Security in order
to undertake an unpaid appointment.
They want something which is practically related
to their studies?but which also enables them to
Students at an adventure playground in Cardiff
relate to a community environment. They find them-
selves politically and socially motivated to work and
live in deprived communities?to express an aware-
ness through participation. It is in response to this
wave of feeling that a project such as 'Uncareers' has
become very necessary. Students are increasingly in-
volving themselves in studies with a practical bias, yet
they have lacked the necessary grass-roots knowledge
to channel this effectively.
'Uncareers' is, on the one hand, informing people
about work and on the other hand providing a service
for projects based at the community level. These
projects need publicity?all kinds of people with
varying practical skills are always welcome and
needed. Projects where the emphasis lies within the
relationship between the work and the worker and
upon the interaction of people to facilitate results.
To effect this channelling 'Uncareers' has compiled
'The Directory of Alternative Work', whose contents
read as follows:
(1) Exploring what you can do
(2) Living and helping people in a residential situation
(3) Making things: workshops and factories
(4) Groups working with people in local areas
(5) Community action projects
(6) Education
(7) Information/help services
(8) Communications?alternative newspapers, etc.
I have listed them in full, for they show the different
areas of involvement, and the varying interpretations
given to the phrase 'community-based projects'. The
groups vary as to their geographical location, and in
their functions, and although the headings give an
indication of the broad spectrum of alternatives, the
examples below in no way cover all the listed material.
The directory lists community projects started by
'non-college students', members of the underground or
alternative society such as the underground press,
Release, Street Aid, Bit?projects which have evolved
out of the particular needs of young people in London.
Release provides 'a comprehensive service for people
with problems associated with drugs, emergency help
with arrests etc., legal and medical advice. There are
II workers, who all get ?15 a week (there is also a
psychiatric worker, who is paid a salary by the Mental
Health Trust; and an unpaid fund-raiser). There are
fluctuating numbers of part-time volunteers too.
Occasionally new workers are needed.'
It also lists projects existing through a group living
and working within a defined area, which are politi-
cally inspired, and participate in sharing and solving
the same frustrations and injustices e.g. The Notting
Hill People's Association, Stoke Newington People's
Association, Brixton's Own Boss. Brixton's Own Boss
is 'a community newspaper, published by a group
living together in Brixton, also publicising the area's
prospective redevelopment and helping people
organise themselves. Meetings have been held and the
Railton People's Planning Association formed?it
now has 500 members.'
Charity organisations are mentioned who have gone
into communities under their own names, live within
that area, but try to retain an individual identity while
providing a particular service not necessarily related
to the needs of that area e.g. Simon Community,
Cyrenians, St. Mungo Community. All need volun-
teers, and are given a lot of space in the Directory.
The Directory also gives details of students who
are responding to their own needs e.g. Student
Community Housing 'run by and for member tenants.
It gets short life housing free from Camden Council,
patches it up, and then lets it cheap to students and
the homeless'. It uses, at the moment, 31 houses,
housing about 200 people charging ?2 single room,
?3.50 double room.
Communicating grass-roots
activity
This is not a definitive account of the 'Directory of
Alternative Work'?the examples quoted are all in
the London area, and I have mentioned nothing about
workshops, theatre groups, or education. The projects
themselves are not staffed or orientated towards
graduate or student interests, but they represent an
area of possible involvement for a, significant number
of students. Uncareers has sensed this and tried to
respond in an informative manner. The directory is
not based on any philosophy nor does it see itself as
politically or religiously inspired although it would
align itself to the listed projects to the extent of mov-
ing towards some kind of social change.
They have tried, by visiting all the projects them-
selves, to communicate what is happening at the 'grass
roots' level, and to advertise a variety of needs. They
aroused my curiosity as a graduate wanting to develop
a practical skill out of what he learnt at university, so
I wrote to Uncareers. It is informative, but you have
to follow one rule?'Please send a stamped envelope'-
* Directory of Alternative Work', 20p (plus stamped
envelope) from 298b Pershore Road, Birmingham 5. (This
also entitles you to supplements to the Directory for one
year.)
