Team Work for the Mentally Handicapped
======================================

:Author: George Kerr

The last decade has seen a great deal of public and
governmental interest in the mentally handicapped,
culminating in Command Paper 4683 "Better Services
for the Mentally Handicapped" in June 1971.
Implicit in the title is the notion that present services
are not as good as they should be. Most people
working with the handicapped would agree that this
is so, although a sizable minority remain surprisingly
complacement.

The main objectives of any service for the mentally
handicapped should be to help the handicapped
person to achieve maximum independence, and to
help their families to cope with the heavy burdens
which they carry. There has already been a move
away from purely custodial care in hospitals towards
a more therapeutic approach. Over the next twenty
years this will become easier, as increased community
facilities of all kinds become available, thus relieving
the present hospital overcrowding. Alongside the
development of residential provisions, increased
family help will be provided, both from Social
Services and Education Departments on the local
authority side, and from nurses, therapists, and
doctors on the hospital side.

The need for co-operation
---------------------------

In order to help the mentally handicapped and their
families to the utmost, the keynote for success will be
close collaboration and co-operation between the
three services - hospitals, Social Services, and
Education - which provide residential care for the
handicapped, and help for families at present. The
time for complaining about each others' short-
comings is over; and now we need to think positively
about making co-operation work. There are various
ways in which this can be done.

Informal links
---------------
At an informal level, community social workers should
be encouraged to come into hospitals, to attend
out-patient clinics and contribute to case con-
ferences. Nurses equally should go into the com-
munity more, visiting the homes of mentally handi-
capped people, and following up those who have
been discharged from their care in hospital. In these
ways, the workers at grass-root level will gain a better
understanding of each others' difficulties, and this
will lead to a closer working-together. This co-
operation will be made easier when hospitals become
fully aligned with their catchment areas. Regular
meetings between social workers, nurses and doctors
to discuss, for example, the progress of hospital
residents who attend training centres in the com-
munity, are also useful in promoting collaboration
in care.

Formal collaboration
---------------------

At a more formal level, the establishment of joint
working parties and of community teams would pro-
vide machinery for collaboration.

A joint working party between representatives of
the Regional Hospital Board, the Social Services
Department, and the Education Department must
have the right people on it - those people who have
sufficient authority to take the necessary decisions.
A good chairman is also essential. The aims of the
working party should be to formulate a generally
acceptable overall policy, to take decisions about the
kind of provisions which should be made by each
service, and to set very firm target dates for the
completion of these facilities. The investment of time
and money in such working parties is fully justified,
because gradually an overall pattern for the provision
of services will emerge, and each of the three bodies
concerned will be able to see clearly where their
responsibilities lie. As soon as this point is reached,
the information should be passed 'down the line' for
discussion at all levels within and between the three
services. Everybody will then be able to see where
they fit into the overall scheme of things. Insecurity
will be avoided, and active planning can start.

Community teams
----------------

The function of a community team would be to pro-
vide maximum help to the families who keep their
mentally handicapped member at home. In the midst
of talk about overcrowding in hospitals, it is often
forgotten that there are many more severely handi-
capped people (particularly children) in the com-
munity than in residential care. The social, physical,
emotional and financial burdens of their families are
well known. Perhaps their most basic need is to know
that somebody cares about their problem - that they
are not going to be left to deal with it alone. Yet even
today there are socially isolated families with a
mentally handicapped member who get very little
help from any agency.

A community team might consist of a health visitor,
a hospital nurse, a physiotherapist, a speech therapist,
an occupational therapist, a social worker, a teacher,
a psychologist, an administrator, and a doctor
specialising in the care of the mentally handicapped.
Their base would be in a hospital initially but, as the
work-load of each team-member increased, they could
move to a base in the community which they are
serving. A register of all mentally handicapped
children and adults would have to be compiled: and
every family involved should be made aware of the
service which is available. A single telephone call
should be able to bring help when it is needed.

Of course, every member of the team would not
descend on the home like a detachment of the
Household Cavalry. The specific needs of the family
would be identified by the health visitor, social
worker or doctor, who could then ask the appropriate
team-member to visit. Such a team would have access
to residential facilities for short-term care, and regular
team-meetings would be held to discuss on-going
problems and general policy.

Such a team would not only help in promoting
co-operation between workers from the different
services. It would mean that the present hospital-type
services could be delivered to the home, and the
parents could be shown how to actively participate in
helping their child to achieve as much independence
as possible. Parents want to learn about positive
things they can do, from simple exercises to behaviour-
modification. Only a team representing several
disciplines can do this effectively. And once a multi-
disciplinary team is really in action, new ideas for
care develop all the time.

Resources needed
-----------------

Fruitful collaboration between the hospital and local
authority services, to help the mentally handicapped
and their families, is not only essential but achievable.
Many people providing the service will need to learn
new skills and greater flexibility: but, with proper
training and leadership, these will develop. However,
more resources will be needed to make co-operation
a practical reality.

At present, case conferences and assessment
meetings tend to be rather academic exercises,
because of the lack of alternative provisions to
hospital care in most areas. This is not to say that
joint conferences should not continue: it is only when
each side realises the pressures on the other that
further provision will be made. But a range of pro-
visions in the community is essential, so that the
mentally handicapped person can be placed - for
either short or long term care - in the facility most
suited to his needs and abilities.

Hostels, or homes, in the community will have to
be increased, but the time taken to draw up plans,
find sites, and recruit staff makes-these a medium-
term proposition. In the short term, boarding-out
and fostering schemes could be developed on a wider
scale. The use of council houses, with a warden
living in an adjacent house, should also be considered.
These provisions could be promoted quite quickly,
they are cheaper than either hostels or hospitals, and
above all they allow the previously institutionalised
person to 'grow'. For those who have never been
hospitalised before, the transition from home to a
boarding house would be less traumatic than the
move from home to an institution.

The next resource required, however, is a big
increase in the social work staff employed by local
authorities. The social workers already have so much
to do that they can only spend about 10% of their
time with the mentally handicapped and their
families. To operate the boarding-out schemes
efficiently takes a lot of social work time: the right
people have to be found, they have to be encouraged
to do the work, and then given a lot of support if they
are to continue. With the geriatric and mental illness
work-loads increasing all the time - apart from all
their other commitments - the Social Services
Departments cannot devote enough time to mental
handicap. Here perhaps is another opportunity for
co-operation between hospitals and local authorities.

Could not nurses, as well as following up their dis-
charged residents, also develop and support some
community projects ? The sooner people start working
together, the sooner will new and better ideas emerge.
Hospitals need new resources too, as well as better
management of those they already have. Many
buildings are totally unsuited to the development of a
therapeutic milieu, which should be the goal in caring
for the mentally handicapped. Some hospital pro-
vision will always be necessary, and deliberate policy
decisions should be taken now about which buildings
can be improved by upgrading, and which need to be
bulldozed. The siting of new hospital buildings - in
units of 100-200 beds - should be determined now,
linking in with the local authority's proposed develop-
ments - a job for the joint working party.

Hospitals need more staff too - more nurses or care
staff, more people from all disciplines. 'Multi-
disciplinary teams' can only work if we have many
different disciplines involved. But, at a more basic
level, one nurse often has to look after 20 severely
mentally handicapped people at any one time on a
hospital ward or villa. Individual interaction is bound
to be limited: the ones who receive the nurse's
attention are those who misbehave. 'Wrong'
behaviours are thus rewarded, and become
self-perpetuating.

Social training facilities need to be increased in
hospitals as a matter of urgency, to prepare more
mentally handicapped people for life outside the
institution. The potential of so many hospital
residents is not realised until they are placed in a
good training situation. Sending people from hospital
to training centres in the community is valuable,
both as an exercise in co-operation and for the handi-
capped themselves. But most training centres are
already bursting at the seams with those who live at
home, and they tend to concentrate on work rather
than social training: so more provisions need to be
made for social training in hospital, as an interim
measure.

Some remaining problem areas
Even with more adequate resources and better co-
operation between hospital and local authority
services, certain problems will still need to be
resolved. The roles of the doctor, the nurse, and the
social worker will need to be considered in depth;
although many new insights develop when the
disciplines work together in teams. The doctor in
mental handicap must be flexible enough to realise
that the team can function well with him as a member,
but not necessarily always the leader. He must
welcome co-operation and advice from colleagues in
other branches of medicine: he must encourage ideas
and suggestions from colleagues in other disciplines.

The Briggs Report recognises that the nurse's role
in mental handicap is changing, and that more
emphasis must be placed on the social aspects of
their work. This approach is right, and if the time
comes when fewer care staff are needed in hospital,
they will be able to transfer their skills readily into
the community. Nurses should start looking outwards
from the hospital, and taking every chance to see the
problems in the community.

As far as mental handicap is concerned, the role of
the social worker should be that of practical helper
and adviser. Many families who appear to need case-
work would not require it if they had practical help
at the right time.

When professional workers develop the skills which
enable them to pull together as a team, the boundaries
between roles become blurred anyway: and the
members of each individual team gradually come to
define their own roles in relation to the mentally
handicapped person and his family. Once teams begin
to function effectively, the clarification of roles
should no longer be a problem area. Teachers,
physiotherapists, speech therapists, and occupational
therapists all have an important part to play in the
proper care of the mentally handicapped, and their
contribution is clearly defined.

One problem area which deserves consideration
relates to the staff in community homes. Many
wardens feel isolated and deprived of adequate
support. Houseparents become discontented after a
time because of the lack of a definite career-structure.
Continuity of care-staff is important for the well-
being of the mentally handicapped people in these
homes; and the number of homes will increase.
Courses for wardens before they take up their posts,
an effective support-system, in-service training and
a career-structure for houseparents will all have to be
developed.

The service we give to the mentally handicapped
and their families should be very much better in
20 years' time than it is now. Improvement will
depend on co-operation between the different
services involved. Co-operation, in turn, will depend
partly on the provision of more resources. We cannot
get many nurses out into the community now, be-
cause the people in hospital would be even more
deprived than they are already. We cannot get many
social workers into the hospitals, because the com-
munity service would suffer more than it is suffering
already. And we cannot move people out of hospital
until there is somewhere for them to go.

However, co-operation depends too on flexibility,
a willingness to work together, and goodwill. These
features seem to be more in evidence at present - to
end on a note of cautious optimism.