psychiatry Wanted: A Job Definition
====================================

Anthony Clare
It is arguable whether now is the best time to pose
certain questions about the status and prestige of
psychiatry in Britain. On the one hand, the Depart-
ment of Health and Social Security's policy of moving
the centre of psychiatric treatment away from the
large mental hospitals and into smaller units attached
to district general hospitals, the recent formation of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists and an increasingly
lively public interest in the plight of the mentally ill,
all point to s vitality and vigour in contemporary
psychiatry which bodes well for its future. On the
other hand, there are the depressingly familiar
accounts of low standards of patient care within the
service, scandals on a Whittingham scale and a
tendency to portray psychiatrists as insensitive,
authoritarian, Establishment figures who have little
time nor inclination to listen to their patients and have
a predilection for treating them with drugs and ECT.
Yet, even in the face of such contrasts, the demand
for psychiatric treatment appears insatiable. Of every
60,000 people living in this country, some 9,000 or
15% will this year seek the help of their general
practitioner for problems that are in the main
psychiatric. It is fortunate for the psychiatric services
that only about 450 of these are referred onwards to a
psychiatrist - fortunate in that if this referral figure
was even slightly increased the services might well
come to a standstill.
As it is, people attending as psychiatric out-
patients for the first time have been steadily increas-
ing - from 172,000 in 1961 to 227,000 in 1970 - and
total out-patient attendances have also increased
during the same period from 1,272,000 to 1,588,000.
Day hospital attendances have shown the most
dramatic increase of all with 1,062,556 patients in
1970 compared with 370,675 in 1964. It is also worth
noting that the steady decline in the number of
psychiatric patients in long-stay mental hospitals over
the past decade has shown some signs of levelling off
recently.
Number in need
These figures only refer to people already receiving
assessment or treatment but it is known from recent
studies that the actual number in need of some form
of psychiatric assistance is very much larger. Psych-
iatrists working in general hospitals - and in future it
appears likely that most psychiatrists working within
the National Health Service will be doing so - are
finding that their colleagues in surgery, medicine,
obstetrics, etc., are referring more and more patients
to them for help; these are patients who first come to
the attention of the health services because of
physical complaints but, in fact, are later judged to be
suffering from psychiatric illnesses. In much the same
way it can be anticipated that referrals for psychiatric
assessment from social workers will increase as the
local authority social services departments expand and
develop their joint case conferences.
The prison population includes large numbers of
people believed to be suffering from mental ill-health.
West's study of habitual offenders showed that nearly
one-third were suffering from severe psychiatric
disorders while over 80% had severely deviant
personalities. Studies of people sent to prison for the
first time have revealed equally high figures for
psychiatric illnesses, personality disorder, alcoholism
and drug dependence.
When one adds the number of alcoholics estimated
to be living in Britain (somewhere between 300,000
and $00,000), the mentally ill among the growing
number of destitute vagrants wandering the towns
and cities and the people who consult their general
10
The expectations of the community for provision of an
adequate psychiatric service are nowhere near being met!
practitioners with psychiatric symptoms but for whom
the correct diagnosis is missed, one can see that the
needs and the expectations of the community for the
provision of an adequate psychiatric service are
nowhere near being met.
It must be said at once that there has been a steady
increase in the number of psychiatrists and social
workers employed in the NHS over the past two
decades. Yet the service only keeps going because of
an increasing reliance on doctors trained overseas
plugging the gaps, staffing the less desirable posts and
carrying the major burden of working in the large,
out-of-the-way mental hospitals. Over 60% of the
junior psychiatric staff in this country are from
abroad and the past five years have seen a catastrophic
decline in the numbers of home-trained medical
graduates coming into psychiatry. The country
remains desperately short of child psychiatrists, of
psychiatrists specialising in mental handicap, of
forensic psychiatrists, psychotherapists and specialists
in adolescent psychiatry.
Harsh realities
These are the realities which shape the daily
experiences of those who work within, and receive
treatment from, the psychiatric services. The
intellectually fashionable discussions about the
existence or otherwise of mental illness pales into
insignificance in the face of such harsh realities. The
criticism that British psychiatry is excessively organic
in its orientation and relies too much on treatments
such as electro-shock therapy is placed in its context
when one realises that, for example, a region such as
Manchester, with almost 9 million people living
within its own and neighbouring areas, does not have
a single full-time psychotherapist employed within
its regional psychiatric service.
It is often said that when a patient does eventually
get to see a psychiatrist there is rarely time for more
than a cursory discussion of his problem followed by
the mandatory prescription for pills; this state of
affairs can be better understood (though not accepted)
when it is realised that a tripartite committee com-
posed of representatives from the British Medical
Association, the College of Psychiatrists and the
Society of Medical Officers of Health, declared in the
summer of last year that for minimum standards of
psychiatric care and treatment to be achieved it would
be necessary to double the number of psychiatrists
working in the NHS and double them now. There is
not the slightest chance of such a target being
reached. At a recent conference organised by the
11
Association of Psychiatrists in Training, Sir George
Godber, the Chief Medical Officer at the DHSS,
announced that the number of psychiatric consultants
would be increased by $0% but he gave no time limit,
and most informed observers thought that such an
increase would only take place over a decade at the
earliest.
Layman's expectations
So who is going to cope with this veritable tide of
human distress ? And what are the skills and abilities
particular to a psychiatrist? Laing's view of a psychia-
trist as 'a specialist ... in events in inner space and
time, in experiences called thoughts, images, reveries,
memories, dreams, visions, hallucinations' probably
reflects the contemporary layman's view of a psychia-
trist as that specialist, in an age of specialisation, who
comes closest to understanding madness, to making
sense of insanity and reason of irrationality. It is the
vision of a psychiatrist as a skilled expert whose
knowledge and experience (including a knowledge
and experience of himself) enable him, in the course
of a therapeutic relationship between himself and his
patient, to bring about a mutual understanding of the
patient's disturbance and its relief. Many psychiatrists
would significantly qualify such a view and would lay
emphasis on the importance of a psychiatrist having
an expert knowledge of the biological and physical
processes which both aggravate and alleviate mental
disturbance. But I believe that the majority would
overtly or implicitly agree with the layman's expecta-
tions about the importance of some form of thera-
peutic relationship involving psychiatrist and patient.
It is the psychiatrist whom patients and relatives
struggle so hard to see. Yet despite (or even as a
result of) the current revolution in contemporary
psychiatry, they will struggle even harder in the
future. For the psychiatrist envisaged by the DHSS
is less a therapist than a supervisor, less an interpreter
than an administrator. His role will be as a leader of a
small army of psychologists, social workers, occupa-
tional therapists, nurses, general practitioners - a
therapeutic team which will be responsible collective-
ly for the care and treatment of patients. For the
planners believe and many community psychiatrists
would agree that, to quote the words of the present
Dean at the Institute of Psychiatry, 'direct care by
a doctor is unnecessary as well as impossible'.
It is judged to be impossible because of the demand
for and the shortage of psychiatrists; unnecessary
because some psychiatrists argue that much of what a
psychiatrist does can be done just as well by other
staff under psychiatric supervision. I believe this to be
the real revolution taking place within psychiatry at
the present time - a revolution not so much affecting
where the patient is to be treated (though this is the
aspect that has received most of the attention to date)
but by whom he is to be treated.
The significance of this revolution is scarcely noted,
let alone understood, by the layman or indeed by
many professionals working in the field of mental
health. Social workers labouring within the new
Seebohm creations, probation officers struggling
with steadily expanding responsibilities, hostel
workers grappling with problems for which they have
received little preparation and less actual training,
still look with anticipation and hope (except for those
who have become thoroughly disillusioned) to
psychiatrists not merely for assistance in the manage-
ment of some of their clients but often for a therapist-
client relationship which they believe some clients
still require and which they also believe can often be
best given by a specialist whom they have always
regarded as specially trained to do just that. Yet the
average psychiatrist, who was too busy in the old
system with the burdens of his large number of mental
hospital in-patients, is going to be too busy in the new
system with the burdens of team administration and
supervision.
Open to dispute
It would seem indisputable that, at the present
time, a therapeutic relationship between a psychiatrist
and a patient is only possible for a minority of
patients suffering from psychiatric disorders. But the
claim that such a relationship is unnecessary anyway
is certainly open to dispute. It is not surprising that
many psychiatrists, particularly those who are
psychotherapeutically inclined and who regard the
doctor-patient relationship as the corner-stone of
psychiatric treatment, look at current plans with some
suspicion and scepticism.
How attractive such a view of psychiatric practice
(as is afforded by the community psychiatrists) will
prove to medical graduates is difficult to assess. Their
reluctance to enter psychiatry has already been noted
and whether the shift in the psychiatrist's role from
therapist to supervisor will prove more attractive is
difficult to say. Psychiatrists are still being trained as
if they will function in a one-to-one relationship with
their patients, patients still expect to be so treated and
other professionals in the field still seek it and, in my
experience, bemoan the difficulty in obtaining it -
12
yet such a style of treatment is now deemed not
merely impossible but also unnecessary!
It seems to me that certain current dissatisfactions
will persist. I do not mean either the ideological
arguments of Szasz about the allegedly mythical
quality of mental illness or the assertions of Laing and
Cooper that schizophrenia is normal response to an
abnormal society (though these are bound to be with
us for many a day yet to thrill and stimulate in-
numerable television audiences throughout the land)
but the somewhat more mundane, if equally relevant,
dissatisfactions with the service itself.
Time and opportunity
At the present time, the main difficulty is finding a
psychiatrist who does not come from overseas or, if
he does, is not actually interested in psychiatry and is
not marking time waiting for a medical post, doing
his medical membership or learning English; a
psychiatrist who can be seen regularly and who is not
replaced every second visit by a colleague who
readily admits to knowing next to nothing about the
patient; a psychiatrist who has the time and the
opportunity to actually employ his knowledge and
skill - that has taken nearly fifteen years of training to
acquire - in the service of his patient.
Few contest that patients are better treated in their
homes or in small units attached to district general
hospitals rather than miles from anywhere in large,
overcrowded, poorly-staffed mental hospitals. Few
argue against increasing the availability and the
participation of other professional personnel -social
workers, occupational therapists, psychiatric nurses,
general practitioners - in the treatment of the vast
majority of psychiatric patients. But there does appear
to be a pressing and persistent demand for psychia-
trists who do have time, who do take personal
responsibility for their patients and who do possess
special as well as general skills of understanding, care
and management.
I do not believe that the public, the consumer, has
accepted that the doctor-patient relationship in
psychiatry is unnecessary. Many a professional within
the psychiatric service also remains to be convinced.
Perhaps now the discussion may centre not so much
on how many psychiatrists are needed and where but
on what it is that a psychiatrist should actually be
doing, what special expertise he actually possesses
and how he sees his job. The signs are - thankfully ?
that such a discussion is beginning at last.
