Priorities the Way Ahead
==========================

:Author: Derek Russell Davis

Some of the fervour with which Adolf Meyer
championed the mental-hygiene movement in the
United States in the 1920s came from his feeling that
he had failed to anticipate, and take steps to prevent,
his widowed mother's second illness. She had become
deeply depressed when he left Switzerland to make a
career in America. She broke down again two days
after her younger son's marriage to a foreign girl.
Many such illnesses could be prevented, Meyer
argued, if families knew more about the conditions in
which mental illness is liable to occur.

What ought people who are aware of the issues be
doing now to help prevent mental illness? Young
people especially want answers to this question. Tell
us, they say, what we can do to counter the tragedies
arising from drugs, drink, delinquency, depression,
dropping out. Mind has been giving answers piece-
meal. In this the last edition a more general statement
is called for, a broad look at preventive measures.

Educating in the humanities
----------------------------

We must try to ensure that the main purpose of
education (in schools and colleges and through the
mass media) is to help people to discover what it
means to be 'incorrigibly human' and recognise their
common humanity - ie, identify - with others. The
danger is, as it always has been, that the emphasis is
placed on the acquisition of the knowledge and skills
which equip successful students for an elitist position
? in society. The humanities rightly taught - history,
literature, drama and the arts traditionally - bring
people together in an understanding of one another.
Technology as well as the natural and social sciences
can be taught as humanities if the stress is laid on the
part they play in meeting human needs and aspirations.

Teaching on mental hygiene
---------------------------

Much has been learnt since Meyer's day about the
f conditions affecting the development of behaviour in
childhood and adolescence - especially social behavi-
our and the formation of identity. We also know more
about the dynamics of families, the 'support systems'
of families, the crises (or 'psycho-social transitions')
which individuals and families go through, and about
what goes wrong, and when and in what circum-
stances. Teaching on these subjects goes down very
well in schools, and should be part of the ordinary
curriculum. Yet professional mental-health workers
often seem reluctant to share their knowledge and
experience with young people or with the man in the
street. When they are prepared to do so, they tend to
confuse by speaking in the terms of an esoteric Royal-
College psychiatry.

,? I s
I o
H umanit ies
I r l
L-A'')
Mif
The humanities bring people together'
Supporting support systems
Members of families look after each other. Nuclear
families are supported by extended families -
Grannies in particular serve as arbiters and as
marriage- and child-guidance counsellors. Individuals
are supported by friends and neighbours, as well as
relatives, and have relationships in other contexts as
well: school, work-place, trade or profession, church,
leisure-time society, club or pub. Also in supporting
roles are the various caring organisations: church,
Samaritans, voluntary groups, etc.

The mental illness of an individual usually reflects
a disorder affecting the whole family which is
relieved, more or less satisfactorily, when dynamic
changes have taken place within the family. Resorting
to professional advice or other help outside the family
happens when the family becomes unable to cope.
Admission to hospital, which may become necessary
when support systems are beginning to break down,
may lead to further weakening of them. Professional
treatment lies, at least in part, in the support of
existing support systems, to which lay counsellors also
add strength.

Spreading counselling skills
-------------------------------

The techniques of counselling are easily learnt and
can be exercised by any sensible, sensitive person
capable of 'non-possessive warmth, genuineness and
accurate empathic understanding'. They need not be
restricted to graduates with special training. The
objectives of counselling are to restore a person's
confidence in himself and others, to help him define
for himself the problems facing him and to decide
how to deal with them. Counsellors are needed in
every sphere: schools, colleges, factories, offices,
clubs, etc. Teachers, clergy, personnel officers,
Samaritans, social workers in voluntary agencies,
wardens of hostels, youth leaders and other providers
of care can make an important contribution to
support systems. They are more effective as preventers
of illness when they have ready access to advice from
professionals. A greater proportion of the time of
professionals in the future should be devoted to
consultation with counsellors and other care-givers.
Preserving communities

Housing policies, transport policies, policies affecting
the mobility of workers and all other social changes
must be measured in terms of their effects on families
and communities. There is plenty of evidence to
suggest that the disruption of communities by
rehousing or urban planning may have serious effects
on the functioning of extended families and support
systems, with consequent increases in mental illness.
We must do more research into these effects in order
to be able to do more to avoid or counteract them.
'Grannies in support'

Intervening at times of crisis
-------------------------------

Mental illness is liable to arise out of a crisis for an
individual or a family. An example of such a crisis is
the actual or impending loss (through death or in
some other way) of a key person. Meyer's mother
feared that she would be losing her son. Meyer
realised too late that her letters had become less
frequent and had hidden her feelings. In cases like
this, and in crises of other kinds, help can be given
relatively easily if the need is recognised.
Much more difficult are the crises of adolescence
associated with leaving school, starting a job or
embarking on a career, emancipating from parents,
creating a new pattern of relationships and the first
affair - the 'crisis of intimacy'. Young people are
highly vulnerable during these years. This is the age
at which they are liable to become alienated from
parents and other adults, to champion anarchy or
revolution and to start to misuse alcohol and drugs.
Intervention is far from easy.

Helping adolescents
-------------------

We should look more closely at what schools are doing
to prepare young people for the crises of the middle
teens. Perhaps this deserves a higher priority, in
which case more would have to be left for the further
education system to do in training for jobs to meet the
changing demands of industry and commerce. Career
guidance could be more realistic. More could be done
to help young people at special risk because of their
identity problems. However, it may be that we should
develop new methods outside the schools to provide
help and prevent illness during the adolescent years.
This is an area for more experiments.

Bringing the alienated back into the community
The people most at risk are those who, having broken
their ties with relatives and old friends, do not form
new, stable relationships with others. They are liable
to become alienated altogether or to adopt a life-style
which keeps them out of close relationships. Some go
to sea. Some become vagrants at home or abroad.

Some make superficial relationships through member-
ship of a commune, a drug sub-culture or a squatters
group. Some find solace in bars and clubs on the
fringes of society. Some take to crime. We should not
be too concerned if young people spend a year or two
in the wilderness ? getting them back is the problem.
Many of the more severely alienated of the last
generation arrived, by various routes, into mental
hospitals where they tended to be labelled as schizo-
phrenic. This way of providing care is no longer
possible - even if it were satisfactory, which it is not -
for it tends to perpetuate alienation. We have yet to
find new ways of bringing the alienated back into the
community. This is likely to be the most important
challenge to be faced by mental-health workers during
the next decade. The new ways will not be 'medical' in
the narrow sense in which this word has been used in
the past, but the job to be done is one of healing, ie,
restoring the capacity to function as a whole person.
Something of what this involves will be understood by .
a public which is educated in the humanities.
'More realistic career guidance'
'uopuoi ??u?#iaa OC.j
SUSirtSIO 3111 U008
rrrgr
'A drug sub-culture'
