On Finding a Job
=================

Lewis Mantus
The world can be a very hostile place for a person with a history of mental illness who is
trying to re-establish himself with a job and a place in the community. A man who has
made a successful new start draws on his own experience of the problems involved and
suggests ways of improving the situation.
In 1958 when I was 17j years old and had just re-
turned from attending an advertising conference in
Harrogate as a junior delegate, I became very de-
pressed and morose and eventually ended up in an
Epsom mental hospital where I was to stay for 11
months. At first when I came out I tried to study by
correspondence course, which was disastrously
unsuccessful in the circumstances.
Lack of guidance
Until recently I have never known what career to
follow (certainly a vagueness partially due to a still-
prevalent lack of vocational guidance in schools);
this was probably part-cause of my first illness and,
certainly, of my second series of illnesses.
I had been married a year when my firm was
closed down by its parent company. After that I
made a poor choice for my next job and a chaotic
period continued for over a year?including two
sackings. Eventually, my depression and frustration
became manic depression, which led to a rush of
fantastic, but (for me at the time) logical, ideas for
making money.
This phase of my life started in August 1967, and
has continued ever since, covering six stays in three
hospitals, totalling years as an in-patient out of the
last five years. Since my last discharge from hospital
in March 1971, I have managed, by learning to
recognise my symptoms, and with help from truly
marvellous people at Horton Hospital, to treat myself
at home, with minimum time off work (two weeks out
of the past year which I have spent working for a very
helpful company).
Having outlined my 'credentials' as a consumer of
both the mental health and employment services, I
can now go on to express some opinions.
In a well-run hospital there is usually a high-calibre
psychiatric social worker part of whose job involves
helping the patient's family to understand his illness,
finding accommodation after hospital discharge,
liaising with employers to keep a patient's job open,
and providing a link with the Disablement Rehabili-
tation Officer (DRO) at the Employment Exchange.
But constructive help in vocational guidance is not
part of a social worker's job despite the fact that the
prospect of having to find work without help or
direction is terrifyingly awesome for most ex-patients.
Since leaving hospital I have never been contacted
by a local authority social worker. Could not vocation-
al guidance be included in the training of social
workers who are going to be attached to psychiatric
hospitals and could not more effort be made to com-
municate and involve employers on a much wider
scale?
Re-training courses
At present sending a report to the DRO is the most
the social worker does in the case of an ex-patient
deemed to be capable of working in the community
again straightaway. A DRO will most probably offer a
re-training course. I took one of these when I was 19
and found it helpful mainly because it provided time
'?
Getting any kind of job?whether manual or white-collar clerical ?can pose great, and sometimes unexpected, problems for
a person coming out of a psychiatric hospital.
10
for recovery and readjustment. But, at the end of the
course, I was left to my own devices to find work.
These courses are not designed for mental rehabili-
tation, i.e. for someone who has spent time 'out of
society', and who needs the most elementary instruc-
tion to be suitable for employment.
Again more government money is urgently needed
for proper training programmes for DROs and staff
and for the setting up of such rehabilitation centres.
On a wider scale, Employment Exchanges would get
better vacancies on their books if they made a charge
to employers, well undercutting the private agencies,
then people needing work would not give them up as
'useless' when looking for a 'good' job.
My recent experience of private agencies can be
summed up as 'When they are good they are very
good, but when they are bad they are unprintable'.
Their slogan should be 'Placing grass-hopping
secretaries?a speciality'. In the main, agency staff
are not trained to find the right person for the right
job, but to be salesmen. They have no skill to deal
with the 'difficult' applicant, like an ex-patient, who
is forced to rely on private agencies after frustratingly
impotent government 'help'.
Remotely suitable
A usual agency fault is sending the nearest person
to a job, even if they seem just remotely suitable. The
Agencies Association, with official enforcement,
should require agencies to register with them and
follow a conduct and training code, encouraging staff
to take the Association's exam. The training course
should include the study of work-connected social
problems: mental, physical, racial, etc.
Help is also needed to develop the possibilities of
temporary work, which can provide a less demanding
way of working in the community, while still ful-
filling the essential need and satisfaction of earning
money. Usually physical work, wherever possible, is
the best, e.g. gardening, labouring, restaurant work.
Being able to type has provided me with a useful
earning capacity for short periods while looking for a
permanent position.
Going for an interview can be a nightmare. When
confronted with an application form, fill in everything
except the 'previous job' details. It is then up to the
individual to attempt, based on experience and
personal qualities, to show his capabilities for the job.
The subject of your mental illness must be explained
with candour and, if possible, with confidence. A
question to be expected is, 'Will it re-occur'? It is
important not to give assurances that it will not re-
occur, but to convey that, with the possibility of
permanent employment, the chances of a re-occur-
rence would be greatly reduced.
Ask the employer to contact your doctor before
coming to any decision. Most important, do not look
for sympathy or you will find the interview ceases very
quickly. If the interview is more informal and you are
able to gain the employer's confidence during the
course of it, then let the fact of illness come to light
gradually, stressing that you are under supervision,
and make it obvious to the interviewer that you
could be a valuable member of the staff. The cardinal
rule in either interview situation is do not lie, the
employer has almost certainly come across mental
illness within his day-to-day life, and should have
some understanding of it.
Lobby government
Another potential help in finding work is the
NAMH. In my experience the Association has not yet
equipped itself to help to find work for ex-patients.
Once on coming out of hospital, I turned to them for
help to be told that, 'We used to have a service but
now we refer people to the DRO'. I will be interested
to see if the Association will continue active involve-
ment in this field after this year's MIND Week.
They should lobby government much more urgently
and militantly to set up aid in this field, and not
relent until it is forthcoming.
Until government help is forthcoming it seems to
me that the Association must make itself a household
name, well-known to employers and the general
public alike. It should try to support Arthur Carr in
the running of his voluntary agency since he is the
only person at present trying to fill the desperate need
of the 'hard to place'; but basically, the Association
should spearhead the campaign for proper govern-
ment-financed facilities.
Employers need immediate education about the
re-employment of ex-psychiatric patients. Personnel
selection needs drastic re-thinking, there is too much
reliance placed on qualifications and not enough
consideration given to experience, capabilities, and so
on for all people with a 'slightly less than acceptable'
work record to be given the chance of a constructive
future.
Humanising application procedures would be a
good beginning; no person should be rejected on the
evidence of a piece of paper. Employers still work on
the assumption that someone who has been mentally
ill cannot possibly be able to do an efficient job. An
employer must realise that if someone who has been
mentally ill is suitable for a position by virtue of ex-
11
perience, it takes no longer for him to acquire the
skills of a new job than it does for any 'normal'
person and, if it works out, the employer has a
reponsible employee, well on the road to complete
health.
If a relapse does occur, it is essential for employers
to realise that it is of paramount importance that a job
should be kept open, giving the ill staff member the
strongest incentive to fight his illness. Usually there is
a nurse and/or doctor on the staff of a reasonably sized
company, who should be able to keep in contact with
an employee with any kind of health problem. In
other companies people who are responsible for first-
aid, should at least be versed in recognising signs of
mental illness, so that referral or treatment can get
under way as early as possible.
The government has yet to realise that setting up
proper rehabilitation facilities and providing help to
find jobs for ex-patients will cost them nothing in the
long term. The millions of pounds it will cost to set up
such services save hundreds of millions in the long run.
The Department of Employment still has no
effective way of catering for the mentally ill?'perhaps
they don't exist' ? There has never been a comprehen-
sive study of the effect of mental illness on the
economy, past, present and future. Money to improve
re-employment prospects is needed now while such a
study (which will take years) is carried out! Cost-
efficiency arguments alone would justify setting up a
'Mental Health Rehabilitation Council' now.
But a better state of general mental health cannot be
achieved, even if government provides the best
rehabilitation services in the world, without the full
education of the general public. As long as ignorance
and apathy exists the cause of mental health cannot
advance with any meaning?mental illness is not
something which will be eradicated by some 'Salk
Vaccine'.
The Health Education Council seems reluctant to
undertake a programme of mental health education.
The MIND Campaign is better qualified to do the
job, but nobody, public or private, can contemplate
such a programme on the massive scale which is
necessary without substantial government funds.
Does the government not feel that it is responsible
for the education of the public? Education is the
single, most important factor in the improvement of
mental health. Whatever extra funds are to be allo-
cated to mental illness in the re-organisation of the
NHS, there really has to be an immediate provision
for rehabilitation services and public education.
From my own experience, as an ex-patient, the
Establishment, which includes most voluntary organi-
sations, is a much more daunting prospect to face
than is the mental hospital. The return to living a full
life in the community needs to be made a lot less
difficult than at present. Better variety of work
prospects, better educational facilities?more em-
phasis on vocation guidance in particular? would
keep a lot of people out of hospital.
Mobilise ex-patients
It would be marvellous if a lobby of ex-patients,
nurses, and social workers, could be mobilised to
voice the opinions of the people who 'really know'
how much better re-employment facilities need to be.
Luckily, I am a self-motivated person, and I am
sure that there are many more like me who would
speak for themselves, given the incentive; this same
group of people could also help with the job of
fighting for the basic human right of having a job to
do. But there are many more thousands who are
unable (or unwilling for fear of unknown conse-
quences) to speak for themselves, although this is
exactly what is happening to them: these are people
whose lives need not be wasted, and it is they who
need the help of us all; it is they who stand in urgent
need of an energetic champion.
