From Where I Sit
=================

EDITORIAL COMMENT
Mentally what? 

tripping through the minefield
-------------------------------

If it was not so serious the confusion over the use of
semi-psychiatric terms would be almost funny. Time
and again over the past few months, in the Press,
on the radio, and on television, there have been people
tying themselves in all kinds of knots with vaguely
understood words like 'disturbed', 'maladjusted',
'deprived', 'disordered' and 'defective'.

There are almost as many shades of mental disorder
as there are degrees of what we choose to call 'nor-
mality'?but, having used the expression 'mental
disorder', the trouble has already started. 'Mental
disorder' is a shorthand way of gathering both mental
illness and mental handicap under the same umbrella
and, once you start lumping them together, enormous
care is needed when making any kind of generalisation.
'The mentally disordered can never get better'?
no, the mentally handicapped (who are mentally dis-
ordered) cannot get better but the mentally ill (who
are mentally disordered) can and usually do get better.

'Disturbed children are mentally subnormal'?no,
well, they can be but that's another story; by and
large disturbed children are mentally ill. But can you
really call a disturbed child mentally ill? Don't you
have to be grown up before you can have the sombre
label 'mentally ill' attached to you?
How did 'subnormal' creep into that last para-
graph? Subnormal and handicapped are virtually
synonymous but, for the best of reasons, Richard
Crossman when Secretary of State for Social Services
decreed that 'subnormal' was an insidious word imply-
ing 'sub-standard' and 'second best' and that it should
no longer be used. 'Handicap' was a much more
humanitarian and sympathy-evoking word and should
be adopted henceforth. The trouble is that it takes
longer than two years to 'kill off' a word in common
usage, a word sprinkled all over the place in official
publications, textbooks and records?so, people who
have used it all their working lives go on using it. 'You
can't teach an old dog, etc, etc.

Fitting the use of the word 'handicap' to its new
limited role has taken it out of the socio-medical
vocabulary in another context and an important con-
cept has been lost in the process. That concept is that
it is perfectly reasonable to talk of a mental illness and
its consequences 'handicapping' the person who has
been ill?a professional man who develops a schizo-
phrenic illness is almost certain to be handicapped by
it during the rest of his life since he will probably not
be capable of returning to his profession, he will no
longer be up to it. Apart from earning capacity being
lost, the illness may leave someone unable to make
good social relationships. Is that a handicap? Yes, of
course it is.

But tell someone who isn't used to walking deli-
cately through the terminology minefield that a woman
with severe agoraphobia is handicapped as a result and
you run the risk of getting the reply, 'You mean she's
become subnormal?' At that point you may as well
stop all calls for an hour, cancel appointments and
settle in for a hard explanatory climb.

The really basic bugbear is the word 'mental'
which carries with it a whole host of preconceptions,
old wives' tales and fearful ignorance. Once most
people hear the word 'mental' or see it on a printed
page the little red light goes on in their heads, a short-
circuit takes place and, virtually regardless of what
words follow, what they dimly half-understand about
'being mental' takes over.
'Mental' means men in white coats who come and
take you away, it means straws in the hair, it means
institutions where the doors clang shut and they throw
away the key. It really means 'of the mind' or 'done by
the mind'?that's all, it doesn't even mean 'mad'
(whatever that may mean).

So the MIND Campaign has got its work cut out to
implant a widespread reasonable, compassionate, in-
formed response to the words 'mental anything', per-
haps when people know enough to care they will care
enough to use the words properly.

In the meantime, any public education campaign
can be set back years by one or two sloppy uses of
terminology in a newspaper read by 2 million people
or a television programme watched by an audience of
30,000. A slip of the tongue or pen can be enormously
damaging to a family with an adolescent mongol son
who have just established good, supportive contact
with their new neighbours only to have the morning
paper tell them and their neighbours that the man who
enticed a little girl into the wood was mentally handi-
capped rather than mentally ill.

Reporters have a duty to get it right and to do that
they have to learn what is right. Alright, there are not
that many specialist reporters, a general reporter may
cover an animal story, a fire and a case of industrial
pollution in the space of a couple of days and he or
she can't hope to know all about animals, fires and
pollution either. But a mistake in description in those
three stories is unlikely to do any long-term harm, a
similar (apparently small) mistake in a story about
mental illness or mental handicap might and does
cause long-term harm. At best it perpetuates a state of
confusion and bewilderment in the public mind.
A growing number of reporters do know the pitfalls
and are very conscientious about getting it right,
checking back, taking the trouble to be sure?and this
in the most rushed and chaotic job imaginable?but
even the best and most careful story can be sabotaged
on the sub-editor's table.

One recent glaring example of this was in a headline
placed above a good clear report of a conference which
was solely on the subject of mental handicap. The
reporter was exact throughout, he had used the word
'handicap' perhaps ten times in the story yet the head-
line proclaimed 'Plea for more money for the mentally
ill'.

A sub-editor's working life is spent under enormous
pressure, there is never enough time and perhaps his
own red light and short-circuit were activated on this
occasion. But there is still the lingering thought that
'handicap' would not fit in the headline and 'ill'?a
nice short word?would fit and therefore would 'do'.
Obviously there was no intention to confuse?a sub-
editor spends his life making things clearer for the
reader?but there could well have been a genuine lack
of understanding about the difference between 'handi-
cap' and 'illness' and a belief that they were more or
less synonymous.

It could be argued that the medical and social work
professions are responsible for adding to the confusion
by the constant creation of new terminology?des-
criptions, definitions and diagnostic labels fly about in
all directions. But, for the moment, it's all we've got
so we've got to come to terms with it and use it
properly.

Clearly lobby groups and public education pro-
grammes like the MIND Campaign need to involve
newspapers and the broadcasting services in their
work of changing public attitudes. But because of their
enormous influence (It's in the paper, so it must be
true', 'They said it on television so it must be right')
perhaps reporters, sub-editors and broadcasters owe it
to the MIND Campaign to become familiar with the
terminology.

It could be their incalculably important personal
contribution to the MIND Campaign?and it
wouldn't hit them in their pockets.
