Community Care
===============

COMMUNITY CARE COMMUNITY CARE COMMUNITY CARE COMMUNITY CARE CO
MMUNITY CARE COMMUNITY CARE COMMUNITY CARE COMMUNITY CARE COMIV
Focusing on
individual needs
Hugh Freeman
When this magazine started life (as 'Mental Health')
in 1947, the treatment of psychiatric disorder was a
matter almost exclusively for large mental hospitals.
Certainly, there were a number of out-patient clinics
in general hospitals but, apart from a few which
provided some psychotherapeutic treatment for
neurotic patients, these too were merely satellites of
mental hospitals - seeing people before or after
admission.
Added to all the familiar drawbacks of the mental
hospital - its usually remote situation, its forbidding
towers and corridors, the anonymity of its huge
wards - there were, in the late 1940s, the effects of
years of wartime neglect and a severe staff shortage.
Nevertheless, the hospital did at last have something
of real value to offer the depressed or schizophrenic
Patient; this was electrical treatment, which was a
tremendous advance on merely sedating people and
Protecting them from harm until a natural improve-
ment eventually occurred. Such custodial care was
all that had been possible before ECT came into
general use, apart from the operation of prefrontal
leucotomy, which was still in an early and rather
crude form.
In spite of all the cogent reasons, therefore, for not
going into mental hospitals, people were admitted to
them in ever-increasing numbers. Certainly, more
people were also discharged, since more went in at a
curable stage of illness and treatment was better, but
the balance was always on the side of larger numbers
being inside hospital. Since there was practically no
new building, overcrowding grew year by year and
added even further to the hospitals problems.
But, if many patients were going in mainly to be
treated with ECT and were not so disturbed as to
need constant nursing supervision or security, why
not treat them in a different setting, which did not
have all the drawbacks of the mental hospital? This
simple yet revolutionary thought (like the invention
of the wheel or the safety-pin) occurred to a number
of people about this time. It was argued most cogently
by Dr. Will Sargant, who has recently retired from
the directorship of the psychiatric unit at St. Thomas's
Hospital, London. Improvising within a small amount
of space, he began to treat very large numbers of
patients suffering from schizophrenia, depression or
anxiety states. Some cases eventually had to go to a
mental hospital, but the great majority didn't; they
were treated as out-patients or with a short stay in a
general teaching hospital and the contact with their
homes and families was preserved all the time.
Of course, psychiatric beds were not completely
unknown before in general hospitals. But they were
usually in a small corner of a ward, grudingly con-
ceded by a physician or surgeon and looked on by the
rest of the hospital with the greatest suspicion. Any
patient admitted to one of these beds had to be relied
on to cause no trouble; otherwise, his departure to a
mental hospital was likely to be swift.
To treat people effectively in a general hospital,
there had to be a unit of reasonable size with its own
nursing staff and space for activities like occupational
therapy or group meetings. Units of this kind did
begin to appear now, not in London, but mainly in
the cotton towns of Lancashire. Again, these were
improvised from old accommodation, but sitting right
in the middle of the communities they served, they
soon showed that it was possible for them to treat the
great bulk of serious psychiatric disorder arising in
their populations, in the same way that people with
other kinds of illness were treated at a local hospital.
When the revolutionary advances in drug treatment
took place, in the mid 1950s, producing the tranquill-
isers and anti-depressives, the whole process opened
up even further. Many patients could now be treated
by general practitioners without reference to a
psychiatrist, many more could be treated by psychia-
trists without having to be admitted to hospital.
From the other direction, there were many patients
in mental hospitals who could now be discharged,
providing they continued to have regular treatment.
The peak of resident numbers in mental hospitals
was reached in 1954; from then, the total has fallen
steadily, year by year. One further change which
helped this process along was the growth of'part-time
hospitalisation', mainly in the form of day care, but
sometimes allowing patients to come in just at night
or for week-ends. Flexibility and informality allowed
a much more effective use of hospital resources.
All this was very encouraging, but it posed a set of
new problems in their turn. The patients in a mental
hospital (who might number up to 3,000) were all
under one roof; if one decided on a policy of treatment
or rehabilitation for them and had the resources to
apply it, then the logistics were relatively simple. But
the new approach involved what has been called a
'dispersed institution'.
If we think of the population of a medium-sized
town, it will be served by a variety of mental health
resources. These will probably include now a unit in a
general hospital (for in-patients, out-patients and day
patients), beds in a mental hospital (which may be
some distance away), sheltered accommodation
(hostels, group homes and lodgings), a service of
social workers (based in the local authority), the help
of general practitioners and possibly community
nursing, therapeutic social clubs and a sheltered
workshop. In all these facilities, there may be a
contribution by voluntary organisations, such as local
mental health associations.
This multiplication and dispersal of resources has
been one of the most important changes of recent
years, particularly in the period following the 1959
Mental Health Act. Just to enumerate the different
buildings and people who are now concerned gives
some idea of the problems of communication and
management which arise when a service is commun-
ity-based, rather than institution-based.
Yet it is obviously right that services should be
focussed on the needs of the individual person, rather
than forcing patients to conform to the demands of
the institution, like a sausage machine. The peculiar
processes of the large institution, so well described by
the sociologist Irving Goffman in his book 'Asylums',
can be as harmful to staff as to patients, especially
when continuing over long periods of time.
To avoid the secondary handicaps resulting from
this process of institutionalisation, (in addition to the
primary effects of the illness itself) is tremendously
important. It can only be done by providing treatment
and care ior psychiatric disorder through a wide
range of varying, but integrated resources. It requires,
first and foremost, that we get rid completely of the
process of labelling a vast number of people, who
have very different needs, as 'mental' and then of
handling them all in the same unvarying way. This
was perhaps what was most wrong with the system
that existed largely unchanged up to about twenty
years ago and which was based on the large mental
hospital.
The greater effectiveness of psychiatric treatment
methods has helped enormously in the decentralisa-
tion of services. One important recent advance in
treating schizophrenia has been the development of
long-acting tranquillisers, which are given by injection
and are effective for up to a month. Because schizo-
phrenic patients were generally very unreliable about
taking tablets regularly (which is a failing that also
affects other people), they were likely to become
severely ill again and to have to return to hospital,
often in circumstances that were very distressing to all
concerned. Research has shown that regular injections
can make these further breakdowns much less likely.
Almost obsolete
But if the effective decentralisation of treatment is
to be achieved, it will inevitably demand the efforts of
a team of the various medico-social professions, rather
than the traditional idea of the individual doctor and
his patient. In fact, the 'Doctor Finlay' image of
medical care never applied to more than a minority of
our population and it has become almost entirely
obsolete today, particularly for forms of severe
psychiatric disorder which last for many years and
need a whole range of services beyond the resources
of the single family doctor.
No individual - whether a doctor, a nurse, a social
worker or any other professional - can be available
continuously and over the length of time that is in-
volved with these conditions. Nor can it be expected,
when the overall responsibility for the service rests
with the state, that each of these medico-social
workers should personally have to provide a 'locum'
to cover his absences - even if this was possible. The
medical model, which assumes that a doctor treats a
patient for a particular episode of illness and that
things then return to normal, has to be largely aband-
oned because it cannot cope with either the complex-
ity of these situations or the periods of time they are
likely to cover.
In recent years there has been a change towards
multi-disciplinary professional teams taking over the
responsibility which formerly belonged to the doctor
alone and this assumes that the team's decisions are
arrived at jointly, rather than dictated. The three basic
professions of the team are medicine, nursing and
social work; it will also often involve clinical psycho-
logy and occupational therapy, as well as other
remedial groups. However, the change has only been
slow and partial up to now; it is being strongly resist-
ed by a large part of the medical establishment, which
remains committed to its omnipotent image of the
past and demands that it should continue to 'super-
vise' everything done by other professions. Social
workers have been the first to shake themselves free
from this subservient role; the Local Authority Social
Services Act of 1970 established their independence,
at least outside hospitals, and the new social services
departments have now been operating for nearly two
years in most areas.
Frequently the upheaval involved in this reorganis-
ation has been associated with muddle, bitterness and
disappointment. Local authority health departments
have often deeply resented the loss of staff and
facilities to social services and some Medical Officers
of Health even went so far as to pursue a 'scorched
earth' policy of destroying records which they insisted
could only be used in departments run by doctors.
For their part, some Directors of Social Services,
over-sensitive about their new autonomy, have
dismantled long-standing arrangements of co-opera-
tion with hospitals and family doctors. There have
been almost universal complaints that social workers
given the responsibility of dealing with mental health
cases have been completely at a loss, because their
training was in child care or welfare. These criticisms
are justified, but only to a certain extent.
In the first place, any new system must be given a
reasonable chance to settle down; the National Health
Service reorganisation scheduled for next year will
undoubtedly produce even more of these problems,
but it is still needed. Secondly, the setting up of new
social services departments has brought with it a
tremendous increase in the demands and expectations
of the community for these services; the 1970 Act for
the Chronic Sick and Disabled and the new Child-
ren's Act added further to this. Many social services
departments are already providing facilities on a scale
that was never known before. Thirdly, criticisms tend
to come most strongly from areas that had a good
mental health service before Seebohm; but these were
certainly not typical of the country as a whole and as
far as many other areas were concerned, it was really
not possible for things to become worse. The majority
of local authorities had quite failed to carry out the
assumptions and implied promises of the Mental
Health Act about community care, during the time
that Medical Officers of Health were responsible.
Already, there has been a big increase in the numbers
of social workers operating in local authority services,
whilst the quality of staff and their level of training
are improving steadily.
All these considerations give ground for reasonable
optimism about the future of social services in relation
to mental health, though as 'Dymphna' pointed out in
one of our issues last year, there are no limits to their
potential responsibilities. But what has been achieved
up to now in the development of community-based
mental health services can only be thought of as a
beginning; the concepts are still crude and the
facilities sometimes primitive. Integrated services for
the rehabilitation and sheltered occupation of
chronically handicapped people have scarcely been
started. It is certain, however, that developments on
the scale that is needed will be tremendously expens-
ive and sooner or later, the nation as a whole will have
to decide just where these fit in to its list of priorities.
