Tragedies to Come
==================

:Author: W H. Allchin

A book on the Mary Bell case acts, once again, as a depressing reminder that
psychiatric facilities for children and adolescents are dangerously inadequate
and that, until we devote enough resources and mobilise the right skills,
further tragedies may still occur.

Gitta Sereny's clear and readable book* will help
many people, who had only the Press accounts to
guide them, to make some sense of the story of Mary
Bell. She also tries to draw out the lessons to be
learned both by professional workers, and by society
at large.

It is strange that so often the knowledge of deficiencies in the caring services has to be brought into the
open by writers and journalists. The workers in the
field know what is wrong but somehow still lack an
effective voice in trying to reach either the politicians
or the public.

The book gives a good account of the events leading
up to the trial and of the trial itself. The author
expresses her disquiet at the impact of trial procedures
on the two girls, Mary aged n, and Norma aged 13,
a disquiet which was shared by many other people who
attended the trial. I think that she is here touching on
the larger question of the age of criminal responsibility,
and this itself, in addition to the way in which
children may best give evidence, needs further
examination and reform.

However, the findings of the Court are not in
question, it is the events which followed which have
caused such widespread anxiety.

The author has been able to provide authentic
background information, mostly from Mary's relatives, but with no direct contact with Mary's mother,
and little with her maternal grandmother. A picture
emerges which reveals features which will not surprise
anyone who is involved in the care of children and
adolescents with a history of disturbance or deprivation.

This leads on to a discussion of the psychiatric
diagnosis of psychopathy. There was no argument
about this diagnosis of Mary at the trial, and there
seems to have been continuing agreement among the
highly experienced psychiatrists who examined her
that she was, without doubt, psychopathic. The
author gives brief and clear consideration to the
genesis and nature of psychopathy, and this should be
easily grasped, even by those not immediately familiar
with the topic.

The Case of Mary Bell, by Gitta Sereny. Eyre Methuen
?2.75.

But the book makes its strongest challenge when
discussion centres on treatment possibilities for
children such as Mary Bell, and on possible preventative measures.

So let it be clearly said, yet again, that psychiatric
provisions for children and adolescents are seriously
and dangerously inadequate. At the moment, highly
disturbed or damaged young people may be found in
remand homes, community homes (ex-approved
schools), detention centres, special schools, adult
prisons, adult psychiatric hospitals, residential homes
and hostels provided by local authorities, and finally
in the special psychiatric units run by Regional
Hospital Boards. But special units are still quite
inadequate in terms of numbers of places and are often
struggling with staff shortages and lack of facilities.

The network of outpatient clinics provides barely
more than a skeleton service, again with staff shortages and long waiting-lists. And the absence of places
in suitable day centres or hostels makes for further
frustration for those attempting to care for or supervise some of these disturbed youngsters. Social
workers and probation officers still have over-large
caseloads and tend to have to function as troubleshooters, rather than being able to build up long-term
stabilizing relationships with their clients.

The problem presented by Mary Bell underlines
some inescapable facts. Units caring for disturbed
young people need to be small and highly specialized.
Unintegrated or deprived youngsters need a special
milieu carefully designed for them. The work now
being done at the Cotswold Community by Richard
Balbernie and his staff and boys shows that it can be
done. But it is no easy task. As a national community
we can no longer get away with cheap and unsophisticated provisions.

One of the main difficulties is providing adequate
personal therapy in conditions of physical and
psychological security.

The Home Office plans for special units were not far
enough advanced for Mary Bell to be found a suitable
place when she needed it. And the plan which was
improvised for her not only had obvious shortcomings
from Mary's point of view, but also may have exposed
staff members to stress and strain and manipulation
with which it was not easy to cope.

Psychiatrists themselves are not agreed about
treatment measures. Many would feel, as I do, that
Mary Bell (and many other youngsters for that matter)
needs skilled individual therapy as well as a proper
environment. There are few situations where longterm individual psychotherapy undertaken by people
themselves analysed and trained in the work are
available.

Psychiatrists visiting hostels, children's homes and
other residential centres would not have the time,
and outside London it is not easy to find the help of
trained non-medical analysts or therapists. Even
where individual therapy of significant intensity is not
indicated, it is still necessary for someone to be 'tuned
in' to the level of the patient's experience in order to
guide the other treatment measures such as education,
physical activities and the like.

But it would be foolish to conclude on a gloomy or
hopeless note. There are, working in the field, a
variety of people with enormous skill and dedication.
There are institutions of varying kinds which can all
make a contribution. In general, even taking into
account differences of viewpoint and the uneven
distribution of skills and facilities, it seems to me true
to say that we know rather more than we can attempt
to put into practice. We have learned from the
Seebohm re-organisation, and will learn again from
the coming changes in the N.H.S. that a re-organised
insufficiency remains an insufficiency.

Until the community as a whole decides to will the
means, we in the field will struggle on, making do, and
improvising. Until we devote the resources and
mobilize the skills on a sufficient scale, tragedies such
as that which encompassed Mary and Norma Bell, and
the two little boys may still occur. But now we cannot
say that we have not been warned.
