Alison Wotograp
================

need by families wit
f the child even more di
London have formed
o enrich t*

Most people, if asked whether handicapped children
living at home were getting a better deal than those
living in institutions, would immediately reply 'Yes'.
Perhaps because of this, the problems facing the
handicapped child and his family living under the
same roof can all too easily be swept under the carpet.
We forget that parents are often left to cope with a
child whose handicap they barely understand; we
forget that difficult behaviour can ostracise a family,
not only from neighbours but from relatives?little
Johnny may not look as though he's handicapped so:

'Why can't he behave like other children?'
It was this sort of problem which, in 1970, brought
together two families who wanted to do something for
their children. Maurice Collins?who has an aphasic
daughter?and Eddie Renton?who has two partiallysighted sons?talked about their children's future.

Their first move was to hire a nursery in North
London and whole families?parents, handicapped
children and their brothers and sisters spent Saturdays
there. It was, as Maurice says, 'very cramped, but
very exciting'. Handicapped children were playing
with normal children for the first time; parents were
able to relax their vigilance over the children and talk
over their problems with people facing similar difficulties.

This group was so successful that Maurice and
Eddie began looking for bigger premises. After
approaching the Harmsworth Foundation they were
lucky enough to be offered the use of a kitchen, two
recreation rooms and outdoor playspace at Coram
Fields? the children's 'centre' near Great Ormond
Street.

The larger premises meant that more families
could join the group and apart from families who
heard about the group 'on the grapevine', newspaper
articles in the Sunday Times and the Hampstead and
Highgate Express drew in other families. The average
attendance on any one day is now about 15-20
families.

Every other Sunday, after a swim for the more
energetic ones, families gather at Coram Fields soon
after midday. Everyone has a say as to what they want
for lunch and, after noisy prolonged discussion, the
shopping party sets out to raid the local shops. Then
it's 'all hands on deck' for making salads, cutting up
meat and cheese, and buttering the bread.

Over protective solicitous parents may never have
given their chidren the chance to learn things like this
?but simple domestic skills are necessary if these
children are to take their part in the community and
be accepted by it. The atmosphere is so happy and
Eating in company is a social art which has to be learnt and practised.

relaxed that it really doesn't seem to matter if you find
yourself eating a cheese and fish paste sandwich!
Everyone sits down to lunch at a long table and,
although the children can 'get down' when they've finished, the chance to eat together in the company of
other families provides another opportunity for useful
social training.

As I looked around the table I noticed how many of
the children were sitting next to adults other than
their parents. The way in which adults and children
mix freely is one of the group's greatest benefits.
Parents so often tend to 'smother' the handicapped
child, attempting to compensate for what their child
lacks, but this all-too-natural instinct often results in
an additionally handicapped young adult, helpless
and unprepared to take his place in the community,
with a social handicap on top of a physical or mental
one.

Relaxed that it really doesn't seem to matter if you find
yourself eating a cheese and fish paste sandwich!
Everyone sits down to lunch at a long table and,
although the children can 'get down' when they've finished, the chance to eat together in the company of
other families provides another opportunity for useful
social training.

As I looked around the table I noticed how many of
the children were sitting next to adults other than
their parents. The way in which adults and children
mix freely is one of the group's greatest benefits.
Parents so often tend to 'smother' the handicapped
child, attempting to compensate for what their child
lacks, but this all-too-natural instinct often results in
an additionally handicapped young adult, helpless
and unprepared to take his place in the community,
with a social handicap on top of a physical or mental
one.

With 30 or more children in the group there is a birthday
party almost every week-end. For most of the children the
group is composed of their best friends so they want to
celebrate with them rather than at home.

Below Parents help with the serving of food which everybody has had a hand in preparing.

In this group, where everyone is accepted and where
each person feels a 'member', when a child behaves in
a way which is normally considered socially unacceptable, he can be shown, within this tolerant and secure
framework, that to 'do it this way' rather than 'that
way' is less likely to make him stand out in a crowd.
David, for example, is very short-sighted so he comes
up very close to you and touches you when speaking.
Gradually, within the group, he is being taught that
either he must explain his poor sight as the reason for
having come very close to people, or he must stand a
little further back as people normally do.

After the lunch has been cleared away and washed
up some of the parents take the children outside for
games, giving other parents the chance to talk to
each other and to Mary Arkwright and Karen GraefF,
who are around most Sundays. Mary, who is a friend
of the Collins family, has been with the group since it
started and her experience as an educational therapist,
plus Karen's experience as a psychologist, have been
invaluable to the group, helping them gain fresh
insights into their children's behaviour.

During the week the parents meet informally in
each other's homes with Karen and Mary; this gives
them a chance to swop experiences and, with Karen
and Mary, to try and understand more of their children's handicap and how they can best help them. On a
practical basis too, Mary can advise the parents on
how to cope with unsatisfactory educational/training
facilities, lack of satisfactory communication with
doctors and hospitals, and the countless other problems facing each parent.

For many parents the greatest personal benefit is
the increased understanding they have gained of their
child's handicap. As one father said: 'Until recently I
just didn't understand my daughter; I used to wallop
her because I though she was defying me'. Now he
spends an hour with her every evening, talking to her,
looking at things together?beginning to understand
her. When I took someone else along to visit the group
one Sunday, his first reaction was?'There doesn't
seem to be more than a couple of handicapped children here'. Well?that all depends on what you mean
by 'handicapped'. Firstly, many of the children classified as 'handicapped' show no obvious physical signs
of handicap. And secondly, many brothers and sisters
are placed at a disadvantage by the simple fact of
being part of a family with a handicapped member,
they are, in fact, 'handicapped' too. They have had
to share the family's isolation; they may feel resentful
at the apparently greater share of attention and care
lavished on their handicapped brother or sister?all
of which can lead to more problems in the family.
Towards the end of the afternoon everyone comes in
A game of trying to bounce a ball through a group of hoops
can be fascinating and improve co-ordination at the same
time.

The parents' turn to eat?Maurice Collins, co-founder of the group, is at the top left of the table.

for tea?which seems to be a birthday tea almost every
time! With thirty or more children someone nearly
always has a birthday that week or next week so a
birthday tea, cake and candles are the order of the day.
For most of the children this group is where their
friends are, so this is why they want to celebrate.
Towards six o'clock families start packing up to go,
toys are put away, the kitchen cleared and arrangements made for weekly meetings and outings. The
activities of the group have, in fact, mushroomed from
the fortnightly get-togethers. One of the most successful recent ventures was a Whitsun weekend camp.

Spending a day together is one thing, but living
absolutely communally on a camp-site throught three
days of pouring rain is something else?but it worked.
The children had a tremendous time?even if some of
the parents felt a little shattered!

A child who is free of handicap is helped along a 'balancing
plank' by other children one of whom (on the right) is only
partially sighted.

?
A little boy hugs one of the helpers?in fact the group is
trying to break the boy of his habit of putting his arms
around everybody he meets since it is not 'socially acceptable' behaviour although he has to approach very
close to people to recognise them because his sight is so
poor.

A 'balancing plank' getting heavy use in the playground.
On a smaller scale, some of the children have been
to stay overnight with other families in the group. This
may seem a small thing, but spending time away from
their parents is helping them to achieve an emotional
independence within a secure atmosphere but which is
not based on the needs of the parent. This independence is essential if they are to grow up able to take
their place in society. The ease with which many of
these children now relate to other children and to the
adults in the group is of tremendous benefit to everyone and gives the group a relaxed and friendly
atmosphere.

The group's most recent venture was a 'Mobility
Week', held at the former Dyslexic Centre building in
Coram Fields. Under the guidance of Mary and
Karen, ten of the children spent five whole days at the
Centre with a helper assigned to each child. The Week
was deliberately left fairly unstructured with the very
broad aims of learning more about each child and
possibly helping each child overcome some specific
difficulty?such as not being able to go into a shop or
cross the road or use a phone. It also gave each child
the chance to spend considerable periods of time in a
one-to-one relationship with an adult.

It is early days yet to attempt any concrete assessment of the Week?many of the benefits will probably

Two girls help a very small tractor driver to get the hang of
'If I had a beard I could do that too'. the job.

On a smaller scale, some of the children have been
to stay overnight with other families in the group. This
may seem a small thing, but spending time away from
their parents is helping them to achieve an emotional
independence within a secure atmosphere but which is
not based on the needs of the parent. This independence is essential if they are to grow up able to take
their place in society. The ease with which many of
these children now relate to other children and to the
adults in the group is of tremendous benefit to everyone and gives the group a relaxed and friendly
atmosphere.

The group's most recent venture was a 'Mobility
Week', held at the former Dyslexic Centre building in
Coram Fields. Under the guidance of Mary and
Karen, ten of the children spent five whole days at the
Centre with a helper assigned to each child. The Week
was deliberately left fairly unstructured with the very
broad aims of learning more about each child and
possibly helping each child overcome some specific
difficulty?such as not being able to go into a shop or
cross the road or use a phone. It also gave each child
the chance to spend considerable periods of time in a
one-to-one relationship with an adult.

It is early days yet to attempt any concrete assessment of the Week?many of the benefits will probably
only be seen over a number of weeks or even months?
but this sort of social training is of immense importance and something which, unfortunately often gets
missed out at special schools or training centres.
A unique feature of the group is the way it mixes
children with all sorts of handicaps; there are partially
sighted children, two mongol children, aphasics, children with speech and learning disorders; and with
behaviour disorders. It is extremely moving to watch a
severely disturbed child unselfishly helping a partially-sighted child to score a goal at football.

The group has been so successful, that it seems
remarkable that, as far as can be established, no similar group exists. Hopefully the publicity this group has
received will spur other parents on to form similar
groups. If the handicapped in our society?and the
group has shown how blurred the distinctions between
'handicapped' and 'non-handicapped' can become?
are not to live among us as second-class citizens they
need to learn all the social skills possible in the most
natural way possible. Let us not be responsible for
placing our own additional burden of handicap on
these children. Many children will only be handicapped insofar as we 'handicap' them.

Going for a quiet walk among all the bustle of the playground.
