Denise Puttock
===============

Tribal dancing., classical ballet, ballroom dancing, the 'bugaloo'... all the
'rhythms of the universe' are not only expressions of emotions and form
but?often unknown to the dancer?can have healing properties, Shedding
of inhibition, and shuffling off worries and cares, however temporarily, can
help in recovery from mental illness. There is a growing acceptance of
the potential of the dance in psychiatric treatment.
Dance?in all its various forms?sometimes has been
called 'the mother of the arts' perhaps because it seems
likely to be the oldest art form, an integral part of
life which has been called 'the rhythm of the universe'
and the 'dance of life'.
Unlike other art forms, dance requires no equip-
ment and no materials; it needs no musical instru-
ments, no paint, no clay?only the human being?
body, mind and spirit?undivided and undisguised.
And yet it combines all art forms, movement, music,
painting and sculpture, poetry and drama?all these
have echoes in the dance.
Dance was probably used for healing purposes as
far back as prehistoric times. The shaman (the tribal
priest and witch-doctor) discovered the existence of
rhythm through bodily movement and dancing was
used by members of primitive tribes to encourage
physical and mental fitness. The shaman also har-
nessed dance rhythms to induce trance-like states in
the sick and so banish the demons which were believed
to be causing the sickness?although it may appear
incredible to us, it seems to have had positive results.
Dance continued as a method of healing throughout
the centuries. Classical Greece was famous for its
dancing?we have the legacy of eurhythmies; medi-
eval doctors too saw its healing potential. More
recently, Dr. William Sargant wrote of the doctors
who, after the First World War, welcomed the in-
creasing popularity of the jazz movement which
helped to reduce the effects of post-war neurosis and
shellshock.
It was a Czech called Rudolf Laban who, early in
the 20th century, saw the therapeutic potential in
dance. Using his skill as a mathematician, he was able
to define the human body as the centre of a 64-sided
'sphere' which, when combined with the natural forces
of space and resistance, produced innumerable com-
binations of movement.
Although Laban originally intended his system of
movement as a guide for people working in dance and
drama professionally, other people soon started to take
a keen interest in his ideas. Doctors, teachers, and
industrial welfare workers began sending people to
Laban and he began to study these patients, students
and factory workers. He kept records of their progress
and his conclusions were set down in a paper, 'The
Educational and Therapeutic Qualities of the Dance'.
He wrote: 'In simple fact, there was an improve-
ment in the community spirit of whole classes. Cliques
and solitary individuals, who had hitherto been com-
peting and quarrelling tiresomely, became friendly
and sociable. A further surprising effect was that the
health of some of the children improved. Weaklings
. . . became stronger and more vital through dancing.
Nervous children became less frightened, quieter and
more open to advice and correction. . . . Educational
and remedial measures have a common factor. Both
have to deal with individuals who, through various
causes, lack some inner or external qualities needed
in the struggle of life. They must be helped to
rediscover certain powers and functions.'
From his work, Laban came to believe that, latent
in everyone was a quality he called 'charm of move-
ment'. Certainly great dancers like Pavlova and
Nijinsky had charm of movement but so?maintained
Laban?did an elderly, frail woman.
This 'charm' is hard to define but is something we
have probably all seen briefly, from time to time, in
people we meet?a graceful gesture, a lithe movement
which is instinctive and unexpected in its setting.
Dance appears to have important contributions to
make in the treatment of mental disturbance. Broadly
speaking, it can be said to be applicable in three con-
texts : diagnosis, catharsis and therapy.
Where speech fails
For some patients, diagnosis is hampered by their
inability to talk freely to a psychiatrist about their
feelings. Alternatively, although they appear to be
communicating easily they may be masking their true
emotions. A patient may do this deliberately or he
may be completely unaware that it is happening.
But movement does not lie. Tension, apathy, fear,
anger?all reveal themselves in the dance. A patient
taking part in a dance session can reveal many
thoughts and feelings to the dance therapist who is
trained to observe and interpret movement. The
doctor, who is interested and sympathetic to the ideas
of dance therapy, also can observe these sessions for
himself. The diagnostic benefits may not always be
direct; some people find that, relaxed by the music
and movement, they arc more able to talk to the
therapist or the doctor, the relaxing of tensions releas-
ing their previous inhibitions.
The cathartic element in dance?to release pent-up
emotions?is probably one of its most primitive
Maria Tallchief in Prince du Desert'
elements. This goes back to times when it was thought
that a sick person was 'enthralled by evil spirits' which
had to be released and driven out. But?whatever the
original reasons?the cathartic use of dance is of
immeasurable benefit?provided that there is a thera-
pist on hand who is aware of, and able to deal with, the
sometimes very strong emotional reactions which are
provoked in a dance therapy session. This professional
control is particularly important if the medical world
is to accept dance as part of the healing process.
Catharsis, rightly guided and channelled by a thera-
pist or doctor is a force for good, given free rein it can
be dangerous and destructive.
Finally, dance is therapeutic. It can go further than
just pointing to the symptoms (diagnosis) or releasing
the suppressed feelings which may be causing distur-
bance (catharsis). In a dance therapy session?just
moving to music, ballroom dancing, keep-fit or what-
ever?dance can provide a respite from worry and
stress, freeing the mind from tension and allowing a
healing peace to permeate his whole being.
Of course all dance therapists realise that their work
can rarely effect a cure on its own. But, whatever sort
of treatment a person is having?drugs, ECT, indi-
vidual or group psychotherapy?dance can do its work
alongside. Clearly, this requires the sympathy of
psychiatrists who believe in the usefulness of dance
therapy and are prepared to co-operate with?and if
necessary actually work alongside?therapists with
their patients.
Prospects for British dance
therapy
Dance therapy is already firmly established in the
United States. Over a decade ago a dancing teacher,
Marion Chace, who had been attending psychiatry
lectures at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Washington,
persuaded the hospital authorities to let her go on to
a ward for chronic schizophrenics, many of them
silent and uncommunicative for over twenty years.
Although the immediate results were not spec-
tacular, some of the patients began to communicate in
monosyllables. Following on from her work, training
establishments began to be set up and today there are
courses in dance therapy at many of the American
universities and there is a flourishing American Dance
Therapy Association.
In Britain the movement is not as firmly established
as in the States; nevertheless, it is making great
strides. At the Laban Centre at Addlestone in Surrey,
dance therapists are being trained in the tradition of
Rudolf Laban?the 'pioneer' of dance therapy.
Therapists from the American Dance Therapy Asso-
ciation are coming over to Britain as pioneers to work
in hospitals and clinics. There is growing acceptance
by the medical profession as it is being proved that
patients can benefit from dancing.
There seems to be a very good case for involving
young people on a voluntary basis in dance sessions.
Dancing is such an integral part of the lives of young
people?discotheques, parties, and so on, that, work-
ing under the guidance of a trained therapist, their
energy and enthusiasm could be of inestimable help.
In fact, if we only stop and look around us, we can
see that dance therapy is already widely accepted; in
'Top of the Pops', in the discotheques, in the West
Indian reggae sessions?and still, believe it or not?in
the local palais de dance! Everywhere people are
allowing music and movement to relax their minds and
bodies and proving its value as a power for healing
and recovery.
A Mongolian 'shaman,' the tribal priest and witch-doctor
