Labelling What's this
====================

Alexandef
Human beings, as well as consumer goods, can be
labelled 'Damaged in transit', but my immediate
concern in this article is not so much with the ways in
which people can be damaged as they go through life,
but with the damaging effect of the labelling process
itself. Although labelling people may appear to be
necessary, far from helping them to discover who they
are, the label may act as a means of alienating them
from themselves and from others.
Labels and names are a basic part of our culture -
'What's your label?', 'Are you wearing your dog-tag?'
'Give a dog a bad name and it sticks', 'A rose by any
other name . . .', 'The name of the game'. We name
babies, battleships and bargain basements. We name
streets, hotels, hospitals and highways. Without names
we would be lost.
Primitive man felt that he only gained power over
his environment when he was able to give names to
objects around him. Just as he felt that painting the
image of a bison on his cave wall gave him a better
chance of hunting down the beast, so giving a name to
objects and animals and people gave him magical
power over the named object. The name giver
became an important member of the early tribe.
In much the same way, in families, we feel uneasy
until the child has been given his name. We cannot
wait to baptise him, christen him or, if there is no
strictly religious content, at least to have a little party
where all the family meets to greet and name its latest
member. So too with the growing child. Watch him
reach out for objects. First of all he puts them to his
mouth in an attempt to swallow them. Swallowing is
the only way a young child can grasp and keep an
object. Later, he haltingly gives things their name -
we say that he comprehends them or apprehends
them - another way of saying he grasps their signific-
ance and feels that he has some control over them.
A child has his family name, but that only tells him
to whom he belongs; his own personal name, his
^labelling labelling labelling labe
Filing labelling labelling labellin(
YOUR LABEL?
Mitchell
given name, helps him in his first stumbling steps
towards a personal identity - knowing who he is, and
therefore who he can become. The medical condition
of amnesia in which we temporarily lose our aware-
ness of our own name and the names of people and
places around us, is distressing not only because of the
sensation of being lost, not knowing where one is, but
also in being lost in a very basic sense - being lost to
oneself, loss of identity, loss of self-control and loss of
control over circumstances and events.
Names and labels can be very important in
establishing a person in his own right, but the
labelling process can also be used in a destructive,
de-humanising way - when it is used to categorise.
Here, the naming or labelling process is used not to
allow someone freedom to be uniquely himself, but to
restrain and confine him in a category, in a class, in a
box.
Once we have pigeon-holed people, we don't want
them wandering about - that makes a mess of our
classification - we like them to keep still and to be
good classified material. Our labelling of them is to
restrict their freedom so that we may have greater
freedom ourselves. It is a thing that I do to you
because it helps me. I may justify this by saying that
it helps me to help you, but ultimately it is in my
interests and it may not be in yours, no matter how
well I dress it up.
This de-humanising categorisation, if carried to its
extreme, reduces the human being to a cypher, a
number, beloved of computer programmers and the
testers of public opinion. Give me your opinion as
'Yes' or 'No' and this will be translated into the
presence or absence of an impulse on an electronic
tape: the essence of a person reduced to a minute
electrical impulse, reduced ultimately to a plus or a
minus.
But this is required for progress; there is so much
information and knowledge around these days that
c
>2
33
we can only make sense of it if we react to it in this
way, or so say the rationalisers. The basic question is
whether we can ever comprehend the beauty of a
flower reflected in a silent pool by means of digits,
classifications and labels.
What is a general problem is a problem also in
psychiatry. This branch of medicine began by giving
names and labels to things in the great era of descriptive
psychiatry in which order could only come out of
chaos by isolating out symptoms, signs and behaviours
and giving them names. Only then could one person
communicate with another, but what was not
captured nor communicated was the experience of the
person now to be labelled as 'patient'.
This era was followed by categorising psychiatry:
the named phenomena had to be ordered and grouped
into commonly occurring situations or syndromes,
later to be classed as 'illnesses'. We must know to
which group a patient belongs, not only to order the
relevant treatment but to hazard a guess at the likely
outcome. Thus we enter into the great era of medical
model psychiatry employing words such as 'diagnosis',
'aetiology', 'symptomatology', 'treatment' and
'prognosis'.
Shadowy world
The mentally disturbed are understood in terms of
the illness which they exhibit and which, hopefully,
the doctor can modify if not actually cure. But this
was not enough: the experience of the patient became
important - not only what others could observe
directly in him - but how he felt, however mistily,
deep down inside himself. This change of emphasis
took us into the shadowy world of feelings and attitudes,
the world of people (not organisms) confronting other
people, the world of inter-personal psychiatry. What
goes on between two people does not occur in a
vacuum: each of the two people (the dyad), impinges
on others in triads, fours, fives, sixes, dozens. The
interaction of three persons, in which there are endless
permutations of two against one, becomes the basic
interactional unit of what is now social psychiatry.
Here we can label the process, name the interaction,
but is that the same as pigeon-holing symptoms,
categorising patients?
Surely there is all the difference in saying 'That
person is a schizophrenic' and saying 'That person is
reacting in a schizophrenic-like way'. In the one the
person is caught, trapped for ever in a single frame of
what is meant to be a moving picture; in the other he
still has room for manoeuvre, still has room for
change. Who knows, he may even give up reacting like
a schizophrenic and react more like you and me.
This is not just a matter of semantics. It reflects
how we feel about people, how we judge them -
ultimately, how we relate to them. And it matters
very much whether you are the categoriser or the one
categorised.
A case is still made out for labelling in psychiatry
which really means making diagnostic labels. Many
doctors hold passionately that diagnosis is essential,
just as much as others hold that it is dangerous and
limiting so to do. Those who are for diagnosis as part
of the art and part of the skill say that it is essential
for understanding. We cannot know what we know
until we can objectify it in some way, give it an
identity by giving it a name which is universally
agreed. No one really argues about John Smith: he
either is or is not John 'of those Smiths'.
Sharing knowledge
There is not really any room for subtle shades of
opinion which may only serve to make us trip up over
our own clever feet. And understanding is a pre-
requisite for communication. If I am not going to keep
all my knowledge to myself, if I intend to share it with
you, we must have a common language, a common
naming of things. As we communicate we discover
what we know and, perhaps more important, what we
don't know and thus research is born. Research
means looking for answers to what is at present
unanswerable or unanswered. It means asking 'What
is that?' before we ask 'How is that?' or 'Why is that?'
Then again, it is said that diagnosis is necessary
before we can plan a course of management. Of
course, we could do nothing, or do things by chance,
but that would neither be rational nor scientific; also
it would not be economic. We need the quickest and
the best returns for our effort. We have to know what
we are to treat, before we can begin to treat it. But
also, we have to know what it is before we can say how
likely treatment is to succeed and how long it is likely
to take.
Power struggles
These are all very logical and sensible arguments if
we are operating within a purely medical framework
in which the person to be helped is to be not only 'a
patient' (ie, one who has to suffer), but also 'patient'
(ie, one who has to wait for others to minister to him).
But life is rarely as pure as that. We live in an econom-
ic world of competition in which we struggle with and
against each other. This very naming process, this
34
diagnosing, is brought into the world of power
struggles between those who are fit and strong, and
those who are deemed (largely by the others) to be
unfit and weak.
This can be seen clearly in the conflict between
staff and patients. The staff, the doctor or nurse or
social worker or occupational therapist or psycholo-
gist, can be tempted into saying 'It's my job to define
what is wrong with you and it is so and so. Your
diagnosis is this or that.' This is quite legitimate, but
it results in a 'one-up' - 'one-down' situation in
which the staff put themselves in a position of
apparent omniscience or, at least, are in danger of
doing so.
It can be even more subtle than this. Putting a label
on a patient can invalidate the patient - 'You are an
invalid, and what you say is therefore invalid. You are
sick because your label says so.' Diagnosis can there-
fore become a way of restraining people and of
rendering them even more impotent than they were
when they started. To say someone is neurotic,
psychotic, psychopathic or schizophrenic is not just a
scientific descriptive statement. It can become a way
of making a value judgement about the patient and
putting him down.
An assumed label
Of course, this can also work to the patient's
advantage in that he can assume a label and use it
against the family or against society by saying, 'Here,
look at me. I am sick. This label says so, and if I am
sick you can't expect me to be responsible for myself.'
Patients may be disordered and yet still responsible
for themselves to a degree. Being disordered does not
automatically invalidate a person, but having an
illness label nearly always does, or is used as if it does.
What is needed in psychiatry, to help both staff and
patients, and society too, is some system which
embodies the following: (a) clear thinking, (b) con-
ceptual frameworks and (c) unambiguous language.
If we can develop these, then we can make not just
a diagnosis but a diagnostic formulation, which is not
just a limiting label, but is, ideally, a comprehensive
statement about the person and his predicament. Such
a statement should tell us where the person has come
from, where he is at the present time, what he is
capable of in the future. Ideally it should give freedom
to the person to grow, by suggesting help if he needs
it. Further, he should be involved in working out the
formulation. He is not just malleable clay in another
person's hands, but someone who has the capacity
(or, at least, should be given the chance of showing if
he has the capacity) to join with the staff in working
out where he stands. Making the formulation then
becomes a collaborative effort and not a proscriptive
restraint.
William James once wrote - 'I am done with great
things and big things, great institutions and big
success, and I am for those tiny invisible molecular
moral forces that work from individual to individual
creeping through the crannies of the world like so
many soft rootlets, or like the capillary oozing of
water yet which, if given time, will rend the hardest
monuments of man's pride'. Our diagnostic labels are
in danger of becoming some of our hardest monu-
ments of pride, gods to be served rather than servants
to serve us. Abandoning labels in favour of looser
descriptions may be seen by some as a retrograde
step, yet what is the profit of using labels to open up
communication between us, if we find that what we
have to communicate is, at best, a pale shadow of
reality and, at worst, a chain that limits the freedom
of those we seek to help and, ultimately, of ourselves ?
