From Where I sit
==================

EDITORIAL COMMENT
Yesterdays news,
tomorrow's problem

Two mysterious press 'leaks' before
the official date of publication did
a great deal to lessen the impact of
the report of the committee of
enquiry into Whittingham Hospital. For obvious reasons?loss of
news value, topicality and so on?
even a partial press 'leak' results
in an incomplete and 'conditioned'
reaction when the full story is
known.

When the Whittingham Report
was published, its findings and
conclusions blazed (well, burnt
gently) in headlines for a day and
were gone. In several cases the
headlines were restricted to the
back and middle pages of newspapers, whereas the reporting of
previous committees of enquiry
into allegations made about conditions and treatment in mental
hospitals had merited full 'front
page coverage.

It is difficult to know to what
extent the muted response to the
Whittingham Report was because
of the 'sting' being removed by
the 'leaks' or whether it was the
?apparently natural and alarming
fast way in which recurring news
stories get devalued in the press
because 'it has all happened before'.
No longer newsworthy

The devaluing of news is a
common enough phenomenon?in
its 'quiet' periods the obscene
Vietnam war slips into a kind of
'news oblivion' through understandable weariness on the part of
editors deciding what is 'newsworthy' and through frank boredom and detached disinterest on
the part of the public.

Another Apollo moon mission
hardly warrants an eye-brow raised
in interest now, already we take for
granted the incredible feats of
technology involved in even the
simplest aspects of the Apollo
programme.

The imagination and the memory
of the public is saturated, and
dulled in the process, to such an
extent that it is almost impossible
to know what to invest with value
what to consider important and
what to discard and forget.

Obviously, the way in which the
Whittingham Report flared and
died in the national press was a
blessing for the psychiatric nursing
profession which has been selected
?unfairly?for special treatment
in the newspapers. The nurses have
taken a lot of 'hammering' in the
public debate arising out of committees of enquiry even though the
committees themselves have all
been at pains to make it clear that
the vast majority of psychiatric
nurses do a marvellous job in wellnigh impossible conditions of work.

Condemned
by ignorance

But, inevitably, it has been the
allegations of cruelty and callousness which have been singled out
for the greatest dose of righteous
indignation and all nurses have been
smeared by implication in the
process. This amounts to a text
book case of condemnation arising
out of the ignorance of those doing
the condemning.

So, although it is good that the
nurses were not subjected to
prolonged, morale-sapping criticism during the brief 'stardom' of
the Whittingham Report, the problem of jogging the public memory
and stirring its conscience remains.
Whittingham has long since been
overtaken by other, bigger issues?
the Common Market, Vietnam
escalation, threats of chaos on the
railways and so on.

The comparatively blase' way in
which the press and the public now
seem to react to the facts about
many of our mental hospitals?not
the allegations of ill-treatment but
the simple cataloguing of the age
of the buildings, the inhuman overcrowding, the impossible workloads, the apathetic mis management?is depressing to say the
least.

Perhaps there just seems to be
too much wrong, perhaps the whole
issue is too unpalatable, but the
MIND Campaign is pledged to
lobby government and involve the
public in constant and increasing
pressure from all sides to bring
about change, to rearrange our
sense of priorities in public spending, to champion the 'disadvantaged' and speak on their behalf.
The enormous problems arising
from the neglect of our mental
hospital service have to be placed
(<and kept) in the forefront of the
minds of every one of us.

It is for this reason that it is
disturbing to see a gradual 'immunisation process' taking place over
the issue of the quality of life
within our mental hospitals. If
there are more committees of
enquiry (and some consultant psychiatrists would say that hospitals
which have already been subjected
to enquiry are by no means
extraordinary), will the immunisation process simply be reinforced?
Will people persist in thinking,
'It doesn't concern me?and I
can't do anything about it anyway' ?
Do we get the hospital services
that we deserve ?

Communications breakdown
Perhaps the most startling and
least discussed aspect of the Whittin gham Report is the breakdown
of communications within the
hospital, the torturous chains of
command and the general paucity
of management method.

Although allegations of callousness and pilfering are more dramatic and immediate news copy, it is
the Report's comments about 'administration by labyrinth' and
'vague policy formation, splintered
decision-making, inadequate delegation to officers and no systematic
monitoring of performance' which
are really the most telling.

The complaints and serious
allegations about conduct within
the hospital which were made by
the student nurses in 1967 obviously
should have been recognised as a
danger signal and should have been
'picked up' and passed through
clear channels of communication
from the nursing administration to
the Hospital Management Committee. In fact the complaints were
suppressed, let drop and ignored.

Perhaps the management complacency is accounted for to some
extent by the long tenure of several
members of the Hospital Management Committee. Six of the 15 had
been members for 10 or more
years, of these three, including the
Chairman, had been members for
15 years of more. One, the chairman of the Nurse Education Committee, had served since 1948. Six
were over 65 and three over 70.
Referring to minutes of Hospital
Management Committee meetings
the Report comments 'it is possible
to read some of them without
discovering what subjects were
under discussion and what decisions were reached'.

Co-ordination?and even communication ? between different
parts of the management structure
and between the administration and
the medical staff appear to have
been lacking and, again to quote
the Report, 'This failure of communications substantially contributed to the therapeutic inertia on
long-stay wards which gave rise to
the students' complaints of July
1967'.

Posted into the background
Out vast Victorian mental hospitals have been thought of as
'back waters' for so long that even
those working in them have come
to accept the fact in a resigned sort
of way. Little has been demanded
of management as long as the
machinery ticked over resaonably
well and as long as there was no
trouble. Now that there has been
'trouble' in one or two cases, the
lid has been prised off far enough
for the basic and absolutely fundamental problems to be revealed.
The nursing staffs have carried
on over years during which they
have been largely ignored by the
rest of the medical world?the
demands on them, in terms of
patients' needs, have been heavy
and constant, But the demands
made on the administration have
been virtually non-existent unless
they have been prepared to make
demands on themselves, to set their
own standards and establish their
own priorities.

For more than 10 years administrators, staff and patients of hospitals like Whittingham have
known that they are scheduled to
be closed. Part of the blame for
apathy and neglect in such hospitals must be shared by the declared policy of planned obsolescence for the large, isolated hospital.
This policy has been disasterous
for morale and recruiting and it has
never been realistic.

Under sentence of extinction, the
buildings are patched and cobbled:
and, as new district hospitals
develop their acute psychiatric
units, the proportion of acute
mental illness treated within the
old hospitals declines still further?
they are gradually relegated to the
role of caring for the chronics, the
aged, the patients that don't fit
into the neat pattern of care laid
down by Whitehall. Little wonder
that medical and nursing staff are
hard to attract into institutions
officially said to have no future and
little wonder if such hospitals get
the management they deserve.
