Bridget Pears
==============

A total lack of energy is one of the most common features of a depressive
illness; learning to cope with it and hold it at bay is a crucial part of recovery.
Ordering your life and dealing with day-to-day tasks needs planned effort. A
housewife explains how she came to monitor her moods, accepted the ups and
downs, and planned her work accordingly.
During the long unhappy period that followed a pro-
longed attack of acute depression, I was often very
lacking in energy and found that the simplest task
assumed enormous proportions. In order to keep
things ticking over at all, I did but the barest essen-
tials and neglected everything else.
Mending got ignored, our farm accounts got hope-
lessly in arrears and I had neither time nor inclination
for all my usual hobbies. Even to do the minimum
I had to fix my mind resolutely on the most outstand-
ing task and somehow make myself finish it. Work
was done on a day-to-day priority basis.
Very gradually the depression passed, but not be-
fore it had taught me how to make the best possible
use of my time. While still very weary, I evolved
various hints for self-help. Muddle makes even the
cleanest house look unkempt. Mine wasn't very clean
anyway, so I renewed my efforts to keep tidy and
resolutely cleared up old newspapers, discarded
jerseys, empty envelopes, etc. before they had a chance
to pile up and depress me by sheer quantity.
Removing the obstacles
Quite often one niggling little task would somehow
'block' me and make the whole day look difficult. It
was probably a stupid thing, like oiling a squeaky door
or unjamming a drawer?just something out of
routine. Once this job was done, the relief was
immediate.
Many daily tasks are inescapable, but when it
comes to more adventurous jobs I always try to plan
my time wisely. For example, if there is a heavy day's
paperwork scheduled, I try to tackle it on a day when
I feel really keen to do it and get down to work early.
Later on in the day, when I may be rather fatigued
mentally, I shall still be as capable of washing-up or
dusting. Similarly, I prefer to do any cutting-out of
material while the children are at school?and polish
later!
If any visitor to my house should see a pile of
washing-up in the sink at 5.30?well, let her. It
doesn't matter. If the essential requirements of house-
keeping are fulfilled, then it is entirely up to you if you
work till 10.30 one night of the week and spend
another afternoon reading. (I am of course supposing
that these arrangements do not seriously inconven-
ience other members of the household.)
Some days one has a superabundance of energy
and can move mountains. Then there are times when
everything takes ages. So long as one is not side-
tracked into spending time on attractive?but un-
necessary?projects, one can be sure that it will all
even up before the week's out.
Also?'Do it nowV If you're hurrying to go out you
won't want to stop and mop up grimy marks on the
paintwork. But if you're merely clearing dishes when
you notice them?well, isn't it more sense to do the
job then, rather than chalk up yet another task to be
fitted in?
The dog taught me a lesson. If he thinks it's getting
past his supper-time he contrives to get constantly in
my way. So, if I put an unattractive job in a place
where I have to keep on looking at it, the very sight
of the wretched thing annoys me so much that I have
to attend to it quickly in self-defence!
47
I always seem to have a pile of plain hand-sewing,
but I try to work through this whenever a close friend
comes for the day. This leaves me free to chat for
hours with no guilty feeling of wasted time.
If you are not naturally particularly houseproud, be
sensible and keep up a steady level of work that will
be sufficient to produce at least a reasonable standard.
A sudden, over-enthusiastic burst of spring-cleaning
will probably induce a violent antipathy to polish and
pail. Emergencies are always unexpected. Keep an
adequate store cupboard and a goodish reserve of
clean linen; the household can then run itself for a
few days without undue difficulty. A deep-freeze is
certainly a marvellous aid to home management but is
by no means essential. (I know?I lived without elec-
tricity for the first nine years of my marriage.)
Planning the week ahead
It helps me to make a rough plan of the week ahead,
so getting some idea of the amount of time available
for special jobs. This exists as a general guide only,
since some interruptions or changes can't be foreseen.
Sometimes one is extra busy. A dentist's appointment,
a school medical and a parent-teacher association
meeting fall in the same week as an unexpected trip
that involves a whole day out. In that case, accept
right away that that new dress won't be finished till
next week; don't struggle to do the impossible.
I have finally admitted to myself that my own work
pattern is clearly of the fits-and-starts variety. This
much accepted, I no longer find it disturbing that I
have periods of frantic activity followed by days of
lying relatively fallow. I can achieve an enormous
amount on my energetic days and am rarely idle on
slacker ones, though much less efficient.
I find that it really does help my morale enorm-
ously if I always make time early in the morning to
put on proper make-up, even though I expect to re-
main indoors all day. If I promise myself to fit it in
later on, I seldom get round to doing so, and then a
casual glimpse in the mirror shows such a depressing,
messy creature!
If you, too, are of the 'up-or-down' temperament,
try to accept the fact and learn how to live with it.
When you feel like work, really get on with it?but
still take adequate rest. If you have a lethargic spell,
do the best you can without forcing the pace. Some-
times it helps to promise yourself the 'treat' of a day
spent on your favourite hobby. Above all, don't feel
guilty if you know you haven't done as much today
as you did yesterday.
