Woman's Estate
================

:Author: Juliet Mitchell
Pelican, 25p

The estate is one of double bondage
? women expected to maintain a
family structure that is exploding
about them, offered equal pay but
not equal work, encouraged to express their sexuality but denigrated
as they do by advertising whose
main purpose seems to be male
titiilation.

The thesis is familiar ? and well
laid out here; the solution offered is
revolution, and that's where the confusion starts. Much of the book is
given over to the differences between radical feminism and abstract
socialism, and if that sounds turgid,
it often is.

The first sees woman's estate as
the simple result of male domination
? but female domination in its stead
is no solution for the male population. Socialism attacks capitalism,
identifying the economic bondage of
women with that of the American
Negro, and her emotional and mental servitude with those of students
and other young people.

Miss Mitchell argues the ills of
capitalism with spirit, but again,
theory is not enough. Socialist
countries don't take much notice of
women's liberation and there are
plenty of people in the capitalist
world content to remain within the
ranks of the oppressed.

So what sort of revolution and towards what? Miss Mitchell wants us
to ask feminist questions and come
up with some Marxist answers, but
her plea for the solidarity of the
oppressed gives way to calling
liberation of other groups (like
men?) Utopian, and even limiting
the struggle to Western woman. The
revolution must start somewhere,
but does it lose some value if so
particular?

Concrete proposals are thin on
the Marxist ground. Expanding the
concept of a career unit rather than
simply doing away with the family,
bringing women into production ?
familiar enough suggestions.

But in the end, the central questions still seem blurred in theory.
How to find a social organisation
that allows for free expression and
fulfilment for both oppressed halves
of the human race? Is the materialist
solution big enough for the question?

Ann Shearer
