David Johnson
===============

Society needs its scapegoats?the 'bad'
have to be cast out and stripped of rights
to reinforce the 'goodness' of the majority.
For centuries witches were the persecuted
outcasts, many people would maintain that
the mentally ill fulfil this need today?and
the rest of society is satisfied that this
should be so.

Professor Szasz chooses provocative titles for his
books. Author of The Myth of Mental Illness, he now
presents us with The Manufacture of Madness*. I say
'provocative' because there is an immediate appeal to
the reader's righteous indignation. You are invited to
seek out the villain of the piece. Who is responsible
for perpetrating this myth? Who manufactures the
madness ? - grist to the mill here for those who seek
to attack everything.

Looking at the title and its subtitle, A comparative
study of the Inquisition and the mental health move-
ment', before even opening the book, one might expect
an extreme argument and this is what is presented.
This makes it important to establish some basic
facts and puts the author's argument in his own simp-
lest terms. Thomas Szasz, as the frontispiece tells us,
is 'a practising psychiatrist and Professor of Psych-
iatry at the State University of New York in Syracuse'.
So we have an attack on 'institutional psychiatry'
from within psychiatry. Furthermore - and it is
absolutely crucial to emphasise this - his attack is
on 'institutional psychiatry' as practised in the
United States.

In the preface the author says 'I shall compare the
belief in witchcraft and the persecution of witches
with the belief in mental illness and the persecution
of mental patients'. Part one of the book is devoted to
this comparison.

The Manufacture of Madness by Thomas S. Szasz,
published by Routledge & Kegan Paul, ?3.50
5^
llfm
As the witch was made a scapegoat and was
persecuted so, argues Szasz, is the mental patient.

Who is responsible? He is in no doubt - 'Although
individuals occasionally assume the role of mental
patients voluntarily, I shall presume that the mental
patient is cast into his role involuntarily and that the
organisation responsible for his situation is institu-
tional psychiatry'. He indicts institutional psychiatry
still further by claiming that 'harming persons
categorised as insane is its essential function'.

When confronted with such dogmatic statements,
and other like 'the principal problem in psychiatry
has always been and still is violence', the British
reader must be forced to pause and conclude that the
writer is part of a very different experience of
psychiatry.

Most of us are aware that violence in America
represents an enormous social problem far removed
from anything we experience in this country. It is
perhaps legitimate then to ask if violence and the fear
of violence plays a much greater part in American
psychiatry.

Szasz tells us that, in the States, something like
10% of psychiatric admissions to mental hospitals are
on a voluntary basis and suggests that this is a
generous estimate. He tells us that in 1961 in St.
Elizabeth Hospital, Washington D.C., only 3.5% of
admissions were voluntary. My own check with the
records department of the Royal Edinburgh Hosp-
ital revealed that in the years 1966-71 over 90% of
admissions were on a voluntary basis. Given that this
is a teaching hospital there is, nonetheless, some
confirmation that psychiatric practice in the two
countries is very different - something which must be
kept in mind while reading Szasz's book.

To return to the comparative study of the Inquisi-
tion and the mental health movement - the author's
historical account of the persecution of witches is
impressive and many of his claims that the abuses of
American institutional psychiatry bear comparison
must be accepted as fair. The appendix, bibliography
and reference list bears out how well he has done his
research and it is difficult to argue with the facts.
Unfortunately, Szasz clearly does not accept that it
is the abuses of a system with which he is concerned;
his attack is on institutional psychiatry in its entirety.
Nor does the matter rest there. Psychiatric practice
in general comes under fire - the author sees it as
becoming synonymous with institutional psychiatry.

In developing his theme, he takes sideways swipes at
psychiatric training in America, seen as 'as ritualised
indoctrination into the theory and practice of
psychiatric violence', and at Community Mental
Health Centres which are seen as extending 'the
This 16th century woodcut shows three witches being burnt at the stake, victims of ignorance and fear. Szasz argues
that the mental patient today is in a similar position?that of the scapegoat.
traditional police power of the psychiatrist'. Individ-
uals too come under fire - among them a number of
eminent American psychiatrists. With this breadth of
criticism his original argument loses much force.

Basic human need
In the second part of the book Szasz deals with
modern methods of 'manufacturing' madness and
develops his theory that institutional psychiatry
'fulfils a basic human need - to validate itself as good
(normal) by invalidating the other as evil (mentally
ill)'.

The section opens with another verbal assault, this
time on the 'paternalism' and 'love of power' of
Benjamin Rush, regarded by some as the 'father of
American psychiatry'. He is seen as a veritable pioneer
in the manufacture of madness, particularly in the
manufacture of the myth of mastubatory madness.
This historical chapter is masterly and brooks no
argument. Other eminent doctors are also attacked for
lending their support to that particular myth.

Some may feel that psychiatry has advanced since
then but Szasz does not. 'I maintain that the situation
in psychiatry today is virtually the same as it was
when mastubatory madness was the reigning dogma',
and he sets out to justify this in a later chapter
entitled 'The model psychiatric scapegoat - the homo-
sexual'. However, while there is much truth in the
scapegoat notion, it is impossible to agree with the
assertion that psychiatry has made no advance.
The closing chapters of the book are the most
persuasive and the most constructive. The scapegoat
theme is developed since the author sees it as a
problem for society as a whole. He moves from his
rather belligerent attack on institutions and individ-
uals to discuss society's apparent need for a scapegoat,
be he Jew, Negro or mental patient. Society is com-
posed of individuals and the author is here talking
about the mechanism of 'projection', or as he puts it,
'what is considered good must be included in the body
the person, the community; and what is considered
bad must be excluded from them'. Thus we create
our black sheep.

Szasz speaks of our 'existential cannibalism', and
asks if we can create meaning in our lives without
demeaning others. He sees this as the most important
moral question for man. He writes, 'the cannibal
incorporates his victim to give himself virtue - so we
expel ours to give ourselves innocence'. The sincerity
behind the author's passionate criticism of any
situation which, makes 'the Other' anything less than
human is beyond doubt.

Equality and non-coercion
--------------------------

To return to the psychiatric framework; Szasz
makes it abundantly clear that for him institutional
psychiatry is incapable of fostering relationships
between therapist and patient based on equality and
non-coercion, but he believes private psychiatry can
achieve this.

In recent months I have talked with a number of
trainee American psychiatrists. They have been
equally sincere in criticising private psychiatry in
America on the grounds that many private psychia-
trists there are making a very great deal of money
while many people with psychiatric problems are
unable to receive the attention they need because of
lack of money. They judged that situation to be
immoral.

But that is another point of view and I am left
thinking that Szasz leaves little room in his philosophy
for other points of view.
