Right of Reply
===============

:Author: Richard Fox
talking to John Payne

Controversy surrounding methods of treat-
ment in psychiatry?centred on R. D.
Laing's theories on 'schizophrenia' which
have had such a popular appeal?is well
illustrated in the film 'Family life'. But the
mass media seems to be polarising psychia-
trists artificially, yet the silent majority of the
profession persists in remaining silent.

Question Would you agree that the 'Laingian' concept
of psychiatry has effectively captured the imagination
of the media? It's good 'meat' for dramatic material -
whereas so-called 'conventional' psychiatry isn't
really putting its case about why it treats people the
way it does.

R.F. I think this is true, for two reasons. Firstly, I
find the nature of television is that you get a good
programme by producing a conflict. There are
political reasons for this too; you can't have a
Panorama programme, say, putting only the conserv-
ative point of view. But it's good interviewing if you
can produce a tension situation so that you have
(a) countered by anti (a), and (b) countered by anti
(b), with a good old studio punch-up. The whole of
television thinking tends to be built around this
concept.

Secondly, in psychiatry, the extremes are repre-
sented by men who go down well on television, one
extreme being Dr. William Sargant who, I felt, was
very much the model for the second psychiatrist in
'Family Life' - they even looked the same. I know,
and like, Sargant, and hope we think no less well of
each other as the result of disagreeing about some
things - I think his contribution, in terms of better
use of physical treatments, has been invaluable. The
other extreme is represented by Laing, Cooper and
Esterson, who seem, on the whole, less flexible than
the 'physical treatment' exponents, less willing to
discuss things in an open rational way and admit that
they may be wrong.

They seem to rely much more on the smart catch
phrase, like a remark I heard Laing make years ago,
'If the patient is disturbed you prescribe a tranquiliser
- and give it to the nurse'. This is clever, it makes
people laugh, it makes people sit up - but is it in fact
fair? So much Laingian psychiatry relies on this type
of clever polemic which is what it is, it's not science,
it's not objective and it makes me angry.

When you have a school of opinion that exists so
much in terms of reviling its opponents, which it does,
I've heard some people be very abusive privately and
publicly towards those who do not share their views -
it's good material for controversy. Now these psych-
iatrists, it seems, have captured the imagination of the
mass media, and, inevitably, whenever anything
psychiatric comes up, the producers and so on tend
to seize upon these two extremes and try to set them
in opposition.

It is not easy to make a fascinating television
programme out of good, middle-of-the-road psych-
iatry. They tried it with a programme on schizo-
phrenia a few years ago and although everyone tried
hard, it came over to me as rather dull.

Question It would be fair to say of conventional psych-
iatry wouldn't it, that most psychiatrists use some-
thing of both 'schools' and combine the physical and
psycho-therapeutic techniques?

R.F. Sure. I don't see that one can conceivably treat a
person in complete isolation from his social back-
ground, even if he has got the most organic of physical
diseases, because the physical disease will interact
with his background and his background may
exacerbate it or help it; you've got to take social
measures to alleviate the results of his disability. But
because one takes this social (or psychological) view in
terms of trying to understand the person in the
setting of his personality and whole life experience,
one doesn't necessarily have to be Laingian; one
could perfectly well be Adlerian or Jungian or Uncle
Tom Cobley-and-all-ian and do the patient good.

To say that we're all of us Laingians a little bit I'm
not sure follows, but I reckon 99% of psychiatrists
are eclectic. We treat our psychotic depressives with
ECT, we treat neurotics and personality disorders as
best we can with whatever psychological methods we
have time for - with drugs as an ancillary maybe. I
doubt if more than 1% or so of psychiatrists never use
drugs to treat their patients at all and any general
psychiatrist who does this would, I think, be failing in
his duty to his patients. It would be bad psychiatry.
Question Presumably Laing wasn't the first person to
be aware of the importance of family background and
social pressures on the individual. It's almost as
though he developed a philosophy which came as a
blinding revelation and radically changed the way in
which people thought about treating mental illness;
wasn't this always the case for the good, industrious
psychiatrist?

R.F. Oh yes. He has gone farther than the convention-
al 'couch' psychoanalysts who used to represent the
extreme one side of the argument. Laing has taken
psychotherapy off the couch and into the family
situation and tried to see the disorder much more in
terms of family interactions than in a one-to-one
therapeutic situation with its transference and counter
transference. This is a very important development,
but it's not confined to Laing. Howells has been doing
this for years in Ipswich and so have lots of others.

Question Why then are 'conventional psychiatrists'
so loath to put their case?

R.F. This puzzles me because there are people far
better able than I to quote the sort of data which
suggests very strongly that Laing's theories of
schizophrenia are beside the point.

In the Mental Health Research Fund Lecture some
years ago, Professor Devereux demonstrated pretty
clearly that the patterns of communication in families
where one member was schizophrenic were distorted.

This was done carefully, scientifically and objectively.
The other non-schizophrenic members (so called)
did show evidence of schizophrenic thought dis-
order - concreteness, loosening of associations, am-
biguities and all the rest. But he accepted that
schizophrenia was basically a genetic disorder.
In another important American study, they follow-
ed up children with one parent who was schizophrenic
but who had been adopted and reared in a family
where there was no schizophrenia; they found
exactly the same existence of schizophrenia (14%) in
those children compared with children brought up
with their schizophrenic parent. This was very care-
fully done and it seems to knock the whole Laingian
hypothesis right on the head. The psychotherapists,
it seems to me, have a long history of making families
- especially mothers - feel guilty about things for no
good reason. Hooray for the Schizophrenia Associ-
ation !

This is not to say that factors in a family with a
psychotic child may not make the psychosis worse or
better, which is why very often in disturbed families
one has to get the patient out and into a halfway
hostel or other communal home.

Question In the context of 'Family Life', was the
treatment that girl got, reasonably accurately por-
trayed? It has been suggested that not enough diag-
nostic work was done before treatment began.

R.l\ Well - they were telling a long story in a short
time and I think managed to get a tremendous
amount across with implications and hints. If they
had shown a full diagnostic interview, from the
'Tell me about your father' stage, it would have taken
the whole of the film time. One has to take a lot on
trust. The way the first analytic psychiatrist approach-
ed the parents in terms of trying to understand
relationships, I thought rang very true, though the
psychiatrist I went with, also eclectic, was uncon-
vinced.

I thought that the older psychiatrist, the Sargant
figure, came over as quite a kindly, well-intentioned
man, but my colleague saw him as malignant and
thought he had been deliberately portrayed like that
by the film director, so these judgements are very
subjective. The nurses, I thought, were clearly
intended to appear as kindly authoritarian figures
although not very empathic, not in the way that the
first psychiatrist was. What I thought was totally
unreal about the physical treatment situation, was
the exclusion of social background - the fact that we
never see the G.P. or a social worker. It's as if the girl
lived two completely different lives - a hospital life
where she has physical treatment and a home life
where she becomes disturbed. The relationship
between the hospital and home seemed far more
divided than it would be in practice in, again, 99%
of cases - I hope.

Question Do you think that what was portrayed in
the film is liable to make people even more reluctant
to seek psychiatric treatment?

R.F. Very. I have had this already. A man I saw in
the out-patients last week had been studying depres-
sion because his wife was so clearly suffering from it
and was thoroughly put off by the ECT sequence.
For a doctor or nurse this was a low key sequence -
seeing a tooth pulled is much more horrific than what
was shown there - but it was enough to put an inex-
perienced layman right off and I think this was
anti-social.

Question Would it be common practice to give
someone with Janice's symptoms ECT?

R.F. Yes. Quite common.

Question It would. On what basis?
R.F. Practice varies in this. Mine is to start off with
just hospital environment, hospital rehabilitation and
phenothiazines, and if we don't seem to be making
much progress then ECT will often, as it were, 'jerk'
the mental mechanism back on the rails again.

Some doctors use it more readily than others. It
depends on the acuteness of the disturbance too;
ECT acts quickly and you want to get the sickest
patients better fast as a kindness to them, their
relatives and the nurses.

Question Is it used as a way of speeding up treatment?
Given the ideal situation, the sufficiently small case-
load and all the ancillary services would you use it
less?

R.F. I suppose honestly one is bound to say yes.
With one-to-one nursing and that kind of thing one
probably would need to use it less.

Question Talking about the practicalities of treatment
for a moment - in the therapeutic community unit
very little seemed to be happening, an impression
you often get going into these units; is there any
reason to think that a person like Janice would
ultimately finish off feeling 'better', having worked
out all her conflicts and family problems in that unit
without any drug treatment?

R.F. There is a lot of doubt really, as to how far this
therapy is relevant for schizophrenia. If it is, then I
reckon it is only so for a minority. In Shenley where
David Cooper had his Villa 21, on which I think
the first part of the film was modelled, there was some
doubt as to whether the cases in the Villa really
should be classified as schizophrenic, or whether they
were pseudo-psychotic hysterics or whatever.

But in all fairness, we did see a pretty lively group
meeting and a number of individual interviews. We
also saw a patient lying in bed all day because he
wanted to. I'm not sure that it is a particularly good
thing to foster regressive behaviour in a basically
regressive illness - which is what the conventional
mental hospital used to do, of course, and which is
what a totally unstructured therapeutic environment
could also do.

Question Given the practicalities of the situation,
ignoring the Utopian situation, what are the prior-
ities ? Is it important, as it seemed in the film, to have
a good through-put, to get people out and function-
ing, or is it better to keep them in hospital as long as
you need to to get the diagnosis absolutely right?
R.F. The diagnosis doesn't often present that much
of a problem - there are cases where it does and where
you would like to 'do a Maudsley' and observe the
course of the illness over a matter of weeks before
instituting any therapy but practicalities demand that
you make the diagnosis and get on with it and get
people better and out. This is not my research area
but many people feel that the quicker you get a person
with a schizophrenic illness better by whatever
means - ECT included - the better the outlook, and
the longer you let the process meander on, the worse
the outlook; I think that is probably true.
And don't forget the results of a conventional
approach are not half-bad; several studies have
shown that four patients out of five are out and
working two years after admission with schizophrenia.
Question And this, in practical terms, is more
important than this constant digging to find out why?
I mean the Laingian response to those figures would
be 'Yes but you're just suppressing the symptoms' -
wouldn't it?

R.F. Maybe, but at least we are not making them
worse. I have participated in family therapy of this
approach with a typical schizophrenic girl - very
regressed and disordered in thought - who had to
explore with her elderly and rather rigid father, their
incest feelings for each other. This seemed more than
irrelevant - I thought it was cruel and it wasn't doing
her any good at all. I thought it made things worse.
Question How can conventional psychiatry brush up
its image? It's not exactly tarnished it's just getting
superceded isn't it?

R.F. Yes, you're right. I don't know, I would hope
that more of my colleagues - who I know take the
eclectic view - will have the courage of their convic-
tions and their practice to speak up. I hope that this
interview will be read by people in the mass media
who will take note.

Question A course of conventional treatment, as you
say, is a fairly dull procedure. It hasn't got this
dramatic content which Laingian concepts seem to
provide on film or television.

R.F. It's the antecedents of the illness, the events
leading up to the hospital admission, where the drama
really is. Any psychiatrist could describe a dozen case
histories out of his head where the implications for the
family were very devastating, where the behaviour
had been bizarre and extremely cinematographic as it
were. But once they get into hospital and start getting
better it all gets rather dull, as you say.

Question If Janice had been a patient in your hospital
wouldn't there have been social work going on with
the parents and liaison with the local authority?
R.F. Definitely!

Question Before she went into hospital the first time
presumably she had been seen by a GP and there
would have been some kind of follow-up after she
went home?

R.F. The urgency wasn't awfully clear. There
wasn't much urgency about that first admission -
when she went into the therapeutic community unit -
so, under those circumstances, one would have had a
home visit and home assessment. But if somebody is
found praying naked in the rain then, obviously, any
kind of family exploration comes later.

Question So do you think that psychiatrists have
really got to start 'banging their drums' a bit at least,
or putting the other case to the well-documented
Esterson-Cooper-Laing-point of view?

R.F. I'm developing the feeling that we are seeing
too much psychiatry on television. I think the pend-
ulum has swung too far from it being a taboo subject
never to be talked about, to the point where there is
too much of it. I can see the point of view of publicists
who want more money for psychiatric hospitals and
services generally, because if you want money you've
got to put your case to the public so that the public
will pressurise the politicians which seems the only
way that you can get anything done. Let's face it, pub-
lic disclosure and mass media scandals like Farleigh
and Ely have forced the Department of Health to
invest massively in the Health Services and thank
goodness.

Having said that, I don't particularly want the
middle-of-the-roaders to bang their drum but what
the mass media are doing in polarizing us, artificially
maybe, obliges us to bang it. Maybe we have been too
preoccupied with setting up the Royal College of
Psychiatry to take all this seriously. Maybe when the
Royal College is properly functioning and everybody
knows what they're at then psychiatrists will take
more interest in publicity and their public image. It
doesn't help anybody to portray a false picture of the
situation; it's the patient who will suffer in the end,
and that's a pity.
