Volunteers
===========

Chrus King thquiet Revolutlon

The mentally ill?and those recovering from a mental
illness?are people who need people. The natural
response to this sort of statement is?'So does every-
body' and, of course, this is true. Nobody likes being
entirely solitary, almost all of us thrive on human
contact. Our relationships, our interaction with the
world about us and the people in it, are what gives
life meaning. But a mental illness often strips life of
this meaning, the mentally ill often shrink from people
and from the world and, when they are better, re-
establishing contact is no easy task?especially when
the community is indifferent, suspicious, afraid and
even condemnatory.
Modern treatment of mental illness aims to restore
people to their normal lives as quickly as possible. In
this context yolunteers?normal people from the
normal, everyday world?have a most important part
to play. Volunteers add a dimension of reality to the
lives of patients and ex-patients and, in so doing, help
them to maintain, develop and strengthen links with
the community.
Voluntary workers are performing two vital func-
tions?they are taking part, in a very real sense, in the
process of treatment and recovery and, since they are
of the community, they are educating the community
by example.
Patients and ex-patients benefit personally and
directly from the involvement of volunteers in the
mental health movement and they benefit jointly and
indirectly from the way in which the voluntary move-
ment is changing the climate of public opinion
towards mental illness itself and towards mental
hospitals which have been places of dread for so many
years.
Edward 'Nifty' Neale a voluntary worker in Somerset, helps an old lady to read her letters.
More than cake icing
In the past people have tended to think of voluntary
work in the cause of mental health as a kind of 'icing
on the cake'?a sort of bonus that was gratefully
received when it did exist but not actively sought
after if it did not. But, in the last few years, doctors,
administrators and Directors of Social Services have
been making it more and more plain that a vigorous
and efficient voluntary movement is a vital factor in
the provision of a good mental health service at
community level.
It is now widely accepted that even if there was
unlimited money to pay for unlimited numbers of
staff in the mental health service?doctors, nurses,
social workers and therapists of all kinds?there
would still be a need for volunteers. In fact, there
would still be jobs that could only be done by volun-
teers.
This wide acceptance of the importance of volun-
teers has had to be won, it was not granted easily and
without dispute.
Much of the pioneering work of involving volunteers
in the mental health movement and closing the great
divide between mental hospitals and the community
was done by the National Association for Mental
Health through its sponsorship and support of local
associations for mental health in towns and cities all
over the country. This pioneering development got
into its stride during the 1950s?when it was breaking
entirely new ground?and continues to go from
strength to strength in the 1970s (there are now 100
of these local associations).
The first appointment of an organiser of voluntary
services at a psychiatric hospital was my own in
September 1963 at Fulbourn Hospital, Cambridge.
This experimental appointment came about because
of the determination and vision of Dr. Patrick Tyser,
then medical officer of health for Cambridgeshire,
Dr. David Clark, the physician superintendent at
Fulbourn, and Lady Adrian who was a qualified
psychiatric social worker and, at that time, was both
chairman of Fulbourn Hospital Management Com-
mittee and vice-chairman of the National Association
for Mental Health.
Response and drift
All three were convinced that medical services for the
mentally ill were incomplete unless the public were
involved in the work of the Hospital. The Hospital
had encouraged volunteers to come in for some time
?to help arrange entertainment and sports?and the
response had been good, predominantly from the
University and from a local theological college. But,
although the response had been good, the contact with
the Hospital was usually short-lived and volunteers
drifted away.
While on a trip to the United States, Dr. Clark had
been impressed by the numbers of volunteers in-
volved in the work of psychiatric hospitals and by the
way in which the volunteers remained in contact with
the hospitals. This continuity was largely achieved in
the United States by hospitals having a member of
staff with enough time to locate opportunities for
voluntary work within the hospital and then go out
into the community to recruit people and place them
in appropriate voluntary jobs.
Through Dr. Tyser's persistence, a three year
grant to finance the appointment of an organiser of
voluntary services on an experimental basis was
secured from the Nuffield Provincial Hospital Trust.
^ ll
c
?
An old house-owner watches the progress of a young volun-
teer helping to paint the outside of her house.
42
My three years at Fulbourn were spent in a mainly
interpretative role. My instinct, as a social worker who
had not previously been connected with the psychi-
atric field, was that a mental hospital was an 'abnormal'
environment that needed to be made as normal as
possible. People seemed to be in the Hospital for a
variety of reasons?often non-medical?and the
problems did not seem insuperable except that it was
not recognised that the community as such could do
anything to improve the situation.
I do not think that I brought any new ideas to
Fulbourn, I simply brought an awareness that re-
sources did exist within the community and I began
to devise ways in which the resources could be har-
nessed. By the end of the three years it was clear that
the necessary ingredients for involving the everyday
community existed in plenty and that using them was
largely just a matter of liasion, planning and prepara-
tion.
Interest aroused
Another experimental appointment of an organiser
had been made at St. Thomas' in London by this
time and the interest of the Hospital Centre of the
King Edward's Hospital Fund for London had been
aroused. Jean Finzi (from St. Thomas') and I were
asked to take part in conferences at the Hospital
Centre and this, together with Jan Rocha's King's
Fund Report Organisers of Voluntary Services in
Hospitals, triggered off a great deal of interest in the
new appointments.
In 1966 the* King's Fund had agreed to finance a
scheme organised by the National Association for
Mental Health to find out whether a voluntary ser-
vices organiser based in the community would be as
successful as those actually attached to a hospital.
This project (carried out by Hans Muller in Croydon)
has been a spectacular success and, with Mr. Muller
still in post, the appointment became one jointly
financed by the local authority and the hospital
authority and has now come under the wing of the
Croydon Social Services Department as part of the
unified administration of the Croydon Voluntary
Services. In this new form there is to be a co-ordinator,
a deputy and three assistants responsible for hospitals,
day care and residential care together with liasion with
schools.
One of the major issues at that time (as it still is
today) was whether volunteers wanting to work in
psychiatric hospitals should have any sort of'training'
for the kinds of work they might find themselves doing
or whether 'training' as such defeated the object of
voluntary work.
Another cause for concern was the piecemeal way
in which appointments of organisers of voluntary
services were being made and there became an urgent
need to co-ordinate all the information available on
the subject and to pool experience in what was still a
highly experimental field.
Issues like these, together with the publication of
the Aves Report, The voluntary worker in the social
services, in 1969 and the appearance of the Govern-
ment circular HM(69)58, National Health Service:
voluntary help in hospitals, also in 1969, led to the
establishment of the Voluntary Service Information
Office at the Hospital Centre in the same year?finan-
ced once again by the King's Fund and with myself
appointed as Information Officer.
"Voluntary work in hospitals
is not the prerogative of any
one section of the community,
but appeals to all sorts of
people regardless of age, sex,
occupation or social position
. . . Discipline in volunteers
is not necessarily in direct
proportion to age or social
status. Hair and skirt length
are no guide to reliability and
efficiency either way"
Organisers of Voluntary Services in
Hospitals by Jan Rocha. King Edward's
Hospital Fund, 1968.
'Band-wagon' effect
The creation of posts for orgarfisers of voluntary
services in hospitals had begun to mushroom by this
time and there was something of a 'band-wagon'
effect taking place?it quite suddenly became'fashion-
able' to appoint an organiser. The rapid expansion of
organisers (shown in graph form within this article)
was given further impetus when Richard Crossman,
then Secretary of State, championed the cause of the
mentally handicapped and urged the appointment of
43
organisers of voluntary services in hospitals for the
handicapped.
Such a brief survey of the development of the
voluntary help organisers movement in hospitals and
the community?a development which has gone from
tentative origins to achieving almost a 'cure for all
ills' status in the space of 10 years?runs the risk of
giving the impression that all has been plain sailing.
It is all too easy for the momentum of the appoint-
ments of organisers and the involvement of volunteers
to mask the fact that the problems of making voluntary
services valuable, of actually getting the schemes and
projects to work properly and to the advantage of
patients, hospitals, communities and volunteers them-
selves, have been numerous.
In effect, the same problems of philosophy, co-
operation, communication, implementation, funding
and interpretation have cropped up time and again
almost as each new appointment has been made.
With hospital authorities being urged on all sides to
appoint an organiser and plunge their hospital into
the brave new world of voluntary services, there has
been a tendency to make a swift appointment and then
expect spectacular results. Without preparatory work
being thoroughly done and without clear ideas of what
an organiser is supposed to achieve, the results have
sometimes been unspectacular and they have certainly
not been immediate.
Protective shell
Organisers of voluntary services run the risk of finding
themselves installed in an extremely conservative
world. Psychiatric hospitals in particular, often after
years of neglect and being regarded as virtually apart
from the rest of the community, have developed a
protective shell which may be very hard to penetrate,
especially with new ideas which may disrupt the
well-established 'system' and bring changes that
neither the administrators nor the staff are sure that
they want in the first place.
When Hans Muller had completed the first year of
his project in Croydon and was beginning to win the
support of ward staff for what he was trying to do at
Warlingham Park Hospital, the Assistant Hospital
Secretary remarked that Mr. Muller had been
'flogging a dead horse for the first six months because
Growth of appointments of
organisers of voluntary services
in hospitals 1963 ? December 1972*
O 10
4-m4
tH+
44_
1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 197:
Organisers in psychiatric hospitals ? * The plotting on this graph does not allow for appointments made of organisers for hospital groups. Group
Organisers in mental handicap hospitals ?????-?? appointments have become increasingly frequent since 1971 and there were 48 of them by December 1972.
Organisers in geriatric hospitals '??????
Organisers in general hospitals ^ In all there were 160 organisers appointed by December 1972 and 14 assistant organisers.
44
none of the staff really understood what it was that he
was trying to do . This was in the comparatively early
days of the history of organisers but the remark
pinpoints the persistent problem of communication
of making it clear to professional staff just what an
organiser of voluntary services is 'organising' and
just what the volunteers he is organising are going to
be 'organised' to do.
It is crucial to the success of the project that both
the need to use volunteers in a hospital and the pos-
sibility of appointing a voluntary help organiser must
be discussed and agreed by hospital management and
staff at all levels. The day to day work of the organiser
and the volunteers is done at ward level but if staff at
that level have not been consulted about voluntary
services, do not understand the principles involved
and do not give it their support, then the chances of
success are very slight.
Staff have felt that a 'grand plan'?and a threatening
one at that?has been foisted on them from above;
they have felt that volunteers are being brought in to
ease them out of their jobs as an alternative to a full
establishment of trained staff; they have felt that
volunteers have been drafted in to undertake all the
pleasant aspects of psychiatric nursing leaving the
professionals with only the drudgery.
In fact, it is essential that all paid staff and volunteers
should understand that the proper purpose of volun-
tary help in a hospital is to improve the quality of life
for the patient, and to develop in the hospital and its
neighbourhood an overall sense of community in-
volvement. Even if there was unlimited money to pay
for unlimited numbers of staff, patients would still
need volunteers to provide ordinary human contact
from outside the hospital.
No substitute
A volunteer's work is no substitute for the work of a
paid employee, it can only be complementary to it. A
volunteer's work must never put a patient at risk; it
must never put paid staff at risk. There are many
activities which can be undertaken by volunteers in
the wards and departments of a hospital, but, except
in times of epidemics or similar emergencies, volunteers
should never be used as replacements for paid staff;
as a reason for reducing the establishment of paid
staff; or as a mask to cover the real requirement for
additional paid staff.
Equally, it should be made clear from the start (and
reiterated whenever necessary) that the voluntary
help organiser acts as a bridge between paid staff on
the one hand and volunteers and voluntary organisa-
tions on the other. On the staff side he must help to
determine the requirement of patients and assess
the role for volunteers, and must ensure that, when
volunteers are allocated, they are properly controlled.
On the volunteer side he must co-operate with
existing voluntary organisations to help ensure that
the hospital can enjoy the fullest benefit from the
services they have to offer, and he must also be
responsible for recruiting, training and placing in-
dividual volunteers in suitable work in consultation
with paid staff.
Clearly, the efficient functioning of a voluntary
help scheme can be of immense value to the patient,
to the paid staff, who are enabled to make their ser-
vices to the patient more effective, and to the com-
munity, which gets to know and understand its
hospital and the services which it provides.
Despite the drafting of guidelines, several pub-
lications and constant liaison and consultation, there
is still a good deal of confusion about the voluntary
help movement and more than a little hostility
towards it. The Confederation of Health Service
Employees at its ioth annual delegate conference in
1972 declared its opposition to voluntary help schemes.
A volunteer in an old people's ward of a Croydon psychiatric
hospital encourages an old lady to join in a ward entertain-
ment.
45
A Community Service Volunteer at a psychiatric hospital in Warwickshire finds himself behind the stumps during an impromptu
cricket match
46
The man who proposed the resolution made it clear
that he was not anti-volunteers but that his opposition
was on the political issue involved. He said: 'They
[the Government] have actually created a second-tier,
cheap labour force in the Health Service'.
The words of a member of the National Executive
Committee of COHSE accepting the resolution were
rather more depressing: 'I have been asked to accept
the resolution ... for the very good reason that this
organisation has, for many years, advocated and
worked for a professional and a qualified service, and
because we believe that any job that can be done by a
voluntary worker can be done considerably better by a
paid member of staff'.
Ominous grey area
There is still a lot of misunderstanding and a lot more
talking and convincing to be done on this issue and
there is still an ominously large grey - area which
blankets the kinds of jobs being carried out by
volunteers in hospitals and the extent to which they
really are jobs which should be reserved for paid
members of staff. There is no doubt that volunteers
can be abused and mis-used although they them-
selves would be innocent of the fact. There is a lot
to be said for on-going research and monitoring of the
work volunteers are asked to do since brushes with
the Unions can do the voluntary service movement
nothing but harm.
On the other side of this particular coin, it seems
clear that hospital administrators are sometimes vague
about the purpose of voluntary schemes and may
encourage the use of voluntary labour in the wrong
way. Hence, once again, the vital importance of
consultation with staff at all levels. Equally, the
hospital itself may have unreasonable expectations
of its volunteers and, if these expectations are not
confirmed, enthusiasm wanes and co-operation may
become more grudging.
It cannot be said too often that it is crucial to have
plans, duties, expectations, collaboration and lines of
communication hammered out throughout all tiers
of staff and administrators before any voluntary
service scheme gets under way.
With the almost constant reorganisation of the
Health Service, and particularly with the upheavals of
April 1974 in mind, it is becoming increasingly clear
that some organisers of voluntary services are being
appointed to impossible jobs. One man, for example,
was appointed recently to be organiser for a Group
made up of 22 hospitals. He has a job with which it is
impossible to come to grips without assistance, and
the thinking behind the job definition must have been
extremely woolly. This sort of case illustrates again
that some hospital administrators have a strange
concept of the organisation of voluntary services and
quite unrealistic expectations of it.
Substantial skills
But there are signs that, as the nature of the job of
organiser becomes more thoroughly understood, so
those resonsible for making the appointments are
asking for the right people and the right people are
coming forward to apply for the jobs. There are sub-
stantial skills needed to be a good organiser, it is not
a sinecure and it is certainly not a 'soft option'.
One problem about attracting people to a job as an
organiser is that there is still no clear career structure
in sight. At the moment a young man with ability who
makes a success of an organiser's job may find that
the growing responsibilities of a young family mean
that he can no longer afford to go on doing the job.
The organiser is seen as an off-shoot of the hospital
management team and progress upways is still
ill-defined.
A career structure may arise out of the Health
Service re-organisation, the South West Metro-
politan Regional Hospital Board, for example, now
employs Jean Finzi as Regional Voluntary Services
Officer to advise on the development of voluntary
services in their region but, at the moment, this
appointment is financed by a King's Fund grant.
Looking ahead to the 1974 reorganisation, it might
be that a closer tie up with the Social Services will
be the future pattern. There are already several ways
in which co-ordinators of voluntary services in
hospitals have begun to integrate with the Social
Services and to widen their contacts in the community.
Such programmes not only make it easier to re-
cruit volunteers because it is easier to avoid over-
lapping but also it seems to be more logical when one
is thinking about total health care, and the integration
of health services in 1974. It may be that voluntary
service schemes in hospitals will, in the future,
frequently come within the scope of a unified Health
Service, as in the Croydon scheme, and so present a
different sort of picture.
There can be no doubt, despite occasional set-
backs, that volunteers have a crucial part to play in
the treatment process especially of the mentally ill.
Voluntary service in the National Health Service is
here to stay and, as far as the mental health service is
concerned, it represents one concrete factor in the
otherwise nebulous concept of community care.
4/
Mary Croft, a Croydon voluntary worker, plays guitar for a group of old ladies in hospital.
Out of date
At the same time, it is equally obvious that the whole
basis of voluntary service, its principles and philo-
sophy, is undergoing a transformation. The concept
upon which voluntary organisations have been based
in the past is now out of date. It is a sad fact that too
many organisations are more concerned with just
keeping themselves going rather than asking whether
the service they go on providing is really relevant
today.
Young people, many of whom are desperately
anxious to accept responsibility for what goes on in
our society, see many voluntary organisations in
terms of the rich giving to the poor and are beginning
to demand more radical solutions?they want to get
to grips with the origins of problems rather than
tinker about with the results.
The young have made us all question our actions,
attitudes and priorities and it has been a very healthy
inquisition; but idealism is hard to harness and there
is still a great deal that can be done to correct the
here and now as well as preventing the perpetuation
of many of our social ills.
It is sometimes hard to reconcile the fragmentary
and militant climate of opinion of the 1970s with the
degree of organisation and co-ordination necessary
to work in with the statutory services, but not to do
so would be to negate our responsibilities now and
would not say much for our priorities if a better
future is to be secured for the mentally ill.
*
The Volunteer?friend or foe? An exhibition (at
the King's Fund Hospital Centre, 24 Nutford Place,
London WiH 6AN), which tries to illustrate the
contribution and role of volunteers in hospitals and
to demonstrate some of the factors in developing
effective partnerships between those who provide
service and those who use them.
9.30-5.15 Monday to Friday until March 30th.
Group visits should be booked in advance with
Mrs. W. M. Arnett-Rayson (262 2641).
48
