No Title
===========


When the NAMH was inaugurated in 1946 its founders did not conceive it as a protest movement. It was
a pioneering organisation in the field of mental health
?in education, child guidance, residential services,
mental after-care and the provision of a casework
advisory service. True, it has always been concerned
with policy issues and, over the years it has, through
its evidence to expert committees and its direct line to
successive ministers, had a considerable influence on
the shaping of the mental health services.

We were certainly not created as a protest movement but (without reducing our pioneering and service
roles) we have become one. Whether we 'achieved'
this status or had it 'forced upon us' is a matter for
debate.

The 'Save the Paddington Day Hospital' campaign
was an object lesson in successful protest. It began
with a few angry staff and patients who were appalled
at the prospect of a unique psychiatric therapeutic
community being swallowed up and its identity lost by
absorption into the new psychiatric unit at St. Mary's
Hospital. There were some who thought that bannerwaving and 'sit-ins' might do the trick. But the leaders
of the protest movement were sensible enough to involve GPs, social workers, MPs and MIND/NAMH
at an early stage.

The three speakers billed to address a public protest meeting?Dr Faith Spicer, Dr Malcolm Pines
and myself?were all involved in MIND/NAMH.
And over 800 people turned up to add their weight?
deluding many who had benefited from treatment at
the PDH and doctors and social workers who had
been able to refer their patients and clients to it. The
MIND Campaign was able to call a press conference,
to advise on tactics and, with the full authority of our
Council of Management, to state our case to Sir Keith
Joseph, all of which helped to ensure that good sense
Prevailed and the plans for closing the Day Hospital
were dropped.

The fight for the establishment, near Cheltenham,
of an adolescent psychiatric unit for the South-Western Regional Hospital Board was an even better
example for it is the story of two pressure groups
meeting head on. There were those who opposed the
project?despite the fact that there was no unit in the
region for young people, and that the Gloucestershire
Mental Health Association and the Mental Health
Trust had raised over ?30,000 to pay for the conversion of a suitable building. At first the opposition was
successful and, with the help of a solicitor hired to
oppose the plan, it succeeded in getting the local
planning authority to refuse permission on the
grounds that 'the use of the house and land for the
purpose sought would be likely to prove detrimental
to the residential amenities of nearby dwellings'.

So the search began for another site?and no sooner
was one found than another group was set up to block
this urgently needed service. There was a petition and
a Public Enquiry. People expressed 'fears of drug
peddling, the danger to local children?If there are
25 patients who will be free, we are the ones who will
be behind locked doors'. Some acknowledged the need
for such a unit, but 'not in our area'.

The Association waited 13 months for the Minister
to reach his decision; but they had the full backing of
their own MP, Douglas Dodds-Parker (who later became chairman of the all-party mental health group in
Parliament) and the NAMH. Victory again?but as
the result of the delays the unit will not be open until
early in 1974 and the conversion costs, originally estimated five years ago at ?30,000, has now risen to
?80,000. The extra ?50,000 will have to be paid by
the taxpayer?thanks to the opposition which blocked
the scheme for so long.

The support of MIND is now constantly sought in
the struggle for better mental health services. A recent
case hit the headlines when two women were found to
have spent 50 years in a hospital for the mentally
handicapped ever since, as unmarried mothers, they
were sent there as 'moral defectives' under an Act
passed in 1913. MIND immediately became involved.
Then the medical and nursing staff at Stoke Park
Hospital, Bristol, turned to the Bristol Association for
Mental Health and to MIND to protest that inadequate funds were available to provide a decent
service for mentally handicapped patients.

MIND/NAMH is in a strong position to speak up
for we not only enjoy the support and involvement of
the professionals in the world of psychiatry and community mental health care, but we speak from our own
daily experience of steadily expanding services for the
mentally disordered and of educational and preventative work. When we speak we do so with authority??
and our voice is heard by those in power.
