Kept in the Background
=======================

:Author: lorn Merchant

Drawing on his own experience as an in-patient, the author suggests some simple ways of
making life in hospital more beneficial, and perhaps shortening the length of stays, and
expresses some reservations about public attitudes which still face patients when they
return to everyday life in the community.

To criticise the already outstanding facilities bene-
fiting mental patients while presenting bright ideas
of our own would be unfair until balance sheets with
all details were displayed and preferably published.
And then we could pretend that we understood! How
many have the slightest idea of what it costs to keep a
mental patient even if he is not continually treated?
I have heard wild estimates five times the amount
suggested by an equally ignorant person. Most
certainly though, those who recover partially and
receive sickness benefit at home after discharge are
causing a lesser burden to the State while allowing a
sicker entrant to be dealt with quicker. Which should
put paid to the evil myth in our advanced culture that
everyone in professions connected with mental
illness, to justify their places, are opening their arms
to receive us once again 'inside'.

The only refuge
I never saw cruelty during the course of several
stays, at the worst there was a minute minority of
indifference?but in some cases it may have been the
only refuge. For example, patients like me were
termed pests, because it is hard to comprehend why
helpful reassurance worked only after much repetition.

It has often been written that an apathy and
depression comes to long-stay patients so that they
behave mechanically at set periods of each and every
day. I can confirm that impression. But to alter this
is a tremendous task calling for even more dedication
rather than advances in actual therapies, although
these, too, are appreciated.

It would ease patients' tensions if the threat of a
less popular ward, such as a 'disturbed' ward, was
never used to discipline but resorted to only if all else
failed. Patients have taken refuge through their
failure to adapt to even a reasonably benign world?
is it fair that the threat of a greater adjustment should
be held over their heads in their asylum?in the
original meaning of this strangely outcast word?
My minister father preached Heaven, but never Hell,
and he brought me up with love, rather than fear of
punishment.

Many a patient still reeling from the shock of entry
would be happier if he knew where he stood in re-
lation to the community he has just left. The im-
proved patient, with at least one source of security
outside, should be encouraged as strongly as a tiny
tot setting out to school. His happy vision of his own
rehabilitation should be strengthened and supported,
rather than being offered a five-to-one bet that he will
return soon. Some are retained until immediate paid
work awaits them?had this been the yardstick in my
case I might have been a lifelong passenger. I had
to break that sequence of returning. This I did
eventually, without resort to blood relatives, and now
I am 'uncle' to six young tenants in my happy seafront
home, in a situation free from all hostility. A low
maintenance drug has served me at least as well, at
home.

Institution food is dull and I forced it down with
little relish. Once home, I bought and prepared my
own food, a careful choice including well-tried Health
Foods?proven products rather than competitive
wonders with their ingredients from all over the world.
Soon I was better and stayed better even while now
actually facing the deep bereavement from which I
had fled. I found that prescribed drugs served well in
47
partnership with superior nourishment?why all this
'civil war' between the producers of each? Could not
a little more first-rate food be more regularly used as
the support of the patient whose stay might thereby
be shortened?

Outings and entertainments seem to be arranged
sensibly for those that can benefit, as long as the right
of refusal remains?there should be lots of right of
refusal. But the dreary task of Industrial Therapy?
putting into boxes thousands of messy paints and
glue! Protective clothing, please! I ruined a good
suit in a couple of weeks.

Self-help books
----------------

A word about mental hospital libraries. I enjoyed
their well-stocked shelves catering for most tastes. I
agree that orthodox medical textbooks would be out
of place because many patients would identify them-
selves with ailments on every page. But the 'pep'
book written for the layman's self-help, such as the
works of the late Dale Carnegie, can help some
people towards a better understanding of themselves.
Carnegie's books, written in his homeland without
Welfare State, contain much of the 'sink or swim'
advice. Specialised comfort is provided in 'Loneliness
?an explanation and a cure' by Doctor J. B. Hoskis-
son?one book, read at home, that would have
helped me in the hospital library. Many such easily
readable books give either specific or general support.
Provided that some care was exercised in the lending
of such books to the right patients, surely a shelf of
self-knowledge would serve a purpose? Even extracts
from these encouraging books might be displayed?
in much the same way as several are now on my own
mantelpiece.

For the young and responsive, the utter boredom
and even hate for the hospital way of life?not, I
emphasise, for their guardians?should provide a
motive for a final discharge if they really want it so,
because they do not stand to gain through sickness.
Luckier than many, I returned to material security
but how much luckier are those who return to the real
affection of a partner.

In my ward was a beautiful woman who cleaned the
rooms vigorously each day. Otherwise I was surroun-
ded mostly by old men and the contrast she provided
reminded me of the outside world and all to be gained
there. Her very presence caused the rowdy to check
their speech. She did more good, in an utterly
innocent way, than our cinema shows and entertain-
ments. Vive la difference!.

Lady doctors are popular in men's wards and vice
versa. Let's have more mixing, or even an appropriate
nostalgic perfume to blot out the clinical smell.
A sad result that I experienced after ECT was that
it seemed not to be selective of memories that it
expelled. On the first day home we pass, without
recognition, our more recently formed friends. They
are hurt and next day they 'pass by on the other side'.

Prejudice then snowballs. 'Is he violent?' was a
landlady's whispered doubt when, for harmless
change, I looked for 'digs'. It is surprising that in this
enlightened age so many notions are retained which
haunt a man in those delicate days and weeks of his
new freedom and, more pathetically so, his craving for
appreciation and communion with those from whom
he has been away.

It still remains necessary to educate more fully those
members of the public who think that it is sufficient
that the mentally ill are no longer chained up as peep-
show exhibits and it still remains a priority for public
tolerance to allow the man who has been ill and is
taking his first tentative steps into his new world (or
back into his old one) to put a foot wrong from time
to time without the fear that one little slip will result
in an outraged telephone call and the risk of a swift
return journey to the hospital.
