Choose your Speed
==================

:Author: David Gunston

The pace of modern life is often cited
as a contributory factor in mental ill-
health although this is difficult to
substantiate clinically. Nevertheless,
choosing the speed at which to live
our lives and being able to vary the
speed at will is an important quality
for social survival and a sense of
proportion.

In his book Adventures in Solitude, David Grayson
says: 'Many times in my life I have repeated Rodin's
saying that "slowness is beauty". To read slowly, to
feel slowly and deeply; what enrichment! In the past I
Syndication International
have been so often greedy. I have gobbled down
books?I have gobbled down work?I have even
gobbled down my friends!?and indeed had a kind of
enjoyment of all of them. But rarely have I tasted the
last flavour of anything, the final exquisite sense of
personality of spirit that secretes itself in every work
that merits serious attention, in every human being at
all worth knowing.'

In other words, he did not regulate the speed of his
life correctly. Psychologists nowadays are constantly
telling us that many of our misfortunes are simply due
to bad timing, advising us to pick our moments?for
effort, decision-making, seizing opportunity, even
enjoyment and giving pleasure to others. But they
say very little about either the correct speed for
picking the right time, and even more importantly,
the tempo of subsequent action.

Ninety per cent of the art of driving a motor car is
judging the correct speed to proceed, having regard
to all the road and traffic conditions prevailing at any
given, constantly changing moment. In a journey of
only a mile or two, that may mean a dozen or more
adjustments of speed, according to circumstances.
Life is like that, too. It demands a constantly chang-
ing tempo, a keen balance between too little and too
much, a sure knowledge of just when to apply throttle
or brake.

Too often, though, our driving speed of life is
reckless, uncontrolled, erratic and whimsical, slugg-
ish and feverish by turns and governed more by
moods or the main chance than by the prevailing
conditions along the road we have to travel. For the
road conditions in life change just as often as do
those of the highway, and we ignore them at our
peril.

How easily we get our sense of values distorted,
our aims confused, our perspectives exaggerated or
twisted! The things we regard as power are all too
often weakness. The things we so readily regard as
weak prove in the end to have inner strengths. Even
the people we have to live with prove in the end to be
very different when we manage to penetrate their
surface assurance, poise and seeming success to find
underneath the scars of failure and sufferings that
they have endured.

Frequently we tend to rush enthusiastically, even
ecstatically up self-chosen paths from which we
then have to turn back late, often very late in the day.
Once again the speed was wrong; deliberation would
have been wiser and less wasteful.

At other times we 'keep our cool', as we think,
when others more correctly see our attitude as sheer
lethargy, or indifference. Some opportunity or need
presents itself; and we think subconsciously 'to-
morrow is another day'. When our tempo of life
needed swift and sudden impetus, we failed to
respond.

These failures to choose the correct speed, and we
all know them far more than we are prepared to
accept, are ultimately frustrating, exhausting, even
totally destructive of life itself. Constant hurrying is a
modern intemperance that kills in the end: too many
people today are hurrying and worrying beyond
human endurance. As Robert Raynolds points out:
'Many of our painful frustrations are caused by our
Athlete David Bedford choosing his speed ?in this case
faster than anyone else on the track.

driving desire to make an end of something or other.
We work ourselves to death trying to make an end of
unfinished business. We are in a kind of cold rage to
bring about a desired end in our own time and by
our own means. Eternity must laugh at our pretences.
To be driven by a passion to hurry to end is to famish
our lives of a living present'.

Yet, common though this fault is, there are times
when speed makes all the difference. Procrastination
is often a vice, opportunities are frequently fleeting
and must be seized, swiftness of reaction or decision
is sometimes vital for victory in what we seek to do.
Similarly, some people deliberately reduce their
tempo of life way beyond ordinary relaxation, slowing
up mentally as much as physically in a kind of
opting-out process designed (always unsuccessfully,
of course) to bring inner peace. The so-called human
'cabbage', mindless, apathetic, indifferent, life-
wasting and totally devoid of inspiration to others,
especially the young, is very often another example of
the wrong choice of life speed.

Yet again, slowness can be a great blessing. An
hour with nothing to do can be an enriching ex-
perience if we consciously switch off the engine, set
the hand-brake and 'recharge our batteries' by
complete relaxation, taking a walk in the country,
taking time out from the racecourse of life in medita-
tion, study or even one of the more rewarding forms
of idling. As Pascal pointed out: 'Most of the evils of
life arise from man's being unable to sit still in a
room'. And Henry David Thoreau viewed it this way:
'When we are unhurried and wise, we perceive that
only great and worthy things have any permanent
and absolute existence, that petty fears and petty
pleasures are but the shadow of the reality'.
Too often, to continue the motoring metaphor, we
drive fast with the brake on, thereby setting up
tensions that can easily burn up our nervous and
physical energy, impair our skills and dull our
performance in life.

So often we need to save ourselves from our hectic
concern over trifles, our insistent self-immersion in
pettiness and fussiness, our foolhardy giving of
strength to the unimportant, our pursuit of short
horizons that block from our view the eternal
perspectives.

The best way to start is to seek to acquire an inner
balancing mechanism, a kind of mental and spiritual
speedometer that controls our life tempo exactly
right according to each new situation we have to face.
This is really just another definition of the 'true goal
of the considered life', peace of mind.
