A Right Tc
===========


While society seems anxious to secure a 'better deal for the handicapped
emotional and sexual fulfilment. We either deny that they have natuf
relationships. As the extracts from this report show, the handicaps
in a reasonable and rational way.

'Sex isn't really something that comes up here at all
They're too bound up in themselves to bother about
relationships with other people.'
'Of course we want to get married, yes, and have
children as well. Don't you see, we have to? Just be-
cause we're handicapped, it doesn't mean that we
haven't got the same rights and feelings as everyone
else.'

The first speaker is the warden of a home for
physically handicapped people; the second a girl in
the same home, half of one of six couples whom, she
says, feels the same way as she does. The gap between
them is the difference we non-handicapped see
between 'them' and 'us'.
Public attitudes
fear & disgust?
There is something fundamentally disturbing about
the idea of handicapped people having the same urges
and desires as the rest of the population.
Whatever the reasons, we manage to think very
little about sex and disability. When we have to, the
feelings about handicap that we may usually be able
to conceal can come to the surface. 'In his encounter
with society', says a woman with severe rheumatoid
arthritis, 'the invalid rarely meets active dislike or
disgust. But if he ventures into the world of love, such
feelings are not far off'.
A young man severely handicapped and bound to
a wheelchair, recently married to a non-handicapped
woman, tells of a couple down the block from them
referring to him as 'that gentleman we've seen you
with' when they meet his wife?the word 'husband' is
too strong for them. Acquaintances try put a martyr's
crown on her?why else would 'such a nice girl' have
taken on such a man?

Ambivalence
------------

Handicapped people meet all sorts of ambivalence in
their contacts with the normal world?particularly
when their own problems of adolescent adjustment are
raging most strongly. A spastic girl probably speaks
for most physically handicapped people when she
bitterly remembers a young man trying to get off with
her: 'It was going fine until he noticed the chair; then
I could see his eyes turn off'. Yet she also remembers,
as do others, the men who assume that somehow they
are easy sexual game, simply because of their handi-
cap, and who seem genuinely surprised when they
show normal rejection of the approach.

So, on the one hand, handicapped people are out
of the 'normal' sexual and emotional running. On the
other, they are invested with sexual appetities and
needs beyond convention. The myths we hold about
their sexuality and its expression echo the same sort of
paradox. On one hand, we deny that these needs exist,
and make no provision for them. On the other, we
invest the handicapped with exaggerated sexual
demands, from which we and they must be protected.
Either way, we ignore their humanity.

The myth of sexlessness
-------------------------

The views of the warden at the beginning of this
report can be echoed up and down the land, in institu-
tions for the mentally and physically disabled, and
among the people who come into contact with them.
Severely mentally handicapped men may ex-
perience a two year delay in the onset of adolescence,
which they never catch up; severely mentally handi-
capped girls may begin to menstruate later than the
normal population, but the pattern is normal once
established.

But this evidence does not indicate that severely
mentally handicapped people do not have emotional
Ann
Shearer
e seem less than anxious to allow handicapped people the right to
*eds or we create institutions which discourage the formation of close
*ve emotional and sexual needs with which society has to come to terms
needs; their heterosexual relationships with each other
may not always be on a level that would mean much
to the normal observer, but they are still important to
them. In Sweden, where mentally handicapped
couples are often allowed to live together within
institutions, it seems that their needs are not so much
for full sexual fulfilment as for gentler emotional ex-
pressions?kissing, cuddling, sleeping together and
warmth.

The myth of sexual irresponsibility
------------------------------------

It is still widely believed that mentally handicapped
People are uncontrolled and perverted in their sexual
appetites. In the past, this belief has been one of the
main incentives for shutting them away in segregated
institutions. Yet it is segregation which has fed the
myth. They have been separated not only from normal
emotional patterns of life but also from heterosexual
company; it is our 'treatment' of their needs that has
been perverted?not the needs themselves.

The myth that handicap must breed handicap
--------------------------------------------

The misconceptions about inherited physical handicap
must give way in the light of genetic research. But the
mentally handicapped still carry their institutional in-
heritance and the myths that led to their segregation
from society.

But it is not necessarily true that mentally handi-
capped parents have mentally handicapped children.
?nly four of a sample of 1,280 mentally handicapped
People were found to have severely handicapped
Parents. After summarising the various estimates of
the proportion of handicapped children born to handi-
capped parents, one authority concludes that some-
lhing like 30% of them will be either severely or
mildly handicapped. But it is important to realise that
the large majority of defined forms of mental
handicap are not inherited, and that estimates of
handicapped people at any time depend on what
society at that moment is calling 'mental handicap'.

Making the myths come true?

Popular beliefs about the sexuality of handicapped
people are as mythical as the beliefs in the danger that
their sexual emotions and feelings constitute to
society.

In our provision for disabled people, we still deny
them both knowledge about their own sexuality and
the means of expressing their needs. As a result, we
can sometimes encourage the myths about their be-
haviour to become realities. Having created the stereo-
types for our own comfort, we can force people to live
up to them. Mentally handicapped people who are
denied any normal emotional expression may well
develop odd forms of behaviour. Residents in institu-
tions for the physically handicapped?particularly
when these depend on charitable funds?say that, be-
cause there is an assumption of asexuality in the run-
ning of the place, they feel forced to fall in with it and
suppress their own emotional and sexual needs. By
ignoring the needs, and hoping that they will go away
if we do not talk about them, we can also deny handi-
capped people the knowledge on which a balanced
emotional development can depend.

Denial of knowledge
---------------------

Heads of centres for physically handicapped young
people report that those who come on from special
schools are even more ignorant about the physical and
emotional facts of life than those who have been in
ordinary schools. While sex education is pretty slight
for most children in Britain, the handicapped?parti-
cularly those in special residential schools?will have
even less opportunity to find out for themselves than
non-handicapped children of the same age.

The adolescent
---------------

The young handicapped person may find him or
herself stuck in a kind of adolescent limbo. 'Where
circumstances prolong the period of economic
dependence, postpone marriage, or disallow sufficient
emotional separation from the parent, then the
position of the individual as an adult, no matter what
his age, is apt to be tenuous and, like that of the
adolescent, marginal between adulthood and child-
hood. He may well continue to experience conflicts
with parental authority resulting from such margin-
ality, to feel devalued as an incomplete adult, and to
show inconsistent, exaggerated, and emotional be-
haviour typical of conflicting overlapping situations.
It may very well be that the fact of disability in many
cases tends to prolong the adolescent period.'
Sex education

Whatever the theories, the fact remains that for most
handicapped young people the chances of realistic sex
education and emotional guidance are pretty slim.
Staff concerned with them will often refuse to enter
this tricky arena, while complaining at the same time
about their 'immaturity' in courtship, their lack of
'decency', or understanding of what is properly private
behaviour and what is not.

Results of ignorance
---------------------

Recent Swedish work shows that much of the emo-
tional and behaviour disturbance that mentally handi-
capped young people can show in adolescence may
come from simple misunderstanding about what is
happening to their bodies?which can develop into
fear if not properly explained. A young boy, for in-
stance, thinks his wet dreams mean he has started
bed-wetting?and that, he has had it well dinned into
him, is wrong. A girl can find menstruation upsetting.

Living apart
-------------

Mental and subnormality hospitals are generally
rigorously segregated although there are now, in
mental hospitals, some 'experimental' mixed wards in
which patients of both sexes can usually share occupa-
tional and leisure facilities.

Where this has been tried in a couple of so-called
'family units' men, women and children may mix by
day but must separate at night, with even the small
boys returning to the 'male side'.

Staff attitudes
----------------

While the bricks and mortar of residential institutions
can militate against the development of personal re-
lationships between residents, the attitudes of staff can
be even more important.

A request to talk with staff and residents of a home
for the physically handicapped about its emotional
life brought a flurry of embarrassment. 'Now', a mem-
ber of staff told the assembled bunch of residents,
'you're going to talk about you-know-what, and you're
all going to be frank and honest about it'. The embar-
rassment was entirely on the staff side, for one thing
that emerges clearly is the gulf in attitudes between
older staff and their young residents.

The generation gap
-------------------

To an extent, this moral gap between generations is
noticed throughout society. But in a situation where
staff and residents must necessarily be on terms of
unusual intimacy because of the residents' handicap,
its effects are likely to be magnified. The prevalent
staff attitude towards sexual expression appears to
go something like this: 'Of course we think it very
important that they should be free to develop emo-
tional relationships?it's a normal need, after all?so
long as they don't do more than hold hands'.

Effect on residents

Among the residents, certainly, there are complaints
about staff attitudes. 'They treat you like children,
never take you seriously.'

It is perhaps hardly surprising that in such an
atmosphere the residents may start to live up to the
pattern of behaviour the staff expect of them. It is
particularly hurtful when their emotional attachments
are not taken as seriously as they would want them to
be, when their adolescent 'engagements' are laughed
at; perhaps, again, it is not altogether surprising that
these relationships have a 'coarse and comic quality',
in sheer self-defence.

Frustrations and solutions

The frustrations that can develop out of segregated
living in institutions for the mentally handicapped are
perhaps more serious, because the means of getting
round restrictions may be too difficult for some resi-
dents to master, and because their segregation from
each other is more total. The Swedes have found that
an adult living in a single sex institution becomes
childish, egocentric and aggressive; there is a great
deal of open masturbation.

In mixed institutions, where residents have not only
their own room but their own basin and lavatory, or
share them with only two or three others, behaviour
has improved. Residents have become calmer and
more considerate of each other. Adults are allowed to
live together, with women on the pill, and homosexual
friendships are not frowned on; open masturbation is
now no problem.

The old behaviour problems are replaced with some
jealousy and hurt feelings?the 'normal' hazards of an
emotional life. But the staff find it quite possible to
work through these problems with the residents.

What emerges clearly is the explosion of myth;
given the chance of emotional expression, mentally
handicapped people are neither grotesque nor uncon-
trolled in their appetites.

All we can say is that, where both sexes are allowed
to spend their days together, even the most severely
handicapped will find a serenity and calm in their
relationships with each other, even if the only outward
expression of their feelings is merely an occasional
touch. But mixed facilities of this sort for severely
handicapped residents are very rare.

Marriage
--------

Residential centres for both the physically and the
mentally handicapped could do a great deal more
than is sometimes the case to help their residents learn
the sort of physical skills that are needed for running
a home.

Children?
----------

Most physically handicapped couples will want to
know their chances of having a handicapped child,
and they should be able to get the genetic advice on
which to base a rational decision. They will also have
to decide whether or not they can cope, financially and
physically, with a child. A disablement income pro-
vided as of right would ease the problems of handi-
capped people considerably and, for some, would
make having a child a real possibility.

The children of handicapped parents
------------------------------------

Children of severely handicapped parents may have
emotional problems which could lead to a need for
counselling. In a study of 18 couples in which one or
both of the parents was blind, it was found that 15
families had some difficulties. These could not. how-
ever, be blamed on blindness alone. A spastic man,
with normal speech but a very clumsy walk, married
to a non-handicapped wife, tells of the quite severe
emotional problems this brought to his children. The
son, from the time he started school, wanted to avoid
being seen with his father in public; in time he refused
to bring his friends to the house, and the strained re-
lationship between the two wasn't brought into the
open, and its problems resolved, until the son was
virtually grown up. The daughter did badly at school,
and had migraines, although always affectionate to
her father; again, it was not until adolescence that he
discovered how hard she had been fighting for him
against girls at school over the years, and the deep
emotional effect her loyalty to him in keeping quiet
about it had had.

Fulfilment?
-------------

'I love him, I'm satisfied', says a mentally handi-
capped wife. 'She's happy, so am I', says her husband.
'That's all we want?a nice house with a bath in it.
Then you can come home and have a nice bath and go
straight to bed in a clean bed. We're happy.'
Clearly not all handicapped people will reach full
emotional expression. Some will be too handicapped
to marry or to have children. Others, like some of the
normal population, will not find anyone they want to
marry.

But is this any reason to deny them knowledge of
their own sexuality and opportunities of emotional
development?

'A Right to Love?' is available from the National Associa-
tion for Mental Health, 39 Queen Anne Street, W1M OAJ
or from The Spastics Society, 12 Park Crescent, London
WIN 4EQ. Price 14p including postage.
