The Tradeiri Lunacy
======================

A study of private madhouses in
England in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries
by William LI. Parry-Jones
Routledge & Kegan Paul, ?4.75
Confidence in the promise ? if not
yet the achievements ? of psychiatry has brought renewed interest
in its history. There is much to be
learned from our predecessors.
They too fought the perennial battle
to gain for their patients the dignity
and status of sick human beings
against ignorance, parsimony and
prejudice.

Their successes were the more
remarkable for being achieved in
harsher times, when medicine knew
little of causes of disease and less
about those which affect the brain
and so derange the mind. Progress
was made on two fronts which were,
and remain, interdependent ? the
humanitarian and the scientific.
Patients are still treated in Victorian
isolation miles from the mainstream
of medical advance, where the old
and the new rub along together as in
no other speciality.

Because psychiatry bridges these
two cultures ? the humanitarian
and scientific ? its history can be
explored from many angles. This
gives it both its practical turn and
its peculiar attractiveness. Dr. ParryJones combines the role of cautious
clinician and good historian. His
study of the private madhouse system from its beginnings to its heyday
in the late 18th and early 19th
centuries is well-written, thoroughly
readable and scholarly.

Until county asylums became the
rule, private houses provided the
bulk of the country's psychiatric
services and mostly did it well, if
allowance is made for the standards
of the times. These keepers and
doctors who ran them also made
contributions to knowledge. There is
a detailed analysis of the work of
two Oxfordshire madhouses whose
records of admissions, discharges,
etc. are complete for the second
quarter of the 19th century. Interesting comparisons are made from
these and other facts and figures.

Dr. Parry-Jones also provides a
guide through the maze of lunacy
legislation spun like a cocoon
around the rich ? and later also the
poor ? patient, designed to protect
the insane from exploitation and the
sane from incarceration. Periodic
waves of public suspicion are well
described, and a double standard of
care emerges clearly, which even
the National Health Service has not
remedied and which would not be
tolerated in any other branch of
medicine.

Those already acquainted with the
field will meet many old friends and
make some new ones, and will not
fail to be delighted with his use and
survey of first sources and meticulous documentation. It will prove an
eye-opener and salutary corrective
for those who still think psychiatry
began with Kraepelin, Freud and
Bleuler. Recent revelations make it
even more imperative that all concerned with mental hospitals and
mental health should read this book.

Richard Hunter
