Alexander Mitchell
===================

nw(00<3 sense of
Tfie SfiOCT-fiQOO

Every GP is familiar with the words:
'It's my nerves, doctor.' His problem
then is to discover what his patient
means. With all the woolly ideas
about nerves 'fraying', 'snapping' and
'breaking down', the complaint is
often used as a vague short-hand for:
'Something's wrong I'
The trouble with psychiatry is that it is still a rather
inexact art - or science. So many psychiatric terms
used by doctors or patients have both colloquial and
technical meanings. When a patient says to a doctor,
'I'm feeling depressed', on the one hand he may mean
that he has feelings of deep despair and distress, loss
of hope, and thinks that life is not worth living -
features which are commonly recognised as part of a
depressive illness. But on the other hand, he may
simply mean that he is feeling a bit under the weather
or anxious or frustrated or whatever.
In much the same way, when a patient comes to a
doctor and says, 'I'm suffering from my nerves', it is
difficult to establish what is meant. Dr. Parr* has set
out to discover what is really meant by 'nerves' and
'nervous breakdown'.
This word 'nerves' can be used as a kind of im-
precise shorthand. Often people will say to one
another 'Oh, I am just suffering from my "nerves", and
use this to excuse, or even justify certain types of
behaviour. Similarly, doctors will turn to patients and
say 'Stop worrying about that pain, it's just your
nerves'. So it is very important for us to be clear in
our own minds just exactly what is meant by this kind
of statement.
Does it have any specific meaning at all or is it, like
many phrases which we use, merely a 'noise', a way of
communicating while not communicating? It is useful
to have some kind of socially acceptable phraseology
to 'tell' people that we do not want to communicate
something, or that we are unable to communicate
* Understanding your nerves by Dr. J. A. Parr,
published by David & Charles at ?2.50
something specific. Very often in the complex human
situation, when we do not understand what is
happening or find it difficult or embarrassing to put
into words our basic fears and anxieties, it is very
useful to have some phrase like 'it's my nerves' to fall
back on.
Dr. Parr has written his book largely for the general
public - for those people who will come as 'custom-
ers' complaining about their nerves, but it is also
relevant to family doctors, social workers and all of us
who, from time to time, are confronted by people in
distress.* Dr. Parr himself has spent more than 40
years in medical practice and for 6 years he was the
BBC 'radio doctor'.
Starting with a consideration of the way in which
our attitudes to psychiatric and psychological disturb-
ance have developed, Dr. Parr examines the concept
of 'nerves'. He discusses ways in which we inherit
certain tendencies and weaknesses. He considers the
emotional development of the child and goes on, in a
general chapter, to look at the basic signs and symp-
toms of mental disorder. This is followed by a more
detailed discussion of anxiety and depression - the
two commonest forms of nervous disorder in family
practice.
He considers neurosis, has a chapter on agents that
poison the brain and the nervous system (concentrat-
ing largely on the problems of drug dependence and
alcoholism), a chapter on sexual problems and
perversions and a general chapter on treating mental
disorders. He finishes by considering child psychiatry
as a special sub-division of psychiatry. There are two
appendices: the first one a very useful dictionary of
terms used in psychiatry, and the second a long
complicated list of subjects of fears and phobias.
There is a small but reasonable index.
Selection of topics
The book is easy to read, but there are a number of
reservations to be made. First of all there is through-
out an annoyingly subjective selection of topics -
perhaps unavoidable in a book which is not meant to
be a textbook for professionals. An author has to
select topics which, he feels, are of interest and
importance to a general audience, but nevertheless,
throughout the book, Dr. Parr reveals his own
particular biases and orientation - which are some-
what different from my own!
* See also The mending of minds by W. Lawton Tonge,
published by Darwen Finlayson at ?1.75 - very useful as an
introductory book for relatives of the mentally ill and
having much to offer family doctors and psychiatrists too.
He tends to miss out things which are quite
important. For example, in Chapter 11 on 'The
Treatment of Mental Disorders', he makes no signi-
ficant mention of drug treatment and yet in modern
psychiatry, particularly in family practice, drug
treatment is perhaps the major and most important
form of treatment available at the present time.
Dr. Parr also tends to get over-involved in rather
obscure aspects of his subjects. For example, in
Chapter 8 on neurosis, he devotes six and a half pages
to a discussion of compulsive stealing (kleptomania)
but only one page to discussing phobias (although they
are listed at the end of the book). In clinical practice
kleptomania is extremely rare, whereas phobias are
taking up more and more of the doctor's time. People
are beginning to realise that irrational fears are not
something to be ashamed of but something which can
be discussed with a doctor, and which very often do
respond to treatment.
Again, in the chapter on sexual perversions and
sexual problems, Dr. Parr outlines the story of
Leopold von Sacher-Masoch in considerable detail -
an interesting story, but illustrative of the author's
over-involvement in too specific aspects of his
subject.
His arguments are also somewhat weakened by his
emphasis on the rather old-fashioned theory of the
'instincts', which has largely been replaced by more
modern ideas on innate patterns of behaviour set in
motion in response to 'signals' (words, gestures,
actions, etc.) from people with whom we interact.
For example, we no longer believe that there is a
mothering instinct as such, but that the needs of the
child evoke biological responses from the mother. In
much the same way a lot of Freud's early theory of
the sexual instinct is now replaced by more modern
psychoanalytic concepts of sexual development.
Throughout the book there is a concentration on
the individual, and not on the links between the
individual and his environment, except in the case of
the child's relationship with the mother. My own
feeling is that this still reflects a psychiatry which, like
the purely medical model, is based on the individual
patient, whereas psychiatry is now moving towards a
more 'social' concept - a concern with the way in
which people interact, in twos and threes or in larger
groups.
The first of his two appendices, the 'Dictionary of
terms used in psychiatry', I found interesting - but
once more as a reflection of his own highly personal
and rather obscure approach. He includes a number of
terms which are not commonly used in psychiatry -
for example, 'abiotrophy', 'bradyphrenia', 'deja
eprouve', etc.
The second appendix - 'Subjects of fears and
phobias'- seems a little unnecessary; almost 100
phobic types are quoted. This is an extreme example
of abstruseness and, far from helping people to relax
about nervousness, it is liable to confuse, frighten and
'blind them with science'.
Dr. Parr's chapter on child psychiatry is really very
good. He has a simple direct approach here which will
be very helpful and reassuring to parents as they try to
bring up children in the midst of mountains of
conflicting and pompous advice. If Dr. Parr had been
able to maintain this same standard throughout, it
would have been an exceptionally good book.
As it is, Dr. Parr has not fully achieved what he set
out to do. He has given inadequate consideration to
the whole concept of'nerves' and 'nervousness' where
further discussion of this aspect would have made the
book more valuable. These concepts need exploring in
more detail.
To outline briefly the concepts that would benefit
from further exploration - three words are commonly
used, both by the psychiatrist and the layman -
nerves', 'nervous' and 'neurotic'.
Nerves' is used in various ways - a patient will
come and say 'My nerves are bad, doctor', or 'I feel
my nerves are all jangled', or 'I feel my nerves are "on
the stretch", I am all keyed up'.
Nerves 'snapping'
In these cases a patient is applying the word to his
nervous system. He understands that his nervous
system consists of a series of nerves which he likens
to wires through which impulses pass, or even to
violin strings which can be stretched. A 'nervous
breakdown' is thought of as the nerves snapping. In
other words, he is thinking in analogies when he says
I have nerves like violin strings'. The danger of this
ls that one tends to forget that it is an analogy; thus
the nerves are thought of literally as violin strings
which are stretched and can break.
The word 'nervous' is also used widely and vaguely-
f?r example, 'being of a nervous disposition', 'having
a nervous breakdown' or 'being of a nervous char-
acter'. It is used as an adjective to describe a certain
type of person who is thought of as sensitive and
therefore easily upset but, at the same time, sensitive
ln the sense of being quickly aware of the feelings of
others.
So it is a characteristic with good and bad aspects.
^ implies that the person is easily frightened and has
to be handled gently. Very often, people associate
nervousness with artistic sensitivity and creativeness.
The word 'nervous' is used as an opposite to a word
like 'stolid' which implies a solidity of personality, a
lack of sensitivity, and creativeness.
The word 'neurotic' is used both colloquially and
technically. When it is used colloquially (You're just
neurotic') it is often used in a pejorative way - in
other words, as a criticism implying weakness,
debility and temperamental behaviour, in the sense of
being a prima donna.
When used technically by a doctor, the word
implies emotion heightened because of underlying
conflict - as in the diagnosis: neurotic anxiety.
Ordinary anxiety is seen to be natural and consistent
with the circumstances; neurotic anxiety is not
natural and is excessive - an inappropriate reaction to
the circumstances.
The label 'neurotic', when used by doctors and
laymen, also tends to imply that the illness is feigned,
and in this sense, 'neurotic' becomes analogous to
'hysterical' and 'malingering'. These three words refer
to quite separate situations: neurotic anxiety arises out
of conflict and is not under the conscious control of
the individual; hysterical anxiety arises out of a
conflict situation too, and is equally out of the control
of the individual, but serves a secondary purpose;
malingered, anxiety implies that the anxiety is quite
conscious and is deliberately produced or simulated
by the individual in order to escape from a difficult
situation.
So under the heading 'your nerves', a whole range
of attitudes, prejudices and value judgements are
included and, while the heading can be useful, on the
whole it is dangerous because it masks truths which
are better revealed. It is also one way in which people
can classify each other so as to make us all appear to
conform to certain patterns of behaviour, or to use as
a form of blackmail to make other people respond to
us in a particular kind of way.
If people are to have a better understanding of
what ails them it is worth getting over the message
that nerves do not exist in the colloquial sense and to
explain the popular misconceptions that are so widely
held. For this reason it is a pity that Dr. Parr has
enshrined a myth in his title while his whole book is
dedicated to the destruction of this myth.
Rather than 'understanding our nerves' we have to
realise that we have no nerves to understand, and
come to accept instead (as Dr. Parr seeks to do in his.
book) that human distress, anxiety, conflict, despair
and depression arises out of people's relationships and
that the answer to these distressing human feelings
lies in understanding the relationships better and in
learning to be more comfortable within them.
