The Fugitive Mind
===================

:Author: Peter Rowlands
Dent, ?2.25
It seems fashionable these days for
books about handicapped children
to be written not only by doctors,
psychologists, teachers and social
workers but also by parents of handicapped children. This is not to say
that parents are not qualified to write
or are not the best people to write
on the subject but a book written by
a parent automatically has certain
reservations. It is bound to be subjective, certain self-interest is involved, the case study, however
deep, cannot be unbiased, and the
message must be seen as a cry for
help.

Peter Rowlands' 'The Fugitive
Mind' is no exception. What is the
purpose of writing the book? What is
the message? If the objective is (as
it appears to be) to give other
parents the wisdom of their experience in dealing with an autistic
child, the book succeeds moderately
well.

But there are a large number of
reservations to be made. John is
born into an educated family (the
majority of the parents of autistic
children are of the higher socioeconomic group), and with a father
who is a psychologist, but this does
not seem to have led to the condition being recognised earlier. In this
way, the parents behaved like any
other parents, observing some of the
deficiencies yet failing to recognise
them, or not trying to recognise their
significance. A chance visit to a
children's hospital, for a physical
ailment, and a consultant's remark
seemed to trigger off the need for
further probing. By this time, however, there has already been a lot of
stress and tension between the
parents but no positive action.

Again, like most accounts, John's
early life is written up as a retrospective study, and accordingly falls
short of the truth. There are some
hazy bits, some modified, some distorted perhaps. A prospective study
is what we want. In this context the
future development of John (in his
later years), would be worth a
detailed study. The two years of
development since the last chapter
was written, covered in a two page
'postscript' is inadequate. A more
detailed account would have been of
considerable value.

The parents talk about the child
as being 'mildly' autistic. Apart from
the presence of a number of welldocumented features, and the brief
mention of the absence of a few, we
don't know why, and how the diagnosis of 'mild' autism was made.
There is no mention of the level of
intelligence at which John was functioning. Sipce it is well known that
predicting outcome in autism
depends on two main factors ?
language development and intelligence ? this omission needs some
explanation.

Because the author is dealing with
'mild' handicap, the book loses
some of its natural impetus. A mild
handicap inevitably lessens the
enormity of the problems, and to
some extent dilutes the strength of
the message.

Nevertheless the Rowlands' observation of John and their handling
of the problems which he posed will
be of considerable help to other
parents. Their day-to-day dealing
with John and also their handling of
him on special occasions and in
varied situations will also be well
received. Their hopes and joys at
some of his performances and
'achievements', and frustrations at
some of his failures will also no
doubt be shared.

The author often doubts his own
handling of John, and also the positive and negative impact of the
environment on him, and this is natural. The right answer to this must
be extremely difficult to find.
The extensive struggle the parents had to place John in a suitable
school appears to be the second
message. Why was this necessary?
What should be done to prevent this
from happening to others? The
shortages of suitable places is the
basic reason. The other factors ?
attitude of teachers, being the
responsibility of one county or
another, transport difficulties ? are
incidental. The National Society for
Austistic Children, together with
other pressure groups, should be
fully supported in their efforts to
solve the national shortage of
places. The author's account will
certainly add to their voice.
The last word about the role of the
psychiatrist in these cases. It
appears that having been asked to
give an opinion about diagnosis, he
disappeared from the scene altogether. That the headmaster of
John's present school has no time
for psychiatry, and that the author
came to subscribe to his point of
view is abundantly clear. Was it
because of the 'mild' handicap that
he had not played a bigger part?
Has he got a positive role to play?

G. G. Kanjilal
