George Miles
=============

VERDICTS0N1HE MMMOA* ?* rwm ???? W v.!
c Oh, ye canny fling pieces oot a twenty
storey flat,

Seven hundred hungry weans will
testify tae that,

If it's butter,cheese orjeely,if the breid
is plain or pan,
The odds against it reaching us is ninety
nine to wan

The refrain from the lJeely Piece Song' by Adam
McNaughton - quoted in full in Pearl Jephcott's
splendid book* - tells in humorous and vivid
language of a child's reaction to living on the nine-
teenth floor of a tower block.The Song harks back to
the practice in the old Glasgow tenements of mothers
throwing pieces of bread and jam from the windows of
the third or fourth floors, to outstretched hands in the
yard below.

The pros and cons of living in a multi-storey block
have been well aired but Miss Jephcott has made a
fascinating contribution with her study (undertaken
in the Department of Social and Economic Research
of Glasgow University with the financial support of
the Joseph Rowntree Memorial Trust). The work
was done from 1966 to 1969 when 1,321 people were
interviewed - the support and assistance given by the
Corporation of Glasgow is noteworthy.

A dozen housing schemes incorporating multi-
storey blocks in various parts of Western Europe
(including this country) were studied too and inform-
ation was gleaned from as far apart as Melbourne and
Moscow. But the study is essentially one of Glasgow's
use of the multi-storey block as an answer to their
housing problem.

Although Miss Jephcott does not deal specifically
with mental illness which might be attributed to life
in high-flats, the detailed commentary on social
and architectural factors will be of immense value to
ah those involved with the problems of housing and
design. The book is thoroughly readable, well illus-
trated, full of good advice and detailed research. The
footnote references and appendices form an excellent
bibliography for further study.

The tenants' response to being interviewed was
extremely good - 'We didn't know anyone at the
University bothered with us', seems to have been the
reaction. Out of an initial sample of 374 households
1nterviewed in 1967, 95% took part, as did 90% of the
* Homes in high flats by Pearl Jephcott with Hilary Robson
ublished by Oliver & Boyd at ?1.75.

main sample of 692 in 1968. A good deal of material
in both formal and informal interviews was provided
by men. They represented 38% of the total figure for
the two samples. This point is stressed by the author
because so much of the existing material on the social
aspects of high flats reflects the woman's point of view.

Some 90% of those interviewed answered 'Yes' to
the question - 'On the whole, are you satisfied with
living here or not?' Typical remarks made by house-
holders were - 'I love my home' - 'grand here, quiet
and peaceful, nothing upsets you'. The exception was
families with children under 5 - the general opinion
in these cases was that a high flat was 'nae place for
bairns'.

Perhaps this general satisfaction is to some extent a
natural reaction to their previous living conditions
which, on the whole, had been nothing short of
abyssmal. Nevertheless, some missed the neighbour-
liness of the old tenements where, on a summer's
night, they could take a chair on to the pavement and
chat with passers-by.

It is interesting to note that, although the Ronan
Point disaster occurred during the study, the inter-
viewees did not seem worried about the safety of tower
blocks.

Pearl Jephcott makes some sound recommenda-
tions on overall planning considerations - for example,
the provision of lavatories at ground level for tenants
or children using the space provided for sitting out or
playing. Balconies came in for much criticism, they
were an anxiety for mothers with young children,
although useful for tenants wanting to grow plants.

The study also comes up with the suggestion of some
kind of enclosed glass-sided room of sufficient size
to be shared by all households on one floor.

Lifts were not large enough to take stretcher cases.

Operating buttons were usually too high for small
children to reach comfortably. A mother with three or
four children, pram and shopping has a tight squeeze
in the average lift and fills the lift for the whole of one
journey leaving other people with the choice of
walking upstairs or a long wait.

Play is also a problem. Noise from children's games
made ground floor flats particularly unpopular.
Cooped up in a small flat, children are particularly
excitable when they get outside. A great deal is said on
the need for the provision of suitable external play
areas and quotations from children's essays on the
'ideal playground' make constructive reading!
As with so many new housing schemes, the social
amenities provided were inadequate and proper
provision often takes years to materialise. It's nice to
have a new shining bathroom, but queuing in the rain
for a bus or having to buy from a mobile shop, which
tends to increase the cost of the family's grocery
bill, are only two examples of discontent.
Tenants were concerned about the upkeep of the
estate and its landscaping and were very resentful of
vandalism. Graffiti was a problem too.

Multi-storey living appeared on the whole to suit
older people, although loneliness could be a terrible
problem for some - 'If only someone would knock on
my door more often' was one response. Another old
lady of 70 burst into tears when a research worker
called - 'it was just hearing my bell ring' she said. Old
people enjoyed the security of a flat and liked the
views although in some cases the design of window
and balcony balustrade meant that, when sitting in a
chair, they could only see the sky! Communication in
case of emergency was a further problem for the
elderly.

It would appear, to quote Pearl Jephcott, 'that the
families most likely to make a success of multi-storey
life were those whose interests did not centre on their
home; who had plenty of personal resources; and
were relatively well educated and well off. Would it,
perhaps, be a fair assumption that "living high" caters
best for the household and individual who, in very
broad terms, prefers order to growth?' This would
seem to imply that high-rise housing is not the
answer to the living requirements of the average lower
income group family - the very people who go to make
up the bulk of high-flat dwellers at the moment.

