By Dymphna
===========

A personal view of the social work scene
One of the most notable phenomena of the last two
years has been the sudden growth of what might be
called the 'ecological movement'. I think myself that
'ecology' is a bad word to use in this context; I take
the word to mean the systematic and dispassionate
analysis of interrelationships between various kinds
of life-forms and their physical environment?and the
movement is not yet very systematic and is certainly
not dispassionate.

It seems to have moved, generally speaking, pretty
rapidly from the study of the natural environment to
the study of the artificial environment and has become
much concerned with what is called 'the quality of
life'?which seems to mean the quality of man's life.

This shift has meant that all sorts of political and
protest groups have infiltrated the movement, and I
am not at all sure that all these groups are going to go
on advocating the same things. Of course herein lies
first the difficulty of finding a good portmanteau title
for the movement as a whole, and secondly the danger
that the movement may split into fragments if it
comes under pressure.

I use the word 'danger' deliberately, and so declare
my interest, because I wholly welcome a movement
which aims primarily to reduce the intensity of the
self-destructive forces in society. The movement is
predominantly youthful which is a very agreeable
thing. For myself, as I drift worriedly round my
scented boudoir and look at the thing from the lofty
age of twenty-nine, I wonder if the youngsters really
appreciate the strength of the entrenched attitudes
they are up against. I fear they may be forced into
ridiculous nihilistic attitudes largely because of theii
own impatience; and if they are made to look
ridiculous then, of course, the forces of reaction will
sweep down upon them.

I think it's up to us middle-aged fogeys to join in
with this movement to improve the quality of life for
succeeding generations. One of our difficulties will be
that we shan't know quite what it is we're joining;
another difficulty will be to overcome our own deeply-
entrenched attitudes and opinions. These difficulties
become apparent when we consider that one of the
objectives that all members of 'the movement' seem to
be striving for is de-development.

We've heard of development and redevelopment
and underdevelopment and ribbon development, but
^-development (?)?the systematic winding-down
of our material standards of living?is a new one to us
29-year-olds, and a difficult challenge. We've been
conditioned for years to go onwards and upwards: to
buy a first car, then a second car, or to 'progress' from
icebox to fridge to freezer.

Challenge it will be, but we've got to rise to it; and
of all the fogeys that must rise to it, I think we social
workers must be the first. Social work itself is being
overwhelmed by an avalanche of social casualties:
we've got to reduce the pressures.

Well, where to start? Charity begins at home, they
say. I worry about all those hundreds of social
workers?more every year?who are encouraged to
drive about in cars. They must first be scattered
amongst the community and given caseloads which
are all within walking distance.

Then, I will gladly give ?5 to any nominated
charity when the first Director of Social Services
offers his staff a horse allowance or provides a new
worker with a Council pony-trap (or gig or phaeton
or barouche or what-have-you). As soon as sufficient
horses are in post, and a 'Council Blacksmith' has
been appointed, then NALGO should take the lead in
getting car-allowances actually reduced. (Or should
NALGO take the lead now and cut car-allowances
straight away? I hope their General Secretary will
reply to me on this.)

Then, residential establishments: an end, I say, to
all man-made fibres?they're only using up irreplace-
able sources. There are something like 30,000 children
in residential establishments: if they're all dressed in
cotton or wool (replaceable materials) the change will
make a sizeable dent in the wasteful society.

How many Social Services Committees are actively
supporting family planning programmes, using Sec-
tion One of the 1963 Children and Young Persons
Act as their remit?

Once you start on this de-development lark it can
take your thoughts in all sorts of directions. Let's turn
back to residential care. How many authorities are
building shiny, middle-class, ruinously expensive
hostels for mentally ill people where the standards are
so high that the clients are either frightened away or
break down under the strain of conformity? It seems
ludicrous: we're sophisticating ourselves out of
business. Yet what local authority is boldly prepared
to build a messy grubby place where messy grubby
people can be happy? And if an authority tried, would
this frenzied DHSS of ours, with its bloated capital
building programme, really be prepared to lower its
abominable standards?

And what about casework itself?doesn't that need
de-developing as well? It's becoming slower, more
complex and less effective all the time: some agencies
can't even accept inarticulate people who are in dis-
tress, because these clients can't understand the
language. How about more hot-gospelling and less of
the let's-discuss-your-ejection-from the womb?
And finally (this is just a note to our Editor, I'm
sorry you're all eavesdropping), what about MIND
itself? Ought it not to appear on special paper with
special ink so that, once read, it can be boiled down
with a tablespoonful of water and turned into sauce
tartare?
