Letter
=======

Dear Sir,

We read with great sympathy the
letter from the sister of a schizophrenic. The stresses set up in a
family by a mentally sick member
should not be underestimated. My
aunt has suffered for ten years from
depression. She has been treated in
a psychiatric hospital and takes
anti-depressant drugs. Nevertheless, her depression and attitude to
life are alienating her from her
friends and family; her possessiveness and the demands she makes on
her sister can only be described as
destructive.

For two years I also have had a
depressive illness which has already meant suffering for my
husband and children. I have tried,
not very successfully, to minimise
this and dread that I too will become like my aunt. Depression insulates me from giving or receiving
love yet does not blunt my awareness of the need for this exchange
within my family. At times my 18year old daughter is very sad: is
this because of me or is it just the
sadness of late adolescence, with
its attendant problems of A-levels,
choosing a university, coping with
friendships where one's emotions
are involved in a completely new
way? My 14-year old is rebellious
and has shown signs of disturbance
by petty dishonesty and carelessness ; sometimes it seems as though
she wants to punish me for making
her unhappy. Because my objectivity is suspect I am never sure
how real or serious their problems
are. But I do know that I am very
inadequate in giving them comfort,
support and security.

What have I done about this?
I have tried counting my blessings which are numerous (without
the love and support of my husband
I do not think I would have survived this period). But this only
results in my feeling guilty as well
as depressed. For eighteen months
I saw a psychiatrist, and although
therapy has apparently been ineffective, his support has been
invaluable. My gratitude to phar. maceutical research is boundless: I
have swallowed numerous tranquillisers and antidepressants
which enable me to function well
on a day-to-day basis but do not
solve problems.

Just recently I have started a
part-time job. I find this an ordeal
and have to summon every scrap of
willpower to get to work.
My happiest time in the past two
years has been when I lived a
solitary life, seeing only family and
very close friends. Is one justified
in living selfishly like a parasite,
contributing little to society and
reducing drastically the social life
of the family? But I feel I have
nothing to offer, either to society or
friends. And because I fear pity
more than loneliness I try to avoid
friendship and close relationships.
My depression is thought to be
due to an unsatisfactory childhood.
Will my own problems be perpetuated in the lives- of my children?
What can I do to prevent them in
turn growing up depressed and
inadequate?

(Name and address withheld on
request).
.
