An End and a Beginning
========================

From where I sit
EDITORIAL COMMENT

With this issue MIND and mental
health comes to an end after being
published in a variety of forms and
styles for 25 years. Many people
will mourn its passing, and have
written and telephoned to say so
since receiving notice of its closure.
Obviously, there will be more than
a twinge of regret within the
National Association for Mental
Health too - the magazine has
played quite a prominent part in
the evolution of the Association
but its end also represents a
beginning.

Over the past five years the
magazine has been refined and
modified to make it as attractive
and as readable as possible for the
general public. The intention was
to develop the magazine to the
point at which it would be accepted
by major distributors for bookstall
sale. This intention has been
frustrated and there is no possibility
of 'going public' for at least five
years.

With the road to a wide public
readership turning into a cul-de-sac,
and in the knowledge that the
magazine in its current form is
largely preaching to the 'converted', it was decided to cease
publication of the heavily subsidised magazine in favour of
producing a less ambitious, newspaper-format publication which
would reach out to a wide general
readership and help to further
mental health on a broad front.
The first issue of this new publication is due to appear in April.

Spreading information about
mental health and voluntary involvement in mental health projects
at a community level - and, hopefully, changing public attitudes in
the process - is a complex business
which has to be carried out in the
teeth of pretty determined resistance from the man in the street.
It seems that there has to be the
germ of personal interest or involvement before anyone will pick
up and read a newspaper or
magazine on the subject.

If public attitudes towards
mental ill-health are to be changed
for the better then MIND/NAMH
has to reach out to what is, at the
moment, a 'reluctant readership'.
The uninformed and largely apathetic majority has to be contacted
and made receptive if not actually
involved.

The route to these, so far ununcommitted, readers is through
people who are already concerned either in a professional or voluntary
capacity - about the mental health
of the community.

Distributors wanted
The 'newspaper' is intended for
wide distribution to groups of
people on the fringes of voluntary
community action who may benefit
from information about the mental
health movement presented in a
lively and stimulating style, and who
may be encouraged to become involved in the work. It will be free,
and distribution will be in batches of
50 or 100 to secondary points of
distribution from which small
quantities can be fed to groups and
individuals who would appreciate
the information.

Obviously, we are most anxious
that the batches of 50 or 100 should
not end up as door-stops or forgotten dust collectors in some far
corner of a room - it is important
that the paper should reach people
who will be able to make some
constructive use of it.

If readers of this final magazine
think that they could take on the
task of secondary distribution (particularly those readers working in
schools, colleges, departments of
social service, hospitals, or involved with voluntary groups), and
are prepared to do so on a regular
basis (4 or 5 times a year) they
should write to: The Distribution
Organiser, Public Information Department, MIND / NAMH, 39
Queen Anne Street, London W1M
OAJ. Please indicate whether you
would want to handle 50 or 100
copies (or more!) and please give a
rough idea of the method of
distribution you have in mind and
the likely groups to which you
would be distributing.

The value of this new publishing
venture depends almost entirely on
the distribution chain and the way
in which links in that chain make
use of copies. Public education and
the dissemination of information
about mental disorders and community action is fundamental to the
improvement of the mental health
services and a better future for the
mentally ill and handicapped - it
is, in short, the reason for the
existence of MIND / National
Association for Mental Health.

Please help if you can.
