David Ropschitz
================

Outside of the glamorous teaching hospitals, it is becoming almost impossible
to provide a thorough psychiatric service. Frustration, delay, compromise and
'make do' seem to be the order of the day. In many places it seems the blue
touch paper is ready and waiting for the match.

Reading perturbing reports every so often about condi-
tions and incidents in mental hospitals, I am only
surprised, frankly, that they do not appear more often.
The psychiatric profession is reeling under the effects
of excessive caseloads, insufficient recruitment and a
chronic shortage of junior doctors everywhere but in
the teaching hospitals, which very much limits the
effectiveness of treatment. Added to this, during the
past year, there has been the upheaval in aftercare,
social work and service liaison arising from the
establishment of the new local authority services
departments.

The most serious factor of all is the shortage of
junior trained psychiatrists or trainees in provincial
psychiatric hospitals and units. It is a long-standing
problem which has become acute in recent years and
is mainly attributable to three factors: emigration,
lack of attractiveness of psychiatry, compared with
other branches of medicine, and the concentration of
trainee psychiatrists in teaching hospitals. As far as
emigration is concerned, this is as much because of
better working conditions and greater opportunity for
research as for the higher salaries offered abroad.

The severe shortage of junior psychiatrists, has led
to the appointment of more consultants, many of
whom have to carry the entire medical load of their
service almost unaided. This is both a costly and
illogical situation, as the special knowledge of con-
sultants cannot be fully utilised, though of course,
there is a need for many more consultants throughout
the country, with proper supporting teams.

During the 11 years that I have worked at Storthes
Hall Hospital, Huddersfield, we have never had a
senior registrar, and there has been no registrar -
which is a trainee post - for the last 5 years, in spite of
numerous advertisements by the Regional Hospital
Board. One of my consultant colleagues, appointed
last year, still works single-handed. Eventually, out of
despair, an application was made to the Home Office
to grant a doctor from abroad permission to enter this
country so that he might work with this consultant.
When such steps are necessary to obtain doctors,
the situation can only be described as alarming.

Statistics from the Department of Health show that
the neighbouring Manchester Hospital Region has a
lower number of every kind of professional staff in the
psychiatric service than any other region of the country.
The same scarcity of junior medical staff in
provincial psychiatric hospitals has prompted the
employment of family doctors in these hospitals, if
you are lucky enough to find them, since they too are
overworked and in short supply. The trouble with
this stop-gap tactic is that most GPs can only be avail-
able to the hospital for one or two sessions a week. By
comparison, a registrar normally works 11 sessions a
week, so that to provide the same amount of medical
time, one has to employ 5 or 6 GPs.

A further complication is that while junior hospital
doctors are entitled to 4 weeks, leave, general prac-
titioners employed in hospitals can take 6 weeks, leave
a year. If you multiply the number of GPs by 6, you
end up with a great number of weeks without ade-
' quate cover.
In our psychiatric unit in Halifax we have 8 GPs,
two of whom are experienced in anaesthetics. The
Regional Hospital Board has laid down that two
doctors should be present during electro-convulsive
therapy, one of whom must be experienced in
anaesthetics. Electro-convulsive therapy is an im-
portant psychiatric treatment and the GPs have been
trained to carry it out efficiently. The difficulty in this
situation is that 8 general practitioners are entitled to
a sum total of 48 weeks, holiday a year, so that the
ECT service is disrupted whenever one of the two
doctors required for treatment is on leave.

This has serious implications for in-patients and
even more for out-patients. The in-patients' stay in
hospital may be unduly prolonged, but unavailability
of ECT for out-patients is just plain dangerous.
Patients often have strong personal reasons against
being admitted and whenever treatment is possible
without taking a patient into hospital, we are often
relying on an efficient ECT out-patient service.

But if the ECT service has to be frequently
suspended, this intolerable state of affairs must event-
ually lead to family crises or suicide. Rather than
expending time and energy in dealing with the conse-
quences it would be wiser to prevent the possibility of
tragedy by having adequate treatment services
available all the time.

At one time in Halifax we were promised the
services of a consultant anaesthetist for ECT but the
service broke down periodically, owing to his other
engagements. Whenever the anaesthetic service was
short of staff, the axe fell first on psychiatry. The
needs of other departments were always considered
more urgent.

On top of these long-standing shortages and staffing
Problems has come the Local Authority (Social
Services) Act, 1970. The Mental Health Act of 1959
made the Medical Officer of Health responsible for
mental health services in the community. He had a
team of mental welfare officers who were generally
experienced and specialised in their work. I have no
quarrel with the aims of the Seebohm Report, on
* which the 1970 Act is based. It argued that social
Workers ought to be all-rounders, without separate
groups specialising in mental health, child care etc.

is an ambitious aim and I sincerely hope that such
advanced training will materialise in my lifetime; but
what about the transitional period? Nobody becomes
knowledgeable about psychiatric illness overnight.

What would happen, for instance, if it were suddenly
decided to do away with physicians and surgeons and
let psychiatrists - who after all are medically qualified
take over their functions?

My criticism is of the lack of a sufficient transitional
Period to allow for gradual change. In Halifax where
services are less affected, we had 7 mental welfare
officers; now we have only 3 and even they have to
perform other kinds of social work.

Communications broken down
-----------------------------

In the West Riding of Yorkshire part of out
catchment area we had 5 mental welfare officers; now
we have none of the old team. The senior officer was
transferred to the central office in Wakefield, three
others went to attend university courses and the fifth
was transferred to another area. As a result, no
continuity remained, and this in spite of the fact that
mental health services are highly personal, with
human relationships the keys to success! During the
last 12 months, communications seem to have broken
down altogether and what has ensued can only be
described as chaos.

This is not an isolated case, since there are a
number of areas where new Directors of Social
Services have arbitrarily put an end to longstanding
arrangements for social workers to take part in
hospital case, conference or clinics.

Another factor in the confusion is that, whereas in
the past, copies of our reports on discharged patients
or those attending out-patient clinics were sent to the
Medical Officer of Health, a medical man is now no
longer at the head of the Service. Doctors are, of
course, obliged to maintain professional secrecy and
highly personal matters would only be communicated
to other doctors, in general. It is one thing to report
about chickenpox, or an appendicitis operation, and
another to pass on details of sexual perversions,
drunkenness, impotence, adultery, and so on.

We are fortunate to have reached a compromise
solution in Halifax, thanks to a friendly agreement
between the Director of Social Services and the
Medical Officer of Health, who continues to receive
our reports. Unfortunately, in the West Riding part
of our catchment area, such a compromise solution
has not been possible, with the result that one half of
our patients benefit from effective follow-up and
aftercare, while the other half do not to anything like
the same extent. In spite of many efforts to get clear
directions from the Department of Health, the Royal
College of Psychiatrists, the Medical Defence Union
and others,* we are still not much wiser about the
correct procedure.

* One bit of guidance can be gleaned from the reply to a
letter I wrote to the General Medical Council. The reg-
istrar's reply ended, 'the President wishes me to say that he
considers it unlikely that the Council would regard the
sending of psychiatric reports to senior social workers, in
the interests of the after-care of discharged patients, as
improper disclosure of confidential material'.

In many areas, in fact, it is accepted that social
workers concerned with mental health should receive
substantially the same information as used to be
passed to the Medical Officer of Health. Even when
this follow-up work was done within local authority
health departments, very little of it was actually done
by doctors.

Under all these circumstances it is not surprising
that many psychiatrists - especially those in provin-
cial mental hospitals - have become very frustrated
professionally. Very quick and far-reaching measures
ought to be taken to rescue the mental health services
from further disruption. In particular, a more even
distribution of available junior psychiatric staff is
essential and some progress towards this aim might be
achieved by upgrading certain provincial hospitals to
teaching hospital status.

The concentration of young psychiatrists in the
ivory towers of university departments and teaching
hospitals is a luxury which the mental health service
cannot afford. In addition, the young psychiatrist who
has been used to all the amenities and facilities
afforded by university departments will feel lost when
thrown to the lions. All too often, he has not been
trained for the job he will actually have to do in the
main part of his working life. Clinical psychologists,
psychiatric social workers, and other non-medical
personnel will no longer be at his disposal and he will
resent the contrast. The lot of the nursing profession
is long overdue for a radical revision, too, not only
the salary but the working conditions as a whole.
Here again, regional hospitals are very much worse off
than teaching hospitals.

Plea for mercy
---------------

I would like to plead with those who implement the
Seebohm Report to show a little mercy; it is only in
fairy tales that beanstalks grow to heaven in the space
of one day.

It is also up to the Department of Health, other
hospital authorities and bodies like the Royal Colleges
to see that something is done about the disparity in
numbers of doctors between teaching centres and
other hospitals. For one thing, every trainee psychia-
trist, other than just a small elite, should have the
chance of working for part of this training in a
teaching department.

Psychiatrists need to be able to get on with the job,
but they cannot communicate to their patients a
peace of mind which they themselves no longer
possess.

