The Old
========

Fecianthony Whitehead

Before the National Health Service came into
being, large numbers of old people ended their lives
in the dismal wards of poor law institutions or in grim
local authority mental asylums. They were recruited
from the poor, the isolated and the rejected.
Since 1948 there has been a steady increase in the
number of old people requiring help because of ill
health or social difficulties. There has been some
improvement on the situation that existed before the
creation of a National Health Service but these
improvements have not kept pace with the ever-
increasing demand.

The specialty of geriatric medicine arose more
because the Ministry of Health did not know what to
do with the elderly institutionalised it inherited than
from any strong, positive desire to provide an
effective service for old people. Fortunately geriatric-
ians appointed to deal with this problem and their
successors have made impressive efforts to provide a
sensible, hopeful and humane service for the elderly
sick and disabled. Geriatric services have not only
coped with so-called medical and social problems,
but have also tried to cater for a proportion of the
elderly mentally ill.

Until fairly recently the psychiatric services did
little for the elderly. Old people with functional
mental disorders, such as depression, paraphrenia
and neurotic reactions, were treated (with varying
degrees of success) in the same way as younger
people, but if the patient suffered from dementia, or
was labelled as suffering from dementia, the chances
were that either no help was offered, or the patient
was condemned to a long-stay ward with the mini-
mum of care or treatment.

One result of this non-provision of active treatment
was that old people from the community joined the
ranks of those who had grown old within the mental
hospital and together they started to make up an
increasing proportion of psychiatric hospital residents.
This 'flooding' of the mental hospitals, coupled with
the desire of some psychiatrists and other specialists
to provide a better service for the elderly, led to a few
hospitals developing special units for the elderly
mentally ill.

During the past 10 years, a number of special units
have been created and developed, but the majority of
area psychiatric services failed to do anything until
very recently. Now the Department of Health and
Social Security has produced a Memorandum,
'Services for mental illness related to old age',
(HM (72)71, October 1972).

The problem

The statistics of our increasing elderly population are
often set out, but they are worth emphasising. At
present there are nearly 6{ million people over the age
of 65 in our society; more than 2\ million of them are
over 7$. The estimates suggest that, within 20 years,
there will be an extra million people over the age of 65,
with 942,000 more old people over 75, and $22,000
more over 80. At present there are approximately
116,000 patients in mental illness hospitals - $2,000
of them over the age of 6$, and 27,000 over 7$.
The incidence of mental illness within the elderly
population is difficult to assess. Surveys in a number
of areas have shown that some degree of dementia
is prevalent in about 10% of people over 6$, the
majority of whom live at home. Other surveys have
suggested that between 41% and $$% of elderly
people at home have some kind of psychiatric
disorder. Another survey concluded that nearly a
quarter of its sample of apparently healthy elderly
people suffered from serious emotional stress which
could respond to help and treatment.

These studies indicate that there are very large
numbers of old people who need (or may need) the
kind of help that psychiatry, in co-operation with
other services for the elderly, should provide.
A suggested solution

There is little doubt that old people not only prefer to
remain in their own homes until they die, but also
tend to react rather badly when admitted to hospital
or any other type of institution. For this reason it is
important for any service for old people to be
community orientated. This does not mean that
in-patient or residential facilities should be neglected,
but it does mean that these facilities should be only a
part of a much more comprehensive service.
It can be argued that any modern, effective
psychiatric service that provides the necessary range
of facilities for younger patients could deal adequately
with the demands of the elderly as well. This is an
ideal solution which is unlikely to be achieved.The
combination of general lack of staff interest in the
elderly and their special medical and nursing needs
make it necessary for special services to be established
for them. These special services should be staffed by
personnel interested in the problems of old people
and able to co-operate with (and become an integral
part of) other facilities for the old, including those
provided by geriatric units and local authority health
and social service departments.

An essential part of a special service for the elderly
is a day hospital, or several - depending upon the
population and geographical size of the area served.
A day hospital should and can provide all the facilities
of a good in-patient unit except for night accommoda-
tion. This means that patients can be assessed,
investigated, treated, rehabilitated and supported
without the trauma of admission to hospital, and can
continue to be supported whilst still living in the
comforting familiarity of their own homes. Staff from
the day hospital should be available to go out into the
community to help and treat those patients who, for
one reason or another, are temporarily or permanently
unable to come to the day hospital.

Many old people are admitted to hospital because
of some crisis which may be an acute illness - or some
social mishap. If the immediate crisis can be dealt
with at home, subsequent admission to hospital is not
likely to be necessary yet, once admitted, it may be
very difficult ever to re-establish the patient in the
community.

To deal with this aspect of the problem an emerg-
ency team should be available to go out at any time,
24 hours a day, 7 days a week. This team must be able
to deal with most emergencies, including the provision
of a night sitter if necessary. The experience accum-
ulated by such a team has shown that the vast
majority of crises can be dealt with successfully
without admitting the patient to hospital, though day
hospital attendance is often necessary after the crisis
has passed.

In many cases old people need the company and
activity of a day hospital, but do not need its medical
and nursing facilities. For them, day centres, run
either by local authorities or voluntary organisations,
are essential and no day hospital can function
successfully unless there are good day-centre facilities
in its area.

Obviously the special service for the elderly also
needs in-patient units which should be run on active,
patient-participatory lines with enough activity and
entertainment for the patients to be able to live as
normal a life as possible. Some patients need only a
short period in hospital, others need recurrent
hospital admission, either because of their own needs
or the needs of their relatives. A relatively small
number of old people need permanent institutional
care, either in hospital or a local authority home or
hostel.

As well as providing these in-patient facilities, the
special service should concern itself with the patients
who have grown old within institutions. For them
there should be active rehabilitation programmes and
schemes to re-establish within the community those
who are able,. Boarding-out schemes, group homes,
and resettlement with members of their own families
are some of the ways of providing positive alternatives
for these forgotten, and largely neglected, people.
The kind of service which I have described very
briefly should be run very closely with other services
for the elderly. This can only be the case if the various
personnel actively involved in this area of work are
allowed and encouraged to work together. The aim
should be to establish such a degree of integration
that no one ever says 'This is your problem'.

The Memorandum
---------------

Sir Keith Joseph's policy document, 'Service for
mental illness related to old age', looks at the issues,
and makes suggestions similar to those I have aired
here. But the official document does have some
elements of vagueness. It optimistically suggests that
old people with functional mental illnesses can and
will be treated by the normal services for younger
patients. This may happen in some places, but in
many, the old person admitted to the psychiatric
hospital or unit at the moment is treated very much
as a second, if not third or fourth-class citizen.
In its consideration of patients who have grown old
in hospital the Department's memorandum makes no
mention of boarding-out schemes, group homes, and
so on - the inference is that these patients should
remain where they are. A quick look at the elderly
'graduates' in most psychiatric hospitals would show
that an appreciable proportion could be re-established
in the community if the necessary efforts were made.
Little mention is made in the memorandum of the
gross inadequacies of present community facilities for
the elderly. The total number of day hospitals and
day centres in the country is pitifully small. Meals on
wheels and home help services are totally inadequate,
and most hospitals and local authorities seem more
concerned about their residential accommodation
than with providing services to support old people in
the community.

I suspect that most hospital authorities will look at
this DHSS document and continue to do what they
are doing now. Since it is primarily intended for the
hospital service, local authorities will also be able to
ignore what it infers but does not spell out.

The need
---------

Every area in the country requires a comprehensive
service for the elderly mentally ill. This service must
be adequately staffed with people of the right calibre
and motivation, and should fit in to an overall plan of
services and support for the elderly in general. Not
only must the hospital service be pressurised into
doing this but, since the vast majority of patients
treated by any speciality in the hospital service,
(except for obstetrics and paediatrics) are elderly,
medical and nursing education must also be radically
changed so that all personnel know what to do for old
people who are ill.

Geriatric and specialised psychiatric services cannot
and should not be expected to deal with all old people,
and the other social and medical specialists who have
to deal with the elderly should be able to do so
effectively themselves except when special circum-
stances indicate the need for the expertise of a
geriatrician or a psychiatrist with a special concern for
the elderly. Every doctor should be able to recognise
the simple psychiatric and social syndromes associated
with old age and know how to treat them.

Our increasing elderly population is a problem for
all of us. The problems presented can be solved
provided we try. Failure to make the effort could lead
to a problem of crisis proportions, and will mean that
most of us can look forward to only misery when we
become old.
