by Dymphna
===========

A personal view of the social work scene
-----------------------------------------

I have recently been renewing my acquaintance with
Rudyard Kipling - Rudyard Kipling the poet, that is,
as distinct from Rudyard Kipling the short-story
writer and part-time novelist. R.K. the poet is very
much out of favour at present, and has been these
twenty years. I suppose this disfavour springs from
his identification with the spirit of Empire, with the
Raj, with the Great White Sahib, with an aggressive
patriotism; from his comments about 'heathens'
and 'lesser breeds without the law' and 'cleansing our
East with steel'.

Yet he was an extraordinary writer: the command
of language is enormous, his rhythms are supple and
vigorous and it truly is amazing that he could pull
out of a mere eighteen months' stay in India such a
huge range of insights, such a rich vein of material,
that he could work on them for the rest of his life.

Perhaps he can better be appreciated if he is looked
at not as a poet but as an historian who happened to
write in verse. As an historian there is little doubt
that he did capture the feeling of living at the heart of
an Empire - the flavour of those heady, cruel,
exhilarating, arrogant days before 1914; and though
he wrote for the most part about commanding sorts
of sahibs behaving impeccably in distant outposts, he
did also make important contributions in terms of
representing the working class or 'the rank and file',
who had hardly been repesented at all until his day.

In short, the Empire, at its rather unnerving peak,
produced its chronicler. Now the Empire has van-
ished, and Rudyard Kipling with it. Are we not
witnessing, however, the birth and rapid growth of a
new Empire - the Empire of the Social Services?
Ought we not to be looking for a new Kipling to
record these heady and arrogant days?
Shyly, and with the utmost diffidence, I offer
myself. I will set out to step in the footprints Kipling
left.

Rudyard began as a sort of hack-writer on an
Indian newspaper and soon started churning out
little rhyming anecdotes which were later collected as
'Departmental Ditties'. They were full of sly jokes
and native lingo. In the Empire of Social Service
such a verse might run
Lady Maidie Hooper-Klaas
Joined the Child Care hubbub,
Visiting the fostah-mahs1
In the distant subbub2
She inspected clothes and ears
In a manner systematic,
Reducing fostah-mahs to tears
With strictures most emphatic.
But when preventive work occurred
With kids3 who weren't so pretty
Lady M. said she preferred
To serve on a Committee.

1 Foster-mothers. 2 Council estate. 3 Children.
Later on, if she followed the Rudyard pattern, the
Kipling of the Social Services would become fas-
cinated by the life of the 'ranker', or basic-grade
social worker, and would follow him for instance into
the field of mental health.

If you've sub - sub - sub - sub - normals on your
working load
Then good - good - good - good gracious, how the
pace is slowed!
You keep - keep - keep them on the strait and
narrow road,
There's no discharge to the case!
For it's slog - slog - slog - slog to save them from
the tears and sobs,
Slog - slog - slog - slog - slog to find them little
jobs,
For the sub - sub - sub - sub - normals need to
save their bobs:

There's no discharge to the case!

Gradually as the services developed the neo-
^Jpling would discover that caseworkers were going
lnt? action in out-of-the-way corners of the realm,
and might produce commentaries like this
We've done a lot o' casework in our day,
With the Irish and the 'eathen Cypriot;
There was a surly squad o' squatters in Foots Cray
But the gipsy was the finest o' the lot.

^e 'adn't never 'eard o' Sigmund Freud!
Nor cared what we'd learned down along the
Tavi!
Non-judgment seemed to get 'im so annoyed
'E treated us like dirt - and 'im the navvy!
So 'ere's to you, Gippo-Whippo, and your
matriarchal stories,
You're a pore benighted client with your own
subcultural mores,
But 'ere's to you, Gippo-Whippo, in your
roamin' caravan,
You big scrapmetal beggar! for you broke a
Casework Plan.

But it would be with the establishment of the great
new Social Service Departments and the erection of
huge ritualistic hierarchies, full of durbars and inves-
titures, extending all the way up to the Emperor
Joseph, that our latter-day Kipling would discover
within herself new and sonorous organ-notes.

Something like these
Who hath desired the People? O ye in commercial
work,
Ye conscienceless ones, give ear! For the lift and
the swirl and the jerk
And the tumbling turbulent spindrift - atoms yet
all of a unity -
Where mental disturbance hangs high - this,
this, is our working community!
Creeping, pain-ridden, pang-borne, round village
and suburb and steeple,
Prey to emotional blocs and neuroses - these,
these are Our People!
We will plunge as a seaman plunges into water
that moves and thrills -
As a hillman descends from his hills:

So and no otherwise - so and no otherwise -
caseworkers use their skills!
And at last, I suppose, Dymphna Kipling would make
the final ascent, to the point whence she could see
over the whole Empire, marvel at its extent and
complexity, visualise the myriads of social workers
setting out on their evening visits, and thrill to the
romance of the new referral. And write like this
Ye have had a call from County Hall,
And one from the women police;
The inadequates cry: 'Drop by, drop by!'
The depressives are seeking peace.
Let's ha' done with the paperwork, dear lass,
With Review Reports we're through:
It's time to pull out on the old trail, our own
trail, the out-trail,
Pull out, pull out on the Long Trail - the trail
that is always new!
