Defects of Speech among School Children
========================================

By MARION FLEMING
(Diplomee, Central School of Speech Training and of the International
Phonetics Association), Travelling Teacher for the Correction of Speech
Defects, C.A.M.W.
For many years the problem of dealing with the number of speech defects
in Elementary Schools has been engaging the attention of experts interested
in the subject of speech, and during the last five years or so, Education Author-
ities have become more and more alive to the necessity of taking steps to
eradicate such defects, which are not only a very great handicap in themselves,
but are liable to produce a marked effect upon the child's mental and psycho-
logical development. In many cases the speech defect is the first indication of
some psychological disturbance. As such, it is extremely important that the
defect should be tackled while the child is young and before the difficulty is
of many years' standing. Many of the larger cities have appointed a full-time
Speech Therapist (Birmingham, Leicester, Cardiff, to name but a few) whose
function is to organise classes throughout the area for the treatment of all
speech defects in the schools. In the case of smaller areas, however, there
is not always sufficient work to occupy a specialist all the year round, and it
was to try to meet the need of these smaller areas that in 1931 the Central
Association for Mental Welfare conceived the idea of a Travelling Expert,
54 MENTAL WELFARE
whose duties should consist in visiting local authorities for a series of short
visits in order to organise classes among the children in the area and to give
such information to the teachers as would enable them to continue the work,
at the termination of one visit, until the Expert's return.
In September, 1931, I was appointed to this work, and at the conclusion
of two years, it is interesting to look back and to try to form an idea of the
results which have been obtained and the possibilities of further work on these
lines. I have visited, for periods varying from one to three months, ten differ-
ent areas?-two mining districts, one county, one town where the interests
were mainly agricultural, and the remainder large industrial towns. In one
of the largest industrial cities, the work was entirely among Special Schools for
the Mentally Defective, and here one finds a great preponderance of the type
of defect generally known as " Baby Talk," an undeveloped form of speech
which is due to mental causes. In most of the other areas, the percentage of
speech defects to the Elementary School population was approximately the
same, one exception to this being an industrial town where speech classes had
previously been held for many years, the result of which was shown in a far
smaller proportion of defects.
One feels that in the case of slight defects such as Lisping and the milder
degrees of Baby Talk, a very great deal might be done by the elementary school
teachers themselves if they were qualified with the necessary knowledge. In
these visits, therefore, I have tried to concentrate more upon giving as many
hints as possible to the teachers rather than attempted to effect cures in the
children. Indeed, it is utterly impossible to effect a cure, except in the very
slightest cases, when one sees a child six times, at the most. With regard
to Stammering, one feels very strongly that the treatment of this very distress-
ing complaint should never be undertaken except by an expert or under expert
supervision.
In order to understand the causes of defective speech one must, first of
all, have some knowledge of what normal speech is and what are the mental
processes which precede it. In the first place, all speech is the result of imita-
tion, and to enable a child to learn to speak he must have some kind of outside
stimulus, in the form of examples of speech around him which he can imitate.
A child, in the first instance, will naturally speak as his parents speak or those
people with whom he is closely associated. The outside stimulus being pro-
vided, the child's brain is then brought into play to teach him, unconsciously,
how to make use of the patterns he hears to acquire the faculty of speech him-
self. Any talking is said to require at least five regions of the brain for its
proper execution:?*
I. A receptive organ for the sensory impression {i.e., the actual sense of
hearing, which merely records that a sound of some description has been
made).
*" The Psychology of Language," by Pillsbury and Header.
MENTAL WELFARE
55
II. An area in which the mere sound sensations are, so to speak, recog-
nised as words.
III. A connection region which will transfer this word impression to
the regions involved in expression.
IV. A part of the brain in which the word is co-ordinated and prepared
for expression.
V. A motor area from which come the actual impulses controlling the
muscular movements which form a word.
The muscular movements are then carried out by the moveable speech
organs?the tongue, lips, jaw and soft palate?and so a word is produced.
It can thus be seen that speech is a highly complicated business which
involves fine adjustments in the mental processes. When one considers the
number of delicate movements performed in saying even such a simple word
as " CAT," for example, it is apparent that very controlled muscular processes
are also involved and that fine co-ordination between mind and body is
essential.
In the normal speech development of a child all the processes outlined
above arc being exercised and developed unconsciously as he gradually acquires
the faculty of speech. He will pass through the various stages of: ?
(1) Crying, screaming, cooing, etc., which are a way of exercising the
vocal organs and are an expression of his feelings, but as yet have no definite
form.
(2) " Babbling," where he begins to make more formulated sounds for
exercise and as a kind of play, enjoying the noises he produces and the physical
movements used in producing them.
(3) Beginning to imitate and to understand words spoken around him.
(4) Developing rapidly in understanding and in learning to speak new
words.
That is the normal course in a child whose hearing capacity and brain
are normal in every way. But suppose that a child has slightly defective hear-
ing and does not receive absolutely accurate impressions of the sounds around
him, it is naturally very difficult for him to reproduce those sounds correctly.
When one considers the similarity between F and TH, between S and SH,
between T and K, it is easy to understand how anybody who is even very
slightly deaf may confuse them. Therefore the first thing to do in the case
of a child with defective speech is to investigate his hearing and find out if there
is any degree of deafness and whether it is possible to have it remedied.
There also exists a condition known as Word Deafness, in which the
actual hearing is normal, but the " area in which the mere sound sensations
are, so to speak, recognised as words " (II, above) is defective or destroyed as
56 MENTAL WELFARE
the result of an accident or illness. Extreme cases of this nature should only
be treated by a specialist and are not very frequently met. But suppose that
a child has some slight weakness in this area of the brain, or that, for some
reason, it is undeveloped, then he may hear, for instance, the combination of
sounds C-A-T, not as " CAT " but as " TAT " or " CA' and consequently
reproduce the word in that form?" SING " may become " TING " or
" TIN " THING " may be " FING," and so forth. The type of defective
speech thus manifested is known as Lalling or " Baby Talk." A rendering
of " Sing a Song of Sixpence " would be somewhat as follows: ?
" Tin' a ton' of Titpent'
A potet fu' of wye (or more generally, WICE!)
Five an' tenty bat bird
Bate in a pie;
Wen de pie wad open
De bird bedan to tin',
Wadn' dat a dainty dit
To tet before de tin','' etc.
An even more marked degree of the same type of defect, showing
still less development, is the following, where almost all the consonants are
defective, double consonants not attempted, and finals completely lacking: ?
" Baa, baa, ba' see', ha' oo any woo'?
Ye' 'ir, ye' 'ir, fee ba' fu'
One for ve ma'er, an' one for ve da'
An' one for ve 'ickle boy who li' dow've la'."
" Baby Talk is a perfectly natural and normal stage in development
and constitutes a kind of practising for the difficulties of speech, but it should
not continue beyond the age of 4 or 5 years. The fond mother who anticipates
every need of her child and so relieves him of the necessity for asking for the
things he wants, may be doing untold harm. If he finds that his require-
ments are met without any effort on his part to utter a sound, he naturally finds
it easier and more satisfactory to remain in that condition, with the result
that his speech faculties are not being normally exercised and his speech is very
retarded and undeveloped. This undeveloped speech, in some form or other,
is found among children of normal intelligence and may be due to the over-
protective parent or to some weakness in the centres of the brain concerned
with speech. It is, however, far more common among children of sub-normal
intelligence and mental defectives, which is understandable when one considers
the fine mental adjustments necessary to produce anv word correctly. The
danger is that any child suffering from this type of defect may be very seriously
misjudged and written down as retarded or even Mentally Deficient, when
there is nothing wrong but his inability to express himself in normal speech.
Among Mental Defectives, however, this type of undeveloped speech or "Baby
MENTAL WELFARE 57
Talk " is often found, in any stage from the wrong pronunciation of one con-
sonant to speech which is unintelligible through wrong pronunciation of many
sounds. It is induced not only by possible weakness in the brain centres, but
also by the actual muscular difficulty the child may experience in producing
certain sounds or combinations of sounds, such as BL, PL, ST, SP, SC, SL SM
SN, etc. "BLACK" for example, may be rendered as " BACK," " BACKL,"
" BAT," etc. There may be a mental laziness which reflects itself in slip-shod
speech, there may be a lack of tone in the muscles and an inability to produce
firm, decisive movements, which will give much the same effect.
The treatment of such defects lies, first of all, in making the child
LISTEN?listen to the best example of really good speech it is within the
teacher's power to produce. He then requires actual muscular "Speech Drill"
to help him to gain greater control over the movements of the speech organs,
exercises to give flexibility and strength to the movements of jaw, lips, tongue
and soft palate. Practice before a small mirror is excellent as it enables him
to see exactly what he is doing. He will take far more interest in making
" the tip of the tongue touch the top of the teeth," if he can actually watch
his tongue jumping up and down. He needs practice in all the consonants,
taken individually, then combined with vowels, then in simple words and
simple phrases, care being taken not to make him over-conscious of any one
sound or to let him feel there is any particular sound which he is quite unable
to say. The NAMES of the sounds should be avoided, their phonetic value
being used always. Ten minutes' regular daily practice is of far more value
than an occasional half-hour.
Defects of speech are usually divided into three categories: ?
I. Articulatory Defects.
II. Organic Defects.
III. Functional Defects.
The " Baby Talk," of which we have been speaking, belongs to the first
category, as does also Lisping. The term Lisping denotes faulty pronunciation
of the sibilant sounds, S, Z, SH, CH and J. The most common form is what
is known as Infantile Lisping, so called because it is generally a retention of
childish habits, often developing at the age of second dentition. It consists in
the substitution of the sound TH for S, due to the fact that the tongue is pro-
truding between the teeth instead of lying just behind them. This may arise
through there being gaps in the front teeth at the age of second dentition, the
tongue forming the habit of protruding slightly and continuing even after the
teeth have grown. In this case, practice in the correct position (with the help
of a mirror), as suggested above, should bring about a cure quite quickly. In
some cases, however, the defect may be due to irregularity of dentition, where
the front teeth are so formed as to be unable to effect a closure. It is then
difficult to bring about a complete and satisfactory cure, and one generally has
to be content with producing the best result possible in the circumstances.
58 MENTAL WELFARE
An Organic defect is one in which the speech difficulty is directly due to
some physical malformation or disability. The chief of these are: ?
1. Defects due to Cleft Palate.
2. Defects due to Adenoids and Enlarged Tonsils.
A Cleft Palate is a division, at some point, of the palate, which forms the
roof of the mouth and the floor of the nose. The cleft may extend right from
front to back of the mouth, the upper lip also being cleft, in which case one
has the condition known as hare-lip in addition. It may, however, not be
apparent at all on the outside of the mouth, but extend through the hard and
soft palates?or it may be merely the soft palate which is affected. In any
case, the effect upon the speech is very similar. The stream of sound, coming
up from the larynx and finding no palate to direct it forward through the
mouth, ascends into the nasal cavities, with the result that there is an extremely
ugly nasal quality in all the speech. It is, unfortunately, impossible to improve
this to any extent until the physical condition has been remedied by surgical
or dental measures. The cleft in the palate can be closed by an operation,
which should be performed while the child is very young?if possible before
he begins to speak. If this is not possible, or if, as in some instances, the
operation breaks down, it is still possible to have a false palate inserted. These
have been brought to a pitch of perfection now-a-days, and with one in the
mouth the speech can be improved to such a degree that it is difficult to detect
any abnormality. Cleft Palate cases are comparatively rare?which is fortun-
ate, as the condition is a very distressing one and the speech practically unin-
telligible until remedial measures and Speech Training have been given.
The same applies to Adenoids and Enlarged Tonsils. These are infinitely
more common, and, as in the case of Cleft Palate, it is out of the question to
effect real improvement in the speech until the physical condition has been
remedied. Then it is possible to do a great deal.
The third category of Speech Defects, those known as Functional, are
defects in which the actual mechanism of speech is normal, but the use made
of it is defective. The most common of these is Stammering, which is now
definitely regarded by authorities as being not, strictly speaking, a Speech
Defect, but a nervous disorder which happens to affect the speech. Contrary
to the belief held by some people, this disorder appears to be as common among
Mental Defectives as among children of normal intelligence. The approach
to it differs completely from the methods used in dealing with Articulatory
and Organic Defects. These can be treated largely by phonetic means, after
any physical disability has been put right. A Stammer, however, is now held
by competent authorities to be the result of a neurosis?" a disturbance of
thought which affects the functions of the body." Hence the actual speech
defect is merely a symptom of some more deep-seated trouble and it is not of
much value to attempt to correct the symptom before having traced the root
cause and remedied it. The root cause is generally some psychological conflict,
MENTAL WELFARE 59
due to a situation in the child's environment, with which he does not feel
competent to grapple. The feeling of inadequacy may be quite unconscious.
One can cite cases of jealousy of other children in the family, of over-protection
on the part of the parents, of lack of opportunity for the child to make satis-
factory adjustment to the demands of the group in which he lives. Such
environmental factors will not produce a stammer in every child, otherwise
there would be a far greater number of Stammerers in the schools. There
must be, in the child, some predisposition for the neurosis to take such a form.
The predisposition may be either: ?
I. Physical weakness in the mechanism of breathing, in the diaphragm,
the great flat muscle which forms the floor of the chest. This may be inherited
or may be the result of illness, malnutrition, etc.
II. Mental weakness in " word imagery," in forming really clear and
definite mental conceptions of words, with the result that a certain amount of
confusion and hesitancy are present.
In some cases the difficulty is congenital and the child stammers from
the time he begins to speak. More often it is induced by a shock or fright of
some kind, or a bad illness, which for the time being slightly upsets the fine
balance of the nervous system and allows the neurosis to take hold of the
individual's weak spot?or it may be unsatisfactory adjustment to environ-
ment, as mentioned above. One boy of 7 stammered violently after having
seen a playmate of his own age drowned before his eyes. They were playing
on ice, which gave way, and the boy was unable to do anything to save his
friend. Another boy stammered after a very severe scalding; another, a child
of 5, fell from the top of a high wall upon which he was sitting, into a river,
and somehow succeeded in struggling out by himself. Another child, at the
age of 5, was frightened by her nurse with a tale of a headless woman who
would chase her if she were naughty! One hears of cases where the stammer
developed after a severe illness, of men who stammered as the result of shell-
shock. One could multiply examples, but sufficient has been said to give some
idea of the underlying causes which may lead to this distressing complaint.
Suggestions for treatment do not come within the scope of this article, but
help can be given by seeing that the child has adequate rest and nourishment,
that he is kept free from undue excitement and anxiety, and that everything
possible is done to build up his self-confidence. Actual treatment should be
given only by an expert who has had experience of this type of work.
The worst feature of any form of Speech Defect is not only that it is,
in itself, an obvious handicap, but that it tends to produce a marked sense of
inferiority in the child and consequently inhibits him from showing his true
powers. Thus, for the fullest mental development of which he is capable, it
is of very great importance to help him to express himself as freely and easily
in speech as the other children around him. Over and over again it is reported
by teachers that as a speech defect disappears, so the general standard of the
60 MENTAL WELFARE
child's work improves. Sufficient has probably been said at the beginning of
this article to show that even the simplest form of speech requires a degree of
mental and physical co-ordination and control. For this reason, scientific
Speech Training is excellent training, not only for the speech itself, but also
for the mind, and is of great benefit in the teaching of Mental Defectives. One
hopes that the day is not far distant when to minutes' daily " Speech Drill "
will form part of the recognised curriculum in every school.
