Economy Reports
================

News

In view of the present necessity for economies in all the social services of
the country, everyone will recognise the fact that the mental health service
cannot expect to be exempt from restrictions in expenditure. The Report of
the Committee on Local Expenditure,1 now popularly known as the " Ray
Report," which was issued a month ago, outlines suggestions by which these
economies should be effected.

Whilst agreeing in the main with the recommendations of the Committee
we feel that it is a matter of regret that the suggestions have been made in
such a way as to give the impression that the mental health service before others
should be restricted?that the increase in expenditure on this service during a
recent term of years is excessive and that in a sense money is being spent which
would be better employed elsewhere since " only a negligible number of men-
tally defective persons are improved in condition by treatment." In the narrow
sense of medical treatment aiming at a cure of specific defect this may be true,
but " treatment " for defectives includes the training of those who can after-
wards adapt themselves to life outside an institution and aims at enabling them
to become partially or wholly self-supporting and capable of giving help in the
family circle. Again, with reference to the increase in expenditure on defec-
tives it must be borne in mind that the cost is of necessity bound to go up until
ascertainment is fairly complete and the years quoted (1920-30) cannot be taken
as being typical of the further increase in cost over a similar period of time.
The main recommendations of the Report seem to be reasonable and fair
though, as we have stated, some of the arguments put forward cannot go un-
challenged. The Committee recommends a reduction in the general cost of
building of all types of Institutions under Local Authorities (with special
reference to Institutions for defectives) to be secured mainly by a reduction in
the standard of accommodation to be provided. They suggest a lower standard
of certification, a transfer of suitable cases to less highly classified institutions,
and the placing of selected cases, now occupying places in institutions under
licence or guardianship outside. They also suggest the development of
remunerative occupations in both Mental Hospitals and Institutions for defec-
tives. With regard to Special Schools they suggest that the opening of new
schools of this kind should be postponed.

The C.A.M.W. has for some time been considering the possibility of
starting a scheme for the boarding out of suitable cases from Mental Hospitals
under a form of Guardianship, and it is hoped that a scheme of this kind will
shortly be initiated in a carefully selected area. As the Report states, this will
help to free places for urgent cases and should ultimately decrease the amount
of accommodation needed.

1 H.M, Stationery Office, price 2/6,
MENTAL WELFARE i5
It is a matter of regret that Special School accommodation is to remain at
a standstill but much can be done for defectives in the ordinary elementary
schools by the organisation of special classes under a teacher who has received
special training for this purpose. With reference to this, however, we would
stress the urgent need of some administrative machinery which would enable
defective children leaving ordinary elementary schools to be notified to the
Mental Deficiency Authority for further protection if it were considered
necessary.

The Report of the Private Members' Committee of the House of Com-
mons on Economy2 has also been published within the last two months. It is
encouraging to read in this report the following recommendation with regard
to voluntary associations in connection with mental deficiency work: ?
" The efforts of the Voluntary Associations under the Mental Deficiency
Acts, in the care and guardianship of mental defectives, should be encour-
aged. Much can thus be done to secure care and comfort of defectives,
who otherwise require institutional provision. Such voluntary effort needs
fostering, especially in the poorer and more industrial areas, where it may
have had no chance to develop, and Local Authorities are apt to assume
that official Institutions are the only means of meeting their needs."

Conference on Mental Welfare, December 1st and 2nd, 1932
The bi-ennial Conference on Mental Welfare was held on Thursday and
Friday, December ist and 2nd, in the Great Hall of British Medical Associa-
tion House, one session being held jointly with the British Social Hygiene
Council as a part of the National Conference on the Place of Biology in Educa-
tion. The Rt. Hon. Sir Edward Hilton Young, Minister of Health, opened
the Conference with a most encouraging and sympathetic address, and previous
to the meeting visited an exhibition of work carried out by mental defectives
at the various Occupation Centres in Middlesex and under the instruction of
the Home Teachers. The Minister was much impressed with this Exhibition,
which was a most valuable feature of this year's Conference.

Owing to financial restrictions, delegates numbered rather fewer than in
previous years, but the papers and discussions were of a high standard and
the Conference was generally considered to be most satisfying," and of real
practical value as indicating directions in which mental health work could be
developed on a sound economical basis.

A verbatim report of the Conference is to be published, at a cost of
Three Shillings and Sixpence. It is hoped that this will be ready in February.
An Order Form is enclosed in this Journal.
King & Sons, Great Smith Street, S.W.I, price 1/-.

Institute of Medical Psychology
--------------------------------

This Institute, previously known as the Tavistock Clinic, with its premises
in Tavistock Square, formally opened its new premises in Torrington Place,
W.C., on December 9th. The visitors were received by Sir Henry and Lady
Brackenbury and addresses on the work and the aims of the Institute were
given by Sir Walter Fletcher and Dr. Bernard Hart. A further reception was
held on Saturday the 10th, for those who had not been able to attend the open-
ing during the week.

The Institute has been ingeniously adapted from a building previously
used by Messrs. Shoolbreds as a garage and packing department. One of the
biggest improvements on the old premises is the provision of a large airy play-
room for children with four consulting rooms for physicians treating child
patients. The ground floor also contains two refectories, one for adult patients
and one for staff, with a kitchen in between. The lecture room can seat 250
people.

Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency
This new body, which has its headquarters at 56, Grosvenor Street, W.i,
has been incorporated for the study of the psychological treatment of criminals
and for the starting of a clinic to which magistrates can send cases for diagnosis
and treatment.

Dr. Edward Glover is the Chairman and there is a technical advisory
committee of doctors who have made a close study of many aspects of crime.
A public inaugural meeting of the Institute was held at University College on
November 29th.

Sterilisation
--------------

A Parliamentary Committee of 10 members has been formed with the
object of promoting a permissive Bill to legalise voluntary sterilisation of
certain mental defectives. This Committee has circulated to members of the
House a pamphlet setting forth the statement of the case for legalising sterilisa-
tion and giving the text of the proposed Bill. We hope to give a full account
of this Bill in the next issue of Mental Welfare.
The German Medical Association in combination with the Hartmann
Federation have requested the Minister of the Realm of the Interior to intro-
duce a law to regularise sterilisation on eugenic grounds of persons with a
disease of a seriously inheritable nature. The Medical Association are not in
favour of compulsory sterilisation and to ensure against any abuse they suggest
the establishment in every district of State Committees consisting of well-
known doctors and lawyers who will have the right of decision in every
individual case. The Association is particularly anxious to clear up the legal
uncertainty which at present surrounds this matter.

News from Institutions
----------------------

The following items of news taken from Reports on Institutions which
we have received during the past few months may be of interest to readers.

Royal Western Counties Institution
-----------------------------------

During the year this Institution received the consent of His Majesty the
King to use the title " Royal," and a special resolution was passed incorporating
the addition to its name which is now " The Royal Western Counties Insti-
tution."

A Farm Hostel has been opened for young men at Langdon and tempor-
ary villas for low-grade male and high-grade female patients have been added
to the accommodation. The Farm Hostel is proving most successful. It
accommodates 20 men and also provides excellent facilities for training for a
number of defectives who are sent daily from the main Institution. The
defectives in residence at the Hostel are allowed full parole on return from
their work. Their earnings vary from 10/- to 25/- a week.

Coleshill Hall, Birmingham
---------------------------

This is one of the younger Institutions and the Report for this year con-
tains chiefly an account of the gradual development in the building, etc.
A Boy Scouts Band has arisen out of classes in musical training which
were begun early in January, 1932. Attendance at these classes is voluntary and
40 men have received tuition during the past year. Physical Training Classes
have also become part of the daily routine. The classes have proved increasingly
popular and the diffidence and opposition shown, particularly by the lower
grade women, has disappeared.

A picturesque block of workshops has been erected, each consisting of a
large workroom and store rooms adjoining.

Royal Eastern Counties Institution
-----------------------------------

In the report of this Institution for 1932, Dr. Turner gives an account of
the research work which is being carried on by Dr. Penrose as Research Medical
Officer, and Miss Newlyn his Research Investigator. Dr. Penrose has already
published three papers, one on the Position of Family of Mental Defectives,
and two on Mongolism. Two other investigations have formed part of the
work of the year, the first an investigation into the incidence of congenital
syphilis amongst defectives and the second on the size of family and the average
grade of defect amongst different social classes.
Holiday Home for Mental Defectives, Littlehampton
The Green Lady Hostel, East Street, Littlehampton, will again be avail-
able as a Holiday Home for defectives during four months of 1933?April,
May, September and October. Parties of defectives may be sent from Institu-
tions in charge of their own staff, or if desired, the C.A.M.W. will undertake
to provide the necessary supervision. Weekly charges will be as follows: ?
For Supervising Staff ... ... ... ... 26/6 per week
For patients bringing own supervising staff ... 20/- per week
For patients for whom C.A.M.W. provides supervision 25/6 per week
Early application is advisable so that convenient dates for the various
parties may be arranged. Further information may be obtained from the
Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.i.

During the 14 weeks for which the C.A.M.W. rented the Holiday Home
in 1932, a total number of 340 defectives was received, the majority for a
holiday of a fortnight each. They came from all over the southern and mid-
land areas of England and most appreciative letters have been received from
the patients themselves and from those responsible for sending them. This has
encouraged the Association to repeat the experiment in 1933 and it is hoped
that the Holiday Home will again be well supported.

Margaret Macdowall Memorial Scholarship, 1933
----------------------------------------------

Applications are again invited from persons wishing to obtain specialised
training in the care of mentally defective children for a scholarship available
in 1933 under the Margaret Macdowall Memorial Fund. The Scholarship will
be tenable at one or other of the Courses arranged by the C.A.M.W., according
to the qualifications and eligibility of the successful applicant.

The Fund is administered by a Committee of the C.A.M.W., who act as
Trustees, and all enquiries and applications regarding the Scholarships should
be addressed to the Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.i.

Training Courses in 1933
The following Courses have been arranged by the C.A.M.W. to take
place during the year 1933 : ?
1. Course for Medical Practitioners on Mental Deficiency and Allied
Conditions at the University of London, South Kensington, S.W.
Part I. May 8th to 13th.
Part II. May 15th to 20th.
2. Courses for Enquiry Officers, for Supervisors of Occupation Centres and
for Institution Staffs, at Notcutt House, Dorset Square, London, N.W.i.
July 1st to 22nd.
3. Courses for the Training of Teachers of Retarded Children
(a) The Nine Weeks' Course will be held in London from Monday,
May 22nd to Friday, July 21st.
(b) The Short Courses organised by the C.A.M.W. on behalf of the Board
of Education will be held as follows: ?
Advanced Course (in London), July 4th to 27th.
Elementary Course, September 8th to 30th. (Probably in Liverpool,
but place will be announced later.)
Note.?The dates given for the Teachers' Courses are provisional. Details
will be circulated in February.

Forthcoming Lectures
---------------------

A Course of five lectures on Defective Speech and How to Improve It,
will be given by Miss Eileen MacLeod at University College. Gower Street,
London, W.C.i. The lectures will be held on Wednesdays, at 5.30 p.m., com-
mencing on January 18th.

A more advanced course in Orthophonies will also be given on Wednes-
days, commencing on February 22nd. The fee for each course is 1 guinea and
the fee for the two courses together is 2 guineas. Particulars may be obtained
from the Secretary, University College.

The Institute of Medical Psychology, 6, Torrington Place, W.C.i, have
arranged the following series of lectures for next session: ?
Theory and Practice of Mental Hygiene for Advanced Social Workers.
16 lectures, commencing on Tuesday, January 17th.

Theory and Practice of Mental Testing. Six elementary lectures, on
Mondays, commencing January 16th.

The Significance of Mental Tests in Psychiatric Work. Advanced Course
of three lectures, commencing February 27th.
A lecture on Occupational Therapy, followed by a Demonstration. 3 p.m.,
Saturday, February 4th.

Particulars of these and other Post-Graduate Courses may be obtained
from the Hon. Lecture Secretary of the Institute, 6, Torrington Place, W.C.i.
Mental Health Course for Social Workers

Owing to the continued generosity of the Commonwealth Fund, a further
grant of six scholarships to the value of ^200 each for diis Course, is announced
by the London School of Economics for the coming session.

While candidates for scholarships must fulfil certain formal conditions of
age, training and experience, the Selection Committee lays primary stress upon
the importance of personal qualifications for this exacting and responsible
work.

The practical training of the Course is arranged under the special educa-
tional supervision of medical directors and social supervisors at the Maudsley
Hospital and L.C.C. Out-Patient Clinics, and the London and East London
Child Guidance Clinics. A short period of training in mental deficiency work
1S provided for through the co-operation of University College Hospital and
the Central Association for Mental Welfare.

The increasing demand for systematic training in the mental hygiene
aspects of social work is evidenced by the large number of enquiries about the
Course received each year, and the diverse branches of social work from which
applications are received. It seems clear that this training has ceased to be the
monopoly of those definitely intending to take up work in Clinics and is wel-
comed by many of those concerned in a less specialised way with personal and
social well-being.

Attention is called to the advertisement of available Scholarships on
page 26.

Association of Mental Health Workers
-------------------------------------

A small presentation was recently made by members of the Association
of Mental Health Workers to Mrs. Pinsent on her retirement from the Board
of Control, as a mark of appreciation and esteem. This took the form of gram-
ophone records. It is the sincere hope of all members of the Association that
Mrs. Pinsent may enjoy every happiness in her retirement.

The Annual Week-end Conference of the Association is due to be held
in London next April. A Circular has been sent to all members to ascertain
whether it is their wish that the Conference should be held this year. Members
are asked to give the matter early consideration and to reply to the circular as
soon as possible.

Further news of the Association will be seen on page 27.
