News and Notes
================

Stoke Park Colony Camp
About 1,000 of the boys and girls of Stoke Park rejoiced in a delightful
camping holiday at Clevedon during the 10 weeks that it was open, almost
every day of which was fine. Each party stayed about 2 weeks.
The success of the whole was entirely due to Mrs. Burden's large-hearted
generosity and genius for organisation.
The situation of the camp was ideal and not a cloud marred the happiness
of the parties. Clevedon has the advantage of being within easy reach of
Bristol so that the children could travel by charabanc all the way. The air of
Clevedon is wonderfully invigorating, and the big safe paddling and bathing
pool, public park with roundabouts and swings make it an ideal place for a
camp.
A level field of about 10 acres was rented, gas and water laid on to the
little kitchen, and an immense marquee was erected. Here the visitors arrived
early and spent the day out of doors, only turning into the marquee for meals.
The visitors were able to sleep indoors in the dormitories which had been
adapted at Clevedon, so they were comfortably housed whatever the weather.
Each party consisted of 150 to 200 boys or girls with a dozen or more
teachers and attendants. A recreation officer who has been accustomed to
organise sports for large numbers was busy all the time arranging games and
98 MENTAL WELFARE
outings. The field was big enough to give ample space for a dozen games to
be going on simultaneously. Besides all the fun and games in the field, on the
beach, downs and recreation grounds, small groups were thrilled to go shop-
ping in the little town of Clevedon, while nearly all the parties enjoyed a
charabanc drive to the neighbouring towns of Weston-super-Mare, Burnham
or Portishead.
The first Stoke Park Summer Camp was a tremendous success from every
point of view. The boys and girls returned to the colony brown, cheerful and
invigorated. The change has had a particularly good effect on the most in-
telligent working patients, and now the greatest incentive to good work in all
departments is the anticipation of being chosen for the next Camp.
Cell Barnes Colony, Hertfordshire County Council.
Sir Hilton Young, Minister of Health, officially opened this admirably
planned colony on October 5th. It is situated not far from Hill End Mental
Hospital on the outskirts of St. Albans, and certain economies have been poss-
ible through the use of joint sewerage, electricity, etc. In declaring the colony
open, Sir Hilton Young laid stress on the value of a colony as a centre of
research and of training, and its rightful position in regard to defectives who
could after training be placed out under guardianship or on licence. In a
telling phrase, he said that while the " tendrils " of kindness and compassion
should go out to individual mental defectives who were already in our midst,
we should not rest content with our present knowledge, but should continue
effort and research for prevention.
The colony is designed for 600 and there are at present 237 in residence.
Until the County requires all the accommodation, out-county cases can be
received. There are ten ward blocks and eighteen wards, and the whole is
very pleasantly laid out on an estate of 97 acres. The original house has been
enlarged by a new wing, and with its old garden, makes a most delightful
home for the Matron and Nurses.
The essential services are carried out as far as possible by electricity?
there is a splendid laundry sufficiently equipped with all the latest electrical
appliances to undertake the work of another institution. In the kitchen,
electric machines for bacon cutting, vegetable cleaning and slicing, and bread
making, reduce to a minimum the need for labour.
We understand that market gardening and the usual trades are to be
taught to the boys, and that gardening and poultry-keeping are to be included
in the girls' occupations. Every effort will be made to " individualise " the
patients, and to fit them if possible for later life outside the institution.
Rampton State Institution
The Board of Control (Lunacy and Mental Deficiency) invite applications
for two posts (Head Mistress and Assistant Mistress) in School of Children's
Section of Rampton State Institution for Mental Defectives, near Retford,
Notts. Candidates must be either Certificated Teachers or Uncertificated
MENTAL WELFARE 99
Teachers holding Higher Froebel Certificate and it is desirable that they should
have had experience in teaching and training mentally defective children.
Salaries (subject to the 10% reduction): Head Mistress?Burnham Scale 2
for Certificated Head Mistress, School is graded as a Special School Grade II;
Assistant Mistress?Burnham Scale 2 for Certificated Mistress. Both posts
will be pensionable under Civil Service Superannuation Acts and service will
reckon as approved external service under Section 13 (1) (b) of Teachers'
(Superannuation) Act, 1925.
Separate forms of application for each post, with further particulars, can
be obtained from the Secretary, Board of Control, Caxton House West, Tothill
Street, London, S.W.i, and must be completed and returned to him not later
than nth November, 1933.
Shotley Bridge Colony
A new block of buildings was opened recently as an extension to the
colony, and will be reserved for the low-grade cases. The total cost of the
block, including land, building and furnishing amounted to ^6,467, and it
is interesting to note that a similar block built some time ago exceeded this
cost by about ^1,700.
St. Christopher's Nursery Training College, Tunbridge Wells
This training college has been reorganised under the auspices of the Home
and School Council of Great Britain. It is under the direction of Miss M. A.
Payne, whose work in connection with the Institute of Medical Psychology,
and whose book " Oliver Untwisted " have already made her well known to
our readers. Dr. Hadfield is Hon. Visiting Psychologist, and those acting in
an advisory capacity include Dr. Crichton-Miller, Dr. Hector Cameron, Mrs.
Susan Isaacs. The course of training will be nine months, and 42 students
(six scholars at special fees) will be received. The children's ages will range
from a few days old to seven years, and special emphasis will be placed on
psychological understanding in the handling of young children. Two further
courses, of three and six months, in "Practical Child Guidance" will be
arranged for students who have satisfactorily passed the nine months' course.
" The whole plan of education," the prospectus states, " and the environ-
ment of the Home will be based on the most recent knowledge of the needs
of the child." There will be a Montessori School for the children over three
years old.
In addition to a large house, there are three cottages, and in one of these,
delicate, " nervous " and " difficult " children will be received, who will be
transferred to the main nurseries when their special difficulties have been
overcome.
Royal Hostel, Elstead
An interesting note comes from the Secretary of the Surrey Voluntary
Association. Some of the boys at the Hostel have shown that they can com-
pete with, and outdistance the village competitors and that they can carry out
100 MENTAL WELFARE
some amusing and original fun. In the village sports a Surrey lad won the
Silver Challenge Cup and Silver Medal for first place in the mile race, and a
Middlesex lad won the Bronze Medal for second place. The first prize at the
Village Carnival was also won by the Surrey lad, for his costume of Cannibal
Chief, and the second prize by another Hostel lad as Charlie Chaplin. The
costumes were planned and made without any assistance from the staff. Two
other lads organised a side show?a kind of " human " Aunt Sally; they
wore top-hats, and keeping up a run of amusing patter, they invited spectators
to knock off their hats. They raised by this effort ?i gs. for the British Legion.
Sterilisation of the Unfit
While we in England are awaiting the report of the Departmental Com-
mittee appointed in June, 1932, to consider the problem of hereditary trans-
mission and other causes of mental disorder and deficiency, and the value of
sterilisation as a preventive, it is of deep interest to turn to legislation elsewhere.
British Columbia
The question of sterilisation has been before the public in British Colum-
bia for many years, and in July of this year an Act was passed permitting the
sterilisation of certain persons " likely to beget or bear children who by reason
of inheritance would have a tendency to serious mental disease or mental
deficiency." The operation is limited to those in Institutions for whom dis-
charge is contemplated. The Board of Eugenics (non-salaried) numbers three,
a judge, a psychiatrist, and a " person experienced in social welfare work."
No operation may be performed without the consent in writing of the inmate,
or if, in the opinion of the Board, the inmate is not capable of giving consent,
the consent of the husband or wife, parent or guardian. In cases where there
is no such relative resident in British Columbia, the Provincial Secretary may
give consent.
Germany
The recent Act in Germany, which comes into force in January next, is
of far wider scope. Sterilisation, if ordered by the Eugenic Court, is to be
carried out, if necessary, against the will of the person. The Courts, appointed
by the States, are to be attached to the Magistrates' Courts, and are to consist of
a magistrate and two doctors (one of whom is to be specially versed in eugenics)
and their deputies, and there is to be a Eugenic High Court for the hearing of
appeals. Sterilisation may be ordered to be performed on anyone who is
" hereditarily ailing, if in the experience of medical science it is with great
probability to be expected that his progeny will suffer from severe bodily or
mental hereditary disorders." The diseases covered by the law are limited to
eight in number, congenital feeble-mindedness, schizophrenia, periodic (manic-
depressive) insanity, inherited epilepsy, inherited St. Vitus's dance (Hunting-
ton's chorea), inherited blindness, inherited deafness, severe inherited physical
MENTAL WELFARE 101
malformation. In addition, anyone suffering from severe alcoholism may be
sterilised. For those in institutions, hospitals or prisons, the proposal for steril-
isation may be brought forward by the director, and it does not appear that the
inmate or his guardians will have any right of protest beyond the right of appeal
to the Eugenic High Court. A person not in an institution may make the
proposal for himself, or if he is not competent to make it, it may be made by
his guardians. The official doctor of the Eugenic Court can also put forward
proposals.
The operation may only be carried out in a hospital. The Court is not
public, and the doctors and other persons concerned are sworn to secrecy.
('Translations of the Act may be found in " The Lancet," September 2nd, and
in the October number of the Eugenic Review.)
Sweden
Some time ago reference was made in the Press to a Sterilisation Act in
Sweden. We are authoritatively informed that no such Act has been passed
in that country. A report, however, by experts, and proposals for a law regard-
ing the sterilisation of certain defectives are now before the Government.
Other Countries
It is known that elsewhere sterilisation has been carried out under the
existing laws, e.g., in Ontario and parts of Switzerland. Recent legislation
(I93?"3I) m ^ie Canton Vaud has specially authorised the operation, but
medical men in Switzerland have hitherto carried it out on therapeutic grounds,
interpreting therapy on the very broadest lines.
A lecture, more especially dealing with the practice in Zurich was recently
given in London, under the chairmanship of Sir Humphry Rolleston, by Dr.
Hans Maier, Director of the Zurich Mental Hospital.
Lectures
The Child Guidance Council are holding a course of five lectures during
October, on Tuesdays, at 6 p.m., for the staffs of Homes and Institutions. The
fee for the course is 5 shillings.
The Institute of Medical Psychology have arranged a course of six lectures
by Dr. R. S. Gordon and Dr. Rees on Personality: Its Constitution and Its
Problems. The course begins on October 24th and will be held weekly at
6 p.m. The fee for the course is ^1 is. (single lecture, 5s.).
The Institute of Child Psychology announces a course of eight lectures
at Friends House, on " The Mind of the Child." The lectures will be on
Wednesdays, beginning November 1st at 6.15 and 8.15 p.m. Applications to
the Lecture Secretary, 20, Warwick Crescent, W.2.
102 MENTAL WELFARE
National Council for Mental Hygiene
The Conference on Mental Health which is to be held at Caxton Hall
from November 22nd to 24th, will be opened by the President of the Council,
H.R.H. Prince George, K.G. All applications should be made to the Secretary,
78, Chandos House, Palmer Street, S.W.i.
The Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency
Through the generosity of the West End Hospital for Nervous Diseases,
a free clinic is now available for the diagnosis of the physical and mental state
of delinquents and for the treatment of suitable cases. Applications should be
made to the Honorary Secretary of the Institute, 56, Grosvenor Street, W.i.
Children and Young Persons Act, 1933
This Act, consolidating the Children Act, 1908, and the Children and
Young Persons Act, 1932, comes into force on November 1st. The Home
Office have circularised Justices and others on the main provisions.
One of the important Sections of the Act makes it obligatory, when a
child is charged, to notify the Probation Officer and the Local Authority, and
except in trivial cases, to render available to the Court information as to home
surroundings, medical and school record, etc. Though this has been the
practice in some of the Juvenile Courts, it is satisfactory to know that the fullest
possible information should now be universally available. The powers of the
Court in regard to both juvenile offenders and children and young persons
in need of care and protection are set out, and it will be possible for a child to
be moved from the care of undesirable or neglectful parents, and placed in an
" approved " school, or boarded out with a relative or other fit person; or he
may remain with the parents under the care of a Probation Officer. To
facilitate procedure in certain cases, the Local Authority is deemed to be a " fit
person." The need for specially trained Probation Officers with knowledge of
psychological problems is manifest, and it will remain with the advanced
Juvenile Courts to lead the way in consulting psychologists and psychiatrists
when investigations are carried out in regard to juvenile delinquents.
Board of Control
The list of State Institutions, Certified Institutions, Certified Houses and
Approved Homes for Mental Defectives in England and Wales, revised to
August 16th, 1933, which has hitherto been obtainable on application to the
Board of Control, is now published as a Government publication and may be
obtained from H.M. Stationery Office, Adastral House, Ki figs way, W.C., or
through any bookseller. Price 1/6, or 1/7 post free.
