A Retired Habitation: A History of The Retreat, York
======================================================

MENTAL WELFARE 21
Book Reviews <rS2 Abstracts
. By Harold Capper Hunt.
London. H. K. Lewis & Co. Pp. XVI : 144.
Price 7/6.
No account of the reforms which have taken
Place in the treatment of the insane would be
adequate which did not give a reasonably de-
tailed account of the inception and progress of
Ihe Retreat at York, and, inseparably con-
nected with this, of those enlightened and
humane men who were responsible for the
conception of the scheme and for the pioneer
^'ork which served to bring it into being. It
xvas not that the idea of reform was entirely
n?vel or that no attempt had been made to im-
prove the conditions in which the insane lived:
^?rgagni, Vincenzo Chiarugi, Pinel, and
t^aquin of Savoy, may be mentioned as re-
formers. But the movement was so limited
that it hardly detracts from the merits of the
uinovators at York to mention it. The names
of William Tuke and of his grandson, Samuel
fuke, would seem, therefore, sure of immor-
ahty in this connection.
It is nearly a hundred and twenty years since
aniuel Tuke's masterly " Description of The
Retreat " was published?a work which may
tv, k-e studied with edification and profit?so
here is ample room for the excellent and read-
able account which Mr. Hunt has given us. (It
ls interesting to note that it is also the work
? a layman?as was the " Description "?for
1 ? Hunt is steward of the hospital). In it he
as recapitulated the early history, portrayed
le chief personalities among those who have
rued on the good work, noted the changes
k lch had inevitably to take place in order to
ceeP the hospital abreast of the times, re-
Unted the opinions of distinguished visitors,
^scribed war-time conditions, and brought the
TiC0Untup to date with a chapter on "Modern
r lles." In addition, there are twenty-one well
?(Produced illustrations, a valuable chapter on
IsTp-i 3 future of Mental Treatment," by Dr.
Pier eoc^? and a foreword by Dr. Bedford
Ce> to whose memory the book is dedicated,
d ? Avas for thirty years Medical Superinten-
laill "The Retreat," whose death we
ino-anc^ regarding whom it is not surpris-
tim-, ? Jearn that " in later years he was affec-
"onately referred to as ? Father.' "
Of the influence of the example of " The
Retreat " in this and in other countries there
can be no doubt: yet it was obviously the
quality of the scheme and not its extent which
was the factor at work. For, in the early days,
the practical experience was limited : and we
have it on the authority of Samuel Tuke that
from 1796 to the end of 1811 the admissions
amounted to one hundred and forty-nine. In
view, also, of what is probably still a prevalent
misconception it is worth noting what Mr.
Hunt says in regard to the matter of restraint;
" Though the Retreat was a pioneer in the
matter of relaxing control by mechanical
restraint, the treatment of mental patients with-
out any such restraint was not undertaken until
1838, when Dr. Charlesworth and Mr. Gardiner
Hill abolished all mechanical restraint in the
asylum under their charge at Lincoln. Shortly
after this Dr. Conolly adopted the same meas-
ures on a much larger scale at Hanwell." It is
as well to note that experience has justified
some modification in the extreme view in this
respect?for example, in surgical cases. The
same may be said in regard to control by drugs
of which Mr. Hunt remarks that: " it is not
difficult to see that this may be even more cruel
than restraint by straps, and the use of such
methods has always been disapproved by the
Directors and Committee of The Retreat."
In writing of the Tukes and their work, Mr.
Hunt might have mentioned the excellent
account, for example, given of them by Dr.
Rene Semelaigne in his large and comprehen-
sive "Alienistes et Philanthropes," which has
for its sub-title " Les Pinel et Les Tuke."
These are small criticisms of this most inter-
esting and admirably produced book?and one
which everyone interested in the treatment of
the insane will wish, and ought, to add to his
library.
H.J.N.
The Health of the School Child. Annual
Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the
Board of Education for 1931. H.M. Sta-
tionery Office. Price 2/6 net. 1932.
Sir George Newman can always be relied
upon to provide an attractive and interesting
opening to his annual report on the Health of
the School Child. This year he has given us
several paragraphs on the " ancestry " of the
School Medical Service. Although this service
22 MENTAL WELFARE
as a statutory institution has only existed
since the Education (Administrative Pro-
visions) Act of 1907, its origin can be dated
back as far as the foundation of St. Paul's
School by John Colet in 1509; though medical
care, in the modern sense did not begin in Eng-
land until the eighteenth century with the
work of Robert Owen and Lord Shaftesbury.
With reference to Special Schools, Sir
George Newman points out that the increase in
accommodation in schools for the mentally
defective, the blind and deaf has proceeded at
a much slower rate than the schools for the
physically defective. In 1909 there was accom-
modation for 3,291 physically defective child-
ren; to-day that has increased to 30,266. The
total accommodation for the mentally defective
in schools to-day is only 16,862. He attributes
this to the fact that the open-air schools,
cripple schools, etc., are far and away more
promptly effective than the others and their
value is quickly and rightly realised by public
opinion. In fact, as a result of the benefit de-
rived from open-air schools, 80% of the ordin-
ary school building plans submitted to the
Board for approval, contain proposals for the
adaptation of some or all classrooms to make
them available as open-air classrooms.
In summarising the work of the school
medical service, Sir George Newman considers
it under four headings:?the ascertainment,
by periodical medical examination, of any
disease, defect or impairment, where such ex-
ists; the medical and surgical treatment carried
out in School Clinics and hospitals; the reduc-
tion of the incidence and mortality of disease,
including a striking reduction in mortality due
to tuberculosis; and finally, the emergence of
a health conscience by the teaching of personal
hygiene and cleanliness and by organised
physical exercises and games. Writing of this
development of a " health conscience," he
states : " Out of this public service has sprung
the special school and its particular form of
education (for the blind, deaf, physical or
mental cripple), and above all, the responsibil-
ity of the parents has been awakened and stim-
ulated. There can be no question of the trans-
formation which has resulted from these simple
and almost domestic reforms, far more power-
ful in themselves than any Act of Parliament
or than any specific medical treatment of the
defective child . . . the children are as a whole
cleaner, better in physique, better fed, better
clothed, better nurtured, than they have ever
been since we possessed records of them, and
this evidence is clinched by the simple fact that
their parents have themselves been through the
same hygienic discipline and know its value."
300 Careers for Women. Compiled by
Vyrnwry Biscoe. London. Lovat Dickson.
1932. Pp. 227. Price 2/6.
The book has been compiled to open the
eyes of " girls, schoolgirls, students and older
women," to the immense number and variety
of occupations and professions that are now
open to women. The compiler speaks from a
wide and varied experience as the director of
a vocational bureau and an admirable preface
is contributed by the Rt. Hon. Margaret
Bondfield. Information concerning available
training, probable cost, grants-in-aid, length of
training, etc., is given in almost every case,
but unfortunately, in the laudable attempt to
tabulate and concentrate information, an
erroneous impression of the ease with which
certain professions may be entered has been
given, and in some cases strict accuracy has
been sacrificed. In the section on " Mental
Welfare Work," for example, particulars have
evidently been taken from the syllabuses of
the various training courses for one particular
year and generalisations have been made from
them, with rather misleading results.
However, the book will be most useful as a
signpost to direct those interested to the place
where fuller information may be obtained on
any particular profession, and in doing this it
will have fulfilled its purpose.
M.U.W.
Studies in the Psychology of Delinquency-
By Grace W. Pailthorpe, M.D. Issued by the
Medical Research Council (Special Report
Series No. 170). Price 2/-.
This is a study of the psychology of delin-
quency which deals with the investigation ot
the female inmates of prisons and of the lfl*
mates of preventive and rescue homes for girls
and young women.
The preface states that the author is person-
ally responsible for the results and the opinions
she rests upon them.
MENTAL WELFARE 23
Dr. Pailthorpe's preamble of the history of
scientific criminology is very interesting and
she suggests that modern psycho-pathology
takes cognizance of certain symptomatic and
characterised reactions which were previously
Snored as unimportant or " natural " habits.
The material for this report has been gath-
ered over a period of five years and the
^umbers considered, 200 : of whom 100 were
Prison inmates and 100 inmates of rescue
homes, etc. The method of interviewing pris-
oners is elaborated, and one realises the diffi-
culties of getting the truth from some of these
subjects, which is only gained by very tactful
eatnient and the experience of years.
For those who showed defect in intelligence,
he Hamblin Swinten scheme of tests was
^sed, but occasionally supplemented by the
met Terman series.
Her observations and summary of results
may be of use to those dealing with mental
efectives, but it must be remembered that the
JJereuSe of mental tests is not sufficient, but
right conclusions deduced. One is glad to
See that the importance of " scattering " is
emphasised.
It was rather surprising to see that 15% of
ese female prisoners were of defective intelli-
gence, but of course, 100 cases do not allow of
much margin.
in^?t a single case of her series was educated
^ a public or private school, and Dr. Pail-
jn?rPe considers that there is something lack-
pJ%ln elementary school education and sug-
w s. *hat it may be " co-ordinated character
trainmg " t
aS'ree with her when she remarks on the
lo Parative absence of any kind of parental
of 4iln ^ves ?f some of the children (34 out
. this absence was almost complete) and
qUe^s seen particularly amongst child delin-
On
t^s e cannot but be interested to learn from
cjefG st_udy that " cases diagnosed as mentally
ac^; lve have as a result of psycho-analysis
POtyeJ^Mconsiderable liberation of intellectual
^oubf/T^01-1 llsec^ to ^ie ru^e? ^
day j 1 ^ ^ prevails to any great extent to-
?thern-an^ uP-to-date institutions certified or
all on 1Stf a ^er assertion '' that in England
alone/-Homes anc^ Institutions are still run
ous ^nes and they are all under religi-
J Trisdiction," is too sweeping.
Appendix 6, which is a report on prisons and
homes on the Continent in 1927, is very in-
structive and might have been enlarged.
There is a good bibliography of the works
consulted.
E.J.B.
The Child in Home and School. By Florence
M. Surfleet. Headley Bros. Pp. 137. Price
3/6.
Of books dealing with the problems of child-
hood there seems no end. Small wonder that
the parent seeking guidance is often be-
wildered. But here is one which will surely
prove helpful to many. Young parents who
are just beginning to realise what their new
responsibilities involve, will find in " The
Child in Home and School," Florence M. Sur-
fleet, an excellent introduction to psychology,
written in such simple language that no one
could fail to grasp its plain teaching.
It is quite refreshing to find so much com-
mon-sense in one book; in these days of small
families there seems a tendency to keep child-
ren for ever in the limelight, constantly keyed
up to the highest pitch, an unhealthy state for
any young, growing thing; it is a relief to read
in the chapter on activity and rest . . . "he
should be left quite alone to play as he chooses
for long periods at a time." How much young
children suffer from the constant attentions
and interference of grown-ups we can never
know, but this seems to me one of the most
valuable pieces of good advice in a book full of
practical suggestions.
The chapter dealing with the physical care
of the child is most welcome; it cannot be said
too often that " Nail-biting does not mark a
stage through which most children pass, but,
like bed-wetting and thumb-sucking, is usu-
ally found in the child who is too dependent
on the adult in his environment ... or whose
life has lacked stability." And again, how
many homes would be infinitely happier if
those in charge of the children could be made
to act on the good advice that "it is defin-
itely harmful to children to receive much com-
mendation for a habit which should be taken
for granted." (The author is here speaking of
constipation) and to remember that there are
many children (as well as grown-ups) like
Brenda who " did not sem to mind which kind
24 MENTAL WELFARE
of attention she got (scolding or coaxing) so
long as she got attention."
Chapter VII on " Fear," contains nine ex-
amples of children's fears, all of which could
have been so easily prevented with a little
more forethought or knowledge on the part of
the parent. How many young children suffer
untold fears from " confused ideas about
everything pertaining to sex, due to the age-
long sex-repression and fearfulness which
makes it improper to speak of the subject."
The advice 011 page 145 to answer a child's
question's simply and truthfully is good?but
to explain to a child that in some cases it is
better for him not to discuss these questions
with other children, seems to me to be asking
for trouble or rather paving the way for such
discussions.
It is perhaps still not generally realised how
remarkably susceptible children, especially in-
fants, are. They " sense fear in the grown-up
even when the grown-up herself does not recog-
nise its presence." For this reason, as Miss
Surfleet says, " it is very important that the
grown-up should realise the power of her un-
spoken fears, her half-conscious or wholly un-
conscious fears." She should also have the
compensation of realising "just how powerful a
force for good her confidence in the child's
ultimate achievement may be" and what better
illustration of this point could be given than
that wonderful work " Oliver Untwisted,"
which is recommended to readers in the Biblio-
graphy on page 147.
The form of this book, the short chapters
with many illustrative stories and the ques-
tions at the end of each chapter, should make
it especially useful for discussion groups, for
the informal discussions which should arise at
parents' meetings in connection with Nursery
Schools, etc. : it is for such groups, as well as
for individual young parents, that " The
Child in Home and School" can be thoroughly
recommended.
Z.B.
Nervous Disorder in Infancy and Child-
hood. By N. Hobhouse. Lewis, London.
1932. 8/6 net.
Rather more than half this book is descrip-
tive of nervous disorders of an organic type,
but throughout there is shown appreciation of
the psychological concomitants of even the
more stereotyped physical conditions. One is
disappointed, however, that the section deal-
ing with conditions which would formerly have
been called functional, does not go into the
same detail as the previous section, and modern
psychological practice would disagree with
the author in certain of his statements, for in-
stance, that enuresis is frequently hysterical
and that masturbation in infants should be
mechanically controlled.
The chapter on mental deficiency is short,
and the author shows so many signs of great
understanding of the difficulties faced by the
defective, that it is a pity he did not deal with
educational maladjustments in more detail.
At a time when there is a tendency to sec
only the psychological in nervous disorders of
children, such a book is welcome, and, though
pure pediatricians 011 the one hand and child
psychologists on the other will each find much
to disagree with, the author has adopted a11
attitude which is undoubtedly facing in the
right direction.
The book would appeal mainly to the medico*
post-graduate, who will find in its pages much
that is new and stimulating.
W.M.
On Certain Aspects of Human Biology. By
C. J. Bond. Lewis. London. 1932. Pp-
Price 2/6.
In the third lecture given in the Willi?111
Withering Series of Lectures at the University
of Birmingham, dealing with certain aspect-1'
of Human Biology, by Mr. C.J.Bond, C.M.G->
F.R.C.S., the lecturer dealt particularly ^vl*
genetics in relation to Public Health and Pre"
ventive Medicine.
The theme was that further progress in PlC
ventive Medicine could only be brought abo^
by the application of biological methods. Th
chief lesson which a study of the course 0
human evolution taught was the all-import?11
part played by biological factors in hum?1
history. Among these factors the mental
temperamental endowment and capacity
resist disease and injurious environmental 111
fluences are the most important. j
Environmental influences both good and oa ^
help to promote 01* to arrest the development
inherited tendencies and capacities, but th y
MENTAL WELFARE 25
can only do so within the limits fixed by here-
ditary endowment. If Eugenics means the
application of this genetic knowledge to human
life, then Eu genics constitutes the greatest
Problem of our time.
The only way in which we can increase the
Proportion of citizens endowed with the essen-
tial qualities of adaptability and educability is
by the eugenic method.
In spite of the good work done by the School
Medical and other social medical activities, the
Writer thinks there are evident signs of racial
deterioration manifest, and there is no evidence
of.any growth in intelligence or innate cap-
j*city. In other words, the improvement has
been in Nurture and not in Nature, and we are
replenishing our population from the less well
endowed rather than from healthy and vigor-
ous stocks.
While interfering with and preventing the
operation of natural selection, civilised man
las) up to the present, evolved no organised
Method of control to take its place.
f he practice of conception control, and the
paving of child lives, he thinks, is having a
ysgenic effect on the population as a whole.
-lUch of our social and domestic legislation
?~day is not founded on sound biological prin-
Jples. The weak are aided at the expense of
e normal citizen, and much the same effect is
r?nght about by some of the activities of
Medical science and practice.
He pleads for a more favourable attitude on
e part of the medical training schools towards
r e teaching of genetics, and puts forward as
nedies, (a) endeavour to encourage eugenic
^arriage, (b) the restriction of the choice of
Stikr.ria8"e and the prevention of procreation in
Jects of hereditary defects.
^Though some readers may think the picture
mf^u1 *S ^ar ^00 ?l?omy> there is nevertheless
tUr substantial food for thought in this lec-
re e" The status of the lecturer commands
sid an^ reasoned opinions must be con-
life f an^ weighed- To revert to the social
?f the early 18th century is unthinkable,
Welf en Progress has been as rapid in social
half^ as has been the case during the past
PausCentUry' ^ behoves all thinking people to
f?r 0 t? analyse the results achieved and to
are r a*e schemes for adjustment where they
?Und to be necessary.
O.M.H.
