The Royal Medieo-Psyeliologiesil Association
=============================================

(Contributed)

The Annual meetings of the Association took place on July 5th, 6th and
7th, under the Presidency of Dr F. Douglas Turner, at Colchester and Clacton-
on-Sea, namely, at the Albert Hall and the Royal Institution for Mental Defec-
tives at Colchester, and the Town Hall, Clacton. In view of the specialisation
of the new President in mental deficiency as contrasted with full lunacy, this
meeting can be said to have been a Mental Deficiency Study.

THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS
-------------------------

Dr Turner said he thought this was the first occasion on which a member
had been chosen as President whose life-work had been on mental deficiency,
and a fitting sub-title for his address might well be, " The wheel always comes
full cycle." Over and over again in the case of defectives, during the past
hundred years, methods and ideas were used, then discarded, and at a later
date were re-introduced and hailed as new. The basic principles of Seguin's
methods were those in occupation centres to-day, i.e., to first awaken the senses,
educate the larger muscles of the body, and infuse vitality, passing on then to
the finer co-ordinating movements. 28 years ago the aim was first to teach
reading and writing, but that idea has now been discarded.

After dealing with the history of the movement, Dr Turner went on
to say that in the first instance nearly every great cause had been commenced
by the voluntary efforts of people whose sympathies had been stirred by becom-
ing aware of some evil, and who did their best to help their fellows. Usually
the State had only given help after years of voluntary effort had shown the
way. It was not until the passing of the Mental Deficiency Act in 1913 that
the Local authorities were empowered to build their own institutions for
defectives, and to contract with existing institutions to take their cases
on payment. The Royal Institution at Colchester still had a charit-
able income of nearly ^10,000 a year, and maintained 200 patients by its
charitable funds. Plans were now being made for the accommodation of 444
additional patients. Up to the present time defectives in England had been
protected by three separate Acts of Parliament, and the wheel had only to take
one more turn to get back to full cycle and come again under the Lunacy Acts,
a consummation which he hoped not to see. Both England and America had had
alarmist periods, which commenced when it was recognised that many defectives
could not be cured, and was added to by the invention of intelligence tests, the
latter being the sole arbiters as to feeble-mindedness. Emphasis on eugenics
and studies of heredity seemed to teach the same alarmist doctrine, and the
compilation of family histories was hopelessly unscientific. Less than ten years
ago a well-known society, established to improve the race, said in a pamphlet
it published, " If all mental defectives could be prevented from having child-
ren, the number of mental defectives in the country would be halved in about
three generations." Those with every-day experience of mental defectives
would agree that such a statement had no basis in any knowledge the profession
at present possessed. Defectives in institutions now lived longer than formerly :
in the five years preceding his appointment, the death rate averaged 7.5% each
year, whereas now it was 1.4%. It was, he thought, wrong to consider mental
defect as a separate entity owning one single cause; there were perhaps a dozen
or twenty causes; in some cases it followed birth injury, congenital syphilis, or
encephalitis, or some alteration in the secretions of some glands. The hopeful
types were those in which the cause was known. He did not think it could
be said how much mental defect was due to preventible causes, how much was
due to heredity acting alone, how much was due to a mixture of both. But
he had been much struck by the effect of environment on the production of
certified defectives; he believed that had the environment of those cases been
better, the person would probably have led a hardworking and blameless life,
though in a lowly sphere. The legal definitions of a defective were of social
character ; they depended on the social capacity of the subject to live in the world
to which he belonged. Civilisation produced defectives by making living con-
ditions more difficult, and a person regarded as defective in a city might easily
pass muster in a village. When cases due to disease or injury were excluded,
there remained a large number who were simply normal people on a low grade.

An intelligence below the average was no more abnormal than a height which
was less than the average. Whoever might be sterilised, there would still be
a failure to eliminate the normal people below average intelligence who could
not react successfully to their environment, and who, therefore, would be
labelled " Defective." It would never be possible to provide a sufficient num-
ber of big training institutions to allow of every mental defective in the country
being retained in them permanently; the expense would be prohibitive. The
problem was to find the best way in which the central institution could, within
the limits of its capacity, give the greatest service. The instrument by which
the desired re-socialisation could be attained was an ever increasing and more
effective use of one of the most valuable things the Mental Deficiency Act con-
tained, i.e., the liberty to grant long leave of absence or license to defectives
from an institution for as long as might be deemed necessary. Dr Bernstein
not only sent his patients out on license, he also had a valuable half-way house,
which he called a colony. These colonies were miles from the institution, they
were separate houses or farms, from which the boys and girls went out to
dailv work in the neighbourhood. They were really trying-out places for the
purpose of determining whether or not the defective could stand the increased
responsibility entailed in this added freedom. This had been somewhat copied
also in England. Dr Turner did not agree with the sending of defectives
direct to foster parents, for if a defective had failed at home, it was not fair
either to him or the guardian to send the case to the same sort of environment,
especially as he thereby missed the skilled examination, training and treatment
at the central institution. The essence of the scheme, and a necessity for its
smooth working, was that all defectives who had once been admitted to the
institution, whatever their subsequent transfers, such as to colonies, must
remain on the books and be considered as on license from the parent institu-
tion. Certainly every large institution should be a training school, not only
for the teachers and nurses on its staff, but for anyone who wished to take up
the work. He did not favour the idea of the medical superintendent acting
as adviser to the local authority.

The future policy of these institutions should be a recognition that the
defective was, in the majority of cases, a normal person, and a turning away
from the alarmist doctrines prevalent in the immediate past.
Another paper on the subject was read by Mr. Edgar A. Doll, Ph.D.,
Director of Research in the Training School at Vineland, New Jersey, on

 COMMUNITY CONTROL OF MENTAL DEFICIENCY IN THE U.S.A.

He said that the conclusions reached in England on the subject of mental
deficiency had largely influenced the professional points of view held in the
States. His own interest in the community control of mental deficiency was
directly attributable to an article by Miss Evelyn Fox in " Mental Welfare "
five years ago. In the States the term " feeble-minded " was used in a generic
sense and was held to include idiot, imbecile, and moron, the latter term having
been coined by Goddard to avoid the confusion then prevailing. In the States
it was generally concluded that one per cent, of the total population was men-
tally defective; this figure was exceeded in rural areas and districts where in-
breeding was prevalent. And at least two per cent, of the school population
were mentally deficient. Their principal agencies for dealing with the men-
tally deficient were (a) public and private institutions, (b) elementary schools,
(c) public welfare organisations. Nearly every State had at least one public
institution for the mentally deficient: and many State hospitals for the insane
also received mentally deficient patients; almshouses and correctional institu-
tions also cared for an uncertain number. In 1928 there were 65,000 patients
in institutions for the mentally deficient; the number was now probably about
80,000. Thus only about six per cent, of the total number were cared for in
public institutions. It was felt that something like a systematic programme
should be provided for the vast majority of mentally deficient persons who at
present had no institutional care. The cost worked out at about ^'100 per head
per annum. The cost of care in private schools varied greatly, in some being
as high as 2,400 dollars per annum each. Institutional segregation was not
justified for mental deficiency alone : it was this plus some complicating factor,
such as dependency, social mal-adjustment, delinquent behaviour, crippling,
misconduct at school, etc. The parole was extended to all kinds of deficients.

There were now 8,000 patients on parole from State institutions in his country.

There were 25 million children of school age in the United States, and it was
estimated that 500,000 of them were mentally deficient, and but few of the
schools took steps to insure institutional care of those who were of too low a
grade to profit from ordinary instruction in school conditions. The special
education of mentally deficient children in the rural districts of the States
presented a particularly difficult problem, largely because the population was
so scattered.

The majority of mentally deficient persons resided in the community, so
that this represented the most important aspect of the problem. In the States
there were few agencies or programmes comparable with those developed in
England for this phase of social control; most of the State agencies were con-
cerned with the co-ordination and supervision of State institutions. Mental
hygiene clinics had been extensively developed in some urban centres, and
travelling clinics were available for some rural districts. In some communities,
too, child guidance clinics had been developed, and in some cases they served
rural areas near large cities. Vocational and educational guidance clinics, as
well as mental clinics, were available in many of the U.S.A. universities. In
some municipalities and in a few rural areas the visiting teacher was an im-
portant aid in relation to mental deficiency, but it was too expensive to be
adopted on a large scale. But there was little provision of occupation centres,
boarding homes, residential schools, social and industrial placements, follow-up
and supervision.

The White House Conference Sub-Committee on Mental Deficiency
advocated a social classification of mental deficiency as follows: ?
1. Low grades, those in this grade being so subnormal that aid had to
be given them in feeding, dressing and personal care, as well as protection from
ordinary dangers. They could receive such training in personal habits as would
make it easier for the family to resume care of them.

2. Adjusted high-grade patients. These included high-grade imbeciles
and morons difficult to manage at home and not amenable to class-room disci-
pline in the elementary schools. They were properly institutional cases.
3. The physically handicapped, including mentally deficient persons to
whose condition were added serious physical handicaps which increased the
social liability of low mentality. These defects might be so severe as to need
similar care to that given to the low-grade cases.

4. The aged high-grades, including the comparatively senile or in-
dustrially incapacitated so that they could not be cared for in their own homes
nor be economically adjusted to the community. Such patients could be cared
for in almshouses, where the facilities were less expensive than in a training
institution, and where only personal care of the aged was required.

5. Clinical types, including the clinical varieties of mental deficiency,
for whom mental treatment could not be provided satisfactorily, either at home
or in the community. These patients had serious physical stigmata and ortho-
paedic and other complications. Presumably some of these could be returned
to the community after an extended period of institutional treatment or care.
6. Neuropsychiatry types, including mental deficiency, with such mental
disorders as epilepsy, psychopathy, psychosis, or neuropathology with deteriora-
tion. These, also, were properly institutional, and could be suitably provided
for in hospitals for the insane.

7. Well-adjusted young high-grades, a group well adapted for special
education in the elementary schools. If the home was economically and socially
capable of caring for such children institutional care was not imperative, and
they benefited from continuing to live in the community, for this enabled
them, under supervision, to adjust socially and economically.

8. Well-adjusted high-grades, including those for whom community
supervision under well-considered programmes of occupational placement and
home care were adequate.

Large numbers of mentally deficient persons were now being cared for in
good homes where the family was able and willing to provide the necessary
care and supervision.

With regard to sterilisation, authorities in the States seemed to be much
more optimistic as to the possibilities in this direction than those in England.
The experiment in California had demonstrated that sterilisaton of mental
defectives was not followed by sexual promiscuity, but it did make possible the
restoration to family or community of people in whom the sex factor had been
of prime importance. The trend of authoritative opinion in the States favoured
selective sterilisation. In that country, too, the outstanding development in
this matter was in research.

A remarkable and memorable feature of this Annual series of meetings
was the demonstration of what is being done for defectives in the Royal Institu-
tion at Colchester which the President controls. The workshops were seen to
be hives of industry, and included shops for shoemakers, tailors, mat making,
basket making, ordinary sewing and embroidery, weaving, knitting, brush
making; while the musical and recreational aspect was even more admirable.

The girls of fitting grade gave a delightful entertainment in the theatre, ruled
by the orthodox fairy queen, with her electrically lighted diadem and wand,
and it passed off without a hitch. In the grounds, on a fine piece of grass
sward, and favoured by perfect weather, an exhaustive series of exercises and
games were given by both sexes, to the accompaniment of the institution-trained
band, and their efforts were loudly applauded by a large company of visitors.
It was evident to all that a happiness and contentment pervaded the whole
exhibition which speaks volumes for the skill and care bestowed.
