Mental Deficiency. Stoke Park Studies
=======================================

MENTAL WELFARE
103
Book Reviews and Abstracts
First Series. Edited by R. J. A. Berry,
M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S.E. Pp. 249. Mac-
millan & Co. 10/6.
This volume is the first contributed by the
medical and consultant staff of the Stoke Park
Colony, near Bristol, under the editorship of
the Medical Director, Professor Berry. It is
dedicated to the memory of the late Reverend
H. N. Burden, who founded the Colony and
who, until his death in 1930, acted as Warden,
a position now held by Mrs. Burden. It gives,
in a memoir on the life of the founder, the
history of the founding of the institution and
Particulars of the actions taken by the late
Warden and the present Warden to foster re-
search in mental deficiency.
The work is well presented in a very read-
able form, and is amply illustrated by photo-
graphs, charts and diagrams. There are seven-
teen articles on various scientific and clinical
aspects of the subject. Not all the work has
been done at Stoke Park, but there is in-
eluded certain work done elsewhere at various
times by the Staff. A comprehensive biblio-
graphy is given at the end of the volume.
Much of the work is on anatomical lines
and there are several interesting articles deal-
lng with the neurological aspect. One con-
tribution by the Editor deals with a practical
njeth?cl of the detection of potential social in-
efficiency and high-grade mental deficiency,
and is based on a former work published by
11111 in association with Professor Portens.
The value of head measurements in diag-
nosis is greatly stressed. One would, however,
1 ' a^on8" with most clinicians, to regard
hese as by no means generally accepted as
e<?nclusive, but to be considered in their place
with many other diagnostic points,
the accurate psychological examination of
jle lowest grades has always presented prob-
jjllls- A very suggestive and helpful article by
^j1, R- G. Gordon on the application of the
foerriH-Palmer tests promises much useful in-
fRation. More details are to be given in a
Work which will be published at a later
of> article gives the family histories of some
ti0nle Patients in the Institution. The atten-
1 ?f all who work with mental defectives is
naturally, just now especially, directed to this
aspect, owing to the researches in hand for
the Departmental Committee at present con-
sidering the causation of mental, disease and
inefficiency and the possible utility of steriliza-
tion. Professor Berry, by reason of his being
Chairman of the B.M.A. Committee on Mental
Deficiency, which recently reported its find-
ings, speaks with considerable authority. His
plea for a greater recognition of the hereditary
factor might be carefully studied by advocates
of sterilisation on a large scale amongst mental
patients. He very rightly makes the point
that the real crux of the problem is the un-
certified person who produces the defective
offspring, and, one might also add, the un-
detected " carrier."
A most instructive contribution is an ab-
stract from a paper by Dr. II. L. Gordon on
the mental make-up of a young man who was
recently hanged in Kenya Colony for the mur-
der of two young women. The effects of both
heredity and environment are clearly shown.
The bearing of such a case on the safety and
well-being of any community is important. The
latter certainly needs much more education in
matters dealing with mental abnormality, and
the attitude of the law altering, before one
can feel reasonably happy about the treatment
of the mentally abnormal.
This is certainly a book which can be recom-
mended for the careful attention of all who
are interested in Mental Deficiency. It shows
that the mental deficiency service intends to
keep its subject as well forward in research as
arc other branches of medicine.
A.M.McC.
Human Values in Psychological Medicine.
C. P. Blacker, M.C., M.D., M.R.C.P. Ox-
ford University Press. Pp. 179. 8/6.
The first impression made by this book is
good, the plan of approach is admirable, and
the exposition most lucid. The positive con-
tribution, however, is nevertheless most disap-
pointing, nothing really new is offered for
either the theory or the practice of psycho-
logical medicine.
Dr. Blacker professes a deep debt to Freud
but shows no evidence of having assimilated or
applied the essentials of psycho-analytical
theory, namely, the conception of the uncon-
scious. He criticises fairly and brilliantly the
104 MENTAL WELFARE
theory of the death-instinct, yet himself em-
ploys the conception of instinct in a casual and
obscure manner. Thus he talks of social re-
flexes, of a socialising instinct, and again, of an
instinct of acquisitiveness, in a way that would
be condemned by any serious thinker. He ob-
viously finds no satisfaction in any of the class-
ifications of instincts and instinct values that
he discusses, but he replaces them by equally
abstract social ethical values. The pivotal
values that Dr. Blacker wishes us to accept are
themselves highly derivative, and only pivotal
in the theorising mind of the onlooker. That
there is some flaw in their pivotal quality Dr.
Blacker seems to be uneasily?if only intuitive-
ly?aware when at one moment he defines
those values as the factors that " unify and
justify life, give it coherence and make it on
the whole worth living," while later he tells us
of people who have not got pivotal values and
do not feel the need of them and who yet
apparently do find life worth living.
Theory, in this book, has taken the bit be-
tween its teeth and has left practice and the
writer behind. Much as one approves of the
author's intention?the discovery of the fun-
damental drives in human life by a study of
the individual's social activities?to the re-
viewer at least it seems to have failed in its
purpose.
J.S.
Social Development in Young Children : A
Study of Beginnings. By Susan Isaacs,
M.A., D.Sc. Geo. Routledge & Sons, Ltd.
480 pp. 15/-.
This book has been eagerly awaited by all
those who enjoyed Dr. Isaacs' " Intellectual
Growth in Young Children," and who have
followed the research projects in recent years.
After a clear statement of plan, the enquiry
proceeds to set forth the valuable descriptive
material gathered at the Malting House School
and elsewhere. This is fascinating reading.
The second part of the book is concerned with
the interpretation of these facts. An admirable
concluding section applies principles to prac-
tical problems of the teacher and the parent.
It might be thought that psychology has
passed beyond the stage when the straightfor-
ward observation and recording of children's
behaviour could contribute anything new.
This is quite fallacious. A good deal of psycho-
logical literature proceeds to theories and ap-
plications as if all observation were finished :
Dr. Isaacs does a valuable service by remind-
ing us that the groundwork of accurate ob-
servation has still to be completed, particularly
in regard to the sex life of young children in
a free environment?a subject which finds
even most psychologists regrettably ignorant.
One would wish that all these records had
been more extensive?dealing with various
ages and the whole of the waking day. New
and interesting facts might well have emerged
from statistical comparisons of different ages.
It is unfortunate, too, that the first-hand ob-
servations were confined to a small and highly
atypical group of children. No mental ages
appear to have been worked out, but any
psychologist familiar with the average (elemen-
tary school) infant will recognise at once that
these Malting House children must have I.Q.'s
in the neighbourhood of 140, a fact of great
significance in interpreting their behaviour and
drawing conclusions from it for average child-
ren.
If the times and subjects of observation are
arbitrary, the classification of records is at
least equally so. Admittedly, as the writer
points out, it is very difficult to separate com-
pletely interpretation from observation. But
why are Imitation and Suggestion totally ig-
nored in this classification; why do the motives
of curiosity, disgust and protectiveness find no
place, and why is aggression linked with sexual
play ? McDougall's classification of instincts
would have made a better sorting box for the
facts, with less prejudice to the eventual the-
oretical deductions.
Indeed, it is in the second, explicitly inter-
pretative and deductive section, that the great-
est misgivings come upon one. However well
disposed one may be towards psychoanalytic
explanations, the time has come when one ex-
pects that they shall be put to the touchstone
of scientific method. It is humbug to refer the
reader to the so-called "researches" and "dis-
coveries " of the " classic literature." These
intuitions should by now have been supported
by classic experiments. And it is utterly un-
conscionable that serious workers should
imagine that they can continue indefinitely }?
evade the responsibility of presenting statis-
tical and other confirmatory evidence. If
half of the ingenuity displayed in speculative
MENTAL WELFARE
105
elaborations of the theory had been devoted to
finding methods of establishing the main
theories we should now be in possession of
valuable and dependable principles.
There is an air of completeness about Dr.
Isaacs' theoretical explanations which doubt-
less makes them attractive to the busy prac-
titioner, but which at once differentiates them
from the tentative, trial and error structures of
a growing science. When the writer speaks at
the outset of " gathering confirmatory evi-
dence from other sources " (italics mine), one
perceives that the theories are the main in-
terest, not the facts displayed, as a formality,
beforehand.
Dr. Isaacs' " Notes on the Incidence of
Neurotic Difficulties in Young Children" gives
?ne hopes that she was about to undertake the
formidable task of establishing by statistical
and analytical methods, a true basis for the
understanding of problems of emotional and
Social development. The present books runs
away from any such laborious or skilfully
Planned approach.
The discussion, however, is full of stimula-
ting suggestions. It manifests a sane touch in
detecting the main themes in emotional en-
tanglements and a shrewd common sense born
?f wider experience in this field than is given
t? most psychologists. The behaviour records
are admirably lucid; condensed where con-
densation is permissible and full wherever
detail is likely to be significant.
Psychology and Social Progress, by Ray-
mond B. Cattell, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D. The
C. W. Daniel Co. 1933. Price IS/- net.
pP. 418.
^t is difficult to do justice to a book of this
Sc?Pe and complexity in the course of a short
Gview. The author has approached his vast
ield of enquiry from the threefold point of
lew of the scientist, the psychologist and the
Ucationist, and the stress laid on the two
r fi?1 asPects gives the work a particular and
W li 1 un^(lue value. The whole work is very
^ documented and we would draw attention
^ the excellent bibliographies at the end of
\vh aPters? these are particularly helpful
bo CU' llccessity, many of the subjects must
cursorily treated.
the 1 var*ous chapter headings arc perhaps
>est indication we can give the reader of
the scope of this approach to Social Progress :
Nation and race, their significance for human
progress; Rich and poor, the biology of class
interaction; Ultimate morality and natural
science; Progress and the presence of God;
Man and woman in civilised life; The Control
of destiny; The Conquest of obstruction;
Education; and finally, Summary of essential
aims in a society for constructive racial con-
trol. Every chapter has a final paragraph sum-
ming lip its main thesis and this is always a
help to the general reader, who may not be
conversant with the varied authorities cited in
a very condensed form.
Dr. Cattell endeavours to show the historical
background of the various phases of evolution
in social progress, and to give some indication
of the roads by which we have travelled to
arrive at our present deplorable social chaos
and disorganisation. He is not an optimist, as
indeed few can be at the moment. Whatever
aspect of social progress he looks at he sees
the same disastrous conditions, no settled ideals
or policy, no enlightened leaders (accepted as
leaders) and with power to implement their
ideas, nations of poorly endowed and badly
educated men clinging to the older methods,
oblivious of the fact that advances in biology
and other sciences should enable men in an
enlightened community to control and guide
their destinies towards a harmonious social
adaptation. We are at a turning of the ways
and unless we realise this, and the nations of
the world definitely equip themselves to meet
the new conceptions with new ideals, the civil-
isation of these days will go the way of the
older civilisations. The picture is a gloomy
one, and this clinging to the past in all our
social and national ideals can only spell ruin.
And above all he sees a disgenic trend in
society which if not checked will certainly
reduce the population of the civilised peoples
to so low a general level of vigour and cap-
acity that they will succumb to the forces of
disorganisation. " Side by side with the
pomp of outward and visible progress in hu-
man conditions which has gone on during the
last five centuries there has proceeded with
special rapidity in recent years, an invisible
decay of the average inborn vigour and capac-
ity. There is going on now a close race be-
tween an almost galloping decline and the
efforts of a few scientifically educated people
to institute constructive measures." (p. 407.)
io6 MENTAL WELFARE
This is the key-note of the book; it seems to
us somewhat forced, one-sided and dogmatic,
ignoring other trends such as better general
health, which may more than compensate for
the survival of some weaklings, greater feel-
ings of social responsibility, a more vivid real-
isation of the value of the individual, a sense
of duty towards the less fortunate members of
the community.
The remedy for the author lies in an im-
provement of the race by definite constructive
methods such as are advocated by eugenists,
sterilisation, segregation, the encouragement
of children from good stock; but he very wisely
stresses the absolute necessity for an under-
standing education guided by biological and
psychological principles if this better individ-
ual is to bear his full share in the regeneration,
or rather in the re-orientation of our social re-
lations. He lays stress on the debt we owe
to Freud and the psycho-analysts for the light
they have thrown on the problems of the in-
dividual and he emphasises anew the import-
ance of the education of the infant and the
adolescent 011 sound psychological and there-
fore scientific lines. He points out that only
the individual unhampered by the many inhib-
itions due to our present outgrown educational
systems will be able to make the experiments
which the new conditions demand. With many
of these arguments and contentions readers
will be in accord. Where they are more likely
to differ is as to the means to bring about such
an educational system as to secure the desired
results.
Dr. Cattell suggests placing the control of
education in the hands of a few leaders, the
best experts, but he does little to tell us where
they are to be found (unless he has in mind
the body of Inspectors of teaching whom he
so highly praises 011 page 389), nor how their
very progressive and even revolutionary views
are to be accepted by the bulk of the nation
under such different conditions.
The practical difficulties underlying such
sweeping reforms loom large in the eyes of the
reader who is seeking a solution to his own par-
ticular problems, whether educational, psych-
logical or social. Many questions such as crime,
are very sketchily touched on with too little
consideration of the reliability of evidence
(vide the Jukes statistics, pp. 164-5), but this
is inevitable in so wide and oeneralised a sur-
vey. Dr. Cattell has, however, made a prac-
tical contribution to the study of many present-
day problems, inasmuch as his book will be
illuminating and helpful to many readers who
are either not specialists or who are anxious
to see something of the relation of their own
particular interests to other social and educa-
tion problems.
E.F.
Child Upbringing and the New Psychol-
ogy. By Richard Amaral Howden. Oxford
University Press. 5/-.
This book, written by " a parent, an ex-
schoolmaster, and one who has had months of
treatment along the lines of modern psycho-
therapy," discusses the value for parents and
educators of the findings of the new psychol-
ogy. It has the defects and the excuse of deal-
ing with wide and controversial issues in a
hundred small pages.
Mr. Howden is on the side of sanity. He
desires to indicate a course " which can help
the ship of childhood to steer between the
Scylla of unrestrained liberty and licence and
the Charybdis of suppression and anxious
fear." This moderation he achieves. For the
general public the advice given in the earlier
chapters seems somewhat obscured by the use
of Adlerian terminology and by diffuse writing.
There are clearer and more practical sug-
gestions in the last chapter on sex education.
The book is addressed to those whose children
are exposed to the perils of nurses and public
schools.
P.C.S.
The Nineteenth Annual Report of the
Board of Control for the Year 1932.
H.M. Stationery Office. Pt. I. 2/-.
Mental Disorders.
The Board's Report begins with a considera-
tion of the working of the Mental Treatment
Act. Stress is laid on the need for close co-
operation between the general practitioner and
the psychiatrist in charge of a clinic. The num-
ber of clinics remains substantially the same a*
last year, but the general progress in this form
of early treatment is on the whole satisfactory-
The Board, however, find the number of tem-
porary patients with on I certi fication admitted
MENTAL WELFARE 107
to public mental hospitals still disappointingly
small. It appears that the observation ward of
the Public Assistance Institution is still too
largely used even when the case is acute and
transfer to a mental hospital is inevitable. The
result too often is serious disturbance to a
patient and consequently certification. The
Board realises that to recommend a patient for
treatment in a mental hospital involves respon-
sibility and sometimes causes friction with re-
lations, but they say " we feel sure that if
doctors only realised how their poorer patients
are prejudiced, the percentage of rate-aided
temporary patients would soon approximate to
that already obtaining in the case of private
patients. It seems remarkable that in only
two per cent of the total direct admissions
during 1932 was this procedure used, though
there is a notable exception in the num-
bers admitted to the Derby Borough Men-
tal Hospital, where no less than 34 out of the
100 admitted were received as temporary
patients. In forty mental hospitals no " tem-
porary " patient was admitted. .Special atten-
tion is called to the new mental hospital of the
County Borough of Swansea, which has been
able to establish its work from the beginning
under the new conditions. The figures ob-
tained there are such as to encourage the Board
to think that not less than 60 per cent, of all
rate-aided patients should receive treatment
without certification.
No new proposals under Section 6 have been
before the Board for the reception of mental
Patients in general hospitals. The Board make
^Pecial reference to the opening of a ward at
Ring's College Hospital as an annexe to the
^audsley for the reception of 30 female
Patients, and this development in a hospital
M lth a medical school is of significant value.
Reference to the good results of occupation
therapy is briefly made and a separate report
011 this subject is now available. (.See separate
'CVIC7V in this issue.)
1 he value of social service is emphasised, and
ls being increasingly used in carrying out
^obstructive work in the patient's home and in
^cilitating boarding-out, though as the Board
ftiark, the movement is a recent one and has
01110 at a time when expansion is difficult.
An
investigation is being carried out into
^'le dumber of patients in Mental Hospitals
who are suitable for transfer to a Mental De-
ficiency Colony or Public Assistance Institu-
tion. In two mental hospitals the numbers were
11 per cent., and this enquiry may prove of
great importance, when the heavy cost of
Mental Hospital accommodation is considered.
The new forms for costing' returns issued re-
cently by the Board will in future show very
clearly the comparative costs of institutions,
and the transfer of suitable cases will effect
considerable economy.
Mental Deficiency
We are very glad to note that in the Intro-
duction to the Report the Board refer to the
allegations made that the consent of parents to
the admission of children to institutions is ob-
tained without their full appreciation of the
conditions. The Board say that " in 110 case
has any positive proof been obtained that con-
sent has been improperly obtained. But the
frequency with which such allegations have
been made is in itself disquieting " (p. 10.) We
have not infrequently heard parents say that
they consented because they understood the
child was to get training, but they had 110 idea
they could not later have the patient home as
and when they wished. The Board's view is
" that anything approaching a want of can-
dour in dealing with the parents of defectives
is indefensible." In this we heartily agree.
Ascertainment.
Once again, the Board refer at length to the
inequalities of ascertainment in different areas,
seven areas exceeding the estimate of the
Wood Committee (4.52 per 1,000) and fourteen
areas showing less than 1.50 per 1,000. Many
Local Education Authorities are still behind-
hand in notification, and in 17.8 per cent, of
cases notified, no action was taken. It is ob-
vious that further use of notification is desir-
able and could be greatly extended, even
though the law requires amendment so as to
admit notification of feeble-minded children
leaving any school at any age and not only
the ineducable and those leaving Special
Schools.
Of the 102,345 defectives reported to local
authorities during the year, 917 were in receipt
of poor relief and in accordance with the Local
Government Act, 1929, were ascertainable by
the Local Authority.
io8 MENTAL WELFARE
Accommodation.
The paramount importance of institutional
training in colonies for the young is again
shown, and the Board advocate comprehensive
planning whereby Public Assistance Institu-
tions may be used for the accommodation of
low grade adults and certain idiot children and
the most expensive colony accommodation for
the trainable young. Though 2,146 beds have
been provided during the year, there are still
3,480 cases reported as awaiting removal to an
institution.
Community Care
On January 1st, 1933, there were 1,592 de-
fectives on licence (an increase of 89 in the
year). Licence as an integral part of the plan-
ning of an Institution's work is discussed at
length, and the need is emphasised for the
further development of hostels attached to the
Institution for the accommodation of patients
before they are placed out in the general com-
munity. Success has attended the careful or-
ganisation of licence in close co-operation with
the mother institution, and extension of this
form of care, and if possible the appointment
of a social worker is clearly desirable. Cases
under Guardianship increased by 359 during
the year, bringing the total up to 2,558.
There are now 153 occupation centres, 19
industrial centres and classes and 8 clubs. It
is interesting to note that 5 of the clubs are
managed by Toe. H., and we believe that
their services might be enlisted in other areas,
as they have often been found ready to give-
help to individual mental defectives.
Board of Control. Memorandum on Occupa-
tion Therapy for Mental Patients.
Pp. 27. H.M. Stationery Office, Kingsway.
Price 6d. 1933.
By a review of what has already been done
on the Continent and in the United States of
America and in a few mental hospitals in this
country, the Board seek to urge the Medical
Superintendents of all Mental Hospitals to
make Occupation Therapy a recognised part
of the treatment of varying types of patients.
It is claimed that almost the whole of the in-
mates of a mental hospital can be suitably oc-
cupied, as were 98.7 per cent, on the day when
the Mental Hospital at Gutersloh, under Dr.
Simon, was visited. Similarly at Santpoort,
the proportion was 91.3.
At Gutersloh, where Dr. Simon introduced
the principles of occupational therapy as early
as 1905, the work is organised by the usual
staff and is mostly of a utilitarian character; at
Santpoort, which adapted the methods of
Gutersloh in 1926, and placed the responsibility
011 the nursing staff (who received special train-
ing) it has recently been found advisable to
appoint technicians, who are not nurses, in the
central workshops.
Occupation therapy in many of the principal
Hospitals of the U.S.A., is firmly established,
and there special occupation therapists are ap-
pointed, who have as a rule not less than two
years' training in handicrafts as well as train-
ing in mental hospitals.
The Board recommend that in England oc-
cupation therapists with similar training should
be appointed (at a suggested salary of ?200 to
?300 p.a.), that certain certificated nurses
who have special aptitude should be appointed
as craft workers, and that all nurses should
receive a certain amount of special training as
part of their general course. In addition, it is
considered by the Board that it will be nec-
essary to appoint a small number of skilled
artisans to instruct the patients in the more
difficult occupations and crafts. There should
be 110 limit to the quality of work taught where
patients become capable of achieving a high
standard of production.
A fear has sometimes been expressed that
a general increase in staff per patients Avould
be necessary if occupation therapy were intro-
duced into a hospital. The Board have gone
into this question, and find that divergencies
of percentage of staff have been noticeable be-
fore reorganisation and are not attributable
to it. It is indeed to be anticipated that if a
patient is happily occupied he is likely to give
less trouble, and thus the requirements of staff
for occupation therapy are offset by the re-
duced need for other attention. The Board
envisages that an occupation therapist (who
might advisably be non-resident) would be re-
quired on each side of a hospital of 1,000 beds;
that she should be assisted by two or three
nurses to be appointed as craft workers, and
by the general nursing staff; and that in ad-
dition to the present staffs in the existing shops
and service departments, a few technicians
should be appointed as instructors. For the
additional occupation to be provided, five huts
costing about ?700 each would be required i11
a hospital of this size.
MENTAL WELFARE 109
Individual Psychology and the Child.
Individual Psychology Publications. Med-
ical Pamphlets Numbers 7 and 8. The C. W.
Daniel Company. 1933. 2/6 each.
These two pamphlets are concerned with the
application of the principles of Individual
Psychology to education. The first contains
an address by Dr. Seif to teachers and others
at Birmingham, in which he points out that our
study of the individual is directed towards
making him a happy and fruitful member of
society, and makes clear some of the most
important factors which determine the " style
of life " of the individual at a very early age.
A description of the work done in Child Guid-
ance Clinics follows, by Miss Rayner, and a
third paper by Frau Zilahi gives an enthus-
iastic account of the development of her infant
daughter as guided by the principles of Indiv-
idual Psychology.
The second pamphlet contains two papers
read by Drs. Laura Hutton and Hilda Weber
respectively, in which the influence of lack of
parental love, and of discord between the
parents is revealed later in the development of
neurotic personalities. Both papers contain
interesting case histories, and rather lead up
to, than start out from, the principles of Indiv-
idual Psychology. Dr. Beran Wolfe con-
tributes a paper on the nervous child, in which
he uses the analogy of the small Ford endeav-
ouring to compete in the life race with the
Rolls Royce. He discusses the function of the
mother, and shows how the psychiatrist may
be called in to help those who have the best
?f intentions, but do not know the rules of the
Vcrv complicated educational game.
N.M.B.
