A Psychologist's Point of View
================================

MENTAL WELFARE
75
Book Reviews & Abstracts
. By C. S.
Myers. London. William Heinemann, Ltd.
1933. Pp. vii and 207. 7/6 net.
As the publishers announce, this book con-
sists of " twelve semi-popular addresses on
various subjects." Seven of them have been
Published already, but most of these are not
very accessible, and it is safe to say that none
will welcome more warmly their re-appearance
in a single book than those who read and
studied them when they were first published.
Here is the admirable essay on Freudian Psy-
chology which mingles generous appreciation
with clear and incisive criticism. Here also is
the paper, still very widely consulted by the
student of psychology, on Instinct and Intelli-
gence. Two fascinating papers belonging to
social anthropology?The Taste-Names of
?Primitive Peoples and The Beginnings of
Music?are reprinted. The remaining three
collected pieces are probably less widely
known?one is a discussion on Human Im-
Provability and the others deal with industrial
Problems and consider Industrial Psychology
and Public Health and Hindrances to Output.
-the new addresses all deal with relatively
general topics?Principles of Development,
Education and Vocation, Success, Prayer,
and Individual Religious Differences.
-The subjects dealt with are various and the
Publishers suggest that the only thread that
n?lds them together is that they are the work
?t one psychologist. But there is more in this
than meets the eye, for in fact there is no other
uving psychologist who could write essays
which, combine as these do brevity and lucidity,
Wisdom and insight, breadth of knowledge and
tolerance. A reader who has a mind tuned to
respond to the music of scientific prose writing
at its best will find genuine pleasure in each
essay 0f this book. Further than that, however,
7e addresses are a unity because they con-
^stently express a certain broad outlook upon
afferent psychological problems. Dr. Myers
Writes as a biologist who distrusts all sharp
^ assification and all attempts to find a simple
faster key to every difficulty. Human develop-
ent, for example, has been treated as accres-
ent, or analytic, or integrative (p. 17); it is
?ne of them and it is all of them. It comes,
lndamentally, as one complex stage is differ-
entiated into a new and still complex stage. In
such differentiation many different problems
may be illustrated. So intelligence regarded
from without is instinct and instinct regarded
from within is intelligence. So success has
many modes, all growing from earlier stages in
which what comes to be achieved is there to be
achieved. So prayer grows from a yearning for
communion with the unknown and all its many
forms have a unity of expression.
Too much of modern psychology is an
attempt to fit all the relevant facts into a single
scheme of explanation. Dr. Myers' approach
is different from this. The point of view re-
mains consistent throughout, but within that
point of view there is room for many different
specific modes of explanation. To my mind
at least there is no doubt whatever that this is
the right and fruitful way to an understanding
of human nature.
F.C.B.
The Nervous Child at School. By H. C.
Cameron, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P. Oxford
University Press, London: Humphrey
Milford. Pp. 153. 7/6.
Dr. Cameron's other books, " The Nervous
Child," and " Diseases of Children," are
sufficiently well known to make the study of
a further volume a matter for pleasurable an-
ticipation. The reader will not be disappointed.
The scope of the work may be judged from
the Contents page. Schoolmasters, Parents and
Doctors : Training in the Home as a Prelim-
inary to School: Fatigue in School: Unhappi-
ness in School Life : The Treatment of Fatigue
and Unhappiness in School Life : Disorders of
Health associated with Fatigue : Disorders of
Conduct associated with Fatigue : Bedwetting
and Disorders of Micturition : Special Abilities
and Disabilities : Schools for Girls and Schools
for Boys : Conclusions. Among so many sub-
jects of so much interest points will be found
which will arouse discussion. There is, for
instance, the author's marked appreciation of
the difference between girls and boys: his
habit, when referring to the child, of using a
masculine pronoun: coupled with such a
passage as "if girls are more sensitive than
boys . . . and I do not know that they are . . .
To me the incidence of these things in the
sexes seems very much the same." It is as
though his common sense and his honesty of
76 MENT'AL WELFARE
observation were breaking up an attitude of
convention. There is the absence from the
index of such words as psychology and psycho-
analysis, together with the sentence " When
similar disorders of conduct are repeated again
and again . . . the handling of the matter be-
comes one for the psychiatrist, within whose
province the treatment of delinquency properly
falls." The latter phrase will be energetically
contested by those teachers who view with
distrust the over-readiness of some school-
masters and mistresses to rely on the members
of another profession to do work which
properly belongs to their own?one of the
many lamentable results of specialising in pre-
paring children for examinations rather than
in observing and treating them as unities.
That children are treated by psychiatrists is
due not so much to the psychiatrist's special
knowledge as to the teacher's general ignor-
ance. Another point worth arguing :
" massage, dancing and drill are valuable
curative aids. . . . The whole Army believes
that drill has a psychological as well as a
physical benefit to confer. Under drill the
soldier's virtues develop. . . . Gymnastics are
sometimes productive of strains or cramps . . .
and may have to be omitted." The author
seems to be judging physical training by ex-
army standards. No one could thus separate
" drill " and " gymnastics " who had any real
acquaintance with a proper physical education
and?very fortunately?an increasing number
of parents and teachers have realised that
school is not a place for a special training in
soldierly virtues, but is a place for the careful
and individualised attention to the growing
child which a well trained " gymnastic "
teacher may be eminently qualified to give. On
the other hand, there is more common sense
and more human understanding in the chapters
on Fatigue and Unhappiness, on their treat-
ment, and on the Disorders whether of Health
or of Conduct, which accompany them, than
anyone has a right to expect in a single book.
"We must not expect the moral strength of
the young to grow to maturity more quickly
than their physical strength." "When fatigue
is present with masturbation, the treatment
which is most efficacious is to neglect the
masturbation and to put a stop to the fatigue."
" The unhappy child may . . . dream dreams
. . . see himself successful, honoured . . . and
wholly preoccupied by these phantasies . . .
he may awake to find himself a proven liar,
a detected thief, or an arrested vagabond. To
ask him why he has done these things is usu-
ally to come up against a blank wall. He can-
not explain his conduct. He knows that he
was unhappy before and that he is ten times
as unhappy now." Here is a priceless piece
of common sense. Equally to the point are
the explanations, more purely medical, of
bilious attacks, high temperatures, uncon-
sciousness and convulsions, and the disorders
of sleep : the examination more psychological,
of defects of reading and spelling, and of the
inability to learn mathematics. These latter
should be learnt by heart by those who cram
for examinations and who have a touching
belief in intelligence tests. The whole book is
in the best sense irritating, stimulating. No
staff library should be without a copy, and
every magistrate should carry a precis of it on
the Bench.
R.E.R.
Child Psychology. By Buford J. Johnson,
Professor of Psychology in the Johns Hop-
kins University. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox.
1932. Pp. 439. 23/-.
This book, written by an acknowledged ex-
pert, is an extraordinarily useful condensation
of the views held with regard to the behaviour
of the child, combined with constructive crit-
icism of these views. It deals with such sub-
jects as Periods of Growth, Infant Responses,
Manipulation, Speech, Emotion, Social Be-
haviour and Personality, and Individual
Differences.
Even the structural growth of the child he
shows has a marked effect on its mental out-
look since " size plays a part in the attainment
of success in social activities," causing the
child deficient in recognised stature, height,
fatness, etc., to withdraw into himself, and
possibly producing " the little man " complex-
Quoting Goddard that idiots and imbeciles
are lower in stature than normal children, and
relatively heavier for their height, the author
states by way of contrast that apart from lo\v
grade defectives, "there is no indication in the
data that have been published that a causal re-
lation exists between superiority of mind and
superiority of bodily size."
He also emphasises with other writers oW
adolescence like Professor Bigelow tlia*
MENTAL WELFARE 77
Puberty and adolescencc arc not typified by
turbulence of emotion and behaviour, although
this occurs in exceptional cases of growth or
retardation.
With the exception of the sex glands, growth
changes arc less in puberty than at earlier ages,
aud these changes produce no " organic up-
heavals," such as is so often suggested, though
the secondary sex characteristics, hair, voice,
contour of body, have more noticeable social
effects.
Nor is the onset of puberty as sudden as
ls usually supposed. " It appears that the on-
set of masturbation in girls is preceded by
cyclic periods of increased blood pressure and
Pulse rate which may continue for a year or
longer before actual menstruation occurs."
One of the best and most useful chapters in
the book is that on Infant Responses.
The great difficulty in conducting experi-
ments on children is illustrated by the author's
criticism of the findings of Watson that the
three primary emotions in the infant are those
?f fear, rage and sex. He shows the in-
accuracy of the control of both the stimuli and
efmiteness of response.
He shows for instance, that the stimulus
ljsed by Watson to produce noise also pro-
duced vibrating and tactile stimulation and
Possibly pain: also, further experts have
Pioved that the stimulus, which according to
Watson produced rage in the infant, namely,
olding down the arms, sometimes has the
?Pposite effect of quietening the child, depend-
ln8 probably on the force used.
. -tn his study of infant responses, the author
. Particularly interesting in the evidence he
^ rings forward of the possibilities of definite
J^ponse to stimuli even months before birth.
nese facts give some support to the views of
th^ ^le raental life ?f infants and
? .e unportance of even the early days of life,
of pre-natal life.
tG ^h regard to conditioned reflexes it is in-
vesting to find that even as early as 1787
Wh ?bserved in an 18-day old boy, " If
sic]011- Was crying" hoy was uPon his
soft !n Position of nursing, or if he felt a
hand upon his face, he subsided and
Th the brcast- "
clo S.h this chapter on Infant Responses
tt^TVr some useful and timely hints on
\Yh , e^tal Hygiene of infancy, the book as a
0 e is almost entirely free from the " up-
lift " (and also from the discursiveness) so
often associated with books on children. Far
more useful is it to give, as Professor Buford
Johnson does in this book, the simple reactions
and consequences of certain treatment in the
child, without reference to whether this is
right or wrong, for if we can determine the
consequences of our actions we may choose for
ourselves whether we wish the child to be the
robust athlete, the studious scholar, or the
pious saint, and arrange our stimuli accord-
ingly. At present the parent may have any of
these aims; but not having the scientific know-
ledge he is as likely as not to produce an effect
the opposite of that intended, the " athlete "
hating games, the " scholar " despising books,
and the " saint " turning out a delinquent
because of the rigidity of his upbringing. In
brief, the study of the psychology of the child
should be conducted in the first place as a pure
science, and this is what Professor Buford
Johnson has done.
J.A.H.
The Mind in Daily Life. By R. D. Gillespie.
Methuen & Co., Ltd. 8/6.
In a comparatively short book of 250 odd
pages Dr. Gillespie has attempted an ambitious
task in compressing, it may be said, the whole
of modern psychology and mental hygiene,
into a readable compass. The book is divided
into two sections : psychology of the normal
and errors in mental development. The first
part starts with a somewhat too brief sketch
of development, including as it does not only
the awakening of the infant mind to the ex-
ternal world and the appreciation of the Self,
but also the multitudinous subject of love and
sex and their aberrations?and all this in twelve
pages ! Arriving at Intelligence, we adopt a
more leisurely pace, and having glanced at
Anatomy, find a very satisfactory account of
modern views on the nature of intelligence and
the means of testing it.
The next chapter, on " Phantasy," includes
an excellent condensation of the theory of
dream-interpretation, illustrated by examples.
We come next to the Relation of mental events,
which is in fact a description of mechanisms
rather than relations: repressions, fixations,
delusions; but the generalisations as to the con-
flict between internal and external factors in
producing mental disorder are cogent and
sound,
78 MENTAL WELFARE
In a brief discussion of the term " uncon-
scious " we are struck with the keenly critical,
and at times, philosophic attitude displayed
towards contested terms and theories such as
this; here he points out that it is the self or
ego which should properly be called uncon-
scious and not the impressions and ideas to
which the epithet has been transferred.
At this point, and especially when in the
next chapter we are plunged into the com-
plexities of neuro-physiology, we asked our-
selves for whom this book was intended. It
is in some respects a fairly elementary review
of the subject, but seems to pre-suppose a
good deal of acquaintance with ideas and
terms by no means easy. What will the " in-
telligent reader " make of it ? What the nurse
or student, interested in the subject? The re-
viewer, not having had time to put the book
before such an audience, is unable to reply,
but is merely seeking to give an impression of
what the book is about and to recommend it
for its worth.
For what makes the book stiffer to read than
it might be, the printers are to blame, in that
the lines appear to be too closely packed, and
the paragraph-heading too faint; the import-
ance of format for the psychology of the
reader is highly important in books of this sort
?but this is a digression.
Dr. Gillespie neatly circumvents the diffi-
culties of the mind and brain controversy by
taking a working hypothesis which considers
the living process as a whole and " mental "
events as but the highest " level " of that
whole, of which the automatic or "vegetative"
nervous processes are the lowest. (" High "
and " low " being of course in brackets.)
In the chapter on Heredity this difficult sub-
ject is reasonably and clearly dealt with (and
we note, in passing, a misprint on page 148,
where " same " should read " sane ").
The discussion on temperament is a marvel
of lucid condensation, but would tend to make
the brain reel of one who knew little of schiz-
oids and cyclothymes or anal-erotics; we note
that Dr. Gillespie lumps the golf-loving Scots,
the poets, and the " modern miserables " all
together as " shut-in " types. We now leave
the more arid regions of theory for a respite
among the various charming characteristics of
" nervous " and " naughty " children. This
subject is handled with great skill, en-
tirely free from sentiment, yet full of affec-
tionate comprehension of the child's mind.
While understanding the importance of con-
stitution and physique in the case of the
nervous child, Dr. Gillespie does not make the
mistake of reducing all symptoms to a physio-
logical level, but is as true here as elsewhere
to his principle of the living adaptive process
which is mind and body.
He describes symptoms such as shyness,
timidity, lying, etc., under separate para-
graphs and somehow avoids the dangers of a
symptomatic approach, giving due stress to the
factors in behaviour as a whole. His remark
on what is included under "nervous" is worth
noting, as it is a word which is much used by
parents and has therefore willy-nilly to be used
by psychologists; he says : " ' Nervous ' is a
misleading term, but it is so generally used
that most people know what is meant by a
' nervous ' child. It is either a timid, or a shy,
or a solitary child, or an unusually restless one;
or simply one who suffers from muscular
twitchings."
It is characteristic of the search for deeper
explanations of behaviour in Child Guidance
to-day that the author is not content with the
explanation of one form of timidity as the reac-
tion of a child to an over-anxious parent, but
goes on to discuss the various possible causes
of the parents' over-anxiety as well.
The explanation of shyness as " a reaction
against the normal egocentricity," is not very
clear, as further on this is held to depend on a
continuance of egocentricity at an abnormally
high level, and it is not explained why this
should produce shyness as such; it may be that
the " all-too-famous feeling of inferiority," a5
the author describes it, has more to do with it
than anything else. But, as we read further
on : " it is one of the difficulties of human
psychology that the same effect may be pr?"
duced by apparently opposite causes." Coming
next to the naughty or delinquent child, al'
though one may disagree philosophically with
the author's ideas on morality and disprove
his definition of " original sin " (by now 3
hackneyed phrase, always misunderstood), one
can approve thoroughly of his injunction as t?
the training in morality, which lies so mud1
more in example and life as lived daily than &
explicit teaching. His remarks on what con-
stitutes a good or bad home in the psych0'
logical sense are also worth noting.
MENTAL WELFARE
79
The same keen and understanding spirit
guides us through the difficulties and possibil-
ities of adolescence and adult life, and we are
finally given a brief conclusion envisaging an
ideal for the individual in society in a brave
new psychological world.
There are two appendices: one the " auto-
biography of one who ultimately developed a
mental disorder," and the other on the " art
?f study."
We finish with regret the reading of a very
interesting, original and significant book; one
which can appeal, at least in parts, to every
Psychologically minded reader, and is indis-
pensable to all who are concerned in the art
and practice of Mental Hygiene.
C.L.C.B.
Psycho-Analysis and its Derivatives. By
H. Crichton Miller. Home University
Library of Modern Knowledge. Thornton
Butterworth, Ltd. 1933. Pp. 256. 2/6.
This little volume fulfils its purpose admir-
ably. This purpose is to present to the lay
Public in an unprejudiced and non-technical
^'ay the present position of analytic psycho-
therapy. No doubt the exponents of the vari-
es schools will have faults to find for they
Seeni to consider that only those within the fold
are capable of exposition and criticism. Dr.
j uller pays a well deserved tribute to Freud
*0r his pioneer work which raised psychology
l?ni an arid no-man's land between neurology
and philosophy to a living study of man's be-
aviour. The exposition of the teachings of
reud, Jung and Adler are clear and along
?s?und critical lines.
-tn a chapter on some criticisms of Psycho-
analysis the suggestion that the findings of
Psycho-analytic school owe more to the
^ethod of investigation than to the facts in-
vestigated, is studied at some length. The
orough-going materialism of the Freudian
^ octrine and the denial of all creative function
to are also criticised, as is the failure
find any contact with the physiology of
^ Central nervous system on the one hand or
1 h endocrinology on the other. In a short
fora^ter the work of Prinzhorn is brought be-
j-i re English readers, many of whom will find
c ? 0rig'inal work, even when translated, diffi-
th 't0 master- Prinzhorn lays great stress on
e influence of individuality of the physician
ill the cure of the neurotic patient whose spirit-
ual isolation is sympathetically considered.
For him the ideal psycho-therapist should be
compounded of " one wise priest from each of
the great religious communities, one lawyer,
one teacher, one psychologist, one wise phil-
osopher and three physicians possessing a very
firm biological basis." In a final note of com-
parison, Dr. Miller assesses the system of
Freud as the most intricate, that of Jung the
most profound, that of Adler the most prac-
tical, and that of Prinzhorn the broadest. Each
system will appeal to a certain type of stu-
dent. That of Adler will obtain the widest
appeal since it is the most superficial and there-
fore perhaps the safest, and is at the same time
essentially didactic. Freud is severely dog-
matic and therefore may be " learnt " by even
mediocre exponents and so may have an ap-
peal to would-be practitioners. Jung is so
profound as to lose touch with the practical
reality of life, so will have but a very limited
appeal, while Prinzhorn's system leaves most
to the psycho-therapist, but demands from him
characteristics to which few can possibly
aspire.
This book may be confidently recommended
not only to the intelligent layman, but also as
a handy little reference, to the practising
psycho-therapist.
R.G.G.
Northot Group Intelligence Test. G.
Perrie Williams, M.A., D.Litt. George
G. Harrap & Co., Ltd.
These tests, intended for children from 11 to
12 years of age, are non-verbal and will there-
fore help to meet the growing demand for
intelligence tests in which the child who
suffers from any kind of linguistic handicap,
may do himself justice. The tests can be ad-
ministered in half-an-hour and very easily
corrected by means of an admirable " key."
C.S.
Tests for Accident Proneness. By E.
Farmer, E. G. Chambers and F. J. Kirk.
Industrial Health Research Board. Report
No. 68. H.M. Stationery Office. 1933.
Price 9d.
Earlier work by Farmer and Chambers
(I.H.R.B. Reports Nos. 38 and 55), has shown
that there is a " slight but significant associa-
8o MENTAL WELFARE
tion between success in certain psychological
tests and a low accident rate." In the in-
vestigation now reported the experiments ex-
tended over a longer period and certain defects
in experimental procedure, inevitable in the
earlier work, were avoided. Sensori-motor tests
were applied to apprentices (shipwrights,
electric fitters, engine fitters and naval
artificers) at H.M. Dockyard at Portsmouth.
The results obtained were subjected to three
different methods of statistical analysis, each
of which showed a significant relation between
the sensori-motor tests and accidents in those
groups of workers who were living under
ordinary industrial conditions, e.g., the ship-
wrights, electric fitters and engine fitters. The
use of sensori-motor tests as an aid to the
selection of apprentices would have resulted in
the lessening of the accident rate. It is of
importance both to psychology and to industry
that one factor in accident proneness has been
isolated and its importance measured.
C.S.
Report of the Commissioners of Prisons
and the Directors of Convict Prisons
for the Year 1931. (H.M. Stationery
Office. Cmd. 4295. 1933. 1/6.)
This Report begins with a warning against
mistaken inferences from Prison Statistics,
which need the most careful analysis if a
correct view of the state of crime is to be
formed. Such facts must be taken into account
as that out of every 100 receptions of men,
only 15 were guilty of crimes entailing sen-
tences of over 3 months, and only 9 out of
every 100 receptions of women.
Details relating to recidivism, payment of
prisoners, prison industries, Borstal Institu-
tions, voluntary workers, are all of interest,
but for readers of " Mental Welfare," the most
valuable part of the Report is that drawn up by
Dr. East, Medical Commissioner. Apart from
prisoners proved to be insane, 1,747 men and
649 women were remanded for observation as
to their mental condition; 182 mental defec-
tives were reported to the Courts, and dealt
with under Section 8 of the Mental Deficiency
Act, 1913. Dr. East says that personal experi-
ence leads him to believe that the prison popu-
lation to-day is not only superior in educational
attainments but is also of a higher standard of
intelligence than the prison population at the
beginning of the century. He points out that
the Mental Deficiency Acts are " continually
cutting off the supply of defective delin-
quents," and refers to the segregation in a sep-
arate section of a prison of those who are not
certifiable but show mental abnormalities. He
considers that if the recommendations of the
Persistent Offenders Committee in regard to
the prolonged sentence in certain cases were
adopted, there would probably be a sufficient
number of sub-normal non-certifiable cases to
enable a special Detention Establishment to be
set up for their care, and for vocational em-
ployment without the repressive features of
prison life.
Dr. East treats the question of psychotherapy
with a cautious reserve. " Statements are
sometimes made by those who are interested
in this matter which suggest that psycho-
therapy can be relied upon to cure many recidi-
vists and most first offenders. It is, I think,
fair to say that the medical witnesses who gave
evidence before the above-mentioned Com-
mittee presented their views with studied
caution." . " The bald statement is some-
times made that a full psychological investiga-
tion is required in the case of every offender,
and that without this, penal measures must be
futile. This is so contrary to practical experi-
ence that it is likely to defeat its purpose."
Interesting examples are given of people
who are relieved of the abnormal condition
without any special treatment, of others who
respond to a general or a deeper psychological
investigation. Dr. East concludes :?" It is a
travesty to suggest that crime is a disease. But
it is clearly the result sometimes of a neurotic
disorder." He would welcome a scientific in-
vestigation carried out at a penal institution,
on the lines suggested by the Persistent
Offenders Committee, recording failures and
successes in treatment of the " pathologic^
condition associated with the crime." He adds,
" But there are many practical difficulties to
surmount, and the truth can be ascertained
only by taking the greatest care to avoid the
influences of preconceived ideas and prejudices-
And in this matter, truth is more helpful tha
optimism,"
MENTAL WELFARE 81
In Search of the Beginning. By M. A.
Payne. H. R. Allenson & Co., Ltd. 5/-.
Those who were touched by the story of
Oliver Untwisted," and encouraged by the
author's enthusiasm?and surely there are
niany such?will welcome this new book. In
it they will find an exposition of the author's
philosophy of life, and once more they will
come in contact with her enthusiasm; but they
will probably close the book thinking that Miss
Payne is at her best when she is recounting the
actual difficulties and triumphs of individual
children, and that " In Search of the Begin-
ning " must stand second to " Oliver Un-
twisted." Indeed, to anyone who had not read
Oliver Untwisted," and knew nothing of
Miss Payne's work, the book would perhaps
lack appeal. It is told in the form of a story,
the three characters being Susan, a nurse in
a private family, " Tommy," a nursery gov-
erness, and Diana, who worked at a Clinic for
People suffering from " nervous " disorders.
In the frequent talks of these three who are
daily dealing with problems of children 01*
adults, we have unfolded the ideas which the
author holds on education, religion, and the
Problems of life. The titles of the chapters,
such as "The Vision of the New World," "The
Creation of the Mask," " God as made by
Man," indicate the scope of these discussions.
is doubtful whether the thin device of the
story was worth while, but it enables the author
to be less formal in the presentation of her
eas than she would otherwise need to be.
London County Council. Annual Report,
1931. Mental Hospitals and Mental Defic-
lcncy. Vol. VI. P. S. King & Son, Ltd.
1 /- net. 1933.
. 1 he London County Council is faced with an
.^crease in the number of patients for which
tV?1S resPonsiklc under the Lunacy Acts even
a ?Ugli the figures of the 1931 census " sug-
^,Cst fairly conclusively that the population of
^ e administrative county is decreasing," but
must not be taken to imply an increase in
cIie lncidence of mental disorder. It is partly
0 et? the migration, of the younger members
of ti C01nmunity, to the increasing longevity
de i l)0PL1^ati?n generally, to the lessened
e 7h rate in mental hospitals. But the nec-
ttial ^ ^01 *ncreased accommodation exists, and
Kes all the more imperative the transfer of
all Mental Hospital patients suitable to be
dealt with under the Mental Deficiency Act,
and the continued and increasing use of ab-
sence on trial and boarding out. It is noted
that the number of cases under treatment in
London County Council Mental Hospitals
under the Mental Treatment Act was 173 in
1931, exclusive of those treated at the
Maudsley.
Reference is made in the Report to the work
of the psychiatric out-patient clinics at three
of the London County Council Hospitals under
the Central Public Health Committee, which
are under the direct charge of a medical
officer of the Maudsley, under the general
direction of the Medical Superintendent of the
Hospital; a trained social worker has been
appointed at each clinic. Similar openings for
the extension of social work have been found,
through the Child Guidance Council by the
loan of two trained social workers for work at
Banstead and Ewell Mental Hospitals. The
progress of this work is being keenly watched
and it is to be hoped that an increase in the
use of social workers for work in connection
with cases of mental disorder will be a feature
in all new developments.
Figures on the Mental Deficiency side of this
Report are always of exceptional interest, in
view of the carefully organised work which
the Council has carried out for so many years,
so that it can claim " that in London all that
the law provides for in the way of ascertain-
ment and notification of defectives has been
done as far as possible." There is still going
on the " count-out " of cases in institutions
transferred to the London County Council
under the Local Government Act, 1929, and
there is now a systematic notification of prima
jacic cases of defect which come to the notice
of the Public Assistance Authority. The in-
crease in the rate of ascertainment over 1929 is
thought to be due to this tightening up of the
service. The total number of defectives on
31st December, 1931, subject to be dealt with
or who might become subject to be dealt with,
was 14,085 (excluding special school children
and those still not " combed out " in Public
Assistance Institutions) and this figure, per
thousand of the population, gives a ratio of
3.23 as against the figure of 8 per 1,000 as
the incidence of defect estimated in the Wood
Report (which, however, included special
school children).
MENTAL WELFARE
It is interesting to note that of the 1,879 cases
notified during the year no less than 1,461 can
be described as " tractable "?there are 2
moral defectives, and only 2 post-encephalitis
lethargica cases (the figures for the previous
4 years being 9, 8, 7, 12). The Council were
asked to investigate 93 cases of alleged mental
defect at courts of summary jurisdiction, and
of these only 55 were dealt with by detention
orders under Section 8. Figures such as these
are encouraging.
