Research Work at Birmingham into the use of Psychological Tests in Vocational Guidance
========================================================================================

It is gratifying to hear from time to time of the increasing co-operation
of educational bodies with the National Institute of Industrial Psychology.
The Birmingham Education Committee have recently drawn up a report on
their research work and by the courtesy of Dr Innes we are allowed to reprint
it here: ?

The Birmingham Education Committee have always realised the import-
ance of exploring every method of giving vocational guidance to children
leaving school. As might be expected, therefore, they have directed their
attention to the use of Vocational Tests.

In 1925, the generosity of a local Trust made it possible for the Committee
to send two members of the staff of the Juvenile Employment and Welfare
Department to London to receive a course of training at the National Institute
of Industrial Psychology. In 1927 the Education Committee decided to under-
take definite research work and inaugurated two experiments.

The First Experiment
---------------------

The object of the first experiment was to ascertain from the point of view
?f a Juvenile Employment Committee the practical value of a certain series of

tests for selecting boys with innate aptitude and ability for engineering work.
The tests chosen were given to a group of engineering apprentices at the
Central Technical College and also to a group of boys who were just com-
pleting a two,year full time course at a Junior Technical School. These groups
were ranked by the teaching staffs in order of " apprentice ability " and com-
parison was then made with the test results. Consideration was given to
temperament and personality traits, and it is interesting to note that when
allowance was macfe for particular temperament traits the agreement between
the test results and the teachers' rankings was over 90 per cent.
Research work is still being continued in connection with these tests.
They are being given to every boy admitted to the Junior Technical School and
careful records are being kept in order that they may be compared with the
school records at the conclusion of the course. Information will thus be ob-
tained as to the value of the tests in selecting boys for admission to the School.
The tests are also being used at the request of certain firms with a view to
judging their value in selecting boys for apprenticeships.

The Second Experiment
-----------------------

The aim of the second experiment was to find out whether certain tests
known to be of value in estimating aptitudes and qualities required in industry
could be put to practical use in advising boys and girls in their choice of careers.
During four terms the children leaving three Elementary Schools were
divided into two groups. The children in one group were given vocational
guidance in accordance with the general method followed in Birmingham and
constituted the " control group." The children in the other group constituted
the " tested group " and were given guidance based on the results of a series
of psychological tests studied in conjunction with social, scholastic, medical
and temperamental reports.

The industrial careers of the children in both groups were watched during
a period of two years and the resulting data were studied from various aspects,
viz., duration of posts, reasons for leaving posts, views of employers as to the
efficiency of the children and the opinions of the children themselves as to the
suitability of the posts. It was found that, from whatever aspect the evidence
was studied, children whose vocational guidance was partly determined by the
results of the series of tests and who entered posts in accordance with the
guidance were more satisfactorily placed than any of the other children.
While the Education Committee deprecated any final conclusions being
drawn from the results of either of the two experiments, they were satisfied
that both enquiries appeared to indicate distinctly that young people might be
more effectively guided if the special means of supplementing the usual
methods of giving vocational advice were available and had been standardised.
As already indicated, the Committee are continuing the research work in con-
nection with engineering ability. So far as the second experiment is concerned,
it should be stated that the results confirmed conclusions reached in a larger
experiment in London. The next step was to examine methods of putting
this scientific practice into operation. About 15,000 children leave School each
year in Birmingham and it would be a task of some magnitude to apply a
scheme of special vocational guidance necessitating the use of a series of psycho-
logical tests to such a large number of scholars. Consideration was conse-
quently given to the possibility of arranging for selected Teachers to apply
the tests to the children in the Schools. Head Teachers were consulted, and
it was found that there were so many volunteers that only a proportion could
be chosen. Arrangements were made for a course of training in the Scientific
Methods of Vocational Guidance to be given to fourteen Teachers drawn from
seven Elementary Schools, and to other Juvenile Employment Officers by the
two Investigators who had conducted the original experiments. These Teachers
and Officers have been trained in the general theory underlying the use of
psychological methods and have been shown the special technique necessary
in the application of various group and individual tests. They have had a con-
siderable amount of practice in the work and have undergone an examination
conducted by the National Institute of Industrial Psychology. It is, therefore,
now possible to enlarge the scope of research work into the practical use of
scientific vocational guidance. In each of the schools it is proposed that the
specially trained Teachers shall apply tests to children during their last term
at school. The Investigators will be in general charge and will co-operate
with the Teachers in the interpretation of the results. Vocational Guidance
will be given and arrangements will be made to " follow up " the children in
order that the results may be examined at the end of at least a two year period.
While this first Group of Teachers is proceeding with their investigations,
the second Group of Teachers will begin a Training Course so that eventually,
a sufficiently large number of schools and children will have had experience
with the new methods to enable the Education Committee to form a reliable
estimate as to the value of the system.

In view of the fact that the Training Course arranged by the Birming-
ham Education Committee is the first effort of its sort in this Country, it may
be of interest to give some particulars. The Course was conducted by Mrs.
E. P. Hunt and Mr. Percival Smith. The training given was definitely limited
in scope, but within the severe limitations it was very thorough. A special
library was provided, and the members of the class were urged to undertake
a certain amount of reading. In addition to the theoretical background, they
were required to obtain a considerable amount of practice in the special tech-
nique necessary in applying various types of tests. The subjects included in
the Course were:?General Testing Methods, Group Tests of Intelligence,
Performance Tests, Mechanical Ability Tests, Manual Dexterity Tests, Clerical
Tests, Temperament and its Assessment and Elementary Psychological
Statistics. At the conclusion of the Training Course an examination was
arranged by the National Institute of Industrial Psychology. Each member
of the class taking the examination was required to pass a theoretical and a
practical examination. At the practical examination which was supervised
by Dr A. Macrae of the National Institute, each candidate interviewed and
examined by means of certain Performance Tests and Tests of Manual Dex-
terity, a child with whom he or she had no previous acquaintance. Forms
were provided for recording the test results, and the information gained con-
cerning home conditions, leisure, interests, vocational inclinations and so forth.
The candidates were required also to record, on a specially prepared rating
scale, their judgments of certain tendencies of temperament and character.
The children had previously been given a verbal intelligence test, the results
of which, together with copies of the school-leaving cards completed by the
Head Teachers were made available to the candidates.

The examinations of the children were conducted in separate rooms and
Dr Macrae observed in each case the initial handling of the child and the
beginning of the testing. At a later stage in the testing he returned to make
further observations. Finally, when the testing had been completed and the
various forms filled in he questioned the candidate regarding the methods
generally and, in particular, the conclusions formed concerning the child
examined. The total time spent in observation of, and discussion with, each
candidate was forty minutes.

The report on the examination received from the National Institute of
Industrial Psychology states that considered as a whole the standard of work
achieved by the candidates appeared to be distinctly higher than might reason-
ably have been expected, and seemed to reflect great credit on both the instruc-
tors and the instructed. The examiner was impressed by the enthusiasm of
the teachers, their grasp of the practical methods of testing, their appreciation
of both the merits and the limitations of the psychological technique, and their
frank recognition of their own limitations as practitioners. In the opinion of
the National Institute, the experiment of giving teachers a limited training in
these methods would appear to be justified. " Indeed," the report states, " the
candidates were so good that it may perhaps be advisable to consider an exten-
sion of the training particularly in the direction of assessing temperament."
Very careful consideration has been given to the question of the issue of
some sort of certificate to the successful candidates. Naturally, they have
expected some definite recognition of what they rightly regard as a special
qualification. It will be realised that these teachers will now begin using
certain psychological tests in the schools. Undoubtedly, when this fact becomes
known there may be a tendency for such tests to become over-popular, and
other teachers who have not had any specialised training may begin to use
them. It would seem therefore, that only by the issue of some form of certifi-
cate will it be possible to control the further use of the tests. It must also be
realised that good as the training is, within its own limits, it is not sufficient
to enable the recipients to do more than the preliminary work in administering
tests and, where teachers are concerned, to use their knowldgc of the children
in the scientific assessment of temperamental characteristics. Any final con-
elusions as to vocational guidance will obviously necessitate a more intimate
knowledge of industrial conditions entailing additional qualifications.
Considerable thought has also been given to the question as to who should
issue the certificate which I would again emphasise is to give some form of
recognition to the teachers and juvenile employment officers who are going
to assist in the experimental work in the immediate future. It was felt, there-
fore, that for the present purpose a certificate should be issued by the National
Institute of Industrial Psychology and countersigned by the Chief Officer of
the Local Education Authority responsible for the Training Course.

Great care has been exercised in drafting the certificate which places
adequate restriction on the use of tests and the giving of vocational guidance,
and the Officers of the Board of Education and the Ministry of Labour have
been consulted in regard to the matter.

It is perhaps desirable to emphasise the fact that this pioneer work which
may have in the future a great effect on the whole system of vocational guid-
ance, and which in any event is of the greatest importance as research work,
has only been made possible by the receipt of voluntary funds specially given
for this purpose.
P. D. INNES,
September, 1933. Chief Education Officer,
