Language and Speech Training Stories
=====================================

MENTAL WELFARE 49
:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts
:Author: R. K. and M. I. R. Polkinghorne. Univer-
sity of London Press, Ltd. Pp. 238. 3/6.

This book contains a number of useful sug-
gestions for the teacher who finds some diffi-
culty in formulating an independent scheme
for language training.

The age of the children for whom the book
!s intended ranges from five to eight years.
The work is divided into months, each section
containing four stories, followed by various
language training and activity exercises.
The animal stories are those most calculated
to hold the interest of young children. Some
of the remainder are rather trivial and the
graduation in difficulty is not very apparent.
One could wish that the authors had used a
few of the nursery " classics " as the basis for
the excellent language training and vocabu-
lary exercises which follow. These form the
most useful section of the book, and show a
Welcome realisation of the need in the infant
school for some very definite training in word
values.

Speech and action are correlated and the
child's natural love of activity will find full
expression in carrying out the work planned
in the section entitled " Things to Do."

D.E.W.
Hostels in London for Professional and
Working Women and Girls (Fifth edition).
Compiled by the Central Council for the
Social Welfare of Women and Girls in Lon-
don. Price 1 /-.

Sir Oscar Warburg contributes a preface to
this handbook, which has been issued to assist
girls and women to obtain suitable hostel ac-
commodation in London at a cost of ?2 2s. Od.
or less per week. The addresses of some 150
hostels are given, together with a useful list
?f " Emergency Addresses," to which women
requiring temporary lodging may apply, and
Particulars of the Central Information Bureau,
53, Victoria Street, S.W.I, and its activities.

invaluable handbook for every social
Worker concerned with the welfare of women
and girls.
Love : An Outspoken Guide to Happy
Marriage. By X. Ray. C. W. Daniel Co.
1 /- net.

In the few pages of this little book, the
author attempts a summary of humanity's
emotional experiences where the affections are
concerned. Some of the chapters seem ad-
dressed to parents, others to young men and
women who may some day enter married life;
this divided aim detracts from their value and
makes the book in part inappropriate to one or
the other group. There is no lack of plain
speaking, but one asks oneself, for whose bene-
fit exactly is this analysis of states of feeling
and physical conditions, and will such an
analysis really make love stronger and more
enduring ?

General Principles of Human Reflexology :
An Introduction to the Objective Study of
Personality. By V. M. Bechterev. Trans-
lated by Emma and William Murphy. Lon-
don : Jarrolds, 1933. Pp. 467. Price 21/-.
The work of the celebrated neurologist,
Pavlov, on animals, has given us in terms of
the nervous system, a schematic explanation of
behaviour, and the experiments of his pupil,
Krasnagorski, has extended the doctrine of
conditioned reflexes to the behaviour of child-
ren. In Pavlov's latest writings an attempt
was made to explain all animal behaviour, in-
cluding man, as a growing complexity in the
pattern of reflexes conditioned by experience
and experiment. But Pavlov never ventured
to construct a more philosophic theory of men-
tal activity on the basis of experiment. Pro-
fessor Bechterev, world famous for his re-
searches in the anatomy and physiology of the
nervous system, has in this work attempted to
construct an Objective Psychology which bears
close affinities with the work of Pavlov. He is,
however, not committed to a thorough-going
Behaviorism which must necessarily follow if
we accept the fundamental axioms which Pav-
lov's work presupposes. While Pavlov and
the Behaviorists are satisfied with a pure des-
cription of behaviour in terms of muscle
movements initiated by the brain, Bechterev
refers all neural activity back to some funda-
mental energy in the universe of which neural
energy is but a special form. Like them, how-
ever, he does not allow for the existence of a
special mental energy, but as he says, his Re-
flexology " draws its general premises from
the final generalisations of the natural
sciences." He contents himself with defining
energy as the initiator of movement. Although
he terms this neuro-psychic, he is against any
form of interactionism, and what we call sub-
jective phenomena are merely a function of
the resistance met by neuro-psychic energy in
its normal flow and outlet. Subjectivity, there-
fore, is nothing more than those processes in-
itiated by resistance within the organism, or
in other words, they are nothing more than
interpolated processes between stimulus and
response.

Throughout the book there is a refreshing
adherence to the fundamental laws of Nature,
made clear to us in the natural sciences, and
from chapter to chapter Bechterev uses with
persistence, if not always with accuracy, such
terms as the Conservation of Energy, Economy
(Chatelier's Principle Theory), and Periodicity
or Rhythm. In this respect his philosophy of
the Personality bears some resemblance to the
recent work of Raymond Wheeler in America,
but unlike the latter, who is prepared, we be-
lieve, to accept the higher manifestations of
the organism as " Emergence," Bechterev
would not allow for any difference whatsoever
in kind as between the highest and the -lowest
actions of the human organism. The result of
this is a rather naive and facile explanation of
such processes as Creativeness which he ex-
plains on the basis of so-called Mimico-Somatic
activities.

One feels, in reading this book, a profound
admiration for an attempt at systematisation in
terms of brain process, but careful reading dis-
closes from time to time some of the funda-
mental axioms of the Marxian dialectic, for al-
though he strangely enough admits uniqueness
in the work of the greatest creators, he states
that all creativeness is " intended for the social
environment " and " that every artist is also
the child of his own time and reflects through
the glass of his social environment in which he
lives the climate around him." This by 110
means vitiates his principles but it is important
to read his work in the light of what is after
all an attitude towards human experience,
which is admittedly largely social.

A work of this kind?a great work?necess-
arily calls for a more extended and detailed
critical analysis, and one closes the book
having been enriched by much thought, many
valuable facts and some stimulating, if pro-
vocative, arguments.
E.M.
