Forward to Reading
===================

:Author: P. A. Barons,
Head Master, Woodlands Park Junior
School, Tottenham, with a Foreword
by Mary M. Mactaggart, Ph.D.
Books I-IV. Blackie & Son Ltd.
1/6, 1/9, 2/- and 2/3.

One of the most marked features of
recent reading material (for juniors) has
been the appreciation of the fact that, once
fairy tales have lost their hold, the pendulum
of a child's interests tends to swing very
definitely in the opposite direction.

The fascination of the magic wand is
displaced by the claims of the electric
switch; the charcoal burner's son fades
beside his modern brother who keeps a
petrol pump; and the young man who
formerly set out to see the world and seek
his fortune now joins one of the Services
or enters commerce.

This change in attitude and the catholicity
of interest which accompanies it, has been
admirably catered for by a set of four
readers just issued by Mr. P. A. Barons, a
Tottenham Headteacher, who last year
made a valuable contribution to education in
his book Practical Suggestions for Training
Backzvard Children.

Although in these four new books,
Forivard to Reading, there is an encyclopaedic collection of factual information, it is
so woven together that topics relating to
geography, history, nature study, science,
economics, commerce, citizenship and
hobbies are presented as the natural interests
of normal children, in so far as they form
part of their everyday existence and the
world about them.

An especially commendable feature is
that the children, whose conversations and
activities introduce these topics, are essentially human. They are in no sense " infant
prodigies " of that nauseating type who once
were wont to ask those conveniently stilted
questions which were met so finally by
equally limited answers. They are normal
children who interrupt, make mistakes, get
tired and do not necessarily find a subject
interesting for the same reasons, or in the
same way, as adults.

Tn other subtle ways too the author
demonstrates how well he has used the
experience gained in meeting the educational
needs and natural curiosity especially of the
Junior child.

Just as he offers a wealth of general
knowledge, so he provides the means by
which the gradual assimilation of that knowledge may be unobtrusively assessed, not,
however, in the old, obvious " test question "
form, but at the end of each chapter, in a
series of suggested activities which ensure
that the child has understood the topic, has
added new words and their meanings to his
vocabulary, and has appreciated the many
links which the particular topic has with a
number of facts of interest previously uncorrected in the child's mind.

Each book is attractively, clearly and
abundantly illustrated in colour, so as to
break up the print and reduce fatigue,
especially for the younger and the slower
child.

Here again one does not feel that the
illustrations are simply additions or embellishments of the text, they are very
definitely an integral part of each book.
The print itself is clear and bold, an
excellent feature; sentences are short and
expressive, a constant practical example to
those who read them; furthermore both
print and sentences are progressively, though
almost imperceptibly, graded as the child's
skill increases.

Altogether these books constitute a
thoroughly practical illustration and confirmation of the fact that reading is truly
the fundamental "tool" subject; that the
forging of this tool can be an absorbing and
stimulating process, and that the child is
indeed fortunate who learns its use and
value by way of :?I, " The Open Gate
thence to II, "The Pathway", and so III,
" Over the Stile ", to emerge IV, " Into the
Highway
M. I. Dunsdon.
