News and Note
==============

C.A.M.W. Training Courses in 1938
The following Courses will be held by the C.A.M.W. in 1938:?
Six Months' Course for Workers in Institutions and Occupation Centres:
January 10th to July.

Course for Students in training a,s Health Visitors (organised for College of
Nursing) : January 10th to 31st.
Refresher Course for Secretaries of Voluntary Associations: March 22nd to
25 th.

Course for Medical Officers (arranged in conjunction with University of London
Extension and Tutorial Classes Council) : March 28th to April 8th.
Long Course for Teachers of Retarded Children (at Morley College, London) :
May 9th to July 15th.

Advanced Cour.se for Teachers of Retarded Children (organised for the Board
of Education), London : July 4th to 23rd.

Course for Enquiry Officers and Supervisors of Occupation Centres, Notcutt
House, London : July 4th to 23rd.

Elementary Course for Teachers of Retarded Children (organised for Board
of Education), Bristol: August 25th to September 14th.
In addition, the Association is again arranging the practical work in connection with the Course on Mental Deficiency held by the London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine as part of the Diploma Course in Public
Health.

Mental Health Course
--------------------
At the present time, when the nation's physical health is a matter of such
concern, the advertisement, published in this issue, of scholarships for Mental
Health training, recalls a factor vital to general well-being. Eight scholarships,
generously provided by the Commonwealth Fund of America, are available at the
London School of Economics, for the Session 1938-39. Candidates are required
to apply for these by May 2nd but the Course is open to other applicants, who will
be considered until the end of June.

While the training has been designed to equip psychiatric social workers
for employment in child guidance clinics, mental hospitals, observation wards and
the psychiatric departments of general hospitals, it has also been found valuable
in probation, family case work, juvenile employment, public health visiting, work
with backward and mentally defective children, and with children and adolescents
in "institutions.

To perform their functions adequately such workers must have an understanding of human nature, as well as knowledge of the material and social setting
in which the patient is to live and of facilities available for helping in his
adjustment. . In .a balanced programme of one year's theoretical study and
practical experience under supervision, the Mental Health Course aims at providing students with opportunities of acquiring these prerequisites to the work.
The qualifications for the training, outlined in the advertisement, enable the
fullest use to be. made of these opportunities.

Intending applicants who desire further information concerning the Mental
Health Course, or preparation for it, are invited to consult the Tutor at the London
School of Economics,

The Mental Treatment Act in 1936
Voluntary and Temporary Patients
--------------------------------
In the Board of Control's Annual Report, two interesting tables are given
showing the proportion of voluntary and temporary admissions, respectively,
to total direct admissions in County and Borough Mental Hospitals during 1936.
In the case of Voluntary admissions, the figures range from under 5 per cent
to over 70 per cent. In this highest category are the following eight Hospitals :
Hereford (47 per cent.), Runwell (48 per cent.), West Ham (60 per cent.) Isle
of Wight (62 per cent.), Portsmouth (62 per cent.), Ipswich (63 per cent.),
Cardiff (68 per cent.), Swansea (73 per cent.).

The Hospital with the highest proportion of Temporary admissions is Derby
Borough (52 per cent.), next to which comes West Ham (19 per cent.), Isle
of Wight and Runwell (each 18 per cent.). The percentage of Temporary
admissions to the total number is, in the majority of hospitals, under five, and
seven hospitals make no use of this provision at all.

Out-Patient Clinics
--------------------
In 1936, there were 155 Out-Patient Centres associated with 25 Borough
and 60 County Mental Hospitals. Of these. 100 were at Voluntary General
Hospitals, 8 at Municipal Hospitals, 16 at Mental Hospitals themselves,
2 at a Dispensary, 10 at County or other Public Health Offices, 9 at School
or Child Guidance Clinics and 10 elsewhere.

In 74 Clinics the help of a Social Worker was available.

Mental Hospitals in 1936
-------------------------
In surveying the general position with regard to Mental Hospitals in 1936,
the Board of Control note that only one new Hospital (Runwell, Essex) was
opened during the year and no further additional accommodation on any large
scale can be expected for some time. They therefore issue a warning that the
aggregate overcrowding will become considerably more serious during the next
three or four years. At the same time, they correct the general impression
that this means an actual increase in the incidence of mental disase, by pointing
out that the apparent increase is due to the fact that, owing to a diminishing birth
rate there is now a larger proportion of the population in the higher age groups
in which mental disorder is more likely to occur.

Attention is drawn to the need of an increase in the medical staffs of
mental hospitals without which it is impossible to provide the individual psychiatric
treatment upon which a patient's chance of recovery must largely depend.
" It is unfortunate, though not surprising, that so many visiting committees,
while ready to provide new buildings and equipment, are sceptical of the value of
treatment which appears to consist merely of talk : they will spend freely to
provide buildings and equipment, but they grudge expenditure on staff needed
for psychotherapy. Perhaps it will always be difficult to persuade Englishmen to
believe in a form of medicine which uses no larfcet and prescribes no pill."

London Child Guidance Clinic
----------------------------
In the Annual Report of the London Child Guidance Clinic* for 1936,
a general description is given of its work and methods with some interesting
* Canonbury Lodge, 1 Canonbury Place, N. 1,

statistical tables showing the types of cases dealt with, age groups, sources
of referral, treatment given, results, etc.

In assessing " results ", it is pointed out that the workers are becoming
more critical and the number of cases designated as " adjusted " is steadily falling.
About a third of the cases are classified as " improved ", but only in one-tenth
is a wholly satisfactory result claimed. This does not, however, mean that the
actual number of successful cases is diminishing, as treatment is being undertaken
in a larger number of neurotic children and, despite great benefit derived, a
residual factor of permanent instability is often left. Moreover the cases are
treated for longer periods than formerly and therefore by the end of the year,
treatment is not complete.

The total number of cases on the books of the Clinic during 1936 was
607, the maximum number which can be treated by the present staff in the
present premises.

To meet the urgent financial situation, administrative reorganisation was
undertaken during the year under review; in the autumn, Lord Feversham
succeeded Mrs. Montagu Norman as President, and under his direction a Board
of Governors was set up for the purpose of ensuring that sufficient funds shall
be available each year.

The Clinic does not, on principle, undertake popular propaganda, but short
courses are arranged for qualified students, case demonstrations given to groups
from Training Colleges, Residential Homes, etc., and facilities for practical case
work are provided for students taking the Mental Health Course at the London
School of Economics. Three Fellowships in Psychiatry and three in Psychology
tenable at the Clinic are offered each summer by the Child Guidance Council,
and in 1936, two Bursaries were instituted for trained psychiatric social workers.

Liverpool Psychiatric Clinic
----------------------------
For thirteen years, the Liverpool Psychiatric Clinic has worked as a voluntary
organisation, with (until recently) an Honorary Staff and in premises which,
despite three successive moves, have continued to prove inadequate for the demands
made upon them. From its inception in May, 1924, until March 31st, 1937, nearly
20.000 attendances by patients have been made and during the last two years
the attendances have increased by over 41 per cent.

On November 29th, 1937, another stage in the life of the Clinic was marked
by the opening of new premises in Abercrombie Square, with additional treatment
rooms, an Occupational Therapy Room and a Children's Department. The
opening ceremony was performed by Sir Sydney Jones, Pro-Chancellor of
Liverpool University?to whose generosity the Clinic Committee are deeply
indebted.

In the current Annual Report there is a survey of the work done by the
Clinic since its beginning and an interesting account is given by an ex-patient
describing her impressions of the way in which she was helped by treatment.

In-Patient Provision for Psychiatric Illness
-------------------------------------------
Provision for the treatment of psychiatric cases in general hospitals continues
to be so inadequate that it may be said hardly to have begun to be made, and
it is good news that owing to an anonymous gift of ?43,000, Guy's Hospital is
planning to build a Psychiatric Clinic to accommodate forty-two patients, in
addition to the six for whom facilities already exist.

The Clinic will be under the direction of Dr. R. D. Gillespie, Physician for
Psychological Medicine at Guy's, assisted by at least four full-time medical
officers, and it will receive cases of all types of mental disorder which can be
treated without the necessity of certification.

Building is to begin in the New Year, and is expected to be completed
early in 1939.

Manchester Child Guidance Clinic
----------------------------------
The Manchester Child Guidance Clinic which was founded in 1933 as a
voluntary organisation, has recently been taken over by the Education Committee and has become a branch of the School Medical Service.

The clinical staff consists of a psychiatrist (Dr. Winifred Mary Burbury),
two psychologists and a social worker- It is uncertain whether the Clinic will
be able to continue to accept cases from outside Manchester, as in the past,
but its services are to be available for the children at the Heaton Mersey
Remand Home, which is a Home Office institution receiving cases from
various courts in Lancashire and maintained by the Manchester Education
Committee in association with surrounding Authorities.

Child Guidance Council
-----------------------
The Child Guidance Council, in co-operation with the Battersea Polytechnic, have arranged a six months' non-residential training course for
Officers for Children's Residential Homes and Schools. The Course will begin
in January, and the subjects studied will be Physiology and Psychology,
Mothercraft, Hygiene and Home Nursing, Household Management, and
Recreations.

Other courses arranged by the Council include a week-end course in April
at the Lincoln Training College for its staff and students and for the staffs
of schools in the Eastern Counties, and an Easter Vacation Course at Sputhlands Training College, London, in two sections, one for matrons of schools,
and the other for head masters and head mistresses, teachers, staffs and
students of training colleges.

Particulars of these courses can be obtained from the Child Guidance
Council, Woburn House, Upper Woburn Place, W.C.I.
Waifs and Strays Society's Care of Backward Children
In 1935 the Waifs and Strays Society opened in London a Home (St.
Winifred's, Balham) for boys who were mentally retarded or who, for some other
reason, were in need of special educational treatment. This spring, a similar Home
for Girls is to be opened in Dulwich?to be known as The Rudolf Memorial
Home.

The aim of the Home is to make provision for retarded or problem children
already in the care of the Society, and the experience gained from the experimental
work at St. Winifred's has fully proved its need and value.

A New Certified Institution
----------------------------
There has recently been opened, at Totterdown Hall, Weston-super-Mare,
a new Certified Institution for 25 high-grade girls over 16, and 35 trainable
medium grade girls under that age.

The Institution is primarily intended for patients of the Roman Catholic
faith, but suitable cases of other religious denominations will be accepted with
the consent of the parent or guardian.

The fees to be charged are: adults, 21/6 weekly, with ?5 initial clothing
grant; children (approximately), 27/6 weekly, plus an initial clothing allowance.

Applications for admission should be made to the Sister Superior, Totterdown Hall, Weston-super-Mare, Somerset.

Besford Court Hostel Scheme
-----------------------------
In the Report of Besford Court Mental Welfare Hospital, Worcester, recently
issued, there is an interesting announcement outlining a scheme for the provision
of a hostel in Birmingham for boys who are ready for employment.

The Hostel is to be in charge of an After-Care Department which is being
formed by the Institution to take charge of every boy " from the time of his
admission until he is fit to be discharged from his certificate". It has been
found that Authorities appear to have so much difficulty in securing employment
and lodgings for cases on licence that the only way to deal satisfactorily with
the problem is by a comprehensive scheme on the part of the Institution itself, of
which the proposed Hostel is an integral part.

Bath's New Enterprise
----------------------
The Mental Treatment Act Committee of the Bath City Council, taking
advantage of the powers given under Section 6 of the Mental Treatment Act,
has recently opened a Nursing Home for patients suffering from mild mental
or nervous disorders.

The Home?Weston Lodge?was opened by Mrs. H. B. Tate, M.P. for
the Frome Division, on November 20th, 1937, and contains accommodation
for fifteen women patients- It is a large house standing in its own grounds,
about two miles from the centre of the City.

All the rooms occupied by patients face south, and each bedroom has its
own colour scheme. Special attention has been paid to forms of modern medical
treatment, and several rooms have been equipped for the administration of
remedial baths, sprays and douches of a kind which have been found to have
a beneficial influence on certain types of nervous troubles. As patients
progress, they will be encouraged to occupy themselves in needlework, rugmaking, basket-making, gardening, etc. Provision is also made for outdoor
games, dancing and physical drill.

The Home is intended to meet the needs of patients of limited means. The
usual fee will be three guineas a week, but in special circumstances this will
be reduced. The Matron, who is specially qualified for the work, will be helped
by a staff of six experienced nurses, and expert medical advice will always
be quickly available.

This is the first home of the kind to be opened by a municipal authority
under the Mental Treatment Act, and Bath is to be congratulated on its
pioneer activity.

An Educational Psychologist for Bristol
---------------------------------------
Miss M- T. Dunsdon, M.A., who has been one of the educational psychologists on the staff of the C.A.M.W. since January, 1936, has been appointed
Educational Psychologist to the Bristol Education Committee and will take
up her appointment there in February, 1938.

Miss Dunsdon, during" the time she has been connected with the C.A.M.W.,
has worked in connection with surveys in Jarrow, Southend, Preston and
Dewsbury, and has also lectured and helped in the organisation of the Courses
for Teachers of Retarded Children run by the Association.
In Bristol, her time will be divided between work in the schools and at
the Child Guidance Clinic.

The Board of Control and Holiday Homes
---------------------------------------
The Board of Control has expressed its cordial approval of the C.A.M.W.'s
Holiday Homes and has drawn attention to the value of such provision, in the
following paragraph of its Annual Report for 1936 :?
" Ap activity of the Central Association which calls for comment is the
provision of seaside holiday homes for mental hospital patients as well as
defectives. Monotony is the bane of institutional life; one day is like another
and each year like the last. There are many patients in mental hospitals, particularly those of the quiet parole type, who would benefit both physically and
mentally by a seaside holiday. Letters from patients who have visited these
homes are pathetically grateful. People who are accustomed to regular holidays
can hardly understand what a change of scene means to patients who have
perhaps spent years in one institution. When a new holiday home is first opened
it takes a little time before local prejudice is overcome, but this soon dies down
and, in one popular resort, it was freely admitted that the patients behaved better
than many of the normal visitors. The pleasure of a holiday in one of these
homes is far from being limited to the actual week or fortnight spent there. It
is prolonged by the excitement of anticipation and the happy memories it leaves
in retrospect, and we hope that the demands on these homes, of which there
are now four in different parts of the country, will be sufficient to encourage the
Central Association to open still more."

International Society for the Education of Exceptional Children
---------------------------------------------------------------
Another indication of the growing interest in the welfare of mentally
retarded and physically handicapped children is the formation of an International
Society which will hold a Biennial Congress to focus public attention on the
subject and to stimulate the efforts that are being made in various countries to
deal with it.

A circular has been sent to Ministries of Public Education in every country
asking them to become official members of the Society, whose Secretary is Director
Anton Mailer, Tullnerbach, near Vienna. The first Congress is to be held in
Zurich in July, 1939.

It is interesting to note that the Society was constituted in Budapest at a
meeting presided over by the State Secretary of the Hungarian Social Ministry.
This country?through the activities of the " Save the Children" Fund?has
for many years been a theatre of international relief work for the benefit of
distressed children and it seems particularly appropriate, therefore, that this new
venture, animated by a like spirit?though of a more academic nature and directed
towards the alleviation of a rather different type of " distress "?should originate
there.

National Special Schools Union
-------------------------------
The 17th Biennial Conference of the National Special Schools Union held
in London on November 25th, 26th and 27th, was largely attended and had a
number of influential supporters. The meetings were held at County Hall
and Lord Snell, the Chairman of the London County Council, gave a reception
to the delegates, and presided over the first Session.

An interesting innovation was made at this Session when a series of
short papers was presented by teachers young in the service, under the general
title, " What I want to Know." The questions dealing with Special Schools
for the Mentally Defective were: " Can doctors co-operate more closely with
teachers?" "Should an M.I). child excluded from physical training because
of a weak heart, also be excluded from strenuous work in the domestic science
room?" "Would it be better for children to go barefoot in wet weather
(as in Australia) rather than to wear badly fitting and leaking shoes?"
" What value should be attached to a medical certificate (for absence from
school) given by a private medical practitioner? " " What should be the limit
of physical education for the mentally defective child?" "Should special
(M.D.) Schools be built on open-air lines? " " Cannot something be done to
relieve teachers in special (M.D.) Schools of clerical work? " These questions
were answered by various medical, educational and administrative experts.
For a full report of the Conference, readers are referred to the next
number of " The Special Schools Journal," obtainable from Mr. J- Hudson,
31 Hoodcote Gardens, London, N.21, price 1/-.

Juvenile Delinquency and " Dullness "
------------------------------------
The Home Secretary, Sir Samuel Hoare, has announced the initiation by
the Home Office and the Board of Education of a joint investigation into the
question of juvenile delinquency and dullness. Information is to be collected
with a view to estimating the percentage of " dull " children (i.e., those with
Intelligence Quotients between 85 and 70) in the ordinary school population
and the percentage of such children amongst juvenile delinquents.
In opening a new Remand Home at Hull, Sir Samuel Hoare, in referring
to this investigation, pointed out its educational bearing, for, should it be found
that an abnormally high proportion of dull children become delinquent, the
disclosure must lead to an increased effort to provide for them the special
type of education which they need if they are to make successful social
adaptations.

" Character and Personality "
------------------------------
We are asked to announce that this quarterly journal edited by Professor
Spearman, is being reconstituted and an Editorial Board has been set up consisting of experts in a number of subjects in the realm of psychiatry,
psychology in all its branches, anthropology, sociology, politics, education,
economics, heredity, biography, art and literary criticismIt is planned to present comprehensive surveys of the progress being made
in different fields allied to the special topic of "Character and Personality,"
and as a result of the distinguished support received, it is hoped to produce a
magazine of real value and importance.

The annual subscription is 7/6, and subscriptions should be sent to the
publishers, Messrs. Allen & Unwin Ltd., 40 Museum Street, W.C.l.

Worthing's New Occupation Centre
---------------------------------
For many years the Worthing Association for Mental Welfare, under the
direction of Miss Potter, has carried on an Occupation Centre but it has been
possible to keep it open for part time only, and there have been many difficulties
due to inadequate accommodation.

Now all this is changed, for in September the Centre was moved to
commodious premises specially designed for the purpose in a building, part of
which is used as a Home for the Blind.

In addition to spacious centrally heated and well equipped rooms there
is a good playground with garden plots, and facilities for cooking a midday
meal. At present this is being given experimentally, with voluntary helpers to .
cook and prepare it. Twenty-one defectives are on the register and there is
an average attendance of fifteen.

The new premises were officially opened on December 8th by Miss Evelyn
The new premises were officially opened on December 8th by Dr. .Evans;
Chairman of the Union of County Associations for the Blind, when Miss Evelyn
Fox, C.B.E., spoke on the work of the Occupation Centre. .r

Mental Hygiene for the Pre-School Child
---------------------------------------
In his Report on the Child Guidance Clinics under the control of the
Derbyshire Education Committee during 1936, Dr. H. S. Bryan, Assistant School
Medical Officer, urges the need for Child Guidance facilities during pre-school
years.

"The Public Health Services", he says, "are essentially preventive; and
though by treating behaviour disorders in school children we are undoubtedly
helping to prevent social failure in later life, we are actually tackling a problem , after it has developed instead of trying to prevent it from happening. . . . All
schools of psychology are agreed that the foundations of mental stability are
laid down in the first five years . . . and yet the amount of work which is being
done in this connection is practically negligible."

Dr. Bryan suggests four lines of approach to this problem?(1) the establishment of Nursery Schools, (2) talks to mothers at Women's Institutes, Welfare
Centres, etc., (3) Some Instruction in Mental Hygiene for Health Visitors, and
(4) the provision of Mental as well as Physical Hygiene teaching in Infant
Welfare Centres.

Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency
-----------------------------------------------------
We are asked to announce the following Courses of Lectures which will be
given at the Institute, 8 Portman Street, London, W.l,. during the Spring session :
The Psychiatry and Psychotherapy of Delinquency, by Dr. Frederick Dillon.
Four Lectures on Thursdays at 7 p.m., beginning on January 13th.
Advanced Seminar on the same subject, conducted "by-Dr. Denis Carroll
Eight sessions on Wednesdays at 7 p.m., beginning January 26th.
Mental Defect and Delinquency, by Dr. B. C'rowhurst Archer. Four lectures
on Mondays at 7 p.m., beginning on February 7th.
For the Lectures, the fee is 1/6 each, or 6/- a course. For the Advanced
Seminars, a fee of 10/6 is charged.
