The Handicap of Deafness
==========================

:Author: Irene R.
Hwing, M.bc., .tLllis l^lwydd Jones
Reader in the Education of the Deaf,
and Alexander W. G. Ewing, M.A.,
Ph.D., Hon. Special Lecturer in the
Education of the Deaf, University of
Manchester. Longmans Green, 12/6.

The publisher's caption on the outside of
this book gives a very fair idea of its
content, and on the whole what is said on
the inside of the wrapper is justified.
The claim, however, that the book will be
of great interest to the " general public " is
hardly, in our opinion, likely to justify
itself, and indeed that is where the weakness
of the book appears to lie. Much of it is
emphatically for the specialist who will be
somewhat irritated at matter which to him
is self-evident, while the ordinary reader
will find much which is technically outwith
his judgment and will have to search
through this to find what he really wants?a
description of what deafness means to a
deaf person, and what the possibilities of
alleviation and education really are. The
need for this is so crying?as indeed the
writers realise?that it is the more dis-
appointing to find it only among very
much technical matter; and even when
it is found, it assumes a knowledge
which the ordinary person does not possess,
or it makes its point by rather wearisome
iteration instead of by description.

Furthermore, the subject matter is limited
to the completely deaf, and to the " severely
deaf "; nothing is said of the needs or the
treatment of the large class who are deaf
enough to miss most group conversation and
who cannot hear in a theatre, or who are
handicapped in business life by failure to
hear adequately. Much that is said of
hearing " aids" no doubt applies to them
also, but one would like to know more about
the possibilities of learning to lip-read, and
more, too, of ways in which their very real
handicap can be dealt with by appropriate
education. Or is it that such cases are as
yet left to chance and the interests of the
schools and clinics are meantime concerned
only with the severely deaf?

The chapters on the detection and assess-
ment of deafness seem to be very thorough
and very careful. The tests of intelligibility
of speech as such, are of real importance
and the measurement of the specific benefit
from hearing aids are carefully and com-
pletely worked out. The insistence on the
need for language, not merely as a means
of access to the minds of other human
beings and a mode of organising their own
experience, but as a necessary factor in
individual development which carries far
beyond mere absence of means of communi-
cation or vocabulary for self-expression,
strikes one as a factor in deafness seldom
realised. The comparison with " educated "
deaf persons with normal?in the chapter on
the " Educational Attainment of the Deaf "
are extremely interesting, as are the tests
quoted.

Throughout, the importance of lip-reading
is emphasised?indeed the whole book is a
plea for the hearing-lip-reading method of
education for the deaf. " For the first time
in history, powerful and reliable apparatus
is available by means of which 70 per cent
of the children who are born deaf, or ivho
acquire deafness during infancy, can be
enabled to use their cars, although in many
cases only to a very limited extent, in learn-
ing to talk.

Throughout the book, a good deal of
insight into the social and intellectual handi-
cap of deafness is to be gathered, and the
educational principles based on the psycho-
logical understanding of the deaf and of
their problems, seem very sound. The
chapter appended on the Vocational Educa-
tion of the Deaf, by the Headmaster of the
Royal Residential Schools for the Deaf,
Manchester, is extremely interesting and
raises a number of problems, not confined
to the vocational training of the deaf only.
It would appear to us that the book
contains most valuable material for all who
are interested in the teaching of the deaf,
and in their relation to the social and
economic life around them; further, that
out of it?with some considerable simplifi-
cation, even omission, of a number of the
more technical sections, a different kind of
emphasis, and a fuller description of the
concrete problems of the deaf person?
might come a book which would really
interest " the man in the street" in the
handicap of the deaf person and secure for
him that kind of sympathy and understand-
ing that is usually given to the blind, and
possibly also the awakening of the imagina-
tion and the conscience about forms of
deafness less severe but also handicapping
and isolating the unfortunate sufferer.
A. M. McK.
