Backwardness in School
=======================

:Author: P. A. Barons,
Headmaster, Woodlands Park Junior
School, Tottenham. Blackie & Son Ltd.
3/6.

In accordance with economic theory, the
growth of demand invariably is followed by
a corresponding growth in the available
supply. Too often indeed it leads to over-
supply and slump. Fortunately that point
has not yet been reached in the output of
literature published on the " Backward
Child". The subject has so many aspects
that any attempt to deal at all comprehen-
sively with the diagnosis and treatment of
indicative symptoms has resulted in some
excellent, but also, for the average teacher
and parent, rather expensive volumes.

Often, too, in the available literature there
is assumed a groundwork of terms and
conception unfamiliar to those whose
experience has not yielded the opportunity
for any investigation into the causes of this
not uncommon state of affairs, although
they may have been grappling blindly for
some time with the distressing sequelae.
For this reason, apart from others, Mr.
Barons' recent book " Backwardness in
School" should receive an enthusiastic
welcome from all who come into contact
with children. This is not merely a book
for the'teacher and educationalist; intelli-
gent parents with an interest in the progress
of their children will find in it a good deal
in the way of guidance in forming some
idea of the healthy relationship which
should obtain between progress and ability,
without an understanding of which many a
" maladjusted " child is produced without
any undue pressure from school.

A commendable feature of this book and
one which will be noted especially by those
whose interest in children is not confined to
their response to any one particular school
subject, is the way in which the author
draws upon his shrewd observations of
children at work and at play, in order
. . . "to frame Units of Activity round
children's likes so that work on them could
proceed in school But further, and as a
warning to those whose interest in
'Projects' may outrun that of the child,
. . . "It is essential wisely tp guide the
choice of a child, for it should not be
assumed that a child's likes, or even his
dislikes are forever fixed and constant
The author demonstrates, as so many
more technical books fail to do, the in-
numerable opportunities which are at hand,
both for parents and for teachers, for
collecting from day to day facts which are
prerequisite for any study. He points out,
too, that such a collection is often likely to
prove of greater value in so far as the
child is unaware that he is being observed.

Observations in themselves, however, are
comparatively valueless unless they are
collated and integrated, so that their relative
importance is appreciated and the necessary
pointers obtained from them towards the
major factors in and a possible solution to
the problem. Here again this little book can
justifiably claim advantage over many more
pretentious which stop at isolation of the
symptoms with little attempt at a synthesis
into the commoner syndromes. The com-
plexity of causes and the no less complexity
of symptoms and results are presented not
from one but from a number of aspects. It
is not an exhaustive study of the problem
of Backwardness?the author would be the
last to suggest it?but it does undoubtedly
give, so far as one short and simply written
volume could, a comprehensive view of a
difficult subject. For those who find them-
selves more particularly interested in, or
ignorant of any one side of the problem
there is appended a useful bibliography.
M. I. D.
