English Juvenile Courts
========================

:Author: Winifred A. Elkin. Kegan Paul, 12/6.
This book contains a wealth of informa-
tion on Juvenile Courts, their organisation,
constitution and procedure, on the various
methods of dealing with delinquents and the
new opportunities afforded by the Children
and Young Persons Act, 1933, and on the
further reforms that are needed.

The varying degree of efficiency to be
found between one Court and another and
the lack of any common standard is
strikingly brought out, with the concomitant
need for a pooling of experience so that
essential facts?e.g., the results of varying
types of treatment and the relative advan-
tages of different methods of procedure?
may be made available to all those engaged
in the work. Commenting on this lack of
a common standard in one particular direc-
tion?the use of Probation (the figures for
which vary from under 6 per cent in
Accrington, Warrington and Windsor, to
between 28 and 31 per cent, in Liverpool,
Blackburn and Newport)?Miss Elkin
writes:?

"Differences in local conditions may
affect the methods in use in a court to
some extent, but it is impossible to
believe that they can account for such
wide variations as these. They can only
be taken as indicating a regrettable lack
of any common standard. If the majority
of courts arc right in concluding that at
least half the offenders should be put on
probation, then the courts that make as
little use of it as some of those just
mentioned must be falling below the
general standard of efficiency. . . .
" What is particularly disconcerting is
that, at least in my experience, the courts
that differ markedly from the average in
the use they make of various methods,
are generally unaware of the fact."
In her final chapter, in which she urges a
new method of appointment of justices and
certain other reforms in the organisation of
the juvenile court, she again refers to this
question.

"It is serious enough that children and
young persons should be dealt with by
men and women zvho receive no training
and are left without the assistance that
official inspection would give them. But
the situation is made worse by the fact
that they cannot even turn for guidance
to any carefully collected body of infor-
mation that would shed light on past
results."

The lack of knowledge on the part of magis-
trates not only of what is done in other
areas hilt also of the facilities that are
available in their own, is also commented
upon, and an almost incredible example is
given of a magistrate who was apparently
unaware that there existed a local Child
Guidance Clinic, or, at any rate, that children
coming before her Court could be treated
there.

In discussing the question of psychological
investigation Miss Elkin draws attention to
the undesirability of such investigation
being carried out before the offence is
proved. This practice [although at present
rarely adopted] she considers should be
deplored in that it must inevitably tend to
create popular prejudice against the
development of psychological services, by
identifying the psychologist with someone
who is secretly used by the police to extract
confessions of guilt.

In this same chapter, the question of the
procedure with regard to the making of
preliminary enquiries and the relative
spheres of the school attendance officer and
the probation officer, is. exhaustively dis-
cussed, as is also the question of how such
reports on home circumstances, school
behaviour, etc., can best be handled by the
Court when obtained, whether they should
be submitted in writing or orally, and how
far the parents and the offenders themselves
should be informed of their content.

This is decidedly a book to be read not
only by the student and the social worker,
who are brought into direct contact with
the problem of delinquency, but also by
every intelligent man and woman who takes
seriously his or her responsibilities as a
citizen.
A. L. H.
