Personal Relationships
=======================

:Author: Florence M.
Surfleet. Allenson, 5/- net.
I wish I could recommend this book more
warmly. There is an enormous amount that
might be helpfully written on the subject
ot" personal relationships,?the source of
perhaps our greatest happiness and our
greatest misery in this world. And modern
psychology, based as it is on the intensive
study of individuals in their emotional
reactions to other people from babyhood
upwards, has a wealth of light to shed on
problems concerning all degrees of personal
relationship from casual contacts to passion-
ate bate and love.

This book is described on the wrapper as
"This simple psychology book", but there
is no psychology deserving of the name
within the covers. It is not correct to give
the title of " Psychology" to any account of
possible emotional reactions and situations
couched in any personal terminology. And
that is what the book chiefly consists of.

This would, however, be a small point, if
these accounts had in them anything of vital,
constructive interest and value. One feels,
as one reads them, that the writer has no
doubt been a tremendous help to numbers of
young women, just out of adolescence,
chronologically if not mentally, who have
brought to her their upsets and difficulties
consequent on life in a community of
women (a training college?). She has no
doubt inspired them with her own deep
belief in the value of emotional friendships,
whether hetero- or homosexual (but
probably chiefly the latter), and has helped
them to disentangle some of their practical
problems. These problems as set out in a
book have, however, taken on an incredible
dullness, due to the manner of their presen-
tation. A small quotation picked at random
may illustrate what is meant:

"Naturally in any individttal the forccs
may work so that over a comparatively long
period they may flour in one main direction,
and at another period in a rather different
direction. When the forccs are lethargic the
person finds it difficult often to take
decisions or to make effort, whereas when
they arc lively and sparkling, quicker move-
ment and greater flexibility may be expected
When the forces work unevenly, noiv fast,
nozu slow, the person's behaviour is often
greatly influenced by the particular phase
through which he (or she) is passing at the
moment."

This is from the chapter called " The
Vital Forces". Its style is typical of the
whole book.

Some of the statements and assumptions
are open to serious question. There is an
assumption of parallelism between hetero-
and homosexual attachments, which has no
justification psychologically or biologically.

Love relationships between contemporaries
of the same or opposite sex, or between
child and parent are treated as if they were
all fundamentally the same' thing, the only
distinction made being that between
" dynamic" (= passionate?) and "calm",
and that due to the fact that sex expression
beyond " the ordinary caresses and endear-
ments of intimate affection " is " taboo "
outside marriage. One cannot feel that such
an approach will really help the sexually
inverted individual, or the parent-fixed one,
to understand and deal with their specific
problems, even though one may welcome
the absence of prejudice which it suggests.

A disappointing book, written, however,
by someone who, one feels, has herself
struggled with sincerity and sympathy to
help young people.
L. H.
