Der Schwachsinn (Mental Defect)
================================

:Author: P. Dubitscher, remanent becretary
in the Reich Ministry of Health,
Handbuch der Erbkrankheiten, heraus
von Guett, Dok. med., Arthur, Berlin,
Band !. Georg Thieme, Leipzig, pp. 358.

This book is divided into two sections, one
clinical, the second major section dealing
throughout with researches into intelligence.
This second part contains a valuable survey
of all the more usual intelligence tests. In
addition to the problem of the inheritance
of mental deficiency, Part 1 deals also with
the transmission of normal psychological
faculties. Symptoms, treatment, anatomy
and transmission of the different forms of
mental defect are described separately and
in detail.

The classification of Weygandt with very
slight alteration appears to be the most
practical of the attempts to group the
various aetiological types. The changes
which which have occurred at different
times in the importance attributed to
heredity as a cause in feeble-mindedness is
clearly set forth with numerous examples
from the literature. JThe treatment assembles
brilliantly the results both of the earliest and
most recent genetical researches; indeed, the
whole literature on mental deficiency is
covered almost without omissions.

The question of separate inheritance of
the different grades of defect is left open by
the author. Uniform approach to the
distinction between grades, treated
uniformly, appears to be a pre-requisite for
the resolution of this problem. The author
also refrains from giving an absolutely un-
equivocal answer to the problem of geno-
typic identity in hereditary feeble-minded-
ness. Stumpfi's view that feeble-mindedness
depends on a combination of several
psychological features which are separately
inherited is supported by the author. He
also mentions numerous authors, according
to whom there is a high probability of
unitary inheritance of feeble-mindedness as
a single trait.

The author regards it as important to
distinguish more sharply special personality
types amongst the feeble-minded which are
possibly inherited as a familial configuration.
In addition to heredity, he recognises the
following as the only certain causes of
mental defect : birth-trauma, short-term
births, syphilis in the mother, alcoholism of
the parents, irradiation of the pregnant
mother, injuries and cerebral diseases in
the child. The following bear no special
significance in this regard : blood-relation-
ship of genotypically healthy parents,
illegitimacy, environmental influences, con-
ception during intoxication and abnormal
mental impressions of the pregnant mother.
The factors which are recognised as causal
may often act in combination.

The desiderata for future research on
feeble-mindedness are above all the identifi-
cation of unitary biological and psycho-
logical types, the transmission of which may
be studied as such. Added to this the con-
junction of hereditary feeble-mindedness
and deformities, and other allied diseases
must be examined. Agreement on the
conceptions of the different grades of mental
defect is urgently needed for a clear under-
standing of the transmission of the different
grades. Any assessment of the success of
eugenic measures should be based not on the
question whether feeble-mindedness can
thereby be entirely eradicated but rather
what would be the incidence of mental
deficiency after a given period without such
measures.

C. BRUGGER,
Professor, University Psychiatric Clinic,
Basic.
