Occupational Treatment of Mental Illness
=========================================

:Author:  Iveson Russell, M.B., Ch.B.,
F.R.P.S., D.P.M., Med Supt. North
Riding Mental Hospital. Bailliere,
Tindal and Cox. pp. xvi, 231. 6/-.

For several years now, the occupation of
patients in Mental Hospitals in this country
(notably the North Riding at Clifton, the
Cheshire County at Upton, the Cardiff City
at Whitchurch and the Devon County at
Exminster), has been organised on intensive
lines and referred to as " occupational
therapy

Up to the present, however, no book has
been published dealing exclusively with this
subject, and therefore those who have
introduced this line of treatment and others
who are anxious to do so, will be glad to
learn that this gap has been filled with the
publication of the book " Occupational
Treatment of Mental Illness".

The author, Dr. J. 1. Russell, is Medical
Superintendent of the North Riding Mental
Hospital, Clifton, York, so well known as
one of the pioneers in introducing " Occupational Therapy " in its true form into Mental
Hospital routine in this country. This in
itself should hallmark the book as one well
worth perusal by the general public as well
as by those more intimately associated with
the care of the insane.

Dr. Rees Thomas (one of the Commissioners of the Board of Control) who
writes the Foreword, points out that the
occupation of patients in mental hospitals
in this country has been practised for one
hundred years or so, but fails to draw the
reader's attention to the fact that this has
been limited to willing patients, representing
on an average about 30 per cent, of the total.
This is a very different thing to what is
meant to-day by " occupational therapy " in
its true sense, as those who read this book
will learn.

Indeed it will be seen that rather than
simply allotting to congenial tasks those who
want something to do, " occupational
therapy" means the creating of suitable
occupations for those who have no inclination to do anything.

Dr. Russell's book, therefore, should do
much to convince those who have taken no
active steps to introduce Occupational
Therapy, that it has great possibilities and
is really worth while.

The book is divided into two Parts. Part I
is Theoretical and comprises twelve
chapters. Part II, consisting of eleven
chapters, is Practical and?one might add?
highly technical in some instances.
Witli regard to Part I?the first three
chapters deal with the objects and benefits of
Occupational Therapy and the psychological
and clinical types to be occupied. Herein it
is pointed out that the Schizophrenic, in
which introspection has become a habit,
constitute the major part of the problem and
that the Paranoic is the most difficult. As a
rule the latter can only be occupied in
activities which do not benefit the hospital
in any way.

To those who make up their minds to
introduce Occupational Therapy into their
particular hospital, Dr. Russell gives appropriate words of caution "not to be too
ambitions to start with, and ever to
remember the limitations of the patients as
ivell as the equipment."

To meet the various interests of patients,
occupations are classified by Dr. Russell into
nine groups. Chapters 4 and 5 are devoted
to the prescription and questions such as
whether the patient shall be occupied in bed,
in a ward class or at an occupation centre.
The fact that " Occupation can be started in
new admissions much earlier than has
formerly been done" and that " suicidal
patients need not be excluded provided there
is proper supervision", are pertinent remarks
which it is hoped will be followed literally
by those who read this book.

Chapter 6 describes details of the "habit
training " of stuperosed and faulty patients,
and " outdoor parties" are dealt with in
Chapter 7.

The next three chapters are devoted to the
formation of " ward classes" amongst
patients not fit to leave the ward (e.g., senile
and cardiac cases, cripples and low grade
mental defectives), and the organisation of
classes of Swedish and Physical Drill. In
this connection, Dr. Russell advocates a
properly equipped gymnasium and swimming
bath for all Mental Hospitals in future.
The last two chapters in Part I deal with
accommodation, equipment, and the purchase
of supplies. This is naturally one of the
most important and responsible duties of
anyone aspiring to the rank of "Occupational
Officer" and should, of course, include a
record of how the material has been used,
and the disposal of all articles made.
Part II is the Practical part of the book
and includes chapters on Design, Woodwork,

Basketry, Brush Making, Mat Making,
Printing and Bookbinding. Concrete and
Plastic Modelling, Weaving, etc.
As has already been stated, much of this
is highly technical (specific to each section)
and only of interest to those who make that
particular subject their speciality. Indeed
one cannot help feeling that matters such as
the selection and storage of timber and
much other detail mentioned in Chapter 14,
are definitely outside the province of
" Occupation Therapy" as applicable to a
nurse in a Mental Hospital and pertain
rather to the Clerk of the Works. Occupation Therapy in no sense means the teaching
of a trade to patients in the way that is
done in a Colony for Mental Defectives.
We repeat that it cannot be too strongly
emphasised that its object is to give the
patient something to do, and the consideration of whether the article made is of any
value should not enter into the question.
In fact, it is quite likely that the more
strictly the occupation fulfils its main object,
the worse the results will be in the value of
the finished product!

In the chapter dealing with Brush Making,
one finds the remark that the object should
be "not to produce the greatest number in
the least possible time, as any business firm
ivould do, but on the other hand to avoid
the use of machinery and make them in a
zt'ay which, if adopted in the trade, would
soon bring the firm to bankruptcy" e.g.
" quite an hour can be spent by one patient
making a scrubbing brush which can be
bought in the market for 2d." With this we
are thoroughly in agreement.

The writer of this book is tilling virgin
soil and therefore one naturally hesitates to
criticise it at all. It is hoped, however, that
the one or two criticisms which have been
made here will be received in the friendly
spirit in which they are given. Indeed one
can only admire and recommend a work
which strikes a new avenue of approach to
the treatment of cases of mental disorder.
The book is well produced with a
reference index and several helpful photographs and diagrams as well as a useful plan
and elevation of an " occupational centre
It also contains a valuable list of the names
of firms from which suitable supplies can be
obtained. It should prove invaluable?not
only to those working for special examinations in the subject, but to every member of
the staff of a Mental Hospital who wishes
to keep abreast of the times.
R. E.
