Mental Health Through Education
================================

:Author: Carson Ryan. The Commonwealth
Fund, New "York U.S.A. Pp. 315.
Humphrey Milford. Oxford University Press, 6/6.

Here is a book which anybody interested
in education and in social problems of the
day will thoroughly enjoy reading. It is a
serious book, but it is so humanly written
that it never becomes tedious. It reviews the
present situation with regard to school and
college education in the United States of
America; from the point of view of mental
health both of individual and community.
The author makes kindly and just criticisms
of attitudes and methods of teaching which
have outworn their usefulness, or which
from the beginning have been detrimental to
healthy personal development. He describes
briefly the work of many progressive movements that are endeavouring to remedy the
glaring discrepancies between educational
theory and actual practice in schools. All
through the book, and in summary at the
end, Dr. Ryan gives practical constructive
suggestions regarding what may be done in
the field of education to " enable children
and young people to get a good start in
effective and wholesome living."

The purpose of the book, the author tells
us is to answer the question " How does
educational practice to-day, at every level
and for every type of education, square with
what is known of mental hygiene, and what
further advances can be made?" It is the
outcome of a year of study and extensive
travel, mainly in the United States but also
abroad. It is a balanced report of information gained from visits to schools, clinics
and hospitals, from interviews with people
engaged in health, education and social
work, and from contributions in recent
? literature. The author quotes actual
instances and gives evidence to support any
positive statement he makes whether it be
critical or appreciative. Indeed the short
paragraphs in small type make suggestive
and stimulating reading in themselves.
There is an index at the end, but the various
references quoted are only mentioned in
footnotes. Those readers who wish to keep
in touch with recent literature on educational
problems would possibly have welcomed the
the addition of a bibliography of references
at the end of the book.

Dr. Ryan was amply prepared by
experience to undertake this work on
education and mental hygiene. He has been
himself a school teacher, a professor of
education, and an administrator. He is at
present staff associate with the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching and President of the Progressive
Education Association. He treats his subject
from the broad point of view of one " interested in the rounded development of
children rather than that of the mental
hygiene specialist." He lays stress on the
importance of preventive measures for
normal children, rather than concentration
of effort on remedial work with "misfits".
After all, as seems indicated in many cases,
it may be the educational practices that are
inadequately adapted to their function and
which account for the so-called " abnormality" of children's behaviour. The
reviewer suggests in this connection that
perhaps the abnormal or " problem " child
lias performed a valuable service to society
if only in calling attention to educational
and administrative discrepancies.

" Mental Health through Education " is a
book to be cordially recommended to all
members of the teaching profession, training
college authorities, local education administrators, and also to county and town
councillors. Although it tells mainly of educational problems and progressive workgoing on in the United States, the difficulties
of public education are much the same in this
and other European countries. The author
suggests practicable means whereby education may be made more valuable and
effective, through changes within the
schools, in the training of teachers, and in
collaboration with community forces
working for mental health.
K. M. B. B.
