Sonne Psychological Problems in Institutionalising Defectives
==============================================================

By ISABEL M. LAIRD, M.A., B.Ed.,
Psychologist at the The Royal Scottish National Institution, Larbcrt.
The types of psychological problem noted in this article appear to have
two common qualities?the likelihood of being ignored, and an urgent need
of consideration. Their likelihood of being ignored probably arises from two
main causes?long-standing blindness to their very existence, or a hurried
and even half-conscious forgetting of them whenever they stir the minds of
administrators in, and authorities upon, mental deficiency. The urgent need
of consideration is patent to the psychologically trained observer at present,
and will be much aggravated by the many imminent expansions in Britain of
just those conditions which incubate it.
The present discussion is based upon five years' observation of institu-
tional life, of widely varying kinds, among mentally defective persons of all
ages, of all grades and types, and of all social classes. The points chiefly
selected are those liable to receive least notice, and certainly to arouse least
attack, by casual visitors to our institutions, be those visitors even medical
and educational experts.
2 MENTAL WELFARE
For the purposes of the present discussion, it is suggested that common
ground be reached first in agreement that mentally defective persons should
not only be kept alive and cared for, but that they should live under those
conditions best calculated to encourage and maintain all-round development.
It is generally believed that the community life of an institution offers
the most satisfactory provision for low and middle-grade defectives?the
idiots and imbeciles?whether of school age or older- And high-grade defectives
?the feeble-minded?are apparently being recommended in increasing
numbers for institutional residence and treatment. In its widest interpreta-
tion, the term ' institutional life,' in discussing defectives, must imply any
form of group life, in colony, home-school or even in the very intensive
boarding-out of patients say in every house in a village or district. But in
Britain the movement is increasingly towards provision of very large homes
and training centres, and this form of institution will be foremost in mind
for the present.
Now, in surveying these huge concerns, with their thousand or so patients
and pupils, their pay-roll of two to three hundred names, their vast expen-
diture of money and energy in myriad activities, the routine of the individual
defective is easily forgotten or even overlooked altogether. And in experience,
the valuable opportunities offered, and the wise allowances made in institu-
tional life, are merely being given on the one hand, while everyday essential
chances of development and outlets for interest, are being made impossible
on the other.
In the first tackling of this problem?the search for answer to some such
question as ' what are the real psychological difficulties in institutionalising
defectives ? '?the psychologist in full-time work among defectives is confused.
Perhaps indeed she is not unlike the centipede, who, we are told,
'. . . . was happy quite,
Until the toad, for fun,
Said, " Pray, which leg comes after which ? "
This worked her mind to such a pitch
She lay distracted in a ditcli
Considering how to run.'
Only, there, the means of advance suggested for analysis were doubtless
adequate in the first place. In modern schemes for the care and training of
defectives things are otherwise, and analysis ought to bring in its train more
of help than hindrance.
In what follows, some psychological difficulties in institutionalising
defectives will be grouped under three headings, according as they centre
chiefly round the pupils and patients, or round the members of staff, or round
the parents and the public at large. It is clear that those categories must
overlap, but at least a semblance of order is made possible by their use.
Naturally the first group is most vital, and indeed the others are examined here
in their effect upon the defectives themselves.
MENTAL WELFARE 3
By ' institutionalising'' is here implied the bringing about in the individual
defective, such acceptance of continuous herding or being herded, as shall least
hinder his development towards happiness and usefulness. And in this impli-
cation it must be recalled that a number of these defectives (generally an un-
predictable number, and usually from the middle and high-grade groups only)
will at some time return to a place in the everyday social system. It is one
contention behind the present arguments that a far greater number can
probably be trained, on the one hand for this return, and on the other for a
vastly fuller and more normally-planned lifetime within institutional limits.
Concerning the Dcfectivcs
It will be allowed that the defective is not only defective in intelligence;
that his variation from the normal is far more nearly a personality variation;
and that the usual course of emotional or social development rightly to be
expected among defectives of the several types is by no means yet established.
But the defective has of course a great similitude with normal and bright per-
sons, in the patterns of his impulses and reactions, in the ultimate source of his
knowledge through his sensory experiences, in his ways of acquiring skills or
learning, in his entrance upon social and emotional relationships with other
human beings, and so on. Therefore there is an ever-recurring problem to be
faced at every stage, from the question of age or standard at which institu-
tional life should begin, to the question of age or standard at which return
to ordinary community life outside should be attempted, if ever.
This problem is of the nature of dilemma?in the uncertainty when to be
guided by the more intellectual standard of the patient, as in some combination
of the mental age and intelligence quotient, perhaps; and when by the picture
of his emotional or social age, which may, of course, be a year or two advanced
or retarded in comparison. And this discrepancy is, on observation, a far
more enduring discrepancy than might be thought.
It arises right at the start. Let it be decided that a particular boy is to
be sent to an institution. At what age is separation from the family to be
(for him) recommended. Tt is hard to say; but, apart from economic
considerations, and all-important variable factors such as the presence or
absence of siblings, and their ages, ought we not to be able to decide when
family advantages, and when institutional advantages, shall carry more
weight ? On the one hand, an early age is to be preferred, giving the sooner
an environment in which the child will find himself an average member; and
checking the sooner the likelihood of his unhappiness or unnecessary back-
wardness through either too little or too great allowance being made for his
condition. On the other hand, a later age is wiser, in order that stabler
emotional ties may be made with his family; for, under present British institu-
tional schemes, the defective child has little or no hope of forming useful
parent-figure relationships, has indeed little hope of a lasting, emotionally
4 MENTAL WELFARE!
satisfying, relationship with any adult. We shall return to this point in a
later section of the article.
Then, improvement is urgently called for in the everyday conditions under
which the mass of defective children grow and live. (We take for granted,
of course, all-round satisfactoriness of actual feeding and sleeping arrange-
ments, of medical and general educational attention, in the narrower sense,
and therefore the following remarks refer mainly to middle and high-grade
children). In how many large institutions do trainable and educable defectives
actually see meals being prepared, laid or cleared away? See laundering
done ? Handle money or money-tokens ? Know or see anything of the break-
ing and cartage of coal or wood, or the carrying of stores or of a message?
How many, in short, have chances of making the hundred and one daily obser-
vations and movements that would be demanded of them in their own homes
of whatever status ?
And lest there be retort that all institutions do allow suitable patients
and pupils to share in such workaday activities, it may be said in reply that
this is true : but that in effect what happens is far from satisfactory for the
patients, however useful, for the running of the institution or estate. Thus,
patients may at fourteen or sixteen begin to work in the kitchen, laundry,
garden, boiler-house, upholsterer's shop, etc., but from the age of entrance,
which may be even five or seven years, until this chance comes, they may have
no experience in even observing such occupations. And as a rule, once started
in a trade department, they have chance of acquiring knowledge and practice
in one department only, perhaps for many years on end.
And here mention may be made of the largely erroneous idea that a
necessary concomitant of mental deficiency is preference for monotony. It is
true of many defectives, scattered throughout the grades, that they are content
to sit at one job year in, year out; but before a simple generalisation can be
made about the reasons annexed to this contentment, at least two possibilities
must be dispelled: In what degree is it an apathy induced by narrowly limited
environment with sheer lack of alternative activities over a long period? and
in what degree is it symptomatic of temperamental or mental disturbance
either chronic or temporary ?
But to return. It is not only want of opportunity for observing and
sharing the everyday events of the home that is deplored. There is a very
serious want of things in institutional environment: things to see and touch,
smell and handle, things to name and talk about, things to experiment with,
to break and to make. So, actual sensory experience is far more limited than
need be, vocabulary far more slowly acquired, little skills and muscular co-
ordinations far more delayed in achievement than need be. Therefore institu-
tional school time becomes pre-occupied and school progress hindered by the
added task of carrying individual children through stages of learning and
MENTAL WELFARE 5
experience properly belonging to the pre-school rooms and the extra-school
time-tables.
Other consequences follow upon the general lack of objects in institutional
life, coupled with the lack of opportunity for hoarding in safe corners. Much
of the petty stealing appears motivated by a shallow over-possessiveness, and
is observed to stop temporarily with distribution of new gloves or shoes to
a group, or even with the arrival of balls or skipping-ropes or dolls in numbers
sufficient for each child in the group to own one item (for however short a
period the treasure may last). One is, of course, aware that underlying this
object-hunger there may well be groping after more fundamental security
than the gift of a toy can appease. The point is that a certain degree of relief
can be maintained by the giving out of things to possess, to touch, handle, and
so on.
Then there is the question of continual supervision. Can any psychological
justification be found for the present position in crowded institutional life,
under which it is little short of criminal to allow a child out of sight for more
than a minute or so, and then only for a visit to the nearest cloakroom ?
Workers among defectives must be conscious that these children need more
supervision than normally intelligent children, but why enforce a system of
constant watching; of playrooms and playfields with the least possible number
of projections and erections? Of circumstances making the endless games of
hiding impossible, making the task of playing ' corner ' games incredibly hard.
Concerning the Staff
Concerning the staff, one merely mentions the ironic position of
the highly expert medical superintendent whose years brim over with details
of correspondence, estate management and ' returns.' Concern is far more
with the unit member, the nurse and attendant who have, in fact, the question
of the degree of ' success ' of the defectives, in their hands. At present it is not
only almost impossible to keep a minimum staff in attendance, but also
apparently impossible to attract even a minimum supply of half-promising
applicants for posts. Frequency of change in the nursing staff is therefore
appalling.
Even if the nursing personnel remains stable for one month, the real
psychological difficulty is not met, however. Much depends on the system of
shifts in operation, but mention may be made of two extremes. In Institu-
tion A, let us say, the eight-hour day is tried. Defective John will then be
transferred at one jump from the family group, with its intensely real unity
and continuity for him, to the big block where all who deal with him change
over completely three times in twenty-four hours. In Institution B, there is
a five-day week instead, and John finds, say, four nurses in his block on the
day he is admitted. Since each nurse has two days off per week, and there
must be four nurses always on duty by day, when will John next find his
6 MENTAL WELFARE
original friends all on duty together again? And if he wakes in the night,
some completely other nurse comes to his aid, except on the night a week
when she is relieved by yet another nurse. Psychological development cannot
happen normally or fully under such systems: there is poor chance of real
personal relationships in wholly uncertain settings like these.
A further problem concerning staff may best be introduced by three
questions of vital importance in any training centre not entirely set apart
for idiots. What proportion of the resident staff (matrons, nurses, attendants)
hold a certificate in mental deficiency nursing, in any branch other than Bed-
side Nursing? What proportion of staff in training is being encouraged to
take any training other than Bedside Nursing? Is there anyone on the staff
capable of giving any other training? If replies come 'None, none, no!' it
is difficult to conceive how the adequate care and training can be provided
for imbeciles or the feeble-minded during the eight or nine hours a day when
they are not in school classes or bed. Again, why should it not be possible for
' endorsement' of a final certificate in any one branch of training, to occur a
little later, in some other branch ?
But poverty and sparseness of staff ' material' must, one ventures to
assert, affect the ideal running of the institution less where general con-
ditions of equipment, space, freedom and so on are more satisfactory?a
further plea that root conditions such as are detailed earlier in the article are
primary also in importance.
Concerning Parents and, the Public
Concerning parents and the public, the psychologist notes here only one
or two points too readily ignored. The weeks immediately following upon
admission to an institution are often highly critical ones for the patient or
pupil, especially if still a child. It is not so readily seen that they are also
often highly critical weeks for the parents, especially, perhaps, for the mother.
The relative finally responsible for ' putting away ' the child undoubtedly does
suffer, in most cases, quite intense relief?in all the ramifications implied by
the term ' suffering relief.' Usually, in the best interests of the child, the first
visit is delayed for a month at least. Since we are in an age that recognises
and respects the value of skilled social work, can it not become a part of the
routine of arranging an admission (on the part of the Child Guidance Clinic,
Education Committee, etc., urging the removal of the child), to see that at
least one visit is paid to the home after the removal of the child? Such is
the plea of the resident worker among defectives, because the family reaction,
particularly the mother's, and especially on the first visit, can assist or hinder
enormously the whole progress of the child's enjoyment and training in the
new surroundings.
And finally?though the limitation is one of space only!?there is the
ever-present and subtle difficulty of public ignorance. How best, and soonest,
MENTAL WELFARE 7
can we teach our fellows that only falseness and cruelty are spoken when one
says to another, of a defective child, ' He'll be all right when he's older.' How
best, and soonest, can we induce our fellows to see that the ' stigma ' they so
easily read into a state of mental deficiency, is entirely a projection of their
own attitude, that it exists not in the defective, nor in mental defect, but only
in the mind of a civilised community still half-unwilling to meet fully the
problems of mental deficiency in its midst.
The psychological difficulties in institutionalising defectives are found not
only in the institution, we see, and therefore the solving of them lies not only
with those working in institutions. Solution is to some extent a duty of
Everyman.*
* It is not suggested that all the problems noted here will be found in any one Institution;
but such a discovery would not surprise the writer. Readers zvith first-hand knowledge
of solu'.ions in practice are invited to send some account of these to the Editor.
