Mental Therapy Studies in Fifty Cases
======================================

:Author: Louis S. London, M.D. 2 Vols.
Covici Friede, New York. $12.50.

Students of Medical Psychology, and
especially intending therapists, suffer from a
handicap which does not restrict those, who
study other branches of medicine, namely
that the material which they study is only
partially accessible to them.

The full clinical picture of a psychoneurosis can only be observed at first hand
by the analyst who is treating the patient,
since much of the picture only becomes
visible during the course of the analysis.
Even the direct clinical experience of the
analyst himself is limited, in comparison
with other medical specialists, by the large
amount of time which must be devoted to
each patient.

This restriction of direct access to clinical
material can only be made good by the
reading of reported case histories and
analyses. The publication of such reports
is, therefore, of peculiar importance both
for students and for practitioners of the
speciality.

Dr. Louis London's book consists of fifty
case reports, with a short introductory
section surveying the development of
psycho-analysis, dreams, the psychic
development of the child, and the pathology
of the sexual instinct. In the chapter on this
last subject, the author expounds his own
theory of the "traumatisation of the libido".
These early chapters seem less valuable
than they might be. They are too condensed
to be an adequate summary of psychopathology for the student and too superficial to interest the specialist. They serve,
nevertheless, one useful purpose?namely,
to indicate the type of technique employed
by the author. That a collection of case
histories should include some indication of
the technique by which the analytic material
was elicited, is most desirable, and from
Dr. London's introductory chapters we
gather that his technique is modelled on that
of Wilhelm Stekel.

The case histories themselves are grouped
under the headings of " The Neuroses",
" The Paraphiliac Neuroses " The Borderline Neuroses", "Schizophrenia" and
" CyclothymiaOf the fifty case reports,
twenty-two describe the borderline neuroses
and the psychoses, while seventeen are
devoted to sexual perversions. Of the
remaining eleven case reports of psychoneurotics, five are hysterics, three are
classed as anxiety neuroses, and three are
obsessionals.

This very unrepresentative allocation of
numbers reflects one fault which pervades
the whole book. It attempts to reach too
wide an audience. It is most certainly
desirable that the rarer forms of psychic
illness should be adequately recorded. It is
equally important that the student and
general practitioner should have access to
series of case histories of each common
psychic illness, for only thus can they
appreciate those origins and mechanisms
which are common to all cases of that
particular illness.

To attempt to do both, as this book does,
is to fail. The cases of sexual perversion
which in the book so far outnumber the
much commoner psychoneuroses, give the
student a completely false impression of
their clinical frequency and importance,
while the case reports are too superficial to
interest the specialist.

The case reports themselves are naturally
influenced by the author's technique, in
which dream interpretation plays a large
part. The history of each patient is given
in some detail, but the descriptions of the
analyses are less satisfactory, sometimes
even being condensed to a short series of
dreams and their interpretation.

To summarise?Dr. London appears to
have attempted a double task : to write an
analytical successor to Havelock Ellis's
" Studies in the Psychology of Sex and on
the other hand to provide the student and
general practitioner with case material with
which they may supplement their clinical
experience. His book shows that these two
aims are incompatible.
R. H.
