The Children's Branch of the Home Office
==========================================

MENTAL WELFARE 53

It is ten years since the Children's Branch of the Home Office last issued
a Report, and during that time the Children and Young Persons' Act with its
important new procedure has come into force. This Report therefore is a document
of outstanding sociological interest and of practical value to all social workers.
A great deal of ground is covered, as a glance through the headings of the
chapters reveals, viz. : " Constitution and Procedure of Juvenile Courts"; "Amount
of Juvenile Delinquency"; " Remand Homes"; " Psychology in Relation to
Juvenile Courts"; "Methods of Treatment"; "In need of Care of Protection
or Beyond Control "; " The Approved Schools "; " Orphanages and Preventive,
Rescue and other Children's Homes"; " Employment of Children and Street
Trading by Young Persons."
So much material is contained in these chapters that for an adequate idea of
it, the reader must be referred to the Report itself; all we can do here is to draw
attention to those parts of the Report concerned with, or applicable to, defective
and retarded children.
In attempting to give some estimate as to the percentage of " Dull " children
in the Approved Schools, the Report quotes some findings taken from the record
of investigations carried out in two such Schools which show that in one, 44 per
cent, of the boys had I.Q.s between 70 and 90, and in the other, 54 per cent, had
I.Q.s between 70 and 85. A comparison of these figures with the Board of Educa-
tion's estimate as to the proportion of " Dull" children in the ordinary school
population?viz., between 10 and 15 per cent.?shows how great are the special
difficulties with which the Approved Schools are called upon to contend.
Dealing with the number of definitely Mentally Defective children to be found
in the Schools, the Report states that since the Children and Young Persons Act
was passed in 1933, 125 boys and girls have been found so defective as to require
certification and removal to an Institution under Section 9 of the Mental Deficiency
Act. This state of affairs proves! the need, it is pointed out, for greater care on
the part of local education authorities in supplying the Courts with information
as to the children brought before them. Similarly there is too often a failure
to observe the requirement of the Children and Young Persons Act which directs
local authorities in all but trivial cases of delinquency, to render available to the
court any information likely to be of assistance to it, and, in another chapter,
striking?and in some cases almost incredible?instances are given of essential
information withheld from the School to which a child is committed.
It is the intention of the new Act that defectives coming before a court shall
be dealt with by the facilities provided under Part V of the Education Act 1921
and by the Mental Deficiency Act. From the eight schools certified under the
Children Act 1908, for the reception of delinquent defectives, the certificates
have therefore been withdrawn.
* Fifth Report, January, 1938, H.M. Stationery Office, Price 2s, 6d,
54 MENTAL WELFARE
The Report calls attention to the large number of voluntary homes which
accept mentally defective girls " even imbeciles," and one home particularly is
mentioned which " regards it as a social duty " to take such girls. This is deemed
to be an " improper practice " and one to be deplored.*
In the chapter on " Psychology in Relation to the Juvenile Courts," there
is sounded a note of warning against placing too much power in the hands of the
psychological specialist, and a reminder is given that:?
" whatever psychological advice is made available to a juvenile court,
the responsibility for determining how far to accept and act upon it, rests
with the court which is ordinarily composed of laymen. This fact may not
always be sufficiently present to the mind of the specialist."
At the same time, a tribute is paid to the help that can be given by the trained
and experienced psychiatrist in certain cases whose diagnosis presents difficulties,
and attention is called to the need for facilities for observation by a skilled sta'ff in
a residential centre. The offer of a sum of ?6,000 by the Goldsmiths' Company
towards the establishment of such an Observation Centre for London is apprecia-
tively recorded.
Since the passing of the Children and Young Persons Act the number of
children sent to Approved Schools has increased from 163 in 1924, to 246 in 1936,
and the pressure on available accommodation has therefore been great. Every
effort has been made by the Home Office to overcome this difficulty either by
persuading Local Authorities to provide their own schools or by inducing Volun-
tary Associations to enlarge existing accommodation. Since 1933, however, only
six Authorities (Hertfordshire, London, Middlesex, Manchester, Staffordshire
and Surrey) have opened new schools, and the lack of accommodation is still
so serious that a series of regional conferences have been held in Nottingham,
Bradford, North Wales, Buckinghamshire, Berkshire and Oxfordshire, to review
local possibilities. The outcome of these conferences has been the promise of a
school to be opened by the Nottingham Authority, and the recognition by the
West Riding Group of Authorities of their obligation in the matter though so
far no suitable building has been found. Another school is being planned by the
Buckinghamshire Authority, and proposals are being considered for a school to
be provided by the four North Wales counties. In the meantime, overcrowding
continues and, in some cases, has reached a limit that is not free from danger.
Paying a tribute to the After-Care work done by the staffs of the schools
themselves, the Report records that of the pupils on licence during a period of
three years, 95 per cent, of the boys and almost as large a percentage of the
girls, remain in touch with the managers. It is true that the number of girls
and boys recalled from Licence has risen considerably, but this is attributed to
* Mental Welfare Workers, whilst appreciating the force of this criticism, are nevertheless
frequently indebted to such Homes for their willingness to consider defectives for whom,
at the moment, no other accommodation can be fonnd.
MENTAL WELFARE 55
experimental use of early licence on a wide scale, largely because of the great
demand for vacancies.
A useful summary is given in the Report (Chapter VI) on the methods
that can now be used, under Section 44 of the Children and Young Persons'
Act, as alternatives to committal to an Approved School in cases where a child
or young person (up to the age of 17) has to be removed from undesirable
surroundings. These are : ?
(a) The making of a Probation Order with a residence condition attached.
requiring the child to reside with a foster-parent, for which purpose
payment of up to 15s. a week can be authorised. This method is suitable
in cases where only temporary removal from home is needed, due to
illness of the mother, e.g., or where attendance at a Clinic is prescribed.
(b) The making of a Probation Order with the condition attached that
the young person shall be placed in "Approved Lodgings " near the
employment found for him. The maximum total sum estimated to
be necessary for board and lodging, etc., has been fixed at 24s. a
week and to meet this cost, a maximum supplement of 15s. can be
paid where it is necessary to bring the boy's wages up to the required
amount.*
(c) Alternatively, such a young person placed on probation may be required
to live in an " Approved Hostel."
(d) Where " Approved Lodgings" or an " Approved Hostel " do not
appear to meet the needs of the case, a young probationer may be
sent to a short-term Approved Home for a period not exceeding 6
months. The minimum age for admission to such a Home has been
reduced to 14.
An important innovation of the new Act is the provision by which a boy
or girl coming before the Court as an offender or as being in need of care or
protection, can, up to the age of 17, be committed to the care of the Local Educa-
tion Authority (as a " fit person") who is then empowered to place them with
foster-parents or in Approved Lodgings. This procedure is recommended where
removal from home for a long period is desirable. In 1936, such Orders were
made in the case of 414 children and 99 young persons. It is also now possible
for a juvenile Court to make a "Supervision Order" in respect of boys and
girls found to be in need of care or protection or alleged by parents or guardians
to be beyond control, thus extending the probation method, for the first time, to
a group to whom the Probation of Offenders Act does not apply. In 1936, 490
such Orders were made.
To other valuable information given in this very " human " and readable
Report, consideration of space prevents us from alluding, but to all who are
concerned with the educational and social problems presented by the younger
generation we commend it for the study which it so well repays.
* A circular on this subject was issued by the Home Office in December, 1937,
