Joint Register of Foster-Homes and Schools
=============================================

:Author: Edith F. Turner,

Assistant Sccrctary, Child Guidance Council, and Joint Registrar
The problem of boarding out children away from their own homes under
the care of foster-parents is one which demands a great deal of thought and should
be considered as an inextricable part of child welfare. Isolated instances of
obvious cruelty to children, when brought to light in the press, usually arouse a
stormy emotional response in the general public, a storm which indeed occasionally
develops out of all proportion to the facts of the case. The adult population always
seems prepared to rise and smite any one of their number who has been found
guilty of some specific form of neglect or cruelty to a child. It would be interesting
to know what proportion of that adult population, however, thinks calmly and
clearly of the numerous subtle dangers to which many children are subjected
during their struggle towards development and growth. Boarding out of
children has in the past offered an excellent field for cruelty and real danger to
child life. From the historical point of view it is not so very long ago that
baby farms were rife in this country and unscrupulous people made their ill-
gotten gains in bartering children. With the coming of the Notification of Births
Act, however, the first real legislative attack on baby farms as on other dangers
to child life was made. Though greeted with antagonism by those with little
insight the Act gave articulate expression to the developing social consciousness
of the value of child life. Society was at last assuming responsibility for at
least the continued existence of the children born to it. The later Maternity and
Child Welfare and Infant Life Protection Acts have carried the work of the
Notifications of Births Act much further and society now assumes responsibility
not only for the existence, but for the care and nurture of its children.
Ante-natal and post-natal clinics, child welfare centres, home visiting of
infants and children up to five, as well as the school medical inspection and home
visiting of school children suffering from any physical defect; inspection of
housing and sanitary defects are only a few of the facilities developed by Local
Authorities in their efforts to ensure the physical health and well being of children.
One other very important duty undertaken by Local Authorities, however, is
the registration and regular inspection of foster-homes in their areas where any
children under nine years of age are received for payment. Every effort is made
to ensure that children so placed will have a chance of growing up in a healthy,
* Established by the Child Guidance Council and the Central Association for Mental Welfare.
happy environment. The children for whom foster-homes are most frequently
required are children who have been deprived of an ordinary home life from anv
of a variety of causes, such as the death, illness, desertion or cruelty of parents;
illegitimacy in circumstances where the mother cannot keep the child; such home
circumstances that the children are considered to be in moral danger. Where the
child concerned is in himself normal, the main requisite is for a stable, safe and
happy foster-home where the foster-parents have a genuine love of children and
are not seeking for registration merely to bolster up the family income.

There are, however, children other than these for whom foster-home
placement becomes a much greater problem. Though any or a variety of the
causes of the break up of homes already mentioned may exist in their circum-
stances, a new point for consideration is that the children themselves are suffering
from psychological difficulties of such a character and degree that they cannot
adjust to life in their own immediate group and surroundings.

The socially organised treatment of psychological difficulties in children is
still comparatively new in this country and, though Local Authorities are
becoming increasingly sympathetic towards Child Guidance and in some areas
have made themselves responsible for Child Guidance Clinics, it may be some
time before they are in a position to make themselves responsible for the registra-
tion of foster-homes for their cases even should they wish to do so.
The need for suitable foster-homes and schools for certain nervous, difficult
and retarded children is, however, an urgent problem. In order to answer this
need, the Child Guidance Council and the Central Association for Mental Welfare
have established a Joint Register of Foster-Homes and Schools for these children
with special difficulties.

It can be readily understood that the foster-homes for such a register have
to be selected with the greatest of care. Two trained qualified Psychiatric Social
WTorkers are employed, one by the Child Guidance Council, the other by the
Central Association for Mental Welfare to act as Registrars, to select the homes
and to carry through all the intricate work of the Register. The scheme was first
put into operation on the 1st of October, 1937, and, during the first year the
area covered is confined to London and the Home Counties.

A short resume of the main points of the Register will probably be useful at
this stage.
(a) The Register is strictly confined to the placement in suitable homes of
nervous, difficult or retarded children. It is not intended to be used for the
placement of mentally defective children or for those children who can be
dealt with in the ordinary foster-home placement work of a Local Authority.
(b) Reccommendations for foster-homes are given according to the needs
of the children and, where possible, it is advisable that a psychiatrist's report on
the child should be sent to the Registrars when any application for a foster-home
is made. The Registrars are in close contact with the Child Guidance Clinics
and are always ready to advise applicants for a foster-home on the facilities for
obtaining a psychiatric examination and report on a child if this is necessary.
(c) The minimum maintenance allowance for a child recognised on the
Register is 12/6d. per week. It will be appreciated that foster-parents are being
asked to undertake a great deal of responsibility as well as to exercise a great
deal of understanding, sympathy and patience in their duties.
(d) The facilities offered in the Register are intended for children and
Young Persons up to the age of 18 years. The Registrars may, however, be
consulted in exceptional cases outside this age limit.

(e) In many cases it is advisable that some trained supervision of the child
should be given during his placement in a home. The Registrars can undertake
such supervision where necessary in their capacity as Psychiatric Social Workers,
and submit reports on the child's progress to those responsible for him. The
fee for this service is 25/- per quarter.

During this experimental year the fees for the use of the Register itself
are as follows :?

For a fee of 10/- applicants may use the register, with the exception
of the facility of supervision, as often as they require for 12 months. Other-
wise a fee of 2/6 is charged for the recommendation of suitable foster-homes
in each individual case. A great deal of trouble is taken to secure the right
type of home for the child concerned.

A review of the first nine months of the Register has fully proved the value
of such a service. Subscribers include many Local Education Authorities, Public
Assistance Committees, Hospitals, Child Guidance Clinics, Private Consultants
and private individuals. The Local Authorities, Hospitals and Clinics who are
annual subscribers use the register consistently and it has been possible to maintain
the work on a fairly high standard.

A very common source of referral is from Local Education Authorities to
whose care as a " fit person " children have been committed from the Juvenile
Courts. This fact is very encouraging for it shows the tendency on the part of
the magistrates in Juvenile Courts to find some alternative handling to that of
committing a young delinquent to an Approved School. The Joint Register is
doing its best to co-operate with Juvenile Courts and Education Authorities who
try to carry through the Home Office recommendations with regard to boarding
out young offenders in suitable surroundings.

Frequently the Registrars are asked to place and supervise during placement
a child from a distance. It may be that, in the child's own surroundings a satis-
factory diagnosis of the trouble underlying his behaviour is too difficult?con-
tinued observation, and reports on his behaviour in different surroundings may be
exceedingly valuable to anyone treating the case. The following is a case
in point: ?

E., aged 6o. This case was referred to the Registrars by a Child
Guidance Clinic. For some time past the child had been displaying gross
sexual behaviour and the parents were exceedingly troubled as to her
future and also the correct handling of the difficulties. Though they were
co-operating as well as they knew how with the Child Guidance Clinic,
they were obviously incapable of developing any insight where the child's
difficulties were concerned and it was necessary from the clinic's point
of view that she should be removed from her own area and placed in
a foster-home where there was a chance of her being kept under
observation and being given very sound handling. It was also felt that
she should still be kept under skilled supervision. For these reasons the
Registrars were asked to recommend a good foster-home, to under-
take supervision in this case and to refer the case for treatment if
necessary in the area in which she was placed. No funds were available
from the parents, the Clinic could not pay and there seemed no possibility
of getting help from a voluntary society in the neighbourhood.

The Registrars were asked for their advice in the matter. An
approach to the Board of Education elicited the information that the
Local Education Authority responsible for the child's education could
approach the Board of Education with the full facts of the case for
their approval for payment by the Local Education Authority of the
child's maintenance in a foster-home outside its own area; using
Section 80 of the 1921, Education Act for the purpose of psychological
treatment. This information was given to the applicant for help and in
time the Education Authority carried through the recommendation and
placed the child in one of our selected homes near London. Constant
supervision has been carried out and during the seven months in which
she has been under foster-home care it has become apparent that the
child is capable of responding to wise handling and is not pathological
to the extent of being the moral defective which it was much feared
she would ultimately be considered. The results of this piece of work
have been so good that the Local Education Authority have extended
their period of payment so that she can remain consistently in the foster-
mother's care.

This, of course, is a case referred by a Clinic where the value of good foster-
home placement was already accepted. A different type of case which called upon
the Register generally in an advisory capacity is shown in the following : ?
D., aged 5. In this case the request was received from a voluntary
association for an institution which would receive the child free of
charge. Very inadequate particulars were given in connection with the
child or the need for the request. The Registrars asked for a full report
on the case. It was elicited that the child's sex had so far not been
determined; that the mother was a widow in receipt only of her widow's
pension and of public assistance relief; that the child had been badly
rejected both at home and at the school on account of the difficulties
connected with the physical condition which included enuresis and bad
speech. It seemed obvious to the Registrars from the nature of the report
that psychological difficulties were being created for this child and that
the service in giving the name of any institution which would accept the
child free of charge would probably do more harm than good. They
decided that, looking at the work of the Register from the child's point of
view they must go further. The Association concerned was advised to
the effect that the Register could not give the recommendation of any
institution or Home without a sound medical and psychiatric report on
the case. Very little co-operation was obtained from this Society,
constant requests being sent to get the child away where he could be
taken for nothing. The Public Assistance Committee responsible for the
area of the child's settlement was approached and a maintenance grant
was promised for placement in a selected foster-home sufficiently near
London to allow of the child going to a Hospital for expert examina-
tion and, if necessary, treatment both on the physical and psycho-
logical side. The Waifs and Strays; Society offered most generously
to help with extra expenses connected with the child's treatment provided
that the mother contributed the pension allowed for the child. This was
finally carried through.

The child is placed in one of our foster-homes and has already been
through the first of a series of three operations considered necessary.
He is exceedingly happy, is speaking clearly instead of being considered
a child who could not speak. He has been diagnosed as being dominantly
male in character and there is every prospect of a good psychological
and physical adjustment for this child.

A good measure of co-operation has been established between the Registrars
and other Social Workers concerned in this great problem of selected foster-
home placement and the Registrars venture to be very hopeful as to the future
development of the work which they have begun.

Just as the present-day foster-home placement and Infant Life Protection
work of the local Public Health Authorities are part and parcel of the larger
Maternity and Child Welfare work so one ventures to think is the work of
the Joint Register part and parcel of the work of child guidance in this
country. It seeks to take its place and be recognised as such, feeling its way,
learning its value and its limitations, offering its resources to those who see its
usefulness. Needless to say the Registrars are always very glad to see any who
are really interested in the work, who seek further information or who are in
a position to offer information with regard to possible foster-parents. Any
communication should be addressed to the Registrars of the Joint Register for
Nervous, Difficult and Retarded Children, Child Guidance Council, Woburn
House, Upper Woburn Place, London, W.C.I
IVc all realize to-day that the child has a right above all things to security of environment.
Slowly we are coming to understand that that sense of security can be engendered more
successfully by a normal home than by any other artificial substitute. We now know that if the
child is to reach adult years with a sufficient degree of self-confidence, he must have behind
hun a background of security, or he will be distrustful of his fcllozu-creatures, antagonistic
to those in authority, suspicious ivhere he should be trusting. . . . The central problem of
education to-day is to give the child freedom and inspire him zvith a sense of social
responsibility."
H. Crichton-Miixkr.
