Charles Davies-Jones
=====================

in anvsviumj

Medical Superintendent, County Mental Hospital, Newport, Isle of Wight.
The Mental Treatment Act of 1930 differs in the mode of its application and
interpretation from many enactments in that it depends very largely upon the
initiative and goodwill of those who are able to co-operate in putting it into effect.
It is hardly necessary to say that its provisions are of course statutory and it is
equally possible to say that within a large measure they can be evaded. This
possibility at first sight would appear to nullify the working of the Act but I feel
that it is nearer the mark to regard it as a " mixed blessing " in that it allows
much scope and latitude for individual effort and research. By the Act the law
in relation to lunacy was altered and it became incumbent upon the existing
" Asylums " to adopt and apply it. Its phraseology is concise and at the same
time in parts cumbersome and therefore exposed to much destructive and even
virulent criticism. It is conversely open to useful interpretation and application
and under the latter circumstances brings about the transformation of an "Asylum"
into a Mental Hospital in deed rather than in name only. Its application in a
Hospital newly built in accordance with modern requirements and the Act's
provisions is comparatively easy as compared with the difficulties attendant upon
introducing new methods into an old building hampered with the old-fashioned
routine, discipline, and outlook of " Asylum " days. The problem is indeed that
of " putting new wine into old bottles"; but is it new wine? 1 venture to suggest
that one may regard the vintage as matured but only recently rendered available
for consumption, for many of the permissive provisions of the Act, as it stands
to-day, had been tried out and not found wanting long before they were placed
upon the Statute Book as for example, the out-patient treatment of early mental
illness at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford.

One cannot be expected to imagine that the Act is intended either to be
incapable of amendment or unlikely to be so dealt with. Accumulated experience
and research will render available to our law makers, in process of time, valuable
information. As I have said scope is at present allowed not only by its permissive
sections but also by the fact that they themselves inculcate the spirit of experiment.
I propose in this contribution to outline some of the possibilities and experiments
which have been carried out in an " Asylum" where the desire to encourage
any such effort exists. Naturally I am only able to speak from personal experience.
There appear to me to be, broadly speaking, three main aims in the Act:?

(a) To afford treatment for mental illness in its earliest stages.
(b) To render such treatment available to the sufferers with the greatest
practicable ease.
(c) To diminish the use of admission to Mental Hospitals by the process
known as " Certification."

First of all I feel it would be useful to outline as briefly as possible the
foundations of any success and I do so in what I consider the order of importance
as follows :?

1. It is essential that the Visiting Committee of the Hospital should be
fully desirous of making all sections of the Act available to that section of the
community embraced by its activities.
2. The general public require to be made fully aware of the provisions of
the Act.
3. The local doctors also require to be conversant with those sections which
directly involve themselves.
4. The Mental Hospital Staff and its Superintendent need to be prepared
by precept and example constantly to draw attention to the provisions of the Act
and in a proper manner to keep in touch with those enumerated above. To fight
shy of reasonable methods of propaganda by means of public lectures, circular
letters, etc., cannot be expected to be fruitful. My own experience has taught
me that no stone should be left unturned to bring before the notice of those
concerned, the fact that the County no longer possesses an "Asylum " and that
the Mental Hospital which replaces it is not administered along the lines of the
old-fashioned " Asylum." Every encouragement is given to the doctors to consult
with the Medical Staff of the Hospital over any cases where there is doubt as to
the right course of action to adopt.

For a Medical Superintendent to imagine that he can in any way play a lone
hand in promoting the use of the Act is nothing short of absurd, co-operation
and teamwork are essentials.

The formation of an Out-Patient Clinic is of the greatest importance. On
the Island one was formed in 1932. Two sessions were held weekly, namely at
the County Hall, Newport, and at the County Hospital, Ryde. During the first
year the number of patients attending was 92. Very soon it was found necessary
to open another session which was held at the Mental Hospital. Although the
attendances at this latter session are not as numerous, they are none-the-less
important, for the cases that come to Whitecroft are those requiring longer periods
of treatment (analysis, etc.), or who come for reasons of privacy or where some
laboratory investigation is required to elucidate the condition. In 1933 the Clinic
had established itself to such a degree that a request was received from the Cowes
Town Council asking the Committee to make arrangements to provide a session
there. I consider this action to be an outstanding instance of the success of the
Clinic and was pleased to find that my Committee authorised the opening of a
further weekly session at Northwood House, Cowes. The latest figures show
that the number of patients attending has risen to 203. The Clinic had not been
running long before I became aware of the fact that parents, guardians, teachers
and doctors were making use of it in regard to problems arising connected with
childhood. Children of all ages were being seen and treated. A certain proportion
were naturally found to be mentally retarded while the residue presented the
complex problems which we know to be associated with childhood. The need
to give definite attention to the problem of child guidance became very obvious
and this was increased by the use which was made of the activities of the Clinic
to get assistance in regard to cases of delinquency dealt with by the Juvenile
Courts. It was not long, therefore, before it became necessary to make known
to the departments concerned the real need which existed to provide the easiest
possible means to deal with the problems of childhood and as a result of the
representations made definite steps are now afoot to form an experimental Child
Guidance Clinic. So much for the necessity of Clinics?unless I add that it is
my opinion that Clinics should certainly hold sessions at least once a week and
that as many Centres as possible should be provided so that access may be
rendered the more easy.

Within the Mental Hospital one was immediately faced with the problem
of modernising the " Asylum." The old system of suspicious vigilance and the
tendency to regard cases as " chronic " had to be dealt with. I can well remember
the awkward feeling experienced by myself when I first came here, at the number
of times it was necessary to use a key to gain admission not only to wards but
to the very corridors leading thereto. To a person totally untrained in the ways
of a " Locked Asylum " this was in itself well-nigh unbearable and 1 think that
condition in itself assisted me to appreciate how terrible must be the feeling of
any patient with sufficient comprehension to have to live under conditions always
associated with the jingling of keys and the shooting of locks. The big difficulty
was of course to get the staff to relax their ideas. 1 felt, however, that any
definite direction upon my part that such and such a ward should be forthwith
unlocked would have had very unpleasant consequences. Instead, by dint of
discussing the matter with the Heads of the Male and Female Departments, a
spirit of competition was induced and it was not long before the Head Male
Nurse suggested to me that it might be possible to administer one of the wards
upon the "open door" principle. Within a very few months I was in the happy
position of finding that out of nine wards only three required keys in order to
effect an entrance and the doors from the front door to the corridors to the
wards remain open all day. The blocks on numerous windows on the ground floor
were also removed and within the first year it was noticed that the number of
escapes on the part of patients had fallen below 50 per cent, of what it used
to be in the " locked-up " days. To-day it is a comparatively rare thing to have a
patient deliberately run away. One or two tend at times to overstay their parole
but in the true sense of the word we know where they are.

The question of mechanical restraint is beyond my ability from the point
of view of discussion as I have never applied it and never shall do, being perfectly
convinced, though my experience is by no means large, that it is quite uncalled for.
On the question of seclusion, that is to say the locking of patients into single
rooms during certain legally prescribed hours of the day, I feel no qualm for
in its use is an indication of attention to the individual rather than to the crowd.
That is surely an axiom of modern treatment.

Similarily 1 do not find it possible to range myself on the side of those who
advocate the abolition of padded rooms. When I came here we possessed four
very home-made affairs consisting of canvas which had acquired the hardness
almost of stone as a result of repeated applications of coats of enamel. These have
now been removed and have been replaced by four of the latest design with
special heating arrangements so that they are rendered not only safe but
comfortable.

Where all the doors are locked and where the tendency to treat patients along
the lines of a herd exists there can be, in my opinion, very little hope of classifica-
tion of patients to wards. Nor can there be much encouragement, therefore, of
recovery. It has been found possible, despite the difficulties of overcrowding,
to classify patients and in an area such as this where the Local Authority is
unable to make heavy demands upon the public purse, the provision of a separate
Admission Hospital was very fortunately solved by classifying the private patients
who were accommodated in the private villa. Nor was this move a disadvantageous
one for the private patients for their numbers had fallen so low that they no
longer had the complete use of the private villa but found that the spare accom-
modation was filled by " chronic " patients. Classification has also improved their
lot and the Admission Hospital, which is separate and distinct as a building from
the main Hospital, came into being.

There seems to me to be plenty of scope still for improving the lot of the
patients and it was not long before one realised that the habit of locking patients
of orderly type and habits in single rooms during the long hours of the night
and in complete darkness could be revised. I have been able to put the experiment
successfully into operation of having through handles fitted to the doors of chosen
side rooms and a switch for the electric light fitted within the side room as
well as outside it so that the patient using the room could leave it at will and
could switch the light on or ofif from the inside (as could any visiting nurse from
the outside).

Much can be done apart from classification to improve the sleep function.
1 am quite well aware of the fact that many patients require sedatives and
hypnotic drug treatment to ensure the proper period of sleep but I am also very
sure that the mattresses supplied have a great deal to do with this. I became the
more sure having endeavoured to sleep upon one myself. The Admission Hospital
has now been equipped with mattresses of a modern type filled with coil springs
and from the moment of their introduction success has indubitably attended
their use. These mattresses are made by a firm specialising in providing them
for Hospitals. They are easily sterilisable and when necessary the thin layer of
padding above the springs can be quite easily replaced. The mattresses also have
the added factor that they are light for nurses who have to manipulate them.
Feather pillows have also provided a salutary adjunct.

Consequent upon the unlocking of doors and the strong suggestion of free-
dom which that action implies, comes consideration of the question of parole.
This exists in many Hospitals to a large or small degree according to circumstances
and in an area such as the Island one would naturally argue that the introduction
of any system of parole would be an easy one. 1 at least thought so but it was
not long before numerous residents in the neighbourhood protested and although
I quite agree there may have been some sound reason in part as a foundation
for their protests I also felt that much of it arose because parole was an innovation.
It was not long before complaints reached the Board of Control, and a small
enquiry was set up under the guidance of one of the Senior Commissioners of
the Board. Parole was not abolished and now runs smoothly. I have found it
beneficial from all points of view to grant this privilege to patients under the
term of "associated parole" whereby two or more patients are allowed outside the
Hospital grounds during certain stated periods together, and so far 1 have not
been sorry, for it allows me to grant this boon to those who are somewhat deaf
and liable therefore to be rendered unable to avoid traffic with the acrobatic
agility required to-day.

A further step was taken last summer and is to be repeated on a larger
scale this summer, by the institution of a patients' Holiday Camp. A suitable
field by the seaside on the south of the Island was rented from a very accommo-
dating and kindly farmer and ten male patients accompanied by three male nurses
and a doctor were accommodated for a week in bell tents and had " the time of
their lives." I can only claim that the idea was mine, the whole brunt of the
work fell upon the shoulders of the Clerk and Steward who in the remarkable
way in which, I am happy to say, some Clerks and Stewards seem to be able
to meet all emergencies, provided all the necessaries without the slightest hitch
even to the inclusion of almost military " iron rations." The patients returned
from the holiday bronzed and fit. They had of course been chosen with care, partly
because it was necessary that the experiment should be a success and also of
course from common sense consideration connected with the views of the public.
That the experiment was a popular one there can be no doubt and, as T say, it
is hoped to repeat it this year on a larger scale. The whole project was from start
to finish under the control of the Mental Hospital, that is to say we did not
join in with any local Holiday Camp although one was by no means distant. It
was not possible to sanction bathing upon the part of the patients but games on
the shore, rambles, paddling and all the fun of camp cookery was fully encouraged
and to the enthusiasm of the staff concerned must be attributed the success of
the venture.

I need hardly comment upon the necessity to provide a properly equipped
laboratory for any Hospital hoping to make progress in the application of the
new Act. Nor do I consider that the installation of a laboratory should primarily
be for the purpose of research but rather for the practical and very necessary
investigations which are required in relation to treatment. Where no laboratory
previously exists the question of expense will of course be a somewhat acute
one. Such was the case here. Nevertheless we now possess an efficiently equipped
room which fulfils its purpose including bacteriological examinations and which
is under the care of a trained assistant. The number of investigations carried out
therein amply justify its existence.

Much has been said about the cumbersome sections of the Act particularly
in relation to the Temporary patient but with the passage of time I believe the
somewhat involved provisions in regard to this type are being more fully under-
stood by medical practitioners, with consequent beneficial results. Of course only
a certain percentage of psychotics can ever be embraced by this section and
one should be on one's guard to make sure that mere enthusiasm does not lead
one to tolerate the admission of types not embraced by the provisions. There
must be "a reasonable hope of recovery" which at once precludes, in my opinion,
cases of senile dementia, and of course the patient must be unable to express
willingness or unwillingness. Perhaps one of the most difficult points in relation
to the temporary patient is that which relates to the return of volition, namely
the existence of this condition for a period of 28 days. Here we have tended
to overcome it by employing a system whereby the nurse in charge of the ward
commences to complete a form stating that the return of volition has been noted.
This form is displayed in the Clinical Room and acts as a constant reminder so
that if an unbroken period of 28 days occurs it is not so likely to be overlooked.

With regard to the Voluntary patient much can be said. In many ways this
is one of the most important provisions of the Act for it accords to those of
small financial means the facilities which have hitherto been only available to
persons able to be classed as " private patients." I am of the opinion that,
providing the patient is able to volunteer, the type of mental illness should offer
no barrier to admission. It seems absurd to turn down the application of a
person merely because the condition is fraught with the fear of suicide, for example.
Nor do 1 feel that it is necessary to refuse to admit cases which are a prey
to fugues and agitated panic. I know that the latter are liable to run away but
it is the habit here to obtain an undertaking from the patient and the relatives,
if necessary, authorising us to bring them back to the Hospital. I feel that
many voluntary patients are liable to be refused if one has not the courage to
rely upon the provision of immunity from legal action if one has acted in good
faith. It has been urged from some quarters that the voluntary patients should
be grouped in a ward or building by themselves. I have never been in favour of
this, nor does it seem to me to be a common sense arrangement if one adheres
to the idea that any cases may be admitted who see fit to volunteer. Voluntary
patients here are therefore graded and classified. Prior to admission the patient
is given distinctly to understand that no guarantee can be given as to the
allocation to wards but that classification is dependent entirely upon mental
grounds. The notice intimating the intention to leave the Hospital is kept in the
ward and the patient is instructed on admission that this is so and that the legal
right to demand it is fully acknowledged. It is also impressed that the medical
recommendations as to discharge should naturally be taken into account and where
the patient has completed the notice of intention to depart and subsequently
intimates the desire to remain for a further period, it is the habit here to have
that request written by the patient on the back of the notice, which is then kept
in the Hospital files. We have also made it a rule here that no voluntary patient
departs from the Hospital without some relative or responsible friend having
been previously requested to attend at the hour of departure to accompany the
patient outside the Hospital grounds. Fortunately the form of application for
admission for treatment as a voluntary patient is not a statutory one and at
Whitecroft it has been seen fit to employ one clearly printed and couched in
simple plain English. No effort is made to avoid the fact that admission to the
Mental Hospital is being sought; that application is made entirely voluntarily
upon the part of the patient; that the legal right to give 72 hours' notice of
departure exists; that the forms for this purpose are obtainable on demand from
the nurse in charge of the ward and that the Hospital Rules and Regulations
will be adhered to.

Before I conclude these remarks attention should be drawn to the great
necessity of adequate Medical Staff. There is little doubt in my mind that the
old " Asylum " spirit tended to call for what I may term " a routine outlook
primarily on the part of doctors and one of practical interest and keenness
secondarily. I feel, however, that that order is reversed with the proper application
of the Mental Treatment Act. It is, however, not only necessary to afford the
latest facilities for treatment but to see to it that an adequate Medical Staff
exists for carrying out that treatment. In a similar fashion the unlocking of doors
and the reduction of mechanical aids to supervision call for a larger degree
of human supervision and place increased burdens upon the Nursing Staff with
a demand for its augmentation. Nor must the Clerical Staff be overlooked.
The amount of correspondence, statutory and otherwise, entailed by the
administration of this Act renders our ideas of the staffing of the Clerical Depart-
ment quite obsolete. 1 find that the old habit of using ready printed forms is of
necessity falling into desuetude. Nearly every letter which 1 receive (and they
have increased) requires a personally dictated answer. In any case it is highly
desirable that replies should be made in this manner.

This effort to outline modern mental treatment in older institutions has been
sketchy and is capable of much enlargement and addition in many directions. It
is beyond my power to make it more complete at this moment for the simple
reason that we still live in the age of experiment as far as the application of
the new Act is concerned. I can only outline some indication of my firm belief
that " where there is a will there is a way " and that the slogan of the adapted
" Asylum " should be the motto quoted in our Hospital Rule Book, namely,
" Effort and renewed effort ".
