On The Pathology and Treatment Of Cerebral Disease
===================================================

98
Art. Y.?.
No. V.
BY ROBERT HUNTER SEMPLE, M.D.,
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Loudon.
In treating in a previous paper on the Inflammatory Diseases
of the Brain I adverted to the difficulty which exists in the
present day of defining the exact meaning of the term
"inflammatory," the earlier definitions of the word being now
inadequate to express the idea intended to be conveyed. In
former days, inflammation was a word easily and generally
understood, and the symptoms of inflammation were pretty well
recognised ; but at the present time many maladies, or
assemblages of symptoms, although apparently inflammatory,
are no longer regarded in that light, and, on the other hand,
many structural changes of organs and tissues are now by some
authorities regarded as inflammatory in their origin, although
the well-known and hitherto recognised features of inflammation
are absent, My meaning will be readily understood by con-
trasting a typical inflammation, as it was formerly regarded,
with certain other morbid conditions which are now admitted
by some recent writers into the same category. In the con-
junctiva, for instance, the capillary vessels are often seen to be
enlarged and distended with blood, and at the same time the
eye is exceedingly hot and painful; after a time, according to
circumstances, either the swollen vessels are disgorged of their
blood and the membrane resumes its usual transparency, or the
disease advances in intensity, and pus is thrown out over the con-
junctival surface, or, when the iris is attacked, lymph is seen to
be effused, the colour of the organ is changed, and the pupillary
aperture is altered and obstructed. In such a case as this, there
are all the features of the old-fashioned typical inflammation,
namely, the congestion of the capillaries, and the subjective and
objective phenomena of heat, swelling, redness, and pain ; and,
moreover, there are all the typical terminations of inflammation
?namely, resolution, or the return of the parts to their normal
condition ; suppuration, or the effusion of pus upon the mucous
surfaces; and effusion of lymph, which occurs in certain
membranous structures.
ON PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 99
Oil the other hand, such diseases as cirrhosis of the liver
and tubercular consumption are now regarded by some writers
as forms of inflammation, and many specious arguments are
adduced in favour of this view. In the first-named disease, it
is assumed that the hypertrophy of the fibrous structure of the
liver is due to an inflammatory process; and in the second, it
is now supposed that the tubercular deposition in the lungs is
the result of a pre-existing inflammation of the pulmonary
substance or the air-tubes, or, in other words, that pulmonary
phthisis is only a sequel or accompaniment of bronchitis, pneu-
monia, or pleurisy. Again, there are many diseases which, at
former times and in other countries, were considered as varieties
of inflammation,'but which are now, in this country at least, no
longer regarded in that light; as, for instance, typhoid or enteric
fever, which, from its presenting ulcerations on the mucous
membrane of the lower parts of the small intestine, was once
classed as a special inflammation, and was called gastro-enterite
by Broussais.
Even the same medical author has at one time regarded a
malady as inflammatory which at a subsequent period he has
excluded from that category, as Bretonneau, for instance, who
applied the word Diphtherite or Diphtheritis to the malady
which he himself subsequently called Diphtheria, the change
being due to the fact that liis opinions as to the inflammatory
nature of the affection had undergone a change in the interval.
For such reasons, and many others, it is obviously a matter of
great difficulty to fix the limits which separate " inflammation "
from any other morbid process; and the difficulty is the greater
in the present day when, by the labours of modern pathologists,
a multitude of morbid actions and processes have been detected
which tend to alter the structure of organs and tissues, but
which it is impossible to range under any one comprehensive
title.
Such being the general difficulty hanging over the definition
?f inflammation, the inquiry into the distinction between the
inflammatory and non-inflammatory affections of the brain is
further beset with special difficulties arising from the nature
?f the organ Concerned, and from the mystery which has ever
shrouded and still shrouds the connexion between the material
conformation of the intra-cranial mass and the manifestations
to which its operations give rise. In its healthy state, this con-
geries of blood-vessels, membranes, and nervous ganglia and
fibres?this chemical compound of water, albumen, and phos-
Phuretted fats and earthy salts,?presides over and directs an
infinitude of subordinate agents in the bodily economy, and is
moreover the medium of expressing the faculties, the emotions,
11 2
100 ON THE PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT
the passions, the sympathies, the joys and the sorrows, the sum
of all of which constitutes the mind of man. In its morbid
conditions how varied are the phenomena this organ presents,
how contradictory are the results observed ! Sometimes the
most serious and extensive lesions of its substance are unat-
tended with proportionate disturbance of the bodily or the
mental manifestations; at other times, lesions apparently slight
induce the most formidable and even fatal consequences; and
very often the organ suffers as a whole, in its functional rela-
tions, from irritation of remote regions or parts, although under-
going itself no structural change whatever.
Amidst a host of difficulties by which the pathology of the
brain is surrounded, there are perhaps a few truths which may
be regarded as established data for the guidance of the prac-
titioner of medicine. In the first place, there can be very
little doubt that the central parts of the brain, or those which
underlie the convolutions, have very little share in producing
the morbid manifestations which usually indicate cerebral
disease. This statement is abundantly borne out by the
records of military surgery, which show that large portions of
the cerebral matter have been removed without danger to life,
and without precluding the chance of the brain being eventually
restored to health. The clinical history of brain-diseases and
the records of post-mortem examinations are no less conclusive
on this point, for, as many besides myself have shown, the most
extensive disease of the medullary structure, or the presence of
abscesses or tumours in the central mass, has been found quite
compatible with the maintenance of life and even the enjoy-
ment of health.
In the next place, it is proved that when the seat of disease
lies in the track of some of the nervous threads passing to the
various organs and limbs, sometimes the functions of special
sense will be impaired, sometimes the limbs will be paralysed
or thrown into convulsions, sometimes pain will be expe-
rienced in remote parts, or sensation will be impaired or
abolished altogether.
A third fact, pretty well established, is that the peri-
phery or circumference of the brain is exquisitely sensitive,
and that injuries or diseases of this portion are attended with
the most serious consequences. Hence, the inflammation of the
membranes of the brain, especially of the arachnoid membrane
and the pia mater, is one of the most fatal maladies known in
the practice of medicine, and will be discussed in some of its
bearings in the ensuing pages of this paper.
The question of local lesions of the brain, and of the con-
nexion of these with special manifestations of morbid action,
OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 101
mental or bodily, is now occupying some of the most acute
intellects among physiologists and pathologists, but is too exten-
sive for detailed consideration in the present paper. It may be
mentioned, however, en passant, that the points at issue on this
subject at present are whether the brain always acts as a whole,
being sensitive to any injury of any part of its substance, or
whether certain definite manifestations in some of the limbs
or in certain groups of muscles distinctly correspond to the
injury or disease of circumscribed portions of the cerebral
structure. The direct experiments of Hitzig and Fritsch in
Germany, of Ferrier in our own country, and of Albertoni in
Italy, tend to prove the connexion between local irritation
and definite morbid manifestations ; and the clinical observa-
tions of Hughlings Jackson point in the same direction. On
the other hand, it is well known that the great majority of
facts at present known merely show that injuries of the brain
are usually attended or followed by general morbid manifes-
tations, and Dr Brown-Sequard, whose authority on such
questions is very great, now maintains that the brain, whatever
may be the injury or in whatever part of the organ it may be
situated, acts as a whole, and not by the separate agency of its
individual parts. It is not a little puzzling to the inquirer
after truth to follow the lucubrations of this distinguished
physiologist, and it is disappointing to find him thus expressing
himself in a recent lecture at the College of France : " I have
taken upon me the difficult work to show you that almost
everything you have learned, either in the course of your
lectures or in books which treat of the actual state of
science regarding the doctrines of the physiological and patho-
logical actions of the nervous centres, must be thrown overboard
as entirely false."* It is right to add that Dr Brown-Sequard
includes his own published doctrines in this sweeping condem-
nation.
Recurring to the immediate subject of the present paper?
namely, the Inflammatory Diseases of the Brain?I observe in the
first place that the word " inflammation " is here used by me
in its ordinary sense, as characterised by its generally recog-
nised symptoms, and as followed by its usual results?namely,
the formation of pus, or the effusion of serum or of lymph. It
is reasonable to believe, however, although it is very difficult
to prove, that inflammation of internal organs may stop short
of these last-named results, just as we observe that a visible
inflammation of the conjunctiva may terminate in resolution,
and without suppuration ; and undoubtedly this is the termi-
* British Medical Journal, Feb. 22, 1870.
102 ON THE PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT
nation which medical treatment is directed and intended to
promote.
However desirable it may be to divide the inflammations
of the brain according to the structures which are involved, the
distinction in practice is exceedingly difficult, and even the
primary division between the inflammation of the substance
of the organ (or cerebritis) and that of the membranes (or
meningitis) can rarely be clearly established, and during life
the diagnosis is always very doubtful. But as a matter of fact,
I question very much whether in the present day we can assert
that there is such a disease as idiopathic cerebritis. As I
mentioned in a previous paper, it is quite evident that the cases
formerly described as " inflammation of the brain were really,
in the great majority of instances, nothing more nor less than
certain forms or conditions of typhoid or enteric fever, which
often begins with symptoms of violent delirium and other indi-
cations formerly supposed to denote inflammation of the
cerebral mass. It is now known that although this fever is
often fatal at a very early period, owing to the virulence of
the poison circulating in the system, yet there is no specific
inflammation, properly so-called, and the delirium and other
symptoms pass away Avhen the fever has run its destined course.
The large bleedings and other so-called antiphlogistic measures
so freely adopted in former days in such cases must have been
useless, if not injurious, and yet a great number of patients
recovered, or at any rate escaped, under the treatment.
Still there are a few cases, sucli as I have related in the former
paper, which, though not strictly idiopathic in their nature,
may be regarded as instances of inflammation of the substance
of the brain. Such are the cases (though these are far more
uncommon than is generally supposed) caused by exposure to a
burning sun, especially in tropical climates; the cases where
cerebritis arises from severe injuries, as in concussion of the
brain, or from disease of the cranial bones ; and those which re-
sult from the excessive immediate effects of alcohol. In some of
these cases depletory measures, judiciously employed, and at an
early stage, appear to be of great service, and many complete
recoveries take place. But in the cases now to be mentioned?
namely, where the membranes are affected?the danger is much
greater and the chances of recovery far less.
In inflammation of the membranes, besides the fact that the
disease almost always extends to the cerebral mass itself, there
is effusion of pus, or serum, or lymph, from the inflamed sur-
faces ; and these effusions, pressing upon the substance of the
brain, give rise to the most serious symptoms, and unless they
aie lemoved by medical or surgical means they are almost
necessarily fatal.
OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 108
Inflammation of the Dura Mater.
Inflammation of the dura mater, as an idiopathic disease,
and apart from that of the other cerebral membranes, is very rare,
but it is by no means an uncommon circumstance for the dura
mater to be inflamed in consequence of injuries to the scalp.
It is well known that the cranium is immediately invested with
a fibrous membrane called the pericranium, which is the peri-
osteum of the skull; and the dura mater, lying between the
bony cranium and the arachnoid membrane is, in fact, an
internal periosteum. Now, although the pericranium and the
dura mater are separated by the cranium, there appears to be
a close sympathy or relationship between these two membranes,
their anatomical structure being* the same, and a vascular com-
munication existing between them through the medium of the
cranium. Hence it happens that injuries affecting the external
membrane are often followed by disease of the dura mater, and
when pus is effused beneath the pericranium a similar effusion
occurs between the cranium and the dura mater. A compara-
tively slight injury to the outside of the head will thus often
be attended with the most serious, or even fatal, consequences ;
and I was first impressed with the gravity of such cases when I
was a dresser at the hospital to which I was attached. A young
woman had received an injury to the head which was by no
means apparently of a serious character, and which seemed to
doing well under ordinary treatment, when some days after
the receipt of the injury the parts became swollen and puffy
and the patient became comatose, and died; and after death an
effusion of pus was found on the surface of the dura matei. I
have seen other such cases since, but the primary injury was of
a much more serious character. It is therefore necessaiy to
legard all cases of external injury to the head as of great im-
portance, considering this anatomical relationship between t le
Pericranium and the dura mater.
The early symptoms of inflammation of the dura matei are
not, well marked, but those of the effusion of pus 01 lymp 1,
which is its consequence, are well known, as they are fiequent y
observed in surgical practice, and they result from accidents to
the head. They indicate compression of the brain, and are the
same in their nature whether they arise from extravasations of
blood from natural causes or from external injuries. The
patient becomes stupid, sleepy, and lethargic, and falls into the
state of what is known as coma, from which he cannot be
loused, or only slightly and with very great difficulty; the
breathing is heavy and stertorous, the pupils are contracted 01
104: ON THE PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT
dilated?sometimes one is contracted and the other dilated ;
the pulse is full and strong' and often slow; the feces are passed
involuntarily, and the urine is often retained. When these
formidable symptoms are present the chance of recovery is very
small.
The present paper being devoted to the inflammatory
diseases of the brain and its membranes, the consideration of
many other causes of compression of the brain, such as the
existence of tumours, the hasmorrhagic effusions of apoplexy,
the pressure caused by depressed portions of fractured bone,
and many similar conditions, is necessarily omitted. For the
same reason, in reference to treatment, the relief afforded by
medical or surgical ministrations, in conditions other than those
caused by inflammation, is also passed over, and the following-
brief remarks on therapeutical management relate in the first
place only to cases of inflammation of the dura mater and its
consequences.
As an idiopathic disease, I have just remarked that inflam-
mation of the dura mater is very rare and is very seldom
unaccompanied by disease of the other membranes, and it is
perhaps only in the field of surgery (if indeed it exists in that)
that such a condition can be recognised. If, however, after
the receipt of some injury to the head (and, as has been ob-
served, the apparent sliglitness of the injury affords no criterion
of the amount of internal lesion) the patient becomes dull,
sleepy, and comatose, and exhibits the other symptoms just
indicated, the existence of effusion on the surface of the dura
mater may be strongly suspected, and remedial measures should
be resorted to, although it must be confessed that they are not
often of much avail. Cold should be applied to the head, the
bowels should be opened by croton oil dropped upon the tongue,
perfect rest should be enjoined, and light should be excluded
from the patient's room. The abstraction of blood from the
arm may be justifiable with a view of diminishing the amount
of that fluid in the brain. But, after all, the only remedial
measure which promises relief in such cases, is the removal
of the compressing cause, and this can be effected solely by
the use of the trephine.
But the difficulties in the way of the successful use of this
instrument are various, for, in the first place, the existence of
pus or other fluid cannot be determined with certainty, and if
it could, its exact situation cannot be fixed ; and it cannot even
be proved whether the effusion is on the surface or in the
substance of the brain. Mr. Erichsen, in his learned and
elaborate " Science and Art of Surgery," relates two cases in
illustration of these remarks, in both of which there was sup-
OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 105
puration of the brain in consequence of injury to the head, and
both were fatal. In one case the trephine was employed by
he late Mr. Samuel Cooper, but after death a large amount of
thick yellow lymph was found covering both hemispheres, and
here was also an abscess in the substance of the brain. In
lie other case the trephine was not employed, but an abscess
was found in the anterior lobe on the injured side, and there-
01 e if trephining had been performed it would have been
useless. Mr. Erichsen alludes to a bold and, as it turned out,
successful operation by the celebrated French surgeon
upuytren, who, in a case of cerebral injury from accident,
P unged a bistoury into the substance of the brain, and thus
uckily relieved the patient of an abscess in this situation. A
case which in its bold treatment and in its successful results
1Jjals that of Dupuytren has just been recorded by Mr. Hulke,
the Middlesex Hospital, at a recent meeting of the Royal
1 edical and Chirurgical Society.* A boy struck his forehead
gainst a fence, grazed the skin, and was momentarily stunned,
e continued to work, however, for seven weeks, during which
lrne he ]lac| some pajn jn ?}ie forehead, and then retching and
'emiplegia supervened. The frontal bone was trephined at the
QJ /"*Y f\ O t 0 * ^
at ot injury, and a small fissure was recognised in its outer
>le. The dura mater seemed healthy. An aspirator-trocar
?mg pushed into the brain, pus rose into the syringe. The
1 scess was opened through the membranes with a knife,
ln aU about three drachms of pus were let out. The
rieur^j^ recoverec^ but lost the sight of both eyes by optic
f ^ connexion with this subject I may allude to the inves-
1 ^'l 10ns now in progress with a view of determining the
oca isation of the cerebral functions, and thereby of connecting
c 6 existence of definite outward symptoms with local internal
^eie ral diseases or lesions. Interesting as these investigations
enVlU evei7 Point ?f view, they will be eminently so if they
det -tlle surSeon) in cases of local pressure on the brain, to
th 6rmi?e on what point he should apply the trephine, and
alUS Je^eve the sufferings of the patient. Some such cases are
' leady recorded by French surgeons, and it may be useful to
abs 0n ?Specially the following, viz.: Broca, " Diagnosis of an
th' ^ S1^uated along the region of language: trephining of
nilr jfess" (Revue d'Anthropologic, 1876); Lucas-Champion-
i . ' indications drawn from cerebral localisations for tre-
ancPr^ ^le cranium" (Bulletin de VAcademie, 1876) ; Proust
rrillon, " Contribution to the study of cerebral localisa-
* British Medical Journal, March 15, 1879.
106 ON THE PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT
tions" (Bulletin de VAcademic,, 1876). The views of these
authors, however, are by no means undisputed even by their
own compatriots, and I mention the matter only to draw atten-
tion to a department of surgery and medicine, in connexion
with physiology, which cannot fail to be attended, though per-
haps only at some future day, by the most useful results.
It is, as I have previously observed, very difficult, if not
impossible, to distinguish, during life, the symptoms indi-
cating inflammation of the brain itself from those denoting
inflammation of the membranes; but it is utterly hopeless to
attempt any diagnosis between the inflammation of the arachnoid
membrane and that of the pia mater. These two last-named
membranes are so intimately united together that any cause
which gives rise to inflammation in one must necessarily affect
the other. But the diagnosis of cerebral inflammation at all
has been rendered more difficult than formerly in consequence
of the development of our modern and more correct views of
pathology, by which it is made manifest that many indications,
supposed to denote inflammation of the brain or its membranes,
are due only to irritation or to sympathetic disturbance of those
structures. The more accurate views now entertained, for in-
stance, with regard to typhoid or enteric fever, have already been
briefly alluded to as proving that a great number of the cases
formerly described as phrenitis, or cerebritis, or brain fever,
really belong to the category of specific fevers. Such cases,
then, when treated, as they formerly were, by copious depletion,
including bleeding and purging, were regarded, if the termina-
tion happened to be favourable, as the triumphs of the so-called
antiphlogistic treatment; and when the result was unfavourable,
it was considered that the treatment had not been sufficiently
vigorous, and that enough blood had not been drawn.
I have previously shown that the cases to which the name
cerebritis or phrenitis can properly and exclusively be applied,
are very limited, and that this disease is really due to only a
comparatively few causes.
Inflammation of the Arachnoid Membrane and Pia Mater.
The pathological or post-mortem appearances of inflammation
of the membranes of the brain are sufficiently well marked; and
although they are often associated with those of inflammation of
the brain itself, yet they are often capable of distinct limitation.
But, again, in consequence of the advances made in modern
pathology, it is very difficult to dissociate inflammations of the
cerebral membranes from different diathetic conditions affecting
the individual; or, in other words, it would be presumptuous
OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 107
to declare that meningitis is ever distinctly an idiopathic
disease?that is to say, that it may arise in a person previously
quite healthy and free from any constitutional taint. Scrofula,
rheumatism, syphilis, are now each proved to penetrate into all
he internal organs, and it would be perhaps erroneous to admit
1 hat meningitis exists independently of any of these conditions.
However, the appearances after death in meningitis are often
( istinct, and although I do not attach much importance to the
mere redness or vascularity of the membranes, yet the results of
io inflammatory process may be traced in the presence of adhe-
sions, and in the effusion of pus, serum, or lymph. The effusion
?t pus is rare, and when it is observed, it is generally in cases
injury or accident to the head, and is then found on the
surface of the dura mater. The effusion of serum is very
common, but the amount varies exceedingly?from an ounce or
Wo to several pints. It must be remembered that there is
Naturally a small amount of serous fluid between the mem-
.ranes, both of the brain and of the spinal cord, and this
cncumstance should be taken into account in determining the
appearances characteristic of meningitis. As a consequen&e of
e morbid effusion the arachnoid membrane presents an opal-
escent appearance, and the fluid runs out when an incision is
made into the membrane. The effusion of lymph from the
Membranes is very characteristic, and is an indubitable proof
lecent inflammation of the arachnoid membrane. This is
jsually found at the base of the brain about the commissure
? ? 16 ?Ptie nerves, the pons Varolii, and the medulla oblon-
jVl a ' but; it is sometimes found in large quantities lying over
!e upper surface of the brain or running;* along the course of
>?e assure of Sylvius.
eff . n^n8'itis presents two stages?one of invasion, and one of
usion ; but sometimes the first stage is insidious in its attack
c the symptoms are consequently obscure. But in a typical
ase the symptoms of the first stage are well marked, and when
n all together they leave little doubt as to the nature of
ie affection. The malady commences with rigors, there is
tain 'Pain in tlle llead' ^tolerance of light and noise, and irri-
. jy of temper. In children the disease often begins with
violent scream or cry, the head is thrown in various direc-
h?nf' an^ ^ere is sawing of the air with the hands. The
bfv,0^ head is increased, and the temperature, as observed
hot thermometer, is notably augmented; the skin is dry and
anl'k-1^ Pu^se is frequent and strong; the urine is scanty
gh-coloured, and the bowels are constipated, or, if they
In s*-??ls are pale-coloured and offensive in smell,
a dition to these general symptoms, there are the special
108 ON THE PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT
indications of contraction of the pupils and vomiting. These
two last-named symptoms are of the highest importance, and
when taken together are exceedingly significant. Each taken by
itself is not so important. I have now a case under treatment
where the pupil appears to be permanently contracted, and
has been so, to my knowledge, for at least two years ; and as for
vomiting, it is of course well known that this symptom may
arise from a variety of causes quite independently of cerebral
disease. But, in brief terms, when there are, together with
general inflammatory and febrile symptoms, pain in the head,
increase of temperatuie, diminished secretion of urine, absence
of the specific characters of typhoid fever, constipated bowels,
contraction of the pupils, and vomiting?there can be very little
doubt that the patient is labouring under the first stage of
meningitis.
After a time, however, these symptoms are replaced by
others, the supervention of which tends to confirm the diagnosis.
The inflammation results in the effusion of fluid in or upon the
membranes, and the patient falls into a lethargic or comatose
condition, from which he can be roused with very great diffi-
culty, if at all ; the pulse is now full but slow, and the pupils
are dilated?and this last symptom, following upon the previous
ones, is but too sure an indication of effusion. But not only
does this passive condition exist, but various movements of the
muscles are observed, especially as the disease advances : there
is often squinting, from irregular action of the muscles moving
the eyeball; there are often convulsions; sometimes there is
rigidity of one of the extremities ; and at last, involuntary dis-
charge of the feces and the urine, jactitation, picking the bed-
clothes, and other well-known fatal symptoms close the scene.
The treatment of this terrible disease is too often unsuc-
cessful, but, nevertheless, I am inclined to believe that remedial'
measures are sometimes of very great service, and that, even in
apparently desperate cases, a cure may be occasionally achieved.
Bearing in mind the diathetic conditions with which meningitis
is very often, and indeed usually, associated, it is clear that the
treatment must be directed in the first instance to the consti-
tutional taint. Thus the rheumatic, scrofulous, and syphilitic
diatheses respectively must be treated by colchicum, cod-liver
oil and iron, and mercury and iodine ; but when the inflam-
mation appears to be idiopathic?which is sometimes, though
rarely, the case?the ordinary antiphlogistic treatment will be
justifiable and is often successful.
I have given in a former paper (No. II.) a remarkable case,
treated by myself, and which I believe to have been one of
meningitis in an adult, and in which I practised bleeding to
OF CEREBRAL DISEASE. 109
the extent of sixteen ounces with the best results. In this
ease the intellect and the speech were impaired, there were
convulsions of the limbs, the pupils were contracted, the pulse
was full and strong, and the blood drawn was buffed and cupped.
The bleeding was followed up bv the administration of calomel
in repeated doses, together with saline purgatives, and in a
fortnight from the date of the attack the patient was quite
well and had no bad symptoms whatever. I attribute the
successful result in this case to the early performance of blood-
letting ; and I have given several instances, in the course of
these papers, showing that this measure, adopted at the com-
mencement of the attack, has often appeared to ward off the
very serious termination of the disease.
Like the rest of the profession, I have renounced and con-
demned, in a very great measure, the practice of bleeding', but
at the same time I still regard it as a very valuable method of
subduing inflammatory action, especially when adopted at the
very outset of the symptoms. In connexion with this subject,
I cannot help adverting to the remarkable case recorded in
my last paper (No. IV.), and related to me by the subject him-
self, where an army surgeon, recently travelling on a scientific
expedition under a burning sun in the desert of Arabia, and
having no other surgeon in the company, was suddenly seized
with symptoms denoting inflammation of the brain, and had
the boldness and presence of mind to open a vein in his own
arm, and with immediate relief.
In the early stage of meningitis, therefore, if the symptoms
are well marked, if there be an absence of diathetic complica-
tions, and if the patient be plethoric, as will be indicated by
the pulse, I think that some kind of sanguineous depletion is
justifiable?the manner and the amount being regulated by the
age of the patient, the degree of toleration, and other collateral
circumstances. In adults, bleeding from the arm may be piac-
tised, or at least leeches may be applied to the temples ; in the
case of children, the latter measure alone will suffice. At^ the
same time the head should be kept cool by evaporating lotions,
ice may be applied in a bladder, and the patient should be
kept in a darkened room, and all noise should be excluded.
The bowels should be opened by saline aperients, and calomel
should be administered in repeated doses, either in the foim of
pills or powders, or by placing the drug itself on the tongue.
There cannot be any doubt as to the efficacy of this mercurial
ju the cases to which allusion is now made, and more especially
in the case of children. It is astonishing how well calomel is
borne by this class of patients, both in this and in other dis-
eases, and what large quantities may be given, and for a pro-
110 ON" PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF CEREBRAL DISEASE.
longed period, not only without bad effects, but with positive
benefit. The milder forms of mercurial preparations, such as
the hydrargyrum cum creta, are well adapted to the less serious
maladies of children, but in the disease now referred to?
namely, inflammation of the membranes of the brain?calomel
is absolutely necessary, and may almost be considered a sheet-
anchor.
By the adoption of the remedial measures now indicated?
namely, moderate blood-letting, the use of calomel, and the
administration of saline aperients?successful results may often
be achieved, and I think it fair to conclude (although this is a
matter which does not allow of demonstrative proof) that the
supervention of the second stage may be averted.
If, however, the stage of effusion should be reached?as will
be only too manifest by the entire change in the nature of the
symptoms, the pupils being now dilated, the pulse becoming
slow, and the patient comatose?the chance of recovery is very
seriously diminished, although all hope must not be abandoned.
All depletory measures are now useless, and the only favourable
prospect is, that by certain well directed treatment the fluid
which presses upon the brain may be re-absorbed and the
healthy functions of the organ be restored. Although a suc-
cessful result is somewhat rare under these circumstances, yet a
sufficient number of well-authenticated cases has been recorded,
and I myself have seen such an amount of benefit by the
application of therapeutical means, that I think an effort
should undoubtedly always be made to save the patient. The
remedial measures should now consist in the application of
repeated blisters to the nape of the neck, by which the absorp-
tion of the effused fluids may be promoted; calomel should be
freely administered, though in small doses, such as a grain, and
for a considerable time; and iodide of potassium should at the
same time be administered regularly three or four times a day,
in doses of three or four grains or more. By this treatment the
most satisfactory results have been obtained, and even in cases
where the termination was eventually fatal, I have myself seen
so much temporary benefit achieved as to justify the means
employed and to encourage future attempts in the same
direction.
