Education of Girls, Connected with Growth and Physical Development
====================================================================

205
Art. III.? *
:Author: Nathan Allen, M.D., Lowell, Mass., Commissioner in Lunacy to the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts

The question may be asked, What more can be said upon
female education that is new or important ? Suppose the same
question had been asked twenty-five years ago, would not the
changes since that period present a most satisfactory answer?
As one contemplates the great improvements made during these
years, he is surprised that educators were content to tolerate the
state of things that once existed ; so will the next generation,
when still greater and more important changes shall have been
introduced, look back upon this, and wonder that it was so well
satisfied with its own methods.

Twenty-five years ago very little attention was paid to the
matter of health or to the claims of the body, and as to " the
higher education of woman" or the "co-education" of the sexes,
these questions had received scarcely any consideration. In
taking a survey of the past we see that many improvements
have been made; but in forecasting the future it is not so easy to
realise that still greater changes are in store. It may require
time for their development and completion, but they are sure
to come, as discoveries in science and the application of new
principles never go backward.

CHANGES IN EDUCATION.

There must be, in the very nature of things, radical changes
in the whole system of education. As it is now conducted, the
whole process is in a great measure empirical, experimental, not
being based strictly upon either the laws of the body or of the
mind. The old systems of metaphysics, which, as presenting
anything like a correct system of mental philosophy, are discarded
in most of the colleges and universities of the present day, still
prevail as guides in almost every department of elementary in-
struction. How can we properly cultivate the mind, train and
discipline its faculties, and educate them to their highest extent,
until we understand more correctly and definitely what these
faculties are, and the laws that govern them ? We need here a
true system of mental science based upon physiology?upon the
functions of the brain?and the laws that govern the physical
system; and until we have such a system of mental science, all
education must be more or less partial, imperfect, and empirical.
That there are serious evils and defects in the present
methods of teaching is very evident from a growing dissatisfac-
tion with our public school system among the best educators
and most sagacious writers in our country. The conviction in
many minds is becoming stronger and stronger every year that,
considering the amount of time, labour, and expense bestowed
upon our schools, the fruits do not correspond with the immense
outlay, or, in other words, they fail too frequently in 'practical
results. Nowhere is this failure more striking, and its effects
so injurious, as in the education of girls. The most marked
feature in this failure, or, injury, growing out of the present
modes of teaching, is its effects upon health and the physical
svstem. It is found that great numbers break down while en-
gaged in study, others soon after completing their education,
and many others still become physically disabled for discharging
the duties, labours, and responsibilities of life. Such results
constitute evils of no small magnitude.

It is true these evils do not originate wholly in the school,
and, in many instances, it is not at all responsible; they start
in the family and grow out of the present state of society, and
while it may be difficult to point out all the sources, an impor-
tant cause, the most fruitful agency, is connected with the
system of education. The evil is not confined, however, to the
school or the seminary, but extends, more or less, to the general
views and practices on education as adopted and carried on by
parents, school committees, and boards of education.

Fifty years ago, or more, scarcely any attention was paid in
education to the physical system ; the body was not recognised
as of any account in mental improvement. But as the principles
of physiology became better understood in their practical appli-
cations, it was found that they sustained most intimate relations
to education; and the more thoroughly this science is understood,
the more profoundly one is convinced of the importance of
observing the laws of the physical system in their connection
with mental culture.

Great advances have been made in the physical sciences,
and in the application of sanitary law to prevention of disease,
to the preservation of health, and to human welfare ; but in
e!.er^ stage and department of education the importance of
physical development in its relation to mental culture is alto-
get lei underrated. When it becomes fully understood that
education, in all its manifold parts and applications, is dependent
upon the brain, and that the functions of this organ are very
dependent upon the condition and development of the body,
then it will be seen that there is a right and a wrong way in
all attempts at mental improvement, and that, in order for the
greatest success, an observance of physical laws is indispensable.
The term education, used in its broadest sense, is not con-
fined to the intellect, to the emotions, or the moral sense, but
belongs equally to the physical system, to the whole being,
mind and body. Such is their relation and the laws that govern
them, that the culture of the former cannot be properly or suc-
cessfully carried on without that of the latter.

Physiology is a modern science, and its principles, in their
practical application, may very justly be said to be in their
infancy. In process of time they are destined to have a powerful
influence, not only upon human welfare generally, but especially
upon education. As it is now conducted, much labour and study
are wasted or lost; it is one-sided, or bounded by narrow limits;
it is not made practical or useful; it is not adapted to the par-
ticular talents of the individual, or to develop harmoniously his
faculties; it does not enlist and direct all the forces of the
human system in a manner to secure the highest physical and
mental culture. To do this, the laws of health must be observed;
the relations of the body and all its parts to the brain must be
understood; and this must be commenced in childhood, and
followed closely through all the years of youth. Some of the
greatest failures and mistakes in education commence in early
life. This arises from an almost total neglect of the laws that
pertain to the growth and development of the body, which
neglect is not discovered till too late for remedy.

FIXED PRINCIPLES NEEDED.

One of the chief causes of failure in education is the want
of fixed principles as guides. In all matters appertaining to
the welfare of the mind or the body, we should always have some
definite principles to direct and guide us. The Creator has
established such laws in the human system for the proper de-
velopment of every faculty of the mind, as well as organ in the
body. It is the province of physiology to unfold the nature
and character of those laws in their various applications. There
is one general law in this science which should be better under-
stood. In the whole process of education a most important
change is constantly taking place in the physical system which
is but little noticed, viz., growth. There is not only the regular
law of supply and waste going on to support life, but, in addition,
nature demands that provision should be made for the increase
of growth of every part of the body. This law commences its
operations with life, and continues to adult age, though the
changes which nature makes at particular periods are greater
than some others. An observance of this law of growth is of
the highest importance in the whole course of education.

NORMAL STANDARD.

But before noticing these laws and changes, let us inquire
if nature has not established some general or normal standard
to which we may always appeal. In considering any subject
there are great advantages in having before us some perfect
model or pattern, by which every part can be tested. In the
organic world, we believe, there is everywhere such a standard,
though it may be difficult to find perfect examples of it.
In physiology there is a normal standard, and it consists
in perfection of structure and function?that is, that every
organ should be sound in formation and capable of performing
its legitimate functions. Thus in the human body all its parts
must be sound and well developed, and each must perform its
own proper functions, without interfering with that of others.
The human body may be compared to a complicated machine,
where every part has a specific work to do. Hence it will be
seen at once the importance of having the balance or harmony
kept up, so that the "wear and tear" shall come equally upon
every part. The wisdom of such construction and operation is
very obvious.

The most thorough researches into both the sciences of
anatomy and physiology demonstrate that there is such a standard
of organisation; and upon this foundation is based the law of
health and life. It is a normal standard?a universal law ; and
the nearer all parts of the body can approximate toward it, the
greater will be found the aggregate amount of health and the
longest human life. In the growth and changes, therefore, that
take place in the body, it is of the highest importance that this
standard or law should be kept constantly in view. Among the
Greeks and Romans, where physical organisation was made of
great account, we find models set forth corresponding to this
standard. In the " Apollo Belvidere" and the " Venus de
Medici " we find perfect illustrations of development in all parts
of the body. Experience and observation taught the Greeks
and Romans that such standards of organisation, of all others,
were the most desirable; but the principles of physiology not
only demonstrate the fact, but explain the reasons for it and
the modes by which it is obtained.

.The organisation here described furnishes the foundation not
only tor the laws ot health and longevity, but presents the true
standard of beauty, where symmetry, proportion, figure, and
outline are exhibited in their highest perfection. There is still
another principle involved in this same organisation, more
important than either or all the others?that is, the law of
multiplication and continuance of the race. A volume might
be written upon each of these topics, and the object of making
these general statements here is more particularly to show what
may be the effect in education of deviations from this normal
standard of organisation. It is true we shall find no perfect
examples, only approximations towards them, composed of an
almost endless variety and character. If these deviations from
the normal standard are very marked, they are attended with
more or less unfavourable results. This depends very much upon
what organ, or class of organs, are included in the deviation.

PHYSICAL ORGANISATION.

It may be said that we cannot change the physical system
materially?that this is beyond the power of individual choice
and agency. To a certain extent this is true. There is a fixed
type, or there are marked features in the organisation of some
races, like those of the Jews, which continue for ages. It is so,
though to a much less extent, in some families, where their
leading characteristics are transmitted for generations. But in
both these instances the natural relations are generally confined
to the same classes, for just in proportion as this relation ex-
tends beyond kinship or race will there be changes in the
sameness of organisation.

While the principal features in organisation grow out of the
laws of inheritance, radical changes in which must require two
or three generations, still many important changes do take
place in the life of an individual. If the laws of growth and
change were better understood and observed, it would be found
that we have far greater power over the physical system in
development than is generally supposed.

It is an established fact that every part of the body is con-
stantly changing, so that in the course of seven years it is esti-
mated that the whole system is entirely changed, not a particle
?f the same matter remaining at the end of that time. And
although these changes are carried according to certain fixed
laws in chemistry and physiology, we have the power, to some
extent, of directing and modifying their results. The two prin-
cipal agents in effecting these results are nutrition and exercise.
Careful examination shows that these two great agencies are
controlled very much by our own choice and power.

GROWTH OF TIIE BODY.

The human body is made up of infinitely small cells, and
the various changes it undergoes are very properly called cell-
ular development. The principle of " waste and supply " is here
admirably brought into exercise. While nutrition from food
and air is continually furnishing the means, a set of vessels is
provided to carry off all waste matter. These vessels or car-
riers are called the capillary system, and though at times they
are exceedingly busy, yet they never cease their work night,
or day.

The cells composing the primary elements of the body con-
sist of different orders, and vary in form and size. The bones,
muscles, ligaments, nerves, brain, &c., are all built up by cells,
and nourished by cells, formed from food and absorption out-
side through the lungs and the skin. Different kinds of food
are, to a certain extent, designed to make a particular class of
cells?for instance, some form muscular fibre ; others, nerve
tissue ; and others, adipose matter. The capillary system, which
is the agent in these changes in cell-life, is composed of exceed-
ingly small blood-vessels, and is distributed everywhere through
the body. They act as connecting links between supply and
waste, as messengers carrying nutritious cells and removing
those that are waste and decaying. In the whole process of
digestion they act as agents, after the food has passed through
certain changes, in carrying the nutrition to its place of des-
tination, and then of removing the waste matter; they form an
important connection between the arteries and the veins, ex-
changing pure blood for that which has become impure, extend-
ing to the purification of blood through the lungs.

Without entering too minutely into physiological questions,
our object is to show briefly what are some of the laws of growth
and change in the human system, and that these are, in a great
measure, dependent upon human agency. While we may not
at once be able to understand all the points or principles in-
volved in the subject, enough may be seen to show how impor-
tant they are, and that they should be far better understood.
While we cannot draw the line between the kinds of food as
to their adaptation to build up this or that tissue, it is well un-
derstood there is a great difference in their adaptation, and that
selections can be made with special reference to developing the
muscles, or strengthening the nervous system, or increasing the
lymphatic temperament. If all children possessed the same
organisation throughout, the same kinds of nourishment would
be adapted to all alike; but as there are exceptions to this
general rule, greater care should be exercised in their cases.
The time will come when this whole subject will be better un-
derstood, and the laws of nutrition, as applied to all cases, will
be more carefully observed.

Connected with the laws of growth and support, the prompt
removal of all waste matter, or the secretions, is highly impor-
tant. Unless it is done, this effete or decaying matter poisons
the parts surrounding it, or re-enters the circulation, and be-
comes the cause of much disease. Nature has made ample pro-
vision for this work, but its operations are often thwarted by
human agency. For illustration, we may refer to the impor-
tance of cleanliness of the skin, or to the normal action of the
alimentary canal. Another illustration may be given, in at-
tending to the healthy action of the lungs, that they be not
only supplied with an abundance of pure air, but that the im-
purities generated by internal action should not be retained by
compression or want of exercise, and when once expelled, the
smallest particles should never be allowed, if possible, to re-
enter the lungs again. In the early stages of education, when
the individual has no knowledge on the subject, and is entirely
dependent upon a parent or teacher for guidance, it is highly
important that these rules be applied, as they are then most
needed and will do the greatest good.

In providing suitable food for the body many things must
be taken into account, and this is far more important to young
persons while growing than those who have reached adult life.'
Attention should be given to the demands of nature in the
adaptation of food, that all parts of the body should receive
those kinds most appropriate for their growth and development.
It is not the mere kind or quality alone, but there must not be
deficiency in quantity, neither should it be taken in excess.
Then there is the preparation, the cooking part, which is vastly
more important in the case of young persons than is generally
considered. The health, growth, and constitution of children
depend greatly upon the proper preparation of their food.
Then the manner and times of taking food should receive
careful attention ; the food should be taken slowly and be well
masticated; should be consumed at regular set times?at in-
tervals of five or six hours, and nearly in equal portions, unless
at the last meal; care being taken to preserve always a good
appetite.

In the application of the principles here presented there
are several important considerations. From the age of 5 to 20
the growth and development of the body should receive special
attention, whereas the practice at the present day is reversed.
In the matter of education the mind absorbs all attention,
but the claims and interests of the body are regarded as only
of little consequence. What are the teachings of physiology
upon this subject? The principles of this science, and the
lessons taught by experience, should be the guides. It is
very obvious that the mind, or the brain, upon which all mental
manifestations are dependent, embracing so small a portion of
the physical system, should not receive all the attention.
From the age of 5 to 20 nature provides especially for the
growth of the body, so that all parts of it should obtain at 20,
or soon after, a healthy and complete development. After
this period there is no natural growth of the body as a whole,
but changes may occur in different organs, and especially the
brain. During all these years the main object of nature in the
organisation seems to be preparatory work?growth, training,
development, strength, &c.

From this general law we should infer that no one part of
the body should be exercised at the expense of other parts, so
that there becomes a premature development. The indication
is clear, that if the exercise is carried beyond the laws that
regulate its healthy growth, and interferes with the normal
development of other parts of the body, the result must be
exceedingly injurious. Physiology teaches unmistakably that
the normal standard is based upon a sound, well-balanced
organisation; and the nearer the approximation, in the de-
velopment of all the organs of the body, the larger the amount
of health, the longer the life, and the greater the human
achievement and happiness.

THE TEMPERAMENTS.

This principle may be illustrated by the doctrine of tem-
peraments. For the sake of convenience, we take the most
simple division, viz.?1. The Muscular, or motive, made up of
the bones and muscles generally; 2. The Sanguine, including
the heart, lungs, arteries, veins, &c.; 3. The Lymphatic, com-
posed of the lymphatics, absorbents, and glandular system ; and
4. The Nervous, including the brain and nerves throughout
the body.

Now, the more evenly balanced these several temperaments
are, the more healthy and perfect is the organisation. Each
organ is better able to perform its own Specific duty, and, of
course, there are greater harmony and less friction in all their
operations. In such an organisation there is far less chance for
weakness or disease to obtain a foothold.

If there were slight deviations in the balance of the tem-
peraments, it would make but little difference in the health or
strength of ail individual. But if any one of these tempera-
ments becomes altogether predominant, it will he accompanied
with serious disadvantages, especially if this should happen to
he the Muscular or Nervous; for these temperaments consti-
tute the leading agents in the development of the organs
embraced in the other two. The muscles involve the motive
power, the law of exercise, which lies at the foundation of
growth and health; the nervous temperament includes the
brain, the organ of will and thought, which of course must
have a powerful influence in directing and shaping the develop-
ment of the whole system.

It may be said we have no power to change these tempera-
ments?that we cannot change or mould the organs of the
human body at will. It is true there are bounds or limits in
the changes of organic matter beyond which we cannot go;
but then, by commencing early in life and persevering in the
use of proper means, there is abundant evidence that great
changes can be effected. The size and strength of certain parts
or organs in the body have been, in many instances, materially
changed. Illustrations of this character could easily be given,
where the size of muscles have been greatly enlarged, and
where the power of the lungs and other organs has been
surprisingly increased. The fact is, no attempts have been
systematically and thoroughly made for the improvement of
the young in this direction. It will never be known what can
be done in this way until the trial is actually made; and
before any radical changes or reforms can here be effected, we
must understand better the evils now existing. We can notice
only the more obvious of these evils, with a few suggestions as
to their remedies.

EVILS AND REMEDIES.

One of the most encouraging signs of the times is that the
attention of the public is being directed more and moie to
physical improvement. There are undoubtedly serious ob-
jections to some of the ways in which this interest is manifested,
especially as connected with athletic sports and games. The
matter here may be carried too far for the physical and moral
interests of those engaged in them. "\A' here this improve-
ment is most needed is in early training in the family, com-
bined with an educational system. Physical improvement
should become a leading object both in the family and in the
school, and through all the stages of education the culture of
the body should go hand in hand with that of the mind. It
should be made to apply especially to those who need it most,
whose organisation is weak or defective ; where some parts are
imperfectly developed or not well balanced, and there is want
of strength and harmony of function. There should he in all
schools a system of gymnastics or physical exercises of some
kind, wisely adapted to the varied wants of the pupils.
In advocating a more strict observance of the laws of health
and life, and objecting to the present modes of education, it
should be distinctly understood that no one department of
mental culture, no particular mode of teaching, neither the
higher education of woman nor co-education, are here singled
out for criticism; neither is it intended to oppose or object at
all to female education; but, on the other hand, we advocate
the highest possible mental culture for girls that is compatible
with their whole organisation?that harmonises both with the
physical and mental systems. This constitutes the only sure
basis or foundation for all true culture, and its laws are the
certain tests of its correctness and success?for, guided by these
laws, there is no theory, no experiment, no failure.
In making application of the principles here laid down,
reference will be made more especially to girls, as both in the
family and in the school they are less provided with the means
for physical development than boys ; while, considering the
nature and objects of their organisation, it is far more im-
portant for girls. Within a few years the education of girls
has everywhere been pressed harder and harder, especially in
New England. In cities and large villages girls are sent
annually to school from five years of age to sixteen or seven-
teen, with the exception of ten or twelve weeks' vacation
each year. In small towns and rural districts the amount of
schooling is less, perhaps from half to two-thirds as much as
in cities. While great stress is laid upon the kind and number
of studies, and the standard is raised higher every year, scarcely
any attention is given to the growth and development of the
body. With rare exceptions, there is no system of gymnastics
or calisthenics provided in schools for girls, and, generally
speaking, no exercise outside of work or play that is adapted
to 'promote their highest physical development.

DOMESTIC TRAINING.

Once it was customary for the girls in our New England
families to do much domestic labour, commencing quite early in
life. They were trained up to it, year after year. Some part
of this labour was hard, and its performance made a severe tax
upon the muscles. In this way the constitution of girls
became strong and vigorous, capable of much endurance.
Besides, schools were formerly continued only about half the
year, and then, in the intermediate time, girls found an abun-
dance of exercise in work. One of the most unfortunate events
or sentiments that ever befell any people was the change in
feeling and opinion that came over our New England women,
in regarding domestic work as menial and degrading. Had
this notion been confined to hired service?for that only which
received regular pay?this injury would not have been so
great. But the notion or sentiment has gradually been taking
possession of the minds of our New England women, especially
girls, that domestic labour, wherever performed, is degrading?
is not fashionable?and that any other kind of work or business
is preferable.

These views have not been confined to the city, or to families
" well to do in the world," but have pervaded all classes every-
where ; so that very few of our New England girls are trained up
to thorough domestic work. Now, no exercise or employment
can be found which is so well calculated to develop strong,
vigorous, and healthy constitutions in girls as household work,
commenced early and persevered in, even the more laborious
parts of it. At the present day it is only the lighter kinds of
domestic work that girls are called upon to do, and not those
harder portions that develop and strengthen the muscles, that
harden and toughen the constitution. As girls are now sent to
school after six or seven years of age, and kept there five or six
hours a day, with lessons imposed which they are obliged to
learn more or less at home, there is but little chance or time to
attend to household duties. Education is considered by parent
and teacher as paramount to everything else; the growth and
development of the body, strong and vigorous muscles, a sound
and healthy physical system, are practically regarded as of but
little consequence.

What, now, are some of the results of this neglect of physical
exercise and supreme devotion to mental pursuits ? Let us
inquire what are the teachings of physiology on the subject.
A fundamental principle of this science is, that growth and
strength depend upon exercise, and of course those parts or
organs which are most exercised will receive most nutrition.
Exercise is a primary law of existence. There may be some
growth in some parts of the body without much exercise, but it
cannot be continued long in a vigorous and healthy manner.

NORMAL GROWTII.

There is what may be called a normal growth?a regular
order?in which all parts of the body should be so exercised
and nourished, that every part, in its own time, may be in-
creased in vitality and strength. If the laws regulating this
divine order?this natural growth ?are not observed ; if certain
parts are unduly cultivated, while others are greatly neglected,
the consequences must be very injurious, and perhaps ultimately
disastrous. This is very well expressed by a distinguished
female writer in the following language: " During youth the
development of the body must be the first care; its strength,
its beauty, the complete establishment of every function, the
first conditions for its harmonious growth, must be our ruling
principle. There is no possibility of avoiding this necessity?-
this primary predominance of the material organisation; it is
Divine law: every violation will bring its own punishment:
and woe to the people or the race where this order is syste-
matically inverted; disease, vice, and rapid degeneracy will
inevitably mark its history," Because these evils do not follow
at once, their danger does not seem to be apprehended. Such
is the nature of those evils, resulting from the violation of
physical laws, that their effects are not fully witnessed in one
generation, but. are developed more and more by the laws of
inheritance. It may take several generations for their develop-
ment, but unless the causes are removed, these evils are certain
to come, just as surely as any penalties attached to the violation
of the laws of the Almighty.

PHYSICAL EDUCATION OF GIRLS.

That we may then have a better understanding of the sub-
ject, let us inquire more particularly what are the relations of
physiology to the education of girls as now conducted. What
are the facts ?

From 6 to 16 years of age girls are confined closely to
school, except about twelve weeks' vacation each year. No syste-
matic provision for physical culture is made at the school,
neither is there sufficient exercise taken outside for a proper
and healthy development of the body. These ten years
constitute also the principal time in lite for the growth
and development of all parts of the system. The period from
12 to 16 is especially a critical time in the growth and health
of girls. These years in the high school or seminary are
crowded with most difficult studies, combined with examinations,
reviews, and exhibitions, which make a ruinous strain upon the
brain and the nervous system.

In examining the effects of such a course of study the laws
of physiology must be our guide. If we should consider, in all
its bearings, the relation of the mind to the body through life,
it would seem as though the latter should receive as much if
not more attention, during these ten years, than the former.
It is a question whether by such a course the great objects of
existence might not in a large measure be secured. It is a
fact that great numbers of young people who grow up in the
country, with very limited schooling, excel in scholarship and
attainment those trained in the schools of the city. It is also
a fact that, where the half-time system of schools has been
conducted a long series of years, the pupils (working half the
time) have made as much progress in learning as those
attending school all the time.

That we may obtain more definite views of the effects of
education as now conducted, let us consider some of the phy-
siological changes produced by it. The muscles and the brain
constitute the two leading forces in the human system, and
may be represented by the motive and nervous temperaments.
It is of the highest importance that these two temperaments
should both be fully developed and made prominent in the
growth of the body; otherwise the organs included in the
other two temperaments will never attain their proper growth
and complete development.

The muscles constitute by far the larger portion of the
body; they grow only by exercise, and become strong and
healthy only by a great deal of exercise. Ihus they receive
their proper share of nutrition, increase in size and strength,
and gradually obtain that most important quality?fitness for
work and power of endurance. This exercise of the muscles
must commence early, and be continued year after year, so that
the fibres of the muscles, by repeated exercise and contraction,
become hardened and toughened; their possessor can then
work, and hold on without being tired?will have what is called
yveat poiver of endurance.

On the other hand, where there is deficient exercise and a
want of proper growth and development of this temperament,
the muscles are pale and weak, soft and flabby, have not suffi-
cient vitality and strength to carry on, in a healthy and vigoious
manner, the machinery of the whole system. Ihe musculai
temperament, when well developed, receives a large supply of
blood, and constitutes the leading agency in causing a free and
equal circulation of blood through the whole system ; whereas,
when the muscular power is weak, there is a great tendency to
frequent congestion of blood, especially in the internal organs,
which prepares the way for much weakness and many diseases.
Besides, this muscular power, in large supply, is needed to
obtain good blood by a more vigorous action of the lungs and
stomach ; no one thing is more important for good health than
a free and equal circulation of the blood. This muscular power
can be obtained only by a great deal of exercise when young ;
and no substitute, by friction, stimulants, or other human devices,
can be found to replace it. Individuals deficient in this power
labour through life under great disadvantages.

AGENCY OF HEAT.

One of the most important agencies in producing changes in
the system is heat. While the primary source of heat arises
from combustion produced in the process of converting nutrition
into blood, the muscles have much to do with it in two ways :?
1st, in an active circulation of the blood through all parts of the
body, thus diffusing warmth with the blood. The greater the
muscular power, the better the circulation. And 2nd, by the
muscles themselves acting as generators of heat in their power
of extension and contraction, called animal heat or electric cur-
rents. The larger the muscular development is, and the more
highly vitalised it is, the greater is the amount of heat produced
by exercise. Such an organisation is very important to a people
living in a cold climate or one subject to sudden changes of tem-
perature. What inconveniences, what disadvantages, what suf-
ferings must individuals be subjected to through life who have
not, within, their own persons, such powerful generators of heat
and warmth ! Clothing to any extent, and artificial heat, from
whatever sources, afford poor substitutes. Nature, in its normal
state, makes the best provisions for warming the body.

BRAIN AND NERVOUS SYSTEM.

There is another agency holding an intimate relation to the
muscles which is of vital importance. The nervous system has
three great centres in every individual, where nerve force is
generated. The brain is the nervous centre for the mind, the
spinal marrow is the centre for the muscles, and the ganglia,
so-called, forms the nervous centre for the internal organs.
Nervous influences emanate from each of these centres, and
while each class of nerves has its own specific work to do, and
the functions of one cannot be transferred to another, they hold,
indirectly, to each other, most intimate relations. There is this
peculiarity in the nerves that have their seat in the spinal
marrow, they are composed of two classes?nerves of motion
and nerves of sensation, which extend to every part of the sys-
tem. These nerves are constantly brought into action in all
kinds of exercise, and as the muscles compose so large a portion
of the body, these nerves are very abundant; the motor nerves
are indispensable to anything like healthy organisation. It is
by the use of these agents that motion and life are kept up in
the body.

Suppose now that for a series of years the individual takes
hut little physical exercise, these motor nerves soon lose their
strength and power, and the balance between the nerves of
motion and sensation is destroyed. And not only this, but as
the nerves centring in the spinal marrow drop down in vitality,
while the activity of the nerves centring in the brain and
ganglia is constantly increasing, the balance of power between
these different classes is also destroyed. Whenever this balance
or harmony of function is once lost, it is not easily regained.
As the strength and power of these voluntary nerves become
much lessened from inactivity, the individual is subjected more
and more to the influence of the nerves of sensation, which have
been over-exercised, and not unfrequently become morbid and
irritable. The ganglia, the sympathetic nervous system, under
whose influence the organs of the body grow and live, will share
also in the undue activity imparted to the other centres by the
inaction of the muscular system. No description or language can
express fully the terrible effects of these changes in the nerves,
from a healthy and normal state to one artificial and diseased.
But what are some of the direct effects of the present modes
?f education on the brain and nervous system ? According to
the laws of physiology, those portions of the body most exercised
receive the most nourishment. If all other parts of the system
were exercised equally at the same time, or had received their full
growth, such continuous exercise of the brain might not be
injurious; but when both these conditions are wanting, the
changes that take place in the brain, in its relations to the
physical system, from such a course of training, are decidedly
unfavourable. In many cases the brain is over-taxed the
development is premature. Such persons break down early
some living many years, suffering with weakness and sickness,
while others sink into premature graves.

Many girls may go through the whole course of education
the high school, the seminary, and the college may shine as
scholars in every department of learning, but what can we say
their constitutions, of their physical stamina? Has not the
mind or brain been educated too much, altogether at the ex-
pense of the bodv ?

These evils are of such a character that physicians only can
judge fully of their nature and extent. It is a fact that there
has been, within twenty or thirty years, a great increase of
diseases among New England women, of such type and character
as would originate only from an excess of nerve tissue or the
want of a well-balanced organisation. Headaches and neuralgia,
in all their diversified forms, hysteria and neurosis in great
variety and intensity, have multiplied. Some of these com-
plaints are accompanied with excruciating pain and long suffer-
ing, as they are found difficult to treat and almost impossible
to cure. When a person of an intense nervous temperament
breaks down in health, it is apt to continue months or years,
and sometimes for life. With such an organisation, combined
with a want of physical stamina, medicines and sanitary agencies
do not so readily afford relief; neither can we call to our aid so
fully the recuperative powers of nature. There is no class of
complaints so complicated in their nature, so obstinate in treat-
ment, and so doubtful of cure, at the same time accompanied
with so much suffering, as nervous diseases.

It may be that here and there a young woman will devote
all her early years to thorough courses of study, and become
highly educated, as it is said, in every branch of knowledge,
without injury to her health or constitution; but these are the
exceptions. If a comparison could be instituted between the
physiology of the educated girls of the present day and that of
the young women from the same class of families fifty years ago,
or with that of the young women now living who have been
trained up to physical labour, we shall find in these classes a
surprising difference. The brain and nervous system will alto-
gether predominate in the former, while the muscular and san-
guine temperaments will take the lead in the latter. The former
may be far more refined in manner, attractive in accomplish-
ments, and excel in all kinds of knowledge, but can bear no
comparison to the latter classes in physical strength, vigour of
constitution, and power of endurance. But the differences are
more striking than what are indicated by outside 'appearances.
Upon careful examination, the internal evils growing out of the
former organisation are far greater than what would at first be
supposed.

There are one or two features connected with this extreme
development of nerve tissue which call for special notice. It
happens not unfrequently with persons possessing this organisa-
tion, that when all their wants are not gratified, when overtaken
with disappointment or overcome by trials, the nervous system
becomes irritable and morbid; the disposition and temper of
mind are at the same time changed. Without sufficient mus-
cular force or the control of the voluntary nerves, such persons
become anything but pleasant or agreeable companions.
Another feature in such an organisation is its strong ten-
dency to mental derangement. The reason and the will have no
controlling influence; the balance in the mental faculties is
destroyed; and the individual, composed, as it were, of a bundle
of nerves, is governed by mere caprice, whims, or the delusion
of ail emotional nature. Our lunatic hospitals contain at the
present day many just such persons.

Again, we have stated that when in the course and as a
result of education there was a great predominance of the
nervous temperament and a want of the muscular, the internal
organs of the body do not stand so good a chance for growth
and development. As a consequence, these same organs suffer
in weakness and greater liability to disease; the lungs, from
consumptive complaints; the stomach, from indigestion and
dyspepsia; the bowels, from costive habits; and the reproduc-
tive organs, from a variety of weaknesses sand diseases. The
heart also suffers in action for the want of muscular power, and,
in case of weaknesses and diseases in different parts of the body,
it cannot force the vital currents so well throughout the whole
system.

The weaknesses and diseases of all these organs originate
more or less from the want of muscular power, and then this
defect comes from neglect of the kind and amount of physical
exercises which should have been taken while the body was in
a state of growth and development. But an excessive cultiva-
tion of the brain or the mind has, directly and indirectly, done
its full share in producing these evils.

To confirm this statement we might summon a great
number of witnesses, but must be content with the following:?
Mary J. Studley, M.D., now connected a long time with the
State Normal School for Girls at South Framingliam, Mass.,
writes thus: " It has been my privilege, for more than twenty-
five years, to be intimately associated with young women,
either as teacher in the school-room, in the earlier years, or as
medical practitioner, or teacher of hygiene, during the latter
ones, and every day's added experience only confirms me in the
position I have occupied from the first relative to the various
forms of nervousness which characterise our sex. That position
affirms that the best possible balance for a weak, nervous
system is a well-developed muscular system. Weak, shaky,
hysterical nerves always accompany soft, flabby muscles, and it
is a mournful fact that the majority of the young women whom
I meet in schools are notably deficient in muscular develop-
ment." In the normal school we should rather expect to find
more physical stamina, as it embraces only those girls that are
pledged to become teachers.

One feature alluded to in this quotation may be thus
accounted for : this " nervousness" comes partly from a pre-
mature development of the brain, and partly from over-stimu-
lating the mind by appeals to emulation, and other motives or
objects that are decidedly unwholesome in their influence. By
these and other means the whole system is brought into an
unnatural and morbid condition, which is anything but com-
fortable or hopeful, either as far as the individual or her friends
are concerned.

The fact here stated brings us to one of the most serious
evils in the present modes of education. While it cultivates
the mind and stores it with knowledge, training the mental
faculties to their highest extent, and capacitating them for the
greatest happiness, it develops, at the same time, an organisa-
tion which, unless it has health, the means and ability to be
gratified, becomes susceptible of immense suffering both of
body and mind. It may be said that such a result cannot be
prevented, especially in some cases, but, alas, they are altogether
too common, and are likely to increase more and more unless
some radical reforms are effected.

IMPORTANCE OF GOOD HEALTH.

There is scarcely any complaint that a physician hears
oftener from young women than this?a tired feeling, a want
of strength, some weakness here or there, general debility, &c.
Such complaints may come sometimes from weak, frail bodies
by birth, or from local disease, but more generally they
originate from the early neglect of physical exercise and from
a want of muscle, which gives power of endurance. We cannot
describe this want better than in the language of one who was
the first woman in this country to study anatomy thoroughly in
the dissecting-room with reference to professional life. This
occurred over thirty years ago in Philadelphia, and the indi-
vidual has been for a long time a successful practitioner of
medicine in London.

In describing the defective organisation of American women,
says Elizabeth Blackwell, M.D., " We need muscles that are
strong and prompt to do our will, that can run and walk indoors
and out of doors, and convey us from place to place, as duty or
pleasure calls us, not only without fatigue, but with the feeling
of cheerful energy; we need strong arms that, can cradle a
healthy child and toss it crowing in the air, and backs that will
not break under the burden of household cares?a frame that is
not exhausted and weakened by the round of daily duties. We
need muscles so well developed that shall make the human body
really a divine image, a perfect form, rendering all dress grace-
ful, and not requiring to be patched, and filled up, and weighed
( own with clumsy contrivances for hiding its deformities ; bodies
t lat can move in dignity, in grace, in airy lightness or conscious
s length; bodies erect and firm, energetic and active; bodies that
are my sovereign in their presence, expressions of a sovereign
na uie. Such are the bodies we need, and exercise, the means
by which the muscular system may be developed, assumes then
its true position as of primary importance during- the period of
youth. It is the grand necessity to which everything else
should submit." This is strong language, but none too much
so; the description will be heartily approved by all medical
men who comprehend fully the powerful influence of the
muscular system.

Such an organisation as is here described has two great
advantages: 1 st, The self-possession and conscious power which
it gives a woman ; and 2nd, The commanding influence which
such a physique everywhere has over others. There is a power,
a charm, a magnetism in the female form or organisation, when
clothed with all the elements of beauty, which no language can
describe.

But such a development of the whole person is not easily
obtained ; it certainly cannot be by performing the lighter kinds
of housework, by a short walk now and then, by occasional
gymnastic exercises, by a little croquet playing, or by any
amount of piano playing, or attention to music, to embroidery,
drawing, painting, &c.

In no part of female education is there so much need of
reform as in that of physical culture. If the standard of scholar-
ship is to be raised higher and higher in all our schools for girls,
and no greater attention is to be paid to the laws ot health and
life, grave consequences may well be apprehended.
If this educational pressure was confined to a few individuals
there would not be the same danger, but when the great
majority of our New England girls are thus crowded, its effects
become widely extended and far-reaching into the future. The
remark has been made, " Educate a woman, and you educate a
race.'' This saying is full of meaning, and capable of different
interpretations. Its meaning or application must depend upon
the term " educate "?how and in what way it is done. 1 his
" educating " should have reference to the future as well as to
the present, to the body as well as to the mind; for the highest
developments of brain and nerve tissue alone will never go far
towards educating a race?in fact, it will inevitably run out.
Grod lias established most intimate relations between one
generation and another by the laws of inheritance. As yet
these laws are very imperfectly understood, but enough is known
to show that these laws depend upon certain conditions, which
must be carefully studied and taken into account. These con-
ditions and laws cannot always be ignored or set aside with
impunity.

while it may require several generations for the full de-
velopment of these laws, the first links in the chain seem the
more important. If an education that breaks down and im-
pairs the physical energies of the system, tends to defeat the
wise operations of those laws?if this supreme devotion of
mental culture alone, combined with other influences in society,
is calculated to establish generally a standard of living so high
and expensive that the great majority of young people have
neither the means nor the physical strength to adopt and carry
it out?if such is the result of this state of things, that it
must and does interfere directly with the duties of domestic lite
and the objects of the marriage institution, is it not time to
pause and consider whither, as a people, we are drifting ? It
may be said that education is not the cause of such a state of
things or condition of society and the evils that threaten, but
it constitutes the leading, if not the most powerful, agency in
society. This education commences early with the girl?shapes
her habits and character for life, and the influence of woman
dictates the fashions of the day and moulds our domestic insti-
tutions.

This high pressure of educational influences does not extend
much farther back than one generation, and as a people we
are just entering upon the second, but we find already unmis-
takable signs of physical degeneracy. The registration and
census reports are bringing to light startling facts in respect to
decline in the birth-rate, to the diminution of marriages, to
the permanence of the family institution and changes in popu-
lation, &c. Should the same causes continue and increase, as
they may, corresponding results will follow, and the next
generation will witness in those matters still greater changes.
Inasmuch as a primary cause of the evils that have been
alluded to is, we believe, closely connected with the school
system, we would earnestly call the attention of teachers and
the friends of education to consider if some reform cannot be
effected, and especially to the importance of physical culturc,
in the case of girls. Said President Eliot a few days since, in
addressing the alumni of Harvard University :?" Now every-
thing depends with us and in the learned professions upon
vigour of body. The more I see of the future of young men
that go out from these walls, the more it is brought home to
me that professional success, and success in all the learned
callings, depends largely upon the vigour of the body, and that
the men who win great professional distinction have that as the
basis of their activity." Now, if young men must depend for
success in life upon the " vigour of the body," is it not equally
important for young women, who are to be their competitors in
t le learned professions, and in various departments of business,
ut what is still more important, who are to be, in the broadest
and fullest sense, the "educators of the race"?
