The lunacy laws
=================

235
Art. v.?
The Parliamentary Committee which sat during1 last year to
inquire into the working1 of our Lunacy Acts has brought forth
no fruit?as we suggested in a previous number, ex nihilo nihil
fit. Mr. Dillwyn, who alone is responsible for the Committee,
has introduced a Bill, but nothing has been as yet decided.
We give the valuable remarks and suggestions of the Com-
missioners on the existing Lunacy Laws; these appear to fill a
gap long existing, and should be carefully read and studied by
all interested in the question of Lunacy.
" In the course of the Parliamentary Session of 1877, on the
motion of Mr. Dillwyn, M.P. for Swansea, a Select Committee
of the House of Commons was appointed 'to inquire into the
Operation of the Lunacy Law so far as regards the Security
afforded by it against violation of Personal Liberty.'
" This Committee proceeded to take evidence, but had not
made a final report at the end of that Session. It was there-
fore re-appointed in February 1878, and presented a final report
to the House in the following month.
" It was with some satisfaction, but with no surprise, that we
found that the Committee, after sitting 27 days to receive
evidence, and examining a great number of witnesses, including
the persons who had promoted the inquiry, and who held very
strong opinions as to the objectionable and dangerous character
.of the present system, were able to report as their conclusion
that, 'Although the present system was not free from risk,
which might be lessened though not wholly removed by amend-
ments in the existing law and practice, yet, assuming that the
strongest cases against the present system were brought before
them, allegations of mala fides, or of serious abuses, were not
substantiated.'
" Such language, guarded though it be, is, we repeat, not
unsatisfactory to us, on whom necessarily rests much of the
responsibility for the due administration ot the Lunacy Law.
" Among other suggestions contained in the Report of this
Committee, is one of the importance of which we have long
been convinced, namely, that the existing Lunacy Acts should
be consolidated.
" The Secretary of State for the Home Department having,
since the presentation of the Keport of the Select Committee,
23G THE LUNACY LAWS.
informed the House of Commons that your Lordship has the
amendment of the Lunacy Laws under consideration, we are
perhaps justified in assuming that, in due time, Bills for the
consolidation of the Lunacy Acts (a work advised by us as far
back as 1868) will be presented for the consideration of Parlia-
ment. A proper opportunity will then arise for considering
what amendments ought to be introduced, and due weight will,
no doubt, be given to the recommendations of the Select Com-
mittee.
" For ourselves, we are not disposed to advocate any radical
changes in the existing law regarding the care and treatment
of the insane, and in particular, so far as our present experience
extends, we are quite satisfied that the present system of certifi-
cation, both of private and pauper lunatics, and of visitation of
the asylums, hospitals, licensed and unlicensed houses where
they are received, affords, in practice, ample safeguards as well
against the admission of persons of sound mind, as for the dis-
charge of the insane patients without undue detention.
" At the same time we are far from thinking that no im-
provements could be made in the existing regulations. On the
contrary, our daily experience of the working of the Acts has
induced us to note many points where amendment would be
useful.
" The present occasion does not appear suitable for stating
seriatim all these points. This could only be done on the pre-
paration of Bills for consolidation and amendment; and indeed
very many minor difficulties which have from time to time
arisen on the construction of the Acts would disappear on re-
drafting the faulty clauses, and further experience may, of
course, show the desirability of other improvements.
" We think, however, that we may with propriety avail our-
selves of this opportunity of suggesting, for your Lordship's
consideration, and in anticipation of any legislation, the follow-
ing modifications of the present system as to the reception of
patients under order and certificates, on which that system
chiefly rests, and at the same time we may notice a few other,
and perhaps the most important, of the miscellaneous amend-
ments which we should be glad to see effected.
" 1. And, first, as to Medical Certificates:
" The present form is certainly susceptible of improvement.
The names of the persons (if any) furnishing facts indicative
of insanity not observed by the certifier himself, together with
their addresses, should be given. In the case of private patients
it has long been our practice to require the names of informants,
but we should be glad to have both names and addresses made
a statutory requirement in all cases. The alterations we pro-
TIIE LUXACY LAWS. 237
pose will appear more clearly from the form of certificate which
we have caused to be drafted, and which will be found in the
Appendix (P).*
" 2. As to the Order for Eeception:
" In private cases this is a mere request addressed to the
person taking- charge of the patient, to admit him into the
asylum or other house. It might be well to substitute the
word ' authority' or ' request' for the word ' order.'
" As the law stands, the order in private cases may be signed
by anyone who chooses to take the responsibility, and who has
seen the patient within a month. He must state his relation-
ship, or if no relation, ' other circumstances in connection with'
the patient.
" It sometimes happens, though not very frequently, that in
the urgency of the case no relative can be found to sign the
order, which has therefore to be given by a friend or acquaint-
ance, and indeed, occasionally, by a servant. Great exception
has lately been taken to this, and where it can be avoided it is
doubtless undesirable. At the same time we are bound to say
that we are unable to recall any instance in which we have had
occasion to question the good faith of orders so made.
" We should be loth to insist in all cases on the signature of
a relative, for instances undoubtedly occur when immediate
steps must be taken, and no relative can be found. For
example, a foreigner, in good or fair circumstances, becomes
insane, and unless his banker or agent, his fellow clerk, or the
landlord of his hotel, comes forward to sign the order, he must
be treated, to his manifest disadvantage, as a lunatic wandering
at large, or not under proper care or control, and must be sent,
through the police or a relieving officer, to a pauper asylum,
with, in all likelihood, especially in London, a preliminary
detention in a workhouse. We think, however, that the order
or authority should state distinctly that no relative is available,
and should give more precisely than by the present form is
required, the reason for the signature. Added to this, power
might be given to us to inquire into the circumstances of the
signature, and to permit the substitution, as the person entitled
to discharge, of some relative or other person willing to assume
the responsibility, or of the person who makes, or proposes to
make, the payments for the patient's maintenance. This
would be in accordance with one of the recommendations of the
Select Committee of the House of Commons. It should be
expressly enacted that no minor should sign an order.
" By the Act 9 Greorge IV. cap. 41, being the Act of Parlia-
ment which, up to 1832, regulated the care and treatment of
* See page 247.
238 THE LUNACY LAWS.
o
the insane in licensed houses, it was provided that the person
by whose authority a patient was admitted should, personally,
or by a deputy specially appointed, visit the patient once at
least in every six months, though no special penalty was
imposed in case of non-compliance. A similar provision was
inserted in the draft of the repealing and amending Act of
1832 (2 & 3 Will. IV. c. 107), but was struck out of the Bill
by the House of Lords ; and in 1845, when the present Act was
passed, it was not re-inserted. Since then the principle has been
adopted in the case of lunatics so found by inquisition, whose
Committees enter into an undertaking to visit them periodically.
" Although in some recent and acute cases of insanity the
visits of friends may have a prejudicial effect on the patient,
and therefore a compulsory personal visit ought not to be
insisted on from the particular individual who may have signed
the order, yet we think that the principle is right which would
enforce on the friends of patients the obligation to make in-
quiries after their welfare, and to ascertain from time to time
that their treatment is proper.
" To enforce visits of this kind under a penalty would, we
think, be impossible; but it occurs to us as feasible to subjoin
to the form of the authority for reception, an undertaking by
the person signing it to visit, either personally or by deputy,
once in six months.
" The Select Committee made a recommendation as to such
visits, adopting suggestions emanating from our chairman and
another member of the Board.
" A draft of an ' authority,' embracing these suggestions, will
be found prefixed to the draft of certificate in Appendix (P).*
"With regard to orders for admission of pauper lunatics,
which stand on a different footing, a modification of the
language of the 67th and 68th sections of the Act 16 & 17 Vie.
cap. 97, and corresponding changes in the form of order, are,
we think, needed, so as to make clear what we believe to have
been the intention of the Legislature, viz., that the justice, or
the officiating clergyman and the relieving officer, shall not
merely (as we know is now often done) sign the order after
reading the medical officer's certificate, but shall be required to
examine the lunatic in the presence of and jointly with the
medical officer himself.
" No order of admission for a pauper lunatic should be made
by an officiating clergyman and relieving officer, except after
notice to a justice, and this should be made more distinctly
than at present a condition of the validity of such order. The
relieving officer should state in the order the reason why, after
* See page 246.
THE LUNACY LAWS. 239
such notice given, the justice could not attend to examine the
patient, or what reason exists for the patient not being taken
to the justice for the purpose.
" These orders in their present form are on the face of them
perfectly regular, even though no notice of the lunatic has in
fact been given to a justice, and the form itself, we think,
should therefore be altered.
" 3. It would, we think, be advisable to extend the prohibi-
tion against the admission of private patients on certificates
signed by certain relatives of the person signing the order, or
taking the charge, to connections by marriage, as wife's father
or brother, stepson, or daughter's husband.
" 4. The so-called statement of mental condition of the patient
forwarded to our office after two and within seven days sub-
sequent to admission, should be made by Statute more precise
than it at present needs to be so, as to constitute, in fact, an
additional certificate. It should set forth, as a 'certificate'
now does, the facts observed by the medical superintendent or
attendant, leading to the conclusion that the patient is insane,
and stating whether any improvement has been observed, and
giving a succinct note of the main features of the case.
" The requirements of the present Acts are fulfilled if the
medical officer gives merely the form of the mental disorder,
and reports the bodily health to be ' good ' or ' inditferent,'
as the case may be, and most ' statements ' contain little more,
unless indeed some doubt exists as to the continuance of the
insanity, when longer explanations are inevitable.
"From some asylums, however, and notably from the Wor-
cester and the Wilts asylums, and from Brislington House, we
receive ' statements,' giving concise particulars of health, espe-
cially the mental health of the patient, which we frequently
find of great service.
"This 'statement' should be headed 'First Report,' and
we accept the recommendation of the Select Committee, framed
indeed upon a suggestion emanating from our chairman, that a
second report of mental and bodily condition should in all cases
be transmitted to us at the expiration of a month after admis-
sion of the patient.
" 5. The Select Committee, while not pronouncing either for
or against the continuance of licensed houses, advocate the
extension of institutions of the character of the present
registered hospitals.
" While of opinion that for the reception of the richer class
of patients licensed houses under proper management are not
unsuitable, and will continue to find favour with the friends
of such patients, rather than quasi public institutions, we are
240 THE LUNACY LAWS.
well aware that for persons of small means, and for the class
removed a degree or two above the mechanic paid by weekly
wages, an increase in the number of public institutions for the
insane, adequately supported, would be a great boon.
" The Select Committee appear to think that establishments
of this kind might be provided, in the first instance, by a com-
pulsory charge on the county rate, as in the case of asylums.
" It is impossible for us to say whether or no such a propo-
sition would find favour with Parliament or with the country;
but we feel that any extension of the registered hospital system
on its present basis must be accompanied by stricter pro-
visions than now exist both as to foundation and as to
management.
" While acknowledging the advantages which many of the
existing lunatic hospitals offer, and while making no charges
against the present management of any of them, for, as a rule,
it is very good, we think that it is not too much to say that
any one of these institutions, under the existing law, and in the
hands of a weak committee, might easily be worked so as to
become, instead of a philanthropic and charitable foundation,
an establishment maintained mainly for the personal benefit
of the resident staff, subject to none of the control exercised
by commissioners and justices over the proprietor of a licensed
house.
"To obviate these objections, and others which have from
time to time arisen, we woidd suggest several provisions, of
which the following is a summary :?
(a) All hospitals where lunatics are received should be
registered as at present, but applications for registration
should contain a statement of the nature of the proposed
hospital, who are the founders, what persons, and by
whom appointed, are to form the Governing Body, what
class of patients, and at what average payments, are to
be received.
(b) Plans of the building and estate should be deposited in
our office.
(c) Prior to registration the premises should be inspected,
and a report made thereon to our Board.
(d) Registration should be, primarily, a matter for the
discretion of this Board, and should not be compulsory,
as at present.
(6) Should the Board decline to register the hospital, a
statement of their reasons should be laid before the
Secretary of State, who should decide absolutely
whether the certificate, presentlv referred to, is to issue
or not.
THE LUNACY LAWS. 241
(/) If the Board is satisfied with the constitution of the
hospital and the building, &c., or is directed by the
Secretary of State to register, a provisional certificate
of registration should be issued, to be valid for six
months, or until approval by the Secretary of State of
the regulations to be proposed, as at present, by the
Governing Body. During currency of the provisional
certificate, the Governing Body to be at liberty to
receive patients.
(,g) On approval of the Eegulations, a complete certificate
of registration to issue.
(h) Within three months of passing of the Act, all hos-
pitals, except Bethlehem, ought, we think, to deposit
plans of land, of whatever tenure, occupied by the
Governing Body, and on any new purchase or hiring of
land, fresh plans should be deposited. No building in
the occupation of the Governing Body should be deemed
part of the hospital for any purpose connected with the
care and treatment of patients, unless the same be
situate wholly upon some part of the land of which
plans are deposited. The reception of patients in
any buildings not so situate should be a misdemeanour.
The superintendent and all others concerned in taking
charge should then be liable to the same penalties
as persons receiving lunatics in an unlicensed house.
(i) The accounts of Hospitals, audited by a public ac-
countant, should be printed annually, and a copy sent
to us, together with a list of names and addresses of
members of the Governing Body, and principal officers,
medical or otherwise.
(k) Our Board should have power, with the previous con-
sent in writing of the Secretary of State, given upon a
representation from the Board, and after such inquiries
as the Secretary of State might please to make, in case of
wilful neglect of, or disobedience to, Regulations,. to pro-
hibit by sealed order the further reception of patients for a
period not exceeding six months. At the end of that
time further power should exist, with like consent, to'
order the Hospital to be closed.
(I) No person directly or indirectly concerned in supplying
the hospital with goods of any kind, and no medical
officer thereof, should be a member of the Governing
Body.
" 6. As noticed in our thirtieth Report, the system of re-
moving patients from licensed houses and hospitals to the
seaside, or elsewhere, for a change, has extended much of late
242 THE LUNACY LAWS.
years, and is a most beneficial arrangement, much to be en-
couraged, under proper checks.
" Several committees of hospitals and proprietors of asylums
engage furnished houses at the seaside, to which, during the
season, their patients are brought in relays. Such a plan was
never thought of in 1845, when the Act 8 & 9 Vic. c. 100
was passed, and consequently some question has heie and there
been raised as to its legality.
"The practice, we think, should now be distinctly legalised,
as it is greatly to the advantage of patients. It would not
be difficult to provide against any abuse; as, for example, by
requiring notice to be given to the clerk of the peace of the
county that, under sanction of the Commissioners, Visitors,
or Committee, as the case might be, two or more lunatics
under certificates would for a specified time be brought to
an unlicensed house within the county for change of air.
Whereupon it might be competent to any two of the Visitors
of licensed houses in that county to enter and inspect at their
pleasure.
" As it is desirable that we should always be acquainted
with the movements of patients, especially private patients,
we should recommend that notice should be sent to us when-
ever leave of absence is given, on trial, or for the benefit of
health, to any patient in a registered hospital or provincial
licensed house.
" 7. The death of a person in charge of a single patient, and
the consequent requirement of a new order or authority, ought
not, as at present, to involve the procuring of fresh certificates.
This is often a hardship to persons of small means, and it,
besides, occasions unnecessary disturbance to the patient him-
self. Power should, we think, be given to transfer the patient,
but not without our previous consent, into the care of a person
substituted for the deceased.
" 8. There appears to be no reason why the present powers
of the Commissioners to discharge a patient from an hos-
pital or licensed house, on being satisfied that he is detained
without sufficient cause, should not extend to a single patient.
" 9. The provisions against ill-using and abusing patients
should extend to make the carnal knowledge of a female
patient by any officer, attendant, servant, or artisan employed
in or about an asylum, hospital, or licensed house, an indictable
offence.
" 10. With regard to idiot children of the private and the
pauper class, power should be given to relax, in the case of
hospitals or licensed houses where idiot children and congenital
imbeciles alone are to be kept, the rules as to residence of a
TIIE LUNACY LAWS. 243
medical officer, and as to the constant entries in case books
and medical journals.
" A few words added to the existing provisions on tlie subject
would make it more clear than at present that justices can (if
they desire) restrict the use of a separate or joint county Asylum
to the reception of idiots and congenital imbecile cases. Ex-
press power might well be added to charge boards of guardians
with the expense, not only of maintenance and clothing, but
of the industrial training of these objects of compassion.
"11. Power should be given to appoint a substitute for a
Commissioner temporarily disabled by illness or unavoidably
absent. Such a power exists in the case of ' the Lord Chan-
cellor's Visitors of Lunatics,' and in that of the County Court
Judges.
" Having thus briefly enumerated the principal of those
amendments in the Lunacy Law which from time to time have
occurred to us as desirable, we will, with your Lordship's permis-
sion, proceed to notice, so far as appears to lie in our province,
those recommendations of the Select Committee which have not
been already touched upon.
" The Committee, after suggesting admission in case of
emergency on a single medical certificate (which, we may re-
mark, is already provided for in the case of private patients
under the existing law), recommend (page iv of Report) that in
all other cases two certificates should be required. This can
only apply to pauper patients, and in every such case a magis-
trate can at present, if not satisfied, require two certificates.
We should not object to make a second certificate compulsory,
but we must point out that this would involve additional ex-
pense to ratepayers, and we do not ourselves think it necessary
as a protection.
t; We should raise no objection to the introduction into England
of the Scotch law, that an order of reception should be valid for
three years only, with a special report at the end of that time
from the medical superintendent, to be repeated at the end of
each subsequent year. (Report, p. iv.)
" The Committee (Report, p. v), without making a distinct
recommendation for amending the law, dwell on the importance
that detention should cease as soon as the patient is no longer
dangerous to himself or others, and is not likely to benefit by
further detention. They believe frequent and careful visitation
to be the surest mode of guarding against unduly prolonged
detention, with full power in the hands of the Commissioners to
order discharge, and in the more general adoption of probation-
ary discharge.
" The Committee have here omitted an important qualification,
244 THE LUNACY LAWS.
viz., that the patient, though neither dangerous to himself nor to
others, nor likely to benefit by further treatment, should not be
of such habits as would offend against public decency or morality,
if allowed to be at large. If remitted to the care of friends,
they would of course be responsible for his conduct, and even
where detention in an Asylum may no longer be proper, detention
under certificates in a private house may still be necessary. It
must always be remembered that the Committee discovered no
cases of ( undue detention.'
" The Committee's remark as to probationary discharge ap-
plies (to judge by the context) rather to Scotland than to Eng-
land, where discharge upon trial is an everyday occurrence.
" The Committee (page v) repeat, on the subject of the risk
of mal-treatment by attendants, observations constantly made
by us.
" A further suggestion is made (on page v), that reports
should be sent to the Commissioners of patients ' kept under
restraint' (we use the language of the Committee) in private
families or religious houses, not for profit. The reports to be
confidential, and the patients confirmed lunatics.
" We should be glad to see this suggestion pass into law ; but
the mere report would be of no use unless we had power to visit,
and to some extent regulate treatment, as, for instance, by in-
sisting on periodical medical visitation, and entries thereof in a
book. The only way to secure any such registration would pro-
bably be that suggested by Dr Nugent (Q. 2879-81, Evidence
taken by the Committee), to make it penal for the medical at-
tendant to refrain from reporting where the illness and conse-
quent restraint or detention had lasted for a period of, say, six
months.
" The recommendation (page v) as to visits by two medical
men, to be sent by any person with the sanction of the Com-
missioners, to test the condition of any person under restraint,
appears to require no alteration in the law to cause it to take
effect, as the power exists.
" The opinions and suggestions as to workhouse manage-
ment, expressed on page vi of the Report, we leave to the con-
sideration of the Local Government Board.
" The Committee make a suggestion (Report, p. vi) as to the
removal of restrictions on voluntary boarders, whose admission,
they say, is to be reported to the Commissioners. The system
of admitting boarders has answered well. We are quite pre-
pared to extend it to any person who at any time has been an
inmate of any institution for the insane, or has been a single
patient (either as a lunatic so found, or under certificates).
But we do not recommend the indiscriminate admission of
THE LUNACY LAWS. * 245
persons never certified as insane. The following objections
may be sufficient:
" 1. The fear of attempts at evasion of the law by introducing
as boarders persons who ought to'be under certificates.
" 2. The fear of the introduction of mere drunkards.
" 3. The fear of crowding the house to the inconvenience of
the insane patients.
" The previous consent of ourselves or the Visitors should
remain a sine qua non. Notice of admission is thus scarcely
necessary.
" There can be no objection to the recommendation of the
Committee (Report, p. vii.), that the grounds of refusal by
superintendents to permit access to patients be entered in the
case-book and communicated to us.
" In spite of any evidence to the contrary which may have
been brought before the Committee, we do not believe (and we
conceive ourselves peculiarly well able to judge of such a
matter) that any real grievance exists as to the detention of
patients' letters under the present system, which requires all
those addressed to us, the Visitors and Committees of Hospitals,
to be forwarded unopened, the rest to be exhibited to the
officials on their next visit. We may remark, parenthetically,
that the Committee lay under some misconception as to the
amount of labour occasioned by the examination of letters
detained. The majority of them being obviously unfit for
transmission, are easily dealt with on the spot.
" We must very strongly object to the proposal of the Com-
mittee that all letters of patients not forwarded by the medical
superintendent should be sent to us unopened. This would be
a great grievance to the patients themselves. It is impossible
that we should have in every case that full information as to
the patient's exact state of mind at the time of writing, his
family affairs, and other circumstances, which alone would
enable us to judge whether a letter coherently expressed, and
not containing matter of an obviously improper character,
ought or ought not to be sent to the person to whom it is
addressed.
" If the letter were in the end kept back the patient would
gain nothing; if it were posted it might not be until after
several days' delay, and after critical examination in a public
office.
" The Committee themselves remark that it is plainly almost
impossible to prevent the fraudulent suppression of letters.
The scheme which they suggest will certainly not prevent it,
supposing a medical superintendent thought it worth his while
to suppress them.
PART II. VOL. V. NEW SERIES. S
24G * TIIE LUNACY' LAWS.
" The Committee quote no evidence in support of their
suggestion (page vii) that every person discharged from confine-
ment should have access, with our consent, to all documents
connected with his detention.
" If this were adopted we fear it would seriously check the
free and unrestrained communication, both to us and to the
medical superintendents and others, of information regarding
cases which at present, as is well known, is treated as strictly
confidential.
" A Bill before Parliament for amending the Medical Act
will, if passed, provide for the acceptance of Scotch and Irish
certificates in England."
Proposed Form of Authority for the Reception of a
Private Patient.
I, the undersigned, being a person aged 21 years and up-
wards, hereby authorise you to receive A. B., a lunatic [*], whom
I last saw at on the [2] day of 18 ,
as a patient into your house [3]. Subjoined is a statement of
particulars relating to the said A. B., whom I undertake to
visit personally, or by some one specially appointed by me,
once at least in every six months while under care and treat-
ment under this authority.
(Signed) Name.
Rank or profession (if any).
Full postal address.
Degree of relationship (by blood or mar-
riage) to patient.
[If not a relation, the person signing to
state as briefly as possible: 1. Why the
authority is not signed by a relation.
2. His connection with or interest (if
any) in the patient, or the circum-
stances inducing him or her to sign.]
Dated this day of 18 .
To , Proprietor or Superintendent of House [4]
[or Hospital].
['1 Or an idiot, or a person of unsound mind.
[2] Some day -within a calendar month from the date of the authority.
[3] Or hospital.
[4] Describing houso or hospital hy situation and name.
THE LUNACY LAWS. 247
Statement of Particulars.
(As in Schedule A., No. 1, 16 & 17 Vic. c. 96, witli slight
variations.)
Proposed Form of Certificate.
I, the undersigned A. B., do hereby certify as follows :
1. I am a person registered under the Medical Act, 1857,
and I am in the actual practice of the medical profession.
2. On the day of 18 , at [H in the county [2]
of separately from any other practitioner, I personally
examined C. D., of [3] in the county [4]
of ? [5], and came to the conclusion that he is a
[lunatic, an idiot, or a person of unsound mind~\ and a proper
person to be taken charge of and detained under care and treat-
ment.
3. I formed this conclusion on the following grounds, viz.:?
(?) Facts indicating insanity observed by myself at the
time of examination [6].
(?) Facts communicated by others [7].
4. I make this certificate having first read the clause of
the Act of Parliament printed below.
(Signed) A. B., of [8]
[Clause of Act imposing penalties for wilful false statements
in certificates.]
['] Insert the name of the street or place, with number or name of house, or,
should there be no number, then insert Christian and surname of occupier.
[2] City or borough, as the case may be.
L3] Insert residence of patient.
I ] City or borough, as the case may be.
[5] Insert profession or occupation, if any.
[6] If the same or other facts were observed previous to the time of the
examination, the certifier is at liberty to subjoin them ina separate paragraph.
[7] The names and Christian names (if known) of informants to be given,
together with their names and addresses.
[8] Insert full postal address.
