Made Poets
===========

30
Art. III.?
No. 2.
This wretched brain gave way,
And I became a wreck, at random driven,
"Without one glimpse of reason or of heaven.?Moore.
Robert Ferguson, 1750.
Religious Melancholia.

The central points in the biography of this unfortunate man of
genius are that he is first known as a rollicking student in the
University of St. Andrews, nest as an attorney's clerk, plunging
in the intemperance which at one time characterised this class,
then as a lunatic in confinement labouring under a mortal
disease, and dying at a, comparatively early age. He entered
the university an incarnation of fun, folly, and frolic ; and it is
suspected that he utilised the classic groves of Academe for
pensive loitering and golf-playing, that the Muses of his in-
spiration were chiefly the laughing Clio, the dancing Thalia, the
heaven-yclep'd Euphrosyne. He received his education gratuit-
ously, but hung out from his bedroom window a purse, to
indicate his affluence, was instinct with mirth and mischief,
quizzed his professors, tormented the liall-porter, wrote an
elegy on this official, but had displayed so much gentleness and
geniality of disposition in his persecutions that the supposed
defunct described him as a " tricky callant, but a fine laddie
for a' that." Touched to the quick by an allusion to the
sliabbiness of his dress, from those with whom he resided, to
the effect that a visit to the tailor was more necessary than a
visit from the Muses, the theological aspirant is next met with
absorbed amid the deeds and dust of the commissary clerk of
the Scotch metropolis, dreaming more of Crambo Clink than
of engrossing. His compositions were couched in a Scotch
dialect less mellifluous and colloquial than that of Burns,
perhaps because he restricted himself to its exclusive use, got
up its Doricisms and Scotticisms at a time when they were
passing into disuse and regarded as vulgar. It is painful to
watch the death of a language, especially if it contains relics
of Anglo-Saxon and far-distant antiquity. Scotch is evidently
doomed to early extinction by gentility, fusion of races, &c.,
and political economists will rejoice o'er its premature decay.
The present time and causes still in operation have swept away
many similar vestiges of perishing peoples. It is said that
about 100 years ago an old woman in Truro spoke the ori-
ginal British tongue. This must have been Graelic; and now,
notwithstanding the galvanisation of Professor Blackie, it is
already extinct, or has migrated to America. Anthropologists
are prone to stigmatize the Celt as an irreclaimable savage, as
denied the survival of the fittest, as doomed to extinction
or to fusion with nobler or more durable races. Can this bold
denunciation or prophecy be advertised while we look on the
recent ruler of the destinies of France, the representative of that
heroic army of exiles who left their country, their hopes, their
future, in loyalty to a fugitive prince, a ruined cause; or upon
that descendant of some humble emigrant from the banks of the
Spey, who recently led the armies of America to war, and then
led them back to peace, and who is now gathering honours and
the allegiance of all English-speaking freemen? But the
names of MacMalion and Grant may in the mind of the
caviller embody nothing more than the barbarian virtues which
find expression in the charge, the chase, the carousal; assuredly
they pale in the minds of all beside the names of Macaulay
and Murchison, of the profound and eloquent exponent of
history and of its heroes, and of the exponent of the structure,
the progress, the duration of the world we inhabit. We are not
certain but that to many he who painted with such exquisite?
we might write patriotic?taste and success the " land of the
mountain and the flood," and that most characteristic feature
of its brae-sides, the bowers of birk, Macculloch, or that she
who has transmitted to us the lilts and lays which long re-
sounded among- the birchin shaws as the lament for " the good
old creed and the good old cause," and still linger as remnants of
national melody, the Countess of Nairn, may not hold a higher
and more endearing rank in the records of Celtic achievement.
The craving for sudden and brief excitement so often claimed
as a virtue is manifested under the form of vice in Celtic
tendencies. The sluggish temperament may require an arti-
ficial stimulant ere it can he roused into enthusiasm or sono
Though attaining great prominence in our social system
as statesmen, poets, philosophers, and men of renins wl
exercising a robust and healthy influence over our national
life, the Scotch have ceased to be a separate people, and the
doom of their language is sealed. Yet I have listened to
Scotch in pulpit, bar, bench, and in polished society, and now
it cannot be heard except in lyrics, sung by our grandmothers,
or by damsels at " our ewes milking," if such a picturesque
practice still exists in the " land of the mountain and the flood."
As Ferguson's promotion in his master's office involved some
of the duties of a tipstaff, he retained his position with narrow
emoluments and narrower enjoyments. The latter consisted
chiefly in the jollifications of some cellar tavern, where we can
conceive that his own songs formed a staple supply of delight
and drollery, tavern orgies which in a humbler and ranker form
may be supposed to have resembled those described by Sir
Walter Scott as " high jinks." How far these meetings were ac-
companied with excess and intemperance is not now known ; but
in every relation of life he seems to have secured kindness, and
friendship, and love. The excitement, fatigue, and exposure
of what is designated by some of his biographers as the " in-
temperate scenes of a country election," while he was under
medical treatment proved too much for his delicate frame,
and with the seeds of common catarrh were sown those of a
more formidable affection of the nervous system. The symp-
toms were those of religious melancholia ; and all attempts to
restore reason and tranquillity by home treatment having
failed, he was consigned to the rude and wretched Bedlam of the
city, which had been constructed from the ruins of the offices
erected by the promoters of the Darian scheme, in itself as
wild and extravagant a delusion as ever flitted athwart the
imagination of any of the inmates ultimately confined within
its walls. There are two observations which are entitled to
introduction at this point. The first is, that a very large
number of poets, ranging from Cowley, Etheridge, Parnell,
Denham, Lee, Moore, to those of lesser repute, have, either
directly or indirectly, fallen victims to intoxication, seeking
in it the dreamland or fairyland which the Indian finds in
his liaschisch, or the stimulation which over-taxed fancy
may crave, or the temporary realisation of what their pen
has described; and secondly, that in the depression which
poets and a large proportion of men of imaginative mind
experience may be discovered at once the provocative to
stimulation, the ever-recurring palliation of excess, and the
commencement of that series of emotive changes which renders
the members of this class so prone to various degrees of moral
unsoundness, if not to actual alienation. May not dejection
or penitential despondency be the basis of dipsomania, and even
of the repeated paroxysms of habitual drunkenness ?

In the squalid, turfless airing-yard around this once lordly,
but even then half-ruined mansion, of which Ferguson was an
inmate, there stood until lately a solitary willow-tree, at the
root of which ?for its branches afforded no shade?he is de-
scribed as often sitting with his book. But these calmer
moments were but the prelude of rapid decay. It is probable
that the poor invalid died of phthisis, and that the close
of life might be cheered by that bright though deceptive
gleam of hope so often present in this disease. Be this as it
may, his actual departure was sad and sorrowful. " A few days
before his dissolution, his mother and sister found him lying
on his straw bed, calm and collected. The evening was chill
and damp ; he requested his mother to gather the bed-clothes
about him and sit on his feet, for he said they were so cold as
to be almost insensible to the touch. She did as he requested,
and his sister took her seat by the bedside. He looked wist-
fully in his mother's face, and said, ' Oh, mother, this is kind.'
Then addressing his sister, he said, ' Might you not come
frequently and sit beside me ? You cannot imagine how
comfortable it would be. You might fetch your seam, and sit
beside me.' The mother and sister answered only with tears
and sobs. ' What ails you ?' said the dying poet; ' why
sorrow for me ? I am very well cared for here, and want for
nothing?only it is cold, very cold. You know I told you it
would come to this at last. Oh, do not go yet, mother?I hope
to be soon?oh, do not go yet! do not leave me !' But the
keeper motioned that the time was past, and they must depart.
They never again saw Robert Ferguson in life. He was found
a few mornings thereafter dead in his cell." * The hardness and
desertion here detectable were not necessarily signs of cruelty or
indifference. The custodians of the insane a hundred years ago
feared their patients and fled from them; or, regarding them as
possessed by Satan or his emissaries, they fettered, it may be
flogged, they chained, starved, stupefied, in order to subdue;
subjugation being in such eyes the first step towards cure.
Burns writes:?

Ill-fated genius !?heaven-taught Ferguson !
"What heart that feels and will not shed a tear,
To think life's sun did set ere well begun
To shed its influence on thy bright career.
Oh! why should truest worth and genius pino
Beneath the iron grasp of want and woe,
While titled knaves and idiot greatness shine
In all the splendour fortune can bestow ?

In touching so lightly upon the failings and temptations
to which Ferguson was exposed, it must be notorious that
they were the characteristics not merely of the class to
which he belonged, but of the time in which he lived. Perhaps
no educated man was distinguished by absolute sobriety,
certainly none were abstainers. In my view of the subject,
the craving for stimulants has become at different periods
epidemic, as have many other appetites, passions, and peculiari-
ties. There seems to be a rising, a falling, and a full tide in
the vice or the disease of intemperance. There are waves of
increase and decrease, and it has been affirmed that we are
threatened with a deluge. In examining the very curious
statistics submitted to the Commissioners appointed to inquire
into the subject, these alternations are discoverable, although
on the whole the maxim of indulgence has never reached so
alarming a height as at present. Political economists declare
that these changes depend upon the rise and fall of wages, and
that the blessings of prosperity and abundant earnings always
entail the danger, and at present the curse, of intoxication and
degeneracy. This law may affect the industrial classes, but it
cannot affect the community generally, as in the upper strata
of society where no such fluctuations in income occur, and
where the tendency to luxury in other respects has been most
marked during the last fifty years, drunkenness, even deep
drinking, are almost unknown.

The works left by Ferguson consist chiefly of eclogues, elegies,
addresses to external nature, &c., and, considering his tempera-
ment and tendencies, it has been thought curious that so few
expressions of a sensuous or a voluptuous kind are to be found
in his writings. Not as a critical discovery but as a psycho-
logical fact, it should be mentioned that neither Coleridge,
Wordsworth, nor Southey, all of them philosophical, if not
metaphysical poets, and rich in feeling, abound in amorous
epithets or addresses, not even in the higher manifestations of
love. Yet the latter seems to have inspired even in his senile
decay sentiments of the most exquisite devotion and self-
sacrifice, of which his second marriage is a glorious proof.
Charles Fenno Hoffman (New York, United States), 1806.
Mania Errdbunda.

I he life of this poet reminds me of Turner's landscapes,
where the elements are few and simple, the composition un-
elaborate, and where large portions require to be filled up by
the imagination. His mind-picture may be said to consist of
a passionate and picturesque love and admiration for tlie
woods and wilds, the haunts and habits of the children on the
prairie and the hunting path, as they were retiring before
eastern civilisation, and of a keen appreciation and power of
representation of all that was romantic or beautiful in the
history and pursuits and ultimate fate of those aborigines, while
all the background on the canvas has to be occupied by the
melancholy and monotony of twenty-five years in a mad-liouse.
If Cooper was the annalist, Hoffman may be styled the poet of
the Mohawks, Hurons, Iroquois, and all the nobler and gentler
tribes before they were corrupted and annihilated by fire-water,
vicious contamination, imported disease, and by manners and
customs to which they fail to adapt themselves. He was a
graft between the wild and the acclimatised vine. Alas that
the memory of a spirit which understood and had almost
mingled with the best and purest feelings of both races should
have almost passed away with the children of the desert,
except when a pensive tribute is awarded by a kindred heart
(Bryant), and when some of the songs, such as " Monterey," and
" Sparkling and Bright," are sung by those who know nothing
of their origin!

From the college he passed to the desk of a lawyer, but,
impatient both of learned and legal logic, he when a lad of
sixteen seems to have emancipated himself from all thraldom,
engaged in literary contributions to periodicals, and subsequently
in a sort of nomadic life which combined the stimulus of some
slight degree of danger with an introduction to some of the most
genial as well as some of the grandest scenes of his then only
partially settled country. The first and most pronounced
instance of this love of adventure and unreclaimed nature
occurred in 1833, when, on horseback and alone, he traversed
many of the north-west and south-west states, encountering,
perhaps courting, hardship, discomfort, snowstorm, and every
vicissitude of weather. He was proud of this exploit, and
published a narrative of his journey ; but, according to a rela-
tive, he was afterwards constantly to be found on the waters
or on the banks of the magnificent Hudson, and in the regions
where his enthusiastic admiration of external nature and his
interest in the Indian hunters who still lingered amid the
primeval woods might be gratified. A very large portion of his
verses exhale the very odour, repeat the musical sounds, paint the
shade of the forest and the gleam of the fresh and sweeping
savannahs, which he preferred to the marts of commerce or the
busy hum of his fellow-men; and we find that about one-half
of his published poems are devoted to 44 Forest Musings " and

" Lays of the Hudson," while many others commemorate events or
scenes upon the border-lands between the allocations of the Red
and White Man. They are the productions of a man of great
sensibility with a poet's lip and a painter's hand, but not of
great originality of genius.

This craving for solitude occasionally combined with
vagabondage has been felt or affected by genuine poets as well
as poetasters, chiefly of the Byronic or Corsair type. It is not
necessarily misanthropical; it ma}7- be a desire for quiet or
abstraction, or of a fair, unfrequented spot which the fancy of
the dreamer may appropriate as his own, may create into a
realm, peopled, idealised, according to his own standard of
excellence, and perfect, like the Island and adjoining Continent
of the two De Quinceys, or the Jug force of Hartley Coleridge.
It may be a transcript from thoughts to the realities around, a
study to be reproduced in verse. But generally it is the out-
come of a morbid as well as fertile imagination, and I am much
tempted to place this wild escape in search of food or fuel for
rhyme in the same category with the Grolgotha and Chamber of
Horrors, with which Ed. Young surrounded himself when
cultivating the dark and the dismal.

Charles Lamb, 1775.
Melancholia Mania.
(Folie Circulaire.)
It is a true but tattered shred of old wisdom that there is a
skeleton., often many, in every home; but it should be added,
that domestic virtue, peace, pleasure so colour and conceal the
habitual shame, scandal, spectre, that it is generally unfeared,
unnoticed, unknown. The ancient Egyptians carried their
mummified grandfathers to banquets, but the wizened corpses
svere swathed in gold and gems, and perfumed. Then there
are noble sacrifices as well as terrible tragedies in cellars and
garrets as well as in palaces and high places. It is but yester-
day that Lally de Tollendal, the descendant of the grand
chivalrous defender of Louis XVI., rushed from wretchedness in
his cellar and shot himself in our streets. Here, too, is a poor
clerk, living ? in an obscure part of London, amid meagre and
vulgar surroundings ; queer and quakerish in person and aspect,
methodical and precise in habits and manners to the extent of
always going to work by the same street, hanging his hat upon
the same peg, gazing for the same number of hours upon nearly
the same columns of figures, quaint in thought and expression,
kind, gentle, and affectionate in nature, who stands forth a poet,
a martyr, a hero.

It is probable that the gifts and goodness of Charles Lamb
have been over-estimated, hyperbolically described by the
crowd of friends, followers, worshippers, almost all of them men
of genius, high culture, and discrimination ; it is probable that
much of the beauty and nobleness which are interwoven with his
life and literary efforts are due to the intimate association with
these very men, by reflection, or were imparted by intercommunion
growing with the growth and embellishment of his peculiar
powers ; it is affirmed that kindred living in close intimacy grow
like each other in face, in features, and in expression ; it is
certain that such intercourse casts the manners, tastes, opinions
in the same mould, and it is probable that Lamb caught some
rays of pleasantness and imagination from those in whose
intellectual treasures he was constantly sharing, while liis own
angularities, sinuosities, and sensibilities remained untouched ;
but certain it is that this lover of all that was pure and perfect?
this reveller in unexpected affinities, odd antitheses, out-of-the-
way topics, traits, and peculiarities?was, in defiance of his
misfortunes, in despite of his errors, almost because of his
eccentric imagination, one who appealed and still appeals to
those of the finest taste and warmest sympathies. His course
may be arranged into stages or chapters. There was first his
early, close, and long-continued intimacy with Coleridge. They
had been schoolfellows together at Christchurch. They were
linked together by similarity of tastes, sentiments, pursuits,
and this at a season when both were young and fresh and un-
invaded by disease. They were besides connected in their first
literary adventure; but it is worthy of note that of all engaged
in this voyage of discovery?Lamb, C. Lloyd, Coleridge?the wits
were lost or went astray in worthless wool-gathering. The
second era consisted in the invasion of insanity. Of its origin
little is known except that the sufferer was sensitive, susceptible,
and peculiar, occasionally presented strangeness of manner, was
subject to involuntary muscular contractions, tremor of lip,
stammering, irritability, though his ire, like summer lightning,
was brief, bright, innocent; that he branched from a morbid
stem ; that of the personages who appear in his life-drama his
father was an exacting dotard, his mother paraplegic, his sister
a paroxysmal, homicidal maniac, and that a stolid brother lived
apart and perhaps aloft from this sad family group.* His
noble forehead, bis glittering eyes, bave been alluded to, but
bis whole aspect was such as to attract notice. He has been
further represented as theological, metaphysical, perplexed,
despondent. But even where no positive morbidity could be
detected, he was ever betraying " out-of-the-way humours and
opinions," and confessed that " heads with some diverting
twist" were most gratifying to him. It is very strange that
Talfourd should have placed his melancholic above his
humorous vein, but it is quite possible that both sides of his
character were perfectly and equally natural. In a letter to
Coleridge, he has written freely, even sportively, of the first
attack of madness of which we hear. " I know not what suffer-
ing scenes you have gone through at Bristol. My life has been
somewhat diversified of late. The six weeks that finished last
year and began this, your very humble servant spent very agree-
ably in a madhouse at Hoxton. I am got somewhat rational
now, and don't bite anyone. But mad I was! And many a
vagary my imagination played with me, enough to make a
volume if all were told. My sonnets I have extended to the
number of nine since I saw you, and will some day communicate
to you. I am beginning a poem in blank verse, which if I
finish I publish. . . . The sonnet I send you has small
merit as poetry ; but you will be curious to read it when I tell
you it was written in my prison-house in one of my lucid
intervals.

TO MY SISTER.

If from my lips some angry accents fell,
Peevish complaint, or harsh reproof unkind,
'Twas but the error of a sickly mind
And troubled thoughts, clouding the purer well,
And waters clear, of Eeason ; and for me
Let this my verse the poor atonement be?
My verse, which thou to praise wert e'er inclined
Too highly, and with a partial eye to see
No blemish. Thou to me didst ever show
Kindest affection ; and wouldst oft-times lend
An ear to the desponding, lovesick lay,
Weeping my sorrows with me, who repay
But ill the mighty debt of love I owe,
Mary, to thee, my sister and my friend.
The next stage consists in the frightful catastrophe, the
culmination of his destiny, when, in a sudden outburst of
blind fury, his insane sister plunged a carving knife into the
bosom of their helpless mother, and killed her instantly; both
the victim and the parricide remaining unconscious of the
nature of the event. That this sanguinary deed did not overturn
Lamb's reason, that he had nerve-force sufficient to resist the
horrors of the moment and its long train of consequences, is
marvellous ; but that it exercised a powerful influence over his
moral nature, bis sympathy, and responsibility was obvious ; he
felt that it pronounced his doom, that for him animal pleasure,
love?and a filmy love-passage had passed across his life-dream
?marriage, home, were all as shadows, and that the care and
custody or kindly disposal of his maniac charge was the whole
aim and object and duty which remained.

That we never many our first love is sad. That we never
marry any love until we have imbued her with the bloom and
beauty of the first, is sadder.

The violet eye, the tinted cheek, the graces of the childish
form, must encircle with an auriole of first impressions the
mature and matronly sharer in the commonplace, perhaps vapid
or vulgar events of ordinary life. The sparkling miniature
expands into the full-length; it is veneered with the more
delicate polish of romance. Can it be possible that Dante's
Beatrice, Spenser's Rosalind, Petrarch's Laura, Beranger's
Lysette?a serving-wench seen through an auriole, or a score of
blooming " grisettes " rolled into one?and, lastly, Burns's Mary,
are dreams, deliriums, delusions, creations of fancy, that never
lived nor loved, that rose up from some remembered image,
or were created in the depths of consciousness, stimulated the
imagination, elevated the sentiment, and wafted the pure and
pious adoration to the very verge of heaven ? Can it be con-
ceived that the supernatural Laura glided shadow-like through
the domestic circle, side by side with the earth-born, care-
stricken wife of the poet ? Is it credible that the angelic Laura
occupied a niche in the temple of Petrarch's genius and heart
close to the mother of his children, who was neither wife nor
saint nor seraph ? Is it credible that from the same fountain
there flowed the gross pollutions?we almost wrote obscenities
??of the Jolly Beggars, and the pure and prayer-like invocations
to Mary in heaven ? It is noteworthy that the delusions of
insane monks ever led to union with the Virgin, while those of
insane nuns depicted espousals of the Bride of the Saviour.
We have had female lunatics who, misguided hj no special
teaching nor prescribed ecstasies or reveries, claimed in sacri-
legious idea, even in concupiscence, to be united in marriage
with the Lamb.

Then came in Lamb's career a long interval of quiet,
almost happy enjoyment, during which his spirit gave forth the
sweet and elegant utterances of " Elia," during which his humble
ambitions were gratified after his own fashion, during which his
fame and fortune spread greatly in breadth and depth, if not in
elevation, and during which he collected around him in his
Hogarth room, and library of first and rare editions, albeit
garrets, the grandest groups of authors, thinkers, poets,
philosophers that ever met in converse, or yielded their fealty
in friendship as well as in admiration to a fellow-worker
(Godwin, Hazlitt, Wordsworth, Coleridge). It is not to the
credit of biographers, it shakes our trust in the fidelity of
such portraits, when the wrinkles, the scars, the ugliness of
the countenance are omitted, as when the habits of intem-
perance contracted by Lamb at this time, or earlier, are
euphemized or omitted ; except where the anxiety displayed by
his sister on seeing him mix even a second glass during an
animated discussion may be alluded to.

This is the veiled skeleton, the gilded mummy. It reminds
us of draped or coloured statuary, of those caricature photographs
where the mitred, perhaps the glory-crowned head of a saint is
connected with the rude and vulgar trunk and habiliments of a
commonplace mortal. It was perhaps natural, even excusable,
that a craving for stimulants should arise, that relief and
oblivion should be sought from the blight and burden that ever
oppressed; nay, excitement or intoxication may have been but
the analogue or substitute of that moral poison which lurked
within his veins, but the fact should have been told. It is sad
to think that Lamb's latter days were not of the calm and
pleasant sort described by his friend. A great tenderness,
and delicacy, or friendly sensitiveness, has kept back from the
account of Lamb's history much which concerned the horrid
spectre which attended him all through his life. We are led
to believe that in time that great and dreadful trouble had
been softened for him, and had as it were faded out, and that
the evening of his days had been calm and tranquil. This at
least would be the impression on reading the account of his
closing days at Edmonton. But it is said, and it is vouched
for by good authority, that not long before he died he and his
sister had been placed at Enfield in a house called Bay Cottage
with a woman named Kedford, who was accustomed to take
charge of deranged persons. It is said that both required
restraint, and that the woman of the place treated them
cruelly, often locking up brother and sister together in a closet
during some of their fits. There are those who recollect
having seen Mary Lamb at a window tearing up a feather
bed, and scattering the feathers in the air. Fortunately,
friends found out the pitiable state of things, and Charles was
removed in time to Edmonton, where he could die in peace. For
this last scene of all, which has been presented by only one autho-
rity, has been substituted the picture of a quiet, turf-clad grave
in Islington Churchyard, visited daily for eleven long years by a
pensive sister, who ultimately rested beside the precious dust.
Individuals have been haunted for years with the dread of
impending derangement; the phantom being so near and so
real that it mingled with and darkened every joy and hope,
passed into their dreams, ultimately converting the apprehen-
sion into a reality. The substance followed the shadow, the
dread became the cause of the disease. But not only must
Lamb have had a keen sense of the instability of his own tenure
of sanity, but there brooded over him the hideous chimsera of
his sister's periodic frenzy and violence, she sharing with him
a forecast of Bethlem. His letters show that either as an
anticipation or a retrospect her illness and suffering were ever
vividly present. His whole conduct, his domestic arrange-
ments, his simple financial provisions, were regulated by the
scale of her mental tranquillity, by her seclusion in an asylum,
by her temporary return and resumption of household duties.
So precarious was her condition, so minute the foresight and
precautions against her repeated attacks, that whenever he
accompanied her to the country or elsewhere, a strait waistcoat
formed part of the contents of his portmanteau. That the
unfortunate patient herself had some premonitions of an
approaching paroxysm, that these intimations consisted of
depression and melancholy rather than agitation, and that she
voluntarily adopted the course advised by wise and humane
friends, may be inferred from the circumstance that the poet
and his charge were not sorrowful and weeping but calm on
their way to the asylum in which the latter found rest and
refuge so often. That, staggering under all such anxieties and
difficulties, with a dark and lowering future, with few of the
pleasurable supports or solaces by which men usually divert
?r dilute the cares and the cankers which oppress them, he
should have extracted the precious from the baser metal, the
picturesque from the sordid, the ungainly, the awkward, the
romantic from the commonplace; that he should have imparted
gentleness and joy, and even mirth, to all who listened to him
flowing in a pure, continuous stream through the contorted
and poisoned, though not polluted channels of his invention,
except during a spasmodic pang following his mother s murder,
when he burned his MSS., and forswore composition and
books, is one of those triumphs which genius alone can accom-
plish. But let us analyse his springs of character more closely.
He did possess solaces of a lofty kind in religious feeling, in
the perception of the beautiful and the true, and in the calls of
a great and glorious duty.

Nathaniel Lee, 1657.
Mania?(Dipsomania ?).

This unfortunate but celebrated dramatist invited prema-
ture decay and death, it may be, by the fire and fury of his
temperament, by the malign and morbid influence of con-
stitutional tendencies, and assuredly by participation in the
loose and licentious manners and habits prevalent and popular
beyond as well as in his profession. Yet he spent his early
years in the healthy quiet of a parsonage ; he was a West-
minster boy, and completed his education at Trinity College,
Cambridge. At this stage, however, on the beaten and orthodox
highway trodden by our senators, Solons, and upper ten thousand,
he deviated from the accustomed route, and after the in-
variable apprenticeship of play-going and play-writing, he
appeared upon the stage. Here, like others of higher genius
and pretensions of the same order, he proved a lamentable
almost a ludicrous failure, and turned from the attempt to
represent imaginary characters drawn by others to what proved
the more genial and successful task of drawing and highly
colouring characters which might be and were represented by
others. He composed " Sophonisba, or Hannibal's Overthrow
"Nero;" " Grloriana, or the Court of Augustus Csesar;"
"Alexander " Mithridates" Theodosius;" " Csesar Borgia
" Lucius Junius Brutus " Constantine" CEdipus " Duke
of Guise;" " Massacre of Paris " Princess of Cleves all of
which possessed a certain amount of merit, which did not,
however, save them from oblivion. Certain of his tragedies
were the offspring of his lusty youth, certain of his maturer
years, if he ever reached such; some were written when he
was the companion and compotator of the wits and men
of fashion who haunt the green-room or the tavern, and
partake intensely of the inspiration of slashed doublets and
gin twist, while others were the product of long and painful
and repeated seclusion in the cells of Bedlam. It was his
fate to present his works to the pit and the public in an age
of platitudes, of coldness, stiffness, starchedness; of critics who
measured lines and prosed as to the unities rather than dug
out the golden ores of genius ; who were divided into cliques
and clans, and actuated by jealousies, antipathies, and petty am-
bitions, of which the present generation can form no conception.
They were doubtless gratified in dooming and denouncing the
plays of poor Lee, but he secured not merely the approbation of
Addison, who commends his genius highly, observing " that
none of our English poets had a happier turn for tragedy,
although his natural fire and unbridled impetuosity hurried him
beyond all bounds of probability, and sometimes were quite
out of nature but Dr den couches a eulogy in poetry: ?
Such praise is jours ; while you the passions move,
That 'tis no longer feigned, 'tis real love,
Where nature triumphs over wretchod art;
We only warm the head, but you the heart.
Always you warm! and if the rising year,
As in hot regions, bring the sun too near,
'Tis but to make your fragrant spices blow,
Which in our colder climates will not grow.
These praises chiefly refer to the tragedy of " Alexander,"
which is the only one of the long series which has obtained a
permanent place in our modern theatre. It is scarcely con-
ceivable but that an author whose thoughts flowed for nearly
his whole lifetime through channels of rhythmical and poetic
expression, who rarely descended from his tragic stilts, and
seems to have been as familiar with the histrionic art and ex-
citement in his closet as on the boards, and who must have
made the highest and purest models of dramatic literature his
study and science, coidd have avoided the composition of
beautiful and attractive passages. Many of these may be
discovered in his works surrounded or overlaid by baser and
grosser concomitants ; but one example may suffice :?
There's heaven still in thy voice ; but that's a sign
Virtue's departing, for thy better angel
Still makes the woman's tongue his rising ground,
Wags there awhile, and takes his flight for ever.

But it must be confessed that in few of the rejected adven-
turers in the drama are to be found so many objectionable lines
and epithets as in Lee, and that in none of the class of writers
to which these observations apply are there so many proofs?
symptoms they may be styled?of the malady under which they
laboured. These indications consist, mainly, in the repulsive
subjects selected, in the sensational, sanguinary, or melodra-
matic manner in which they are treated, and above all in the
wild, extravagant, exaggerated, and absurd dialogue adopted.
Lee appears either to have been constantly mad, or to have
been subject to recurrent insanity which necessitated repeated
seclusion, and to have retained a certain amount of the taint
and excitement of his alienation even when at liberty. The
" Massacre of Paris " and the " Princess of Cleves " have been
adduced even by his biographers in illustration of this perma-
nent perversion of the imagination.

What would our present playgoers say to the following stage
direction ??

" The scene draws, and discovers a heaven of blood, two suns,
spirits in battle, arrows shot to and fro in the air, cries of
yielding persons, &c. : cries of ' Carthage is fallen,' &c. or
such manifestations of hatred and defiance :?
Were I in heaven, and saw him scorched in flames,
I would not spit my indignation down,
Lest I should cool his tongue.
Or:?

Now by your wrongs, that turn my heart to steel,
Well could I curse away a winter's night,
Though standing naked on a mountain's top,
And think it hut a minute spent in sport.
These quotations must not be regarded as isolated passages;
similar apostrophes recur in every page, and form legitimate
characteristics of the style of the author, especially towards the
close of his career. Although Lee does not appear to have
even coquetted with comedy, nor is there evidence that he
indulged in satire or farce, yet grim jokes have lingered about
the gloomy abodes of his frenzied life that go to show he was
not incapable of either. It is recounted that when in Bedlam
he wittily replied to a coxcomb scribbler, who had the cruelty
to jeer him with his misfortune, by observing that it was an
easy thing to write like a madman, " No; it is not an easy thing
to write like a madman, but it is very easy to write like
a fool." In the same place, but upon another occasion when
writing one of his tragedies, his candle, granted by some
extraordinary extension or breach of asylum discipline, went
out, and provoked by the obscuration of the feeble light from
without by the passing clouds, he is reported to have shouted,
in folly or in frolic, " Jupiter, snuff the moon." Of the cause
or circumstances of his death no precise information has been
preserved except that he perished at the early age of twenty-
four " in a night ramble " in the streets of London.*
Charles Lloyd.

(Circa 1780.)
Melancholia (Paroxysmal).
As withered flower leaves have been found enshrined in
amber, as the fame of annotators has depended chiefly upon
the works which they criticised, and as the faithfulness and
friendship of Boswell have been preserved by his gossip on
the grander qualities of Johnson, so the name, and fame, and
misfortunes of the poet Charles Lloyd are confined exclusively to
the sympathetic writings of a celebrated contemporary. His name
is not to be found in Biographical Dictionaries; his works do
not form part of our libraries ; and except where allusions
have dropped from the lips and pen of Coleridge and Lamb,
the very existence of C. L. as a man of genius, and as the
intimate friend and fellow-labourer of two of the most cele-
brated men of the past generation would be unknown. About
1795 the publication of a volume of poems was projected
by this triumvirate, buoyant with inspiration and hope and
the energies of youth, which was to contain contributions
from each; but I have not seen the work, and introduce
the circumstance to show the high appreciation of the powers
of C. L. by his associates. The first intimation of Lloyd's
mental infirmity appears in the following passage in a letter
from Lamb to Coleridge :?" Poor dear L.! I had a letter
from him yesterday; his state of mind is truly alarming.
He has, by his own confession, kept a letter of mine un-
opened three weeks, afraid, he says, to open it, lest I should
speak upbraidingly to him; and yet this very letter of
mine was in answer to one wherein he informed me that an
alarming illness had alone prevented him from writing."
Statements nearly to the same effect are scattered through the
letters of the same author, and there is reason to believe that
the malady thus faintly shadowed forth ultimately amounted
to derangement requiring confinement, but of the precise
progress or issue I am not entitled to speak more confidently
than by citing the following pregnant note in the " Jovial
Memorials " of Lamb. " Poor Charles Lloyd ! These appre-
hensions were sadly realised. Delusions of the most melan-
choly kind thickened over his latter days, yet left his admirable
intellect free for the finest processes of severe reasoning. At a
time when, like Cowper, he believed himself the especial
subject of Divine wrath, he could bear his part in the most
subtle disquisition on questions of religion, morals, and poetry,
with the nicest accuracy of perception and the most exemplary
candour ; and, after an argument of hours, revert, with a faint
smile, to his own despair !

From another source I have learned that while suffering
under profound dejection C. L. was induced, contrary to his
inclinations and convictions, to accompany a friend to the
theatre. At first he was moody and melancholy; then his
attention was arrested; then he followed the plot and movement
of the drama, yielded himself up to enjoy the humour of the
piece, laughed heartily and. joyously, and returned home cured
and convalescent. The signal power, and generally the benefi-
cence of mimetic impersonation over those of nervous, espe-
cially of excitable and marked nervous temperament, is now
generally admitted. In ancient times in a Grecian city, it is
narrated, that so exquisitely had insanity been represented 011
the stage that, impelled by the principle of imitation, the
inhabitants, or many of tliem, exhibited similar symptoms in
the streets. The tendency in actors, of which Mrs. Siddons is
the most illustrious and best authenticated example, to subdue
their own emotions, characteristics, even their personality, and to
become so absorbed in and identified with the character which
they represent, that they cannot for long periods emancipate
themselves from assumed passions and emotions, is well known.
Such a phenomenon finds a counterpart in the experience of
Talma, who, labouring under such permanent delusions as that
the pit of the theatre was crowded with skeletons, was able so
to concentrate his attention upon his part that he lost all con-
sciousness of everything real or imaginary, except the feelings
or fancies which he was called upon to embody. About the
beginning of the century Esquirol sanctioned the performance
of a play before his patients. The drama hinged upon the
unjust dethronement of a sovereign by his subjects. Notwith-
standing the proximity of the French Revolution, and the
influence which its principles must have still exercised over the
prejudices and instincts of the audience, the lunatics, roused
by the injustice which they had witnessed, rushed upon the
stage in order to defend or restore the injured monarch.
Though this experiment failed at Charenton, it succeeded sub-
sequently at Copenhagen; and for the last forty years farces,
vaudevilles, even more pretentious comedies and melodramas,
have been regularly enacted by the inmates, sane or insane, of
asylums in Scotland, England, America, &c. It is probable
that the initiative was suggested by some psychological theory,
or, what is still more likely, by the wish to supply amusement;
but in the present day the drama has assumed a deserved place
as one of the most important agents in moral treatment.
Lucretius,

Born in the second year of 171st Olympiad, died aged 44.
Mania.

I he analysis of the psychical health of all the thinkers who
have adopted the atomic theory from Epicurus to Tyndall
would be ripe with interest. The examination would present
various modifications of the original or germinal theory, and
occasionally chasms which would create difficulties, if not insur-
mountable obstacles, to progress. The most conspicuous and
perplexing of these would consist in the occasional madness of
Lucretius, the greatest of the ancient expositors of the hypo-
thesis. It is not a little startling that the great leaders of the
scepticism current in the present day, Lucretius and Comte,
should both have been lunatics. It would be as illogical to
hold these men responsible when sane for what they uttered
when insane, as it would be to identify the incoherent fancies of
Goethe and Schiller when drunk with the outpourings of their
genius when sober, but it cannot be regarded as unreasonable
that an inquirer should prefer the convictions of a mind which
had never been disturbed or dethroned to those proceeding from
an ill-balanced intellect that, at times, had altogether lost its
balance. For setting aside all hypercritical definitions of lucid
intervals, there must generally exist an uncertainty as to the
precise amount of sanity or insanity which may influence the
mind at a given time. Lucretius was subject to paroxysmal
mania, and the perplexity arising from what may have been
the precise value and trustworthiness of his utterances may be
gathered from the following explanations and excuses by Bayle.
This authority asserts that a philter had been given to him by
bis wife, which turned his brain, and it is possible that he may
have written poetry while under the influence of the drug, as
Tasso certainly did while in a state of alienation, but the safer
course is to believe that he had lucid intervals during which he
composed his celebrated poem " De Rerum Natura." This
philosophical treatise has been described as a contradiction of
himself and his own opinions, and, in so far as, while inculcating
a high standard of morality, he denies boldly the intervention
of Divine Providence, and yet acknowledges a something which
overthrows human grandeur, this criticism may be accepted as
just. He was a physicist apparently vacillating between the
doctrines of immortality and annihilation; and swayed, perhaps,
by some temporary cause towards the latter, or in vindication
of his honest consistency, he committed suicide.

?James Gates Peecival, 1795, Connecticut, United States.
Genius, Eccentricity, Melancholia.

It is said that Dr Haslam, while under examination as an ex-
pert, made the startling announcement that he had ne\ ei known
a perfectly sane mind save one. Presumably he had in view
the creative mind, the supreme intelligence, the Almighty
centre and source of all thought, feeling, sentiment and spiritual
power ; and that his proposition was preparatory for certain
qualifications and explanations of the conduct of the inferior
being, whose manifestations he had been called upon to ana-
lyse. Without pursuing the theory of this most practical
physician in the direction he intended or indeed further in
any direction, it may be perfectly legitimate to hold that to
err is human, and that in every human mind there exist
so many defects, deformities, disproportions, so much weak-
ness and waywardness, as, although not amounting to aliena-
tion, nosologically considered, places it at a great distance
from a high or even a rigid standard of mental health. It
is perfectly allowable to advocate this opinion, which must
not be confounded with the hypothesis that idiocy and in-
sanity are merely degrees in the development of reason or
some other mental power; and to believe that the over-
turn of reason is a specific neurose. But passing from this
consideration, it is remarkable that so many individuals of
genius and intellect should have been detected under the necro-
scopic microscope of posthumous memoirs to have cherished in
concealment absurd peculiarities, peccadilloes under the exterior
garb of wisdom and learning; and it is still more connected with
our present purpose to point to the vast number of individuals of
ordinary capacity, in the different ranks of society and culture,
who inhabit a border land between soundness and unsoundness
of mind, who hover between moral health and disease, who
occupy a position from which they may be cast down by the
slightest disturbance or distress, or the inherent insecurity
which may be revealed by circumstances of the most common-
place nature, and which would leave the more robust or callous
character untouched and unruffled. In this class must be
placed Percival. He displayed great versatility of talent, but
was destitute of consistency of purpose; he mastered all sciences
and subjects, but achieved nothing; he accomplished paradoxi-
cal wonders, and deceived himself and even others into the con-
viction that he was transcending nature; the companion of
poets and philosophers, he must often have been regarded as
an eccentric, and seemed ever to have been tottering on the
verge of an abyss, into which his failures or fortunes might pre-
cipitate him.

Diffident, of extreme sensitiveness and sensibility, he con-
tinued from his entrance into school to the end of his career a
solitary in crowds, or, at all events, a stranger to all but a
chosen few. Pride may have contributed to this shyness, for
although the son of a medical practitioner, and consequently in
a respectable rank as society was then constituted, be cherished
longings after a more distinguished descent, and claimed or
imagined that he might have shared ' all the blood of all the
Howards,' or, at least, might have boasted of heraldic blazon
of some good old English stock. This appears to be a com-
mon and is a natural infirmity of the transatlantic mind,
whether noble or ignoble. Precocious at school, and the
dux of every class, he preferred familiarity with his father's
library to the slow and dull drudgery of rudimentary studies.
His devotion to books became a passion, the disposal of his
precious companions was to him of greater importance than
that of his other goods and chattels, and more of a biblophile
than a biblomaniac he realised the fiction of a recent novel," in
which an old and perhaps crazy book-vendor endures want and
misery, and risks pauperism, rather than part with his literary
treasures. In several features Percival resembled Cowper.

fhere were the same timidity and retiring habits, the same ad-
miration of beauty in external nature of the pure and simple
in character among his neighbours, and the same marvellous
fertility, the same abhorrence of fun, coarseness, and frivolity
in production, and inferentially it is suspected the same consti-
tutional tendency or puberty. But they were widely sepa-
rated by the outpourings of inspiration, for while there is much
that is genuinely didactic in Percival's writings, they remind us
more of the productions of Keats and Shelley than of the " Task''
or "TableTalk." He was a poet at fourteen, and it is probable that
he carried with him to Yale College not merely his dreamlife,
but liis shy and secluded habits; for while it is mentioned that
a tragedy was found among his exercises, it is added that he
defended himself by satires against some form of persecution
which has not been specified. It would appear that he obtained
distinction in his curriculum in mathematics, oratory, and
almost in every department of scholastic training, although
still regarded and perhaps twitted as an odd girlish hermit.
After the close of his public education and throughout life, his
most marked traits were the enthusiastic pursuit of knowledge,
especially in natural science, and his inexhaustible powers of
laborious research. Whether we trace his career as a tutor;
a physician; in succession a surgeon in the army and navy;
botanist, andassuch superintendent of a public garden; geologist;
contributor to literary periodicals; translator ; lexicographer; or
in the various other pursuits or speculations in which he
engaged and generally failed, we observe the same ardent
spirit and unwearied perseverance. It is probable that in the
intervals which separated his multifarious pursuits he fed
upon his own consciousness or lived within himself, actually
inhabiting however then, or when not engaged in field opera-
tions, his library, which is described as large, dismal, and dusty,
for which however he essayed to provide a more appropriate
home by his testament. The aspect of this lugubrious dwell-
ing betrays the poverty of the possessor, who, although ever
engrossed in public schemes and undertakings, sometimes upon
a gigantic scale and patronised by Government, seems always
to have been ill or unrewarded, and often impecunious. As an
illustration of his ideas of vastness, toil, and completeness, it
may be mentioned that the Legislature of Connecticut, anxious
to obtain a geological survey of the State rapidly executed,
employed Percival, who proceeded somewhat in the following-
manner :?" Those who have seen a Virginia fence can have a
tolerably clear idea of his plan. For in the manner that such
a fence traverses a field, he proposed to traverse the State;
with this difference, however, that whereas a Virginia fence
does not return and take the other angles, Percival's plan did. In
fact, beginning at a corner of the State, he was to trace over its
entire expanse a double Virginia fence, of which the following
array of x's may convey some faint idea:?

An operation which, very naturally rendered him unpopular
with landlords and cultivators. In the next place, his specimens
of soil, strata, &c., would have filled a small museum. In the
third place, his desire to secure fullness and accuracy seduced him
into incessant enlargement of his report, so that he disappointed
his employers after three prolonged respites. For ten long
years this student remained silent, and, so far as publication
went, unproductive, and it has been presumed that during this
period he was saving money in order to repay a loan which had
been contracted in order to prevent his library falling into the
hands of the public auctioneer. There may be an anachronism
as to the time or manner of his hoarding, but there is no error
as to the nobleness or success of his efforts. During one of his long
excursions, which extended to 6,000 miles, when exploring the
lead mines of Wisconsin, he encountered native tribes, and is
affirmed to have acquired a familiarity with their difficult and
monosyllabic dialect. His predilection for the study of the
structure of language, and his facility in becoming acquainted
with various tongues, even to the extent of composing elegant
verses in them, is otherwise manifested by his being entrusted
with editing " Webster's Dictionary," the "Latin Lexicon," with
the translation of Malte Brun, and by his acquisition, at a
very early age, of German, when he produced an exposition of
the languages of the globe, and by his ultimately becoming an
adept in Sanskrit and Slavonic. It is piteous that this really
learned man should at times have been insufficiently nourished ;
that in 1832, perhaps a season of affluence, his income should
not have exceeded ?65. It is equally lamentable that some
of his rarest gifts and finest qualities should have been
disfigured or obscured by indications of extravagance and
peculiarity which cannot be distinguished from disease. Thus,
his intense love of children became almost a laughable passion.
His exquisite sense of melody, even of music, of which he knew
not a note, but of which he had formed a large national collec-
tion, or rather which he recorded by a liieroglyphical system of
notation of his own, led to the following extraordinary exhibition:
"To the surprise of all Percival offered to join our singing club, and
even to sing, although he had not mingled in society for years.

At the appointed time he retired to a corner of the room; he
had never looked half so weird-like; that noble Shakes-
pearian head of his, the sharply cut, spiritual features, his eyes
so full of the wild fire of genius, the then curling locks, all
gave him the appearance of a minstrel come down from anothei
age. We had already quieted the room for the expected^ song.
Standing near him, I soon knew by the motion of his lips
that he was singing. But no one heard him, for I myself
could distinguish only the soft breathing of a melody of his that
was familiar to me " (page 42); and lastly he presented astounci-
ing alternations of indomitable perseverance which enabled him
to compose forty pages in three days, and of absorption in self,
or inspired trance in which he lost all conception of time, and
poured forth his verses uninfluenced by the passage of day and
night, or by the number or nature of the stanzas which were
flowing, or rather rushing from his pen. It would be irreverent
to associate his religious opinions with such moods of mind,
hut that they were of that vague and metaphysical cliaractei
which might be expected from one so constituted shall^ be
shown by the quotation of his own words," Philosophy, religion,
and poetry, sit enthroned as a spiritual trinity in the shiine o
our highest nature. The perfect vision of all-embracing truth,
the vital feeling of all-blessing good, and the living conception
of all-gracing beauty, they form united the divinity of pure
reason.' None of his poems, even the most pretentious,
such as " Pormetheus," " The Suicide," " The Wreck," nor his
sweet lyrics, betray any trace of eroticism or ill-regulated
fancy; even his posthumous poems, selected perhaps, by his
executors, are free from all blemish. But all are pictorial,
pensive, and thus reflect the temperament or moral tendencies
?f their author. Nor need this gloomy colouring be wondered
at when his incessant disappointments, irregular and home-
less mode of life and melancholy diathesis are considered ; nay,
we might be justified in looking for a darker and more
despairing hue of thought, when the veil which covered his inner
life has been somewhat raised, and when it is discovered that
this highly cultivated and gifted man was, throughout his whole
life, a prey to " deep brooding melancholy," that he looked
upon all around through a gloomy and distempered medium ;
that his very activity was, perhaps, resorted to in order to
exorcise the demon, to dissipate the shadows which were settling-
down on his spirit. This despondency has been supposed to
originate in an unfortunate attachment or rejected addresses:
but he has contradicted this supposition, and has left the world
under the impression that if he cherished a secret passion it
was, as in the case of so many of those included in this series,
for an ideal object, " an undying one," who continued to live in
his heart, while it throbbed its last. Of feeble nervous frame,
he is said to have died of general decay.*

Edgar Allan Poe, 1811.
Moral Insanity.

E. A. Poe was the child of actors, who both died in his
infancy, leaving him nothing except great personal attractions
and a high-strung nervous system. The plague spot of
eccentricity was developed in one of his proximate kin. A
childless millionaire, attracted by the destitution, desertion, and
perhaps the extreme beauty of the orphan, adopted and educated
him; first for four years in England, where his character was
that of an indolent, but clever, impulsive, irregular, and eccentric
boy, blossoming, it is said, into a scholar; his next ordeal?for
all his steps were downward?was in the University of Charlotte-
ville, where he was the most distinguished of its alumni, but
where his profligacy in intemperance, licentiousness, gambling,
so far exceeded that of his debased companions that he was
expelled for dissoluteness. Soured and enraged by the temporary
stoppage of his supplies, lie emigrated to Europe, with the
intention of rushing into the patriotic struggle of the Greeks ;
but neither his courage nor his sympathy were ever put to the
test, and after passing a year as a nomade, of whose wanderings
or doings there is no trace or tradition, he re-appears as a
drunken debauchee in a riot in St. Petersburg, is saved from
punishment by the American Minister, who sends him home,
The Poetical JJ orJcs of James Gates Vcrrival, with a Biographical Sketch.
Boston : Ticknor and Fields, I860,
where he is again protected and supported by his former bene-
factor. Through Mr. Allan's instrumentality he becomes a cadet
in the Military Academy of West Point, where he was cashiered
for neglect of duty and insubordination. Insult to the wife of
his friend, which involved criminal ingratitude, was necessarily
followed by exile from his former home.

Want and isolation developed abortive literary efforts; he
then enlisted as a soldier ; is about to be raised from the ranks
by the kind liberality of former school associates, but defeats
their purpose, and invites more signal disgrace and ruin
by vice, folly, and desertion. Again want developed in-
tellectual or imaginative faculties, but on this second occasion
more brilliantly and successfully as the gainer of a competi-
tive prize for the best tale or poem, the award being couched in
the ambiguous terms " to the first of geniuses who had written
legibly." He is appointed editor of the Southern Literary
Messenger, after having pandered his genius, sold his thought
for a noggin of gin, and reduced himself to wretchedness ;
while standing before the arbiter of this final throw for his
future destiny, he is described as thin, pale, sickly, the traits per-
haps of dissipation as much as starvation, in a seedy surtout, so
buttoned as to conceal the absence of a shirt, and his boots so
dilapidated as to reveal that he was stockingless. United in early
life with a cousin, marriage, generally a corrective of errors congenial
to youth, if these be not the fruits of it, afforded a temporary
check to his extravagant indulgence, and paroxysms of long-
continued drunkenness, but the neglect of his literary obliga-
tions again despoiled him of employment. After a year's
disappearance from public, social, and respectable life he becomes
again connected with the press, but the same excesses are
repeated. He is described by a biographer as possessed by a
drunken and unclean devil, actuated by the fury of a wild
beast, as distinguishing neither friend nor foe, and the publica-
tion of the magazine of which he is editor is suspended
during one of these foul and frenzied outbursts. Professional
fraud or treachery is the next ingredient entering into his corrupt
course. He endeavours to start a rival periodical to supplant
that which generosity had entrusted to him, and to secure the
subscribers who had supported his patron. During several years
there is a sickening alternation between labour and degradation,
distempered fancy and unhealthy poetry. Even in the lulls
between these tempests he might be seen skulking in the night
along the streets of a great city with an expression of anguish
and despair, howling curses or defiances, or breathing prayers
and invoking the shades of departed friends and joys. But at a
crisis when liis fame seemed to be established, when pure and
54 mad poets.

intellectual society was about to liail him as an honoured mem-
ber, he reeled, a maudlin savage, from the elevation, and sorrow
was added to his cup by the death of his gentle-liearted wife,
whom he has the credit of having loved. " None are all evil,
&c.," and his mother-in-law adhered to his interests and his
fortunes in good report and bad report, canvassed for him, bore
with the stupor which followed his orgies, and the maniacal rage
which marked his resuscitation, and the ingratitude which
darkened even his calmer moments. During what must be
esteemed a lucid interval, he became connected with the well-
known author N. P. Willis in the management of a daily
newspaper, deported himself with propriety, proved an able and
efficient collaborateur, and is described by his partial chief as of
quiet, gentlemanly manners, of great refinement and delicacy
in his bearing, and presenting the winning intellectual aspect
of that genius which lurked behind wild passions and base
propensities. Like all who belong to the same category, when
known under favourable auspices he seemed to be formed of
?' earth's finer porcelain." These attractions nearly effected an
alliance with a fair and accomplished lady, but towards whom he
acted with such deliberate and incomprehensible baseness as to
be all but inexplicable and incredible. A visit to his native
State, a fickle reformation, a vow of abstinence from stimulants,
the renewal of a boyish attachment, afforded glimmerings
of reason, but a casual encounter with former convivial friends
and a single draught of the poisonous Lethe set all these amend-
ments at nought, and a night of raving and riotous revel
necessitates his removal to a hospital, where in a few hours this
involuntary suicide graduated through a whole lifetime, comes
to an abrupt end. Was this brutism of flagitiousness the
mere husk, the mask, the reptile-cast skin of a noble nature ?
Were his pensiveness and dejection, his best aspirations and
his worst wickedness, a mere diluted Phlegethon of a corrupted
genius,or may they be resolvable into the distinct parts of a moral
drama, into sadness and badness and madness ? An apologist
has advocated the theory that because he composed certain ex-
quisite lyrical gems his original spirit was of " purest ray
serene." This friendly critic, himself a convivialist, has affirmed
that his " exquisite taste was equal to a conscience, that he was
pure, &c.;" but we demur, and would as readily concede that
all who painted saints were saintly, that all who commemo-
rated sages were wise. There is another solution. Either the
fair and fragile infant was born a dipsomaniac, or the childish
lips which " lisped in numbers " must at the same time have
imbibed the stimulants which at once allay and create the
appetite for further gratification, which at once excite and
extinguish sensibility aud sentiment, which shake the very
foundations of human rectitude and responsibility. This is
not a tribunal before which the offenders against common sense,
common prudence, common propriety can be summoned, or in
which the degrees of guilt, the amount of punishment, the
means of protection, can be argued; but directing attention to
the bold epitome which has been sketched of the blurred,
decrepid, bespotted course of a man of high promise and powers,
we conceive that we may claim a medical verdict of the presence
ot periodical derangement.

This outcast, the author of the " Raven," the u Valley of
Weir," &c., popularly familiar even in Europe, was of that
excitable, unstable, ill-trained, but fascinating disposition
which makes his congeners among ourselves, and can be readily
conceived as palliating, excusing, even defending his errors to
his own purblind moral vision. He would affirm that he
suffered pain, agony, remorse, that he loathed the remedy, and
that he sought not intoxication, but relief, oblivion. He would
protest that he knew the consequences, that suffering, sickness,
would follow the momentary delirium of hope and joy, but
that his pressing sorrow was too deep for tears, tolerance,
sympathy. He would argue that, burdened by care and by
duties which he could not spontaneously execute, he is com-
pelled to seek strength, inspiration, intelligence, as well as a
solace, in artificial excitement. He would extol sobriety,
glorify repentance and regeneration, pompously announce the
objuration of all indulgence, eschew even the opportunities and
temptations to indulge after a recent carousal; but his peni-
tence, promises, pledges float away as the thistle-down, and
his numbed, half-palsied hand insensibly crushes the stings of
the thistle itself. If the visions and revelations of such lunatics
be trustworthy, fear, conscience, care are for them unrealities ;
memory carries them back to scenes and seasons of pleasure,
youth, strength ; and the future is either a blank or the ill-
defined and interminable vistas seen in a dream. Let it be
supposed for a moment that such mental states are not fictitious,
but become, when our veins run wine, actual factois of oui
thoughts and acts, become permanent, morbid impulses; such
^ moral enigma as E. A. Poe may be understood not
unless.

His poetry is arabesque, often grotesque, and suggests
rather a shudder than a sentiment. It has been compared to
the productions of the Rev. R. S. Hawker, the romantic, pre-
Ritualistic, and saintly vicar of Morwenstow, but, we think, to
the disparagement of the priest-author of" Pompeii " (Newdegate
Prize), " Poetical First Buds," " Amora," &c. &c.
Henry Scott Riddell, 1798.
Religious Melancholia.

Shepherds in mountainous countries are invested with a super-
stitious picturesqueness suggested, it may be, by the solitudes
in which they dwell, or by their supposed familiarity with won-
derful natural phenomena and with supernatural beings, with
the fays, fairies, wraiths, witches who haunt " the untrodden
ways," or, still more likely, by their guardianship of what has
become a type of innocence and religious feeling in all
Christian lands ; which is denied to the husbandman, though of
higher powers and pretensions of the plains. When the keeper
of the flocks in a wild region became a consecrated shepherd in
Israel, and was entrusted with the care and cure of souls, it
may be conceived that the reverence and awe of those around
were intensified. The object of this memoir took such a step,
the connection between the one vocation and the other being-
formed by the transition stage of dreaming and castle-building,
in other words, of poetic inspiration on the hill-side. He was
the descendant of a race of shepherds who fed their flocks in
that pastoral and romantic region which inspired the genius of
Leyden and which may be well named the land of Scott, who, in
that weird ride from Branxholm to the grave of Michael Scott, has
signalised almost the very spot, where Riddell spent his life:?
Soon in his saddle sate he fast,
And soon the steep descent he past,
Soon crossed the sounding barbican,
And soon the Teyiot side he ran.
Eastward the wooded path he rode,
Green hazels o'er his basnet nod;
He passed the peel'of Goldilaird
And crossed old Eartlewick's roaring strand. *
But this wild and wooded glen echoed in other days to the
tramp of more formidable moss-troopers than William of
Deloraine, bound upon a more fatal tryst than even his, for it
is believed that at Teviot Head were executed the notorious
border bandit Johnnie Armstrong with his seven sons, when the
father
Danced a spiny and sang a song
Aneath the Gallow Tree.

They sleep under the green sward close to the village church,
where our poet ministered for thirty-five years. Oil these hills,
amid the burns and braes and birkenshaws by which they are
beautified, Riddell spent his boyhood as a herd laddie, with so
vivid a fancy and so retentive a memory that he gathered up
from every one he met vast stores of legends, ballads, even
modern songs. His acquisitions in these forms probably
determined his adaptation of the lyric for almost all composi-
tions. His early education was of the scantiest, and seems to
have been confined to short periods spent in parochial schools
during the winter months, prosecuted in defiance of snow, and
storm, and swollen streams, and to the instructions of a person
employed by his father to teach the whole family in the same
studious season. His intelligence, however, speedily led to his
promotion to the rank of shepherd-in-chief, and to his being-
entrusted with a hirsel, or a large flock of cattle, which it was
bis duty to conduct into remote and secluded pastures. In the
lonely glens of Buccleuch his mind " became more tinged with
thoughts and feelings of a romantic cast,'' and then visions
and his fancies burst forth in verse. He assures us that at first
the outpourings of his spirit were confined to his own bosom,
that they served as an occupation of gratification alternating
with the repeated perusal of such books as were accessible in
such a wilderness, and with the construction of pieces of
mechanism with the rude tools which he possessed, using his
knee as his desk; he there recorded local events in rhyme, but
bis hidden and hoarded talent was accidentally revealed by the
wind blowing his bonnet, which formed his only portfolio, from
bis head, and scattering its contents far and wide. His poems
thus distributed became the prey of unworthy critics, although
bis only ambition had been that they should be lauded and
lilted by humble maidens of his own degree. His laborious
upward course may be traced in his craving for knowledge, foi
books, and when every other kind of literature was lacking, in
his frequenting the cottages of those, even of old women, who
bad possessed opportunities of reading and could recall the
impressions they had received. He then attended a school in
obscure town, where, besides miscellaneous information, he
became acquainted with the classical languages. He now
became an author, or the editor of a periodical so humble in its
pretensions and circulation that its name is scarcely known,
and that its readers must have been confined to a rural district.
So humble was the position, and so narrow must have been the
pecuniary resources of his relatives, that it is difficult to under-
stand through whose aid or by what instrumentality he entered
the University of Edinburgh ; but certain it is that he attended
there during a complete literary philosophical course, that his
success in all liis classes was considerable, that he obtained from
a prosaic professor marked commendation for a translation of
an Ode of Anacreon, that about the same time his " Songs of
the Ark " appeared in Blackwood, and that Christopher North
conferred upon him the grand distinction of introducing his
song of " In the Grlen all is still " into the " Noctes Ambro-
sianse." In estimating the financial position of Riddell I was
fully acquainted with the penury and difficulties which, though
they obstructed the theological career of students in Scotland
some sixty years ago, may have served as a part of their training
and as the basis of that laborious, sturdy, self-denying energy
which made so many of them able defenders of the faith as well
as philosophers; nor had I forgotten that Riddell had endea-
voured to explain the means by which he gratified his thirst for
knowledge and his ambition by confessing that he had hoarded
every penny of his wages, and that to these savings was added
a small sum left by his father ; but even this avowal reveals
the hardships to which he must have been subjected. We next
find him engaged in the higher branches of knowledge, at St.
Andrews, subsequently as an extemporised schoolmaster, ulti-
mately returning to his beloved haunts in Teviotdale. During
all these changes he never ceased to engage in the composition
of poetry, especially of songs, which, published and unpublished,
must have amounted to many hundreds. The best known of these
are "Scotland yet," " Our ain Folk," " I have Lo'ed Thee only,"
but many others are still popular in the cottages and shielings of
his native valley, while others have by a natural process of
selection ascended into ladies' bowers and festive halls. But
his muse was not "cribbed and confined" to mere lyrics, but
embraced ballads, epics, translations, diverging even into
Christian political economy. Before settling at Caerlanrig he
had passed successfully through the prescribed examinations
and become a probationer of the Church of Scotland, which
may be translated into a presbyter before consecration. It has
been told that his reputation, passing beyond the secluded nook
where he nestled, attracted the attention of the Duke of
Buccleuch, who, seeing the appropriateness that a shepherd
should deal with the spiritual wants of the pastoral population
of the district, appointed him the clergyman of the chapel in
an adjoining village. In the commencement of his incum-
bency lie had to walk nine miles to the scene of his official
duties, and it was frequently his lot to preach in a very un-
comfortable condition, when indeed the wet would be pouring
from his arms on the Bible before him, and oozing over his
shoes when the foot was stirred oil the pulpit floor. But ulti-
mately the Duke of Buccleucli provided him with a house near
the station, where he afterwards resided. The tale is so sweet
and poetical, and in such keeping- with the kindness and muni-
ficence of the noble patron, that we hope it may be true, but
its hero says nothing to this effect, but in his autobiography
signifies that not long after his migration to Teviot Head " the
preacher who officiated in the preaching station died, and the
peopleconnectedwitliit wished me to become his successor, which,
after some difficulties on their part had been surmounted,Ibecame.''
Here, surrounded by a simple-minded, attached, admiring congre-
gation, he lived, loved, and died. A man of considerable intelli-
gence, of great natural simplicity of character, of that culture which
tancy, under the guidance of a systematic education, secures,
he was enthusiastically attached to his home, his family, the
scenery upon which his eye had rested since imagination was
awakened; he was fond of society, and with congenial spirits
in his own humble dwelling, as in the adjoining market town,
bis conversation overflowed with mirth, music, ballads, and
wild traditions. Occasionally he visited a kindred litterateur in
the border towns, even in Edinburgh, but his time was almost
wholly occupied between his professional studies, his poetic
inspirations, the cultivation of his garden, the tending of a few
sheep pastured on the adjoining slopes, or in wandering through
the " daisy dells," the tangled woodland, or the burnside of his
own Teviot. He was scarcely known to the external world,
except on the appearance of a new song or volume, thus,
''world forgetting, by that world forgot." It is highly probable
that his solitary habits, the dreamy susceptibilities of his earlier
years, the unvarying sameness of his vocations, the feeling
that he had become the partner of a lady somewhat his superior
in tone and habits, and lastly those excitements to which
nervous natures are especially liable, impaired his mental
strength and solidity, but certain it is that in 1841 lie became
the victim of despondency so profound and so complicated with
suicidal tendencies, that retirement to an asylum became
absolutely necessary. The origin of his malady was, however,
traced to the circulation of a report, calculated, it not to impair
the usefulness of his ministrations, to wound his feelings at the
most sensitive point. The injury inflicted pioduced at fiist
great distress of mind, which may fairly be regaided as the
natural result of such a crisis in a mind so constituted 5 but
)vhat was at first merely anxiety and dejection, gradually passed
into panic and perplexity, until the suggestions of his naturally
emotional and imaginative disposition, escaping from the con-
trol of reason, gradually assumed the form of substantive delu-
sions or of delusive fears. Either as an effect of treatment, or
the natural subsidence of his agitation, greater equanimity and
self-possession were observed, greater confidence and reliance
were extended to the superintendent, and the misconceptions
by which he had been enslaved were either doubted or exer-
cised less dominion over his imagination ; but although the
phantom conspiracies, &c., by which lie had been haunted had
faded in distinctness, the in controllable apprehension and
anxiety remained in full force. He was terror-stricken, but
could not identify nor describe the objects of his fear.
He was designedly placed as a member of a group consisting
of two clergymen, two litterateurs by profession, a medical man,
and several other individuals of education and cultivated tastes,
in the hope that the sympathies, similarity of pursuit and habits
of thought, might engage his attention, and prove a source at
once of distraction and consolation ; but at no period of his
residence did he enter into intimate relations with his com-
panions, or do more than tolerate the intercourse of genuine
kindness, of which he was the object. This isolation proceeded
rather from shyness, and a suspicion that his country bearing
and local reputation scarcely entitled him to a defined position
in such a community. To the medical superintendent he was
as open and candid as his quiet and unobtrusive nature per-
mitted. He served as a confessor for his sorrows and secret
cogitations, and these revelations were sometimes of a most
startling but interesting character. His principal theme was
naturally the misery and suffering by which he was bowed
down; but he likewise dwelt upon his inability to escape from
these tyrannical feelings, upon the utter change which appeared
to have taken place in not only his own family and social
relations, but even in the external face of the world, and upon
a suspicion either that his original identity had been subverted,
or that a quality of consciousness had been established by the
processes of disease. He spoke much of two parallel currents
of thought which served to run constantly through his mind,
one of these consisting of suggestions of despondency and
despair, the other of bright imaginations, which shaped them-
selves into couplets or verses of some description. He appeared
to be convinced that many of these trains of ideas, especially
the composition of poetry, originated outside or beyond him-
self ; that neither the thoughts, nor their expression, nor the
lhymes, were acts of volition, or could have been prevented or
a tered had he so wished. He repeated specimens of these
productions, and they were precisely of the same character as
those which were afterwards recognised as his. They consisted
of lyiics, border ballads, hymns, and excited wonder and
admiration both by their beauty, sweetness, and by their origin
in a mind so darkened and distressed, and amid such exquisite
pain and terror. It is very probable that the atmosphere in
which he lived?in other words, the conversations which he
heard, the books and manuscripts and occupations of his
associates?might have insensibly suggested recurrence to his
former mental pursuits and sources of happiness, for at this
time every effort was made to induce the patients to engage
in literary work, and so successful was the attempt that now
were produced many of those poems, essays, " quips and cranks
and wanton wiles," which in after years appeared in the pages
of the New Moo a, and were at that distant time regarded as
marvellous illustrations of the possibility of eliciting light from
darkness?

Darkness shows us worlds of light
"We never saw by clay ;
and of employing in Ja natural manner the healthy faculties of
morbid minds.

Mr. Riddell contributed largely to its pages, and many of
his poems can still be pointed out; but it would be rash to
determine which of these had been composed during his
residence in the asylum, although some of them undoubtedly
were. One of these (November, 1844) beginning "The harp
so loved awakes no more," bears internal evidence of mental
gloom, and may be claimed as belonging to this period, although
it was sent to the editor long subsequently to Mr. Eiddell's
discharge. In addition .to the medical and protective means of
treatment adopted, and in addition to daily and prolonged
conferences and confidences which were resorted to in order to
enable the patient to lay bare the whole extent of his per-
plexity and distress, and to enable the physician to afford what-
ever consolation or support could be derived from presenting
truthful and healthy impressions to his mind, and from ex-
posing indirectly the errors into which he had fallen, repeated
attempts were made to rouse him from the state of stolidity
?r passivity into which he fell, after the disappearance^ of
specific delusions, by reference to his family, former position,
usefulness, by reading aloud portions of his own ^ published
poetry and border minstrelsy, &c.. by inducing him to take
exercise in the surrounding country, to join in appropriate
amusements, and to stimulate the attention and poweis of
mind generally by the infliction of slight degrees of pain, by
means of application of blisters, &c. At one time a maiked
approach to convalescence could be observed: he could be
engaged in general conversation, and spoke clearly and con-
secutively ; he appeared to have denuded himself of all delu-
sions, and described his mind as prostrate before a sense of
confusion and inexplicability, and a vague apprehension of
coming evil. There is reason to believe that the original delu-
sions never afterwards excited any influence over his mind, and
that his look and expression of pain, difficulty, and dread pro-
ceeded from his inability to comprehend the new position into
which he had been thrown, and to struggle against the mis-
fortunes which his consciousness of his impairment of power
seemed to portend. His friends imagining that his removal
to new scenes, and the consequent necessity for self-exertion
and self-control, might call forth what faculties remained, he
returned home. The restoration was not, however, complete.
There are indeed grounds for believing that lie again sunk into
profound melancholy, during- which, although living in silence
and seclusion, and aj)art from his family, he felt constrained
by the mastery of a spirit which seemed at variance to
his own, or external to his consciousness, to engage in com-
position, and actually produced numerous verses of various
degrees of excellence, a metrical translation of the Psalms, &c.
In a letter still existing, he describes the little closet in which
he was accustomed to immure himself, surrounded knee-deep
with MSS.; and where he conceived he was compelled to undergo
a sort of penance or doom, and from which he could not escape.
The friendship thus commenced with his physician?on his part
in the struggle to obtain comfort and support, and on that of
the physician in sympathy and in the sincere desire to afford
relief?never ceased nor waned. After he had entirely regained
his former health and serenity, he commenced a correspondence
with his physician by a wish to obtain his opinion as to doubts
which then disturbed him as to the propriety of resuming his
ministerial, and especially his pulpit, duties. This was followed
by placing at his disposal various unpublished poems, written,
as it was understood, both while in the asylum, immediately
after his return to Caerlanrig, and at other times, for insertion
in the periodical which had commenced, and was conducted by
patients, and which still continues.

The following ballad is supposed to have been written during
the author's residence in the asylum:?
Though spring should flee lightly and summer come soon,
AVe weary a wee for the braid autumn moon,
Tor as she blinks bonnie o'er meadow and glen
She sees her ain sel' in the steel o' our men,
And to the auld tune o' a Michaelmas moon
In capers right cantie the steeds we bestride
And boun to the foray on our Border side.
It's sweet 'when the blackbird sings in the green shaw
To cheer his proud mate in her new-bigget ha' ;
And sweet when the summer o'er mountain and lee
Has spread a' its blooms to the breeze and the bee;
.But o' a' things aboon the braid autumn moon,
Can heeze up our spirits in power and in pride
When boun' to the foray on our Border side.
Our maids at the mirrors their lang tresses trim,
And their een gie us light, though the stars should be dim ;
But there's naught on the earth, and there's naught in the sky,
The lack o' the braid autumn moon can supply;
But later or sooner comes back our ain moon,
And then weel we ken wha the chargers will ride,
And boun' to the foray on our Border side.
Bight proud is the king o' his sceptre and crown,
Begirt wi' the goud and the diamonds aroun',
Yet feelings as proud the brave bosom will feel
When donn'd is the sword and the helmet o' steel,
And wi' the first roon o' a Michaelmas moon,
We swing to the saddle whate'er may betide,
And boun' to the foray on our Border side.
The dewdrops may freeze into rime on the lee,
Where glinted the gowans sae gay in their glee :
But if our ain moonbeams gleam over them there,
The rime shall bo welcome as rubies are rare ;
And then the horse shoon shall be bright in the moon :
When basking at hame they nae langer shall bide,
But boun' to the foray on our Border side.
The courtier may frisk in the light o' the lamp,
While the Borderer sweeps o'er the sward and the swamp;
But he ne'er can be hail'd wi' sick glee by his dame,
As when our braw lads o' the Border come hame;
When to the auld tune o' a Michaelmas moon,
The spoil o' the proud and subdued we divide
To dowrie the daughters o' our Border side.
The maidens are merry, and matrons are free,
The sang has its sweet, and the tass has its glee,
And the hut and the ha', and the hill and the glen,
A charm that the city and sea dinna ken;
And spurtle and spoon keep our bauld hearts aboon,
When bein by the ingle frae winter we hide,
And bask in the bounty o' our Border side.
Mr. Riddell, from conscientious scruples, never resumed his
clerical duties, even after his mental darkness had entirely
passed away.

(The above passages have been extracted from the memoir of
S. Riddell, by James Brydon, M.D., Hawick, 1871, with the
permission of the editor, to which they were contributed by the
Writer of this article, and have been introduced here as afford-
lng an approximation to what is generally inaccessible, a
psychological picture of an imaginative mind when under
palpable or certificated insanity.)
Jean Jacques Rousseau, 1712.
Genius?Moral Insanity.

There are two events in tlie history of Jean Jacques Rousseau
which, to those who do not accept eccentricity as the germ or
gauge of genius, appear ludicrous and lackadaisical. He is re-
presented when a boy of seven as constantly associated with his
father?a conceited literary watchmaker of Geneva?engaged in
reading sentimental novels, probably of the French school, and
when the store of these was exhausted as having recourse to
historical and biographical works, which had been transmitted
from clerical ancestors, who had fled in revolt from persecutions
in the adjoining country. Plutarch's Lives were to thenvas
romances. That this initiatory education, and especially the
influence or rather the contamination of .his reserved, sensitive,
punctilious parent, produced upon a boy of inferior, sickly, and
disordered constitution its natural effects, is proved by the
fact that these recluses fostered their grief for the deceased
mother of the family, engaged in paroxysms of weeping, and
converted what might have been a natural into a morbid or
maudlin sorrow. The second event adverted to occurred
towards the close of his career. It appears that when living
in Paris he occupied his time as follows: In imitation of
what he believed to be the simplicity of a philosopher, he rose
at five a.m., copied music 'till seven, during breakfast
arranged plants previously collected, again copied music for
several hours, dined, visited a coffee house, and then wandered
into the country to botanise, apparelled in a fashion which
must have astounded the Parisians even of those daysi He
wore a long upper coat somewhat like the modern Ulster,
necessitated b}T the existence ot some disease; in the very
hottest weather he carried his hat under his arm, in order to
court, for health's sake, the direct action of the sun upon his
head ; he returned home laden with the spoils of the field, and
retired to bed almost at sundown. But we must trace the upward
growth of the regenerator of mankind. With a deadened sense
of objective relations, which, when unimpaired, is the key-stone
ot sanity, but with the redeeming traits that he clung tenaciously
to his home, to his attachment to those who had once
inhabited it even to their sayings and songs, this ugly, puny,
prematurely self-conscious urchin is sent to school. There
he manifests some generosity to his companions, but is generally
pugnacious, addicted to vicious and sensual habits, and is upon
the whole a clever, contumacious, disreputable, and indifferent
scholar. What is rather a rare attribute of boyhood he
cherished, revenge and retaliation. After prolonged family
councils as to whether he should be a watchmaker, a lawyer, or
a clergyman, and after his inclinations had led him alternately
to seek for fame and fortune in oratory, drama, or in the
pomp and pageantry of glorious war, he is apprenticed to an
attorney, from whose employment he is discharged for stupidity
and incompetency. He next appears under the tuition of a
coarse and tyrannical engraver, whose locks he picked, whose
property he stole, and from whose business he ran away. His
must have been a nomadic family, as his elder brother had
long before eloped and been irretrievably lost in the Far West,
and his father, insulted by some local notable, left Geneva in
anger and disgust.

As if to illustrate the real results of his celebrated hy-
potheses that there are no natural virtues or tendencies to
virtue, that onr prevailing principles and practice are the
artificial products of civilisation, it would appear, from the
evidence of a somewhat favourable commentator, that his con-
nection with his master of the Burin developed the following
crop of repulsive qualities : " slyness, greediness, slovenliness,
untruthfulness, dishonesty, rascality, and the whole ragged
regiment of the more squalid vices." In after life these different
forms of baseness were recollected, but not repented of. ?sow
an exile from his native city, he wandered through the
adjoining country, admiring the beauties, partaking of the
frugal fare of the peasants, inhabiting the picturesque hovels
011 the shores of Lake Leman ; then sojourned with a priest, to
whom lie simulates contrition, whose wine and good cheer may
have contributed to these religious impressions ; next he estab-
lishes himself in the household of Madame de Warens, who is
described as frail and generous, who either seduces or is seduce
% her 'protege. He is next found in Zurin, where he, a stein
Calvinist, professes Catholicism, is admitted into a monastery,
enters upon his novitiate, and after a dexterous controversy
with the monks is baptized. But asceticism did not suit the
constitution of this lascivious voluptuary, and he is dismissed, 01
dismisses himself, in possession of twenty francs. ^ as all this
sham, or self-deception, or delusion ? A wanderei, liung upon
one sou per day, and starving in his visions, repeatedly a
lacquey, in one situation endeavouring to criminate a poor
girl with a theft which he himself had committed, m another
attempting to make love to his master's daughter. At this
ePoch. his musical, sensuous, and sensual proclivities become
epportunely developed or intensified, and he returns to his
former paramour, Madame de Warens. These propensities mus
have induced a state of positive eroto-mania, and lie lived in
relations with syrens, sylphs, and imaginary beings, the creations
of his own fancy, wherever he went. Like others affected with
this form of mental disease, he preferred intercourse with the
phantoms he conjured up to that with real personages, a prefer-
ence strengthened doubtless by the obstacles presented in his
diseased loathsomeness to have passages with his fellow-creatures.
Among his imaginings were two females differing in aspects
and attractions, with both of whom he appears to have been
enamoured, and with whom he held colloquies. For a long period
it is quite obvious he lived in an ideal world, endowing every
object therein with beauty and splendour, and incapable of
discovering anything fair or pleasure-giving in his actual
surroundings. It is worthy of note that this man at other
times indulged in day-dreams of his marriage with royal dames,
of his attainment of rank, riches, celebrity, and that, when
penniless and a dependant, he could not write his romances
except on the very finest gilt-edged paper, nor dry the ink
with any powder except azure or sparkling silver, nor tie up the
packets except with delicate blue riband. His connection with
a family so characterised by degrading dissoluteness, and such
apparent unconsciousness of the real nature of their conduct,
discloses a new symptom in the pathological condition of this un-
healthy adventurer, for he affirms that on approaching the mem-
bers of this morbid group or objects of fascination, " his whole
organisation seemed to be dissolved in convulsions, palpitations,
trembling, fainting." Admitting that this is partly hyperbolical,
partly hypochondriacal, the victim must have resembled the
bird under the fabulous gaze of the snake. Repeatedly we
hear of a life of vagabondage which led him into many of the
countries in the south of Europe, which was diversified by a
number of occupations varying from that of a domestic drudge to
a connection with a diplomatist. With his protectress Madame
de Warens he appears to have lived for ten years, and with
other patrons, whom if he did not regard with lust he treated
with ingratitude, for different periods. Apparently in virtue
of introductions from Madame de Warens, he secures a connec-
tion with the French envoy to Venice when in Lyons, whom
he accompanies to Italy, exercising in succession the capaci-
ties of preceptor, musician, and private secretary. According to
one account he comes into contact at a village inn, according to
another in his lodging in Paris, with a certain Therese, vile,
vulgar, ignorant, who, however, became his lifelong companion,
and the mother of his children. During his whole course this
incarnation of perverse originality, turpitude, treachery, had
ardently and persistently cultivated letters, made himself
acquainted, superficially perhaps, with history, philosophy, and
mathematics, and had gained prizes tor dissertations on the
influence of the arts and sciences, on morality, &c., and we are
not therefore surprised to find that, under the influence of a
lady of somewhat doubtful repute, but who to him proved a
steadfast friend, he was made known to D Alembert, Diderot,
and Condillac, who employed him to write articles for the
Encyclopaedia. There flowed subsequently from his pen com-
positions in music which proved failures, an opeia which was
successful, lectures on music, "Julie, ou la NouvelleHeloise,"
the "Contrat Social," " Emile," " Letters on the Writings of
Montaigne," "Discourse upon the Origin of Inequality among
Men," &c. These works are characterised by brilliantimagination,
by new theories of education, society, political oiganisation,
but are all paradoxical, extravagant, and subversive of the con-
victions of wise and prudent and pure men. It must not
be conceived that during these prolific labours the student
became more rational and respectable, or less restless. He is the
guest, or tutor, in chateaux, where his amorous predilections are
re-awakened: he rouses the prejudices or passions of a district,
and escapes or returns into an island, where he assumes the
American costume; he becomes the pet or friend of our aristo-
cratic sceptic Joseph Hume, with whom he quarrels, and whose
bounties he rejects either because the philosopliei declined to
sit at table with the poor scullion Therese, or because his
supposed criticism was alleged to be unfair or ungenerous.

Contemporaneously with these events, we hear of lemorse,
retributive acts, despondency, and suicide. Whether his death
was self-inflicted or not cannot be ascertained ; but it is probable
that the decay of nature or disease closed his career, as illness
or infirmity is said to have led to his retreat to the country
domain of an affluent protector, where he inhabited a cottage,
herbarised as long as strength permitted, and then lan mg
his benefactors, asking forgiveness from his wife anc 10m o ,
and while gazing wistfully on the fair face of that nature he
loved so much, liis troubled spirit passed into rest and silence.
It might be difficult to determine whether this mnovatoi,
this pretended discoverer of new worlds of thought, was mos
mad as a profligate or a philosopher. His Confessions, whic 1
did not appear till years after his death, and which constitute
the basis of all his fame or infamy m this pait of Emope, affoid
ample testimony of mental unsoundness, and especially of that
moral obliquity which impels an individual to regard as right
^1 that others regard as wrong in both phases It is probable
that these glimpses of his inner life may have been coloured by
that habitual, it may be said that constitutional, untruthfulness
interwoven with almost all his acts; poitions o \em ' ,
have been intended as poetical romances, and are 
admirable; but while they disclose an ill-balanced, perverted,
and morbid mind, it is in his general history, even in the
epitome given here, when viewed constructively, that the real
origin of his otherwise inexplicable conduct may be traced.
It is unnecessary to insist upon the gloom and depression to
which he was subject, his separation and isolation from his
fellow men, to whom he seems to have attached himself
solely for selfish or sensual purposes, nor to the self-destruction
of which he was accused, in order to establish this fact,
for his biographers admit, nay some of them obtrude as a
sensational feature, his attacks of eroto-mania, which not
merely set all the law and limits of propriety at defiance, but
created wild and multitudinous delusions, typical alike of his
brutal natural propensities, and of the phase of alienation which
these had perhaps engendered. But exaggerated notions have
been recorded when he was not under such impulses ; thus he
suspected that the plaudits awarded to his opera were intended
to expose and enhance his offence as a plagiarist. Again, when
about to leave England, he attributed the adverse wind to
the designs of M. Choiseul to detain him in England, and like-
wise thereupon he addressed the English bumpkins in a
long harangue in French. Another manifestation of his
mental degeneration was the conspicuous, the total absence ot
the perception of truth, rectitude, honesty, in short of the
sense of right and wrong, which pervaded not merely his familiar
intercourse with society but his highest mental efforts. It may
be that many of his wild and grotesque theories were proposed
and elaborately marked out in support, in justification, of his
own delirium and delinquencies. It may even be that his
whole being was, from disease, a deceit, an hypocrisy, that his
excited fancy and unholy convictions caused him to look upon
all men, all things, all feelings, all opinions, all creeds, all
conventionalities, through a distorted and false medium, and
that he thought and acted accordingly. But in either case
derangement must have been present. Yet this lunatic was one
of the motors, one of the factors of the French Revolution, one
of the unseen agencies of that volcano which, although at
present silent, has covered the fair soil of France with irreclaim-
able lava and blood. Nay more, he has been classed with St.
Paul, Hildebrand,and Luther, who saved the society of Western
Europe from dissolution, culminating in .the Reformation; as
having with Voltaire and Diderot regenerated France, creating
a new Bethlehem, from which might issue another social and
political birth. It is not because this callous idealist sent his
cliildien to the workhouse to be educated that I hold him to be
morally mad, but because he lacked that natural affection, that
instinctive love of offspring, which would have compelled him,
nay coerced him, to shelter and cherish these unfortunate out-
casts in his home and in his heart of hearts. It is not because
he arrogated to man an original equality in faculties, and feelings,
as well as political rights?that all mental qualities and acquisi-
tions are the product of teaching and training, or that he
extolled the primitive man, who in our woods a noble savage
ran, as the perfect man, the model which should be imitated,
and towards the realization of which all efforts should be
directed?that I hold him to be morally mad, but because he
would have reduced society to its primaeval disorganisation in
order to attain this end, and positively preferred the foul, brutal,
sanguinary wild man of the woods to the finest examples of virtue
and ability with which he occasionally associated ; and because
be practically emulated the passions, the falsehood, and the reck-
lessness of these specimens of fully-developed human natuie.
It is not because of his monstrous criminality and uncon-
scientiousness alone that I hold him to be morally mad, but
because lie failed and appears to have been incompetent to
perceive, or regret, or repair the nature or the consequences of
his own misdoings. He seems to have been somewhat con-
scious of the imperfection or hebetude of his conscience, as,
according to Mad. D'Epinay, when she endeavoured to console
him when labouring under remorse, by attributing his enois to
the head rather titan to the heart, he said," Know that 1 was
born, and am, of a perverse nature, that it gives me pain to do
good, and that I hate my benefactors." *

Richard Savage, 1698.
Moral Insanity.

It is inexplicable that the cold, immaculate Sam Johnson
^hould have condescended to become the defendei o us
intellectual Arab. A governor of Canada allowed a wolf to
nestle in his bosom; a lord chancellor named, nursed, cherished
two leeches; and the great lexicographer must needs have like
Pets. Alternately he is the panegyrist of his verses, the
apologist of his follies; he expends the most turgid phrases and
equipoised antitheses; he runs into paradox in the vain attempt
to show that, although vicious in conduct, Savage was virtuous,
ari(l a friend to virtue, in his writings; and he expends his
* Morlc/s Life of Jean Jacques Rousseau; Dublin Review, Octolcr 1870;
Westminster Review, Octobcr 1859; Imperial Biographical Dictionary.
grandiloquent epithets, and it is to be confessed ethical plati-
tudes, over an expanse of a hundred pages in his " Lives of the
Poets," double the space allowed to Milton, and triple or quad-
ruple that which is niggardly meted out to Cowley, Collins,
Young. The narrative is sad and unsavoury, unsweetened by
the dignity and heroism of tragedy, unrelieved by the humour
and heartiness of comedy; the issue is factitious, being the
downward career of a grovelling genius ; the incidents vulgar?
but it contains elements more striking than the most extravagant
and romantic fiction. The Nemesis embodies the implacable
hatred of a mother towards the fruit of her immorality; the
misfortunes, the meanness, the misapplied talents, the degrada-
tion of her victim; and the struggle between shame and sin,
between fervid imagination and as fervid passions, between the
selfishness and the necessities of the infanticide and the par-
ricide. The author of the " Wanderer," and a vast number of
pieces deservedly less known as being fulsome petitions to the
great and the powerful, even, at last, for a few pence; which in
stateliness of march, command of language, especially of in-
vective, in the discrimination and contrast of character, very
much resemble the productions of his biographer, was, according
to his mother's confession, the illegitimate son of the Countess
of Macclesfield by Earl Kivers, but, disgraceful though the
narration may be, some doubt is cast upon her veracity, as her
object evidently was to procure a divorce from her husband.
In this she succeeded, with the additional publicity that the
separation was effected by a bill introduced into the House
of Peers, instead of the Ecclesiastical Courts. She imme-
diately became the wife of Colonel Brett. That this monster-
mother should have disliked and avoided the ever-obtruding
memento of her guilt, even although it neither trenched upon
or touched her rank, riches, troops of aristocratic friends, may
be intelligible, but for years she pursued her prey with im-
mitigable, unrelenting fury and cunning. Unnamed, disowned,
she first consigned him to the charge of a poor woman, on con-
dition that his origin and antecedents should be buried in
oblivion and the castaway brought up as her own offspring.
She next declared him to be dead, and thus succeeded in de-
frauding him of a legacy of 1,000?. designed by his licentious
father in reparation for the obloquy of his birth; thirdly, in
order to blot out his name and presence, she entered into a con-
spiracy to send him to the American plantations, which was,
however, fortunately defeated, as such a fate was tantamount to
slavery, as may be learned from the issue of the children's
crusade, and the disposal of other troublesome children in those
days; interment of another kind is next tried, and he is appren-
ticed to toil, penury, obscurity, and a shoemaker. Like other
irrepressible weeds which seek light and upward growth, Savage,
the etiolated abortion, having discovered his mother's secret anf3
herself, picturesquely walked in front of her house, in order to
catch a glimpse of his tyrant oppressor, and having entered the
lobby was seized, accused of assault and intent to murder, and
would have been tried for this imaginary offence, had it not been
for the interposition of some one in power; and when condemned
to death for a homicide which he actuall}7' committed, his sleep-
less antagonist attempted to step between him and the mercy of
the Crown. She even thwarted his attempts to gain a miserable
subsistence by his writings for the stage. Upon two occasions
her shame and antipathy were turned to his advantage. Lord
Tyrconnel, a relative, in order to prevent the impending ex-
posure in a series of lampoons of his connection with the poet,
took him into what really was gilded servitude; and on the
publication of his poem of the ? Bastard,' disgraceful in its
intent as well as in its effect, his mother tacitly confessed its
scathing truth, and expelled herself from the society of Bath.
The training of this starveling was of the most meagre and in-
digestible kind. He figures first as a pupil in a small grammar
school at St. Alban's, where precocious beings of the same tem-
perament as he scribbled rhymes, and there he attained some
distinction. In this position he seems to have been supported
by a stranger. In the next stage his spasmodic studies are
pursued during a nightly attendance at the theatres for years,
are crowned by the usual imitation of the pieces he sees in an
" Author to Let," &c., &c., and in his own debut as an actor,
which was sadly unsuccessful; and liis ultimate education con-
sisted in observing men and manners, in the society afforded by
taverns, temporary patrons, and the substrata of the literary
world, where his teachers, needy or bankrupt in purse though
wealthy in wit, displayed much of their ingenuity in evading
creditors, masquerading bailies in execution in the liveries of
servants, and in writing squibs in taprooms, in order to dis-
charge their reckoning?the fruits of his discrimination or dis-
section being preserved on scraps of paper picked up on the
streets or elsewhere, necessity thus, as it lias often done before,
stimulating genius. So elementary, so superficial and shallow
were his acquirements, that even his eulogist unwittingly con-
fesses his surprise that a man of no education, no reading, should
in his satires afford so many indications of classical acquire-
ments, wise discernment, and dignified diction. His works are
undoubtedly redolent of hollands and tobacco, and of the coarse,
if not corrupted atmosphere which then prevailed in places of
public entertainment; but they afford sufficient evidence of
force of character, of astute penetration into the motives of
those with whom he came into contact, and of a facility in
diction, which if not musical is earnest and striking. His lines
remind us of Dryden without his polish; in caustic invective,
of Churchill without his scrupulousness; but in the skilled adula-
tion of the powerful he exceeds these and all his compeers. Of
the beautiful in external nature he had no conception, indeed
he never appears to have journeyed beyond the sound of Bow
bells, except when bribed to subject himself to an economical
and probationary exclusion in Swansea he went half-way. He
has left no trace of love or friendship in an exalted sense, and,
while lavish of money which was not his own, or was given to
save him from misery, or other purposes, there is no indication
of his generosity except one. Meeting on the street a wretched
woman who had perjured herself in order to convict him of
murder, he divided with her his last guinea. Removing from
our consideration for a time the redeeming properties of certain
of his writings, and while attributing much of his degradation
to the cruelty of those upon whom he had a claim, and the
mistaken liberality of those upon whom he had none, and likewise
to his own passions and gross appetites, it is impossible to re-
concile conduct about to be detailed to any other source than
Moral Insanity, to that ill-balanced intellect which fails to per-
ceive the rights of society, the obligations imposed by decorum,
friendship, self-respect, or the delicate, even the broad dis-
tinctions of honour and honesty, nor in fact acknowledges any
higher responsibility than what has been called " gallows morality."

Now to the proof. There may be some explanation or extenua-
tion of the broil in a brothel, where he killed his antagonist,
but there can be none for his pocketing the gold of his patrons,
and then caricaturing them without any feeling of shame or
disgrace?for begging, borrowing, or receiving the assistance of
his associates for one purpose, and then appropriating the means
thus obtained to another with no consciousness of dishonesty?
for the acceptance of munificent supplies from charity and com-
passion, which he squanders in prolonged dissipation and licen-
tiousness, treating with animosity such as required the repay-
ment of a loan, with utter obtuseness of the wrongdoing. This
supposed perversion of his moral sentiments may also be seen in
his lack of gratitude or common-sense in appreciating the home
and hospitality afforded by Lord Tyrconnel, and in casting away
that protection, the very means of livelihood which he could
have no rational expectations to secure elsewhere; except from
the vain and extravagant suggestions of imagination, which
never failed in his utmost need to inspire new schemes although
they rarely provided bread; in his total insensibility or indif-
ference to the comforts, the privileges, the feelings of others;
and in traducing and betraying contemporary authors?so
speaks even Johnson?and in exposing what had been revealed
in confidence; in his iniquitous and insane profusion while
utterly destitute of resources, while he never had a settled
residence for three months together, while subsisting at the
tables of the affluent, or exchanging jests and attractive dis-
course for food, wine, and wassail in obscure drinking-dens,
where he ran the risk of being publicly cudgelled ; and in elect-
ing nakedness, homelessness, passing the nights in the streets,
in cellars, on bulk-heads, or with the vilest associates among
the ashes of a glass-house, rather than sacrifice his orgies, engage
in manly toil, or accept assistance according to the dictates of
others; in his selfishness, self-conceit, meanness, which, led to
the outrageous misapplication of funds supplied by benefactors
whom he lampooned for the liquidation of debts fraudulently
incurred, and to his taking refuge in a jail, where, though kindly
treated, he was associated with criminals, where after a confine-
ment of six months he was seized with languor, dejection, and
fever, and died unable to recall some thought with which his
niind had been burdened; and in actions unjustifiable and un-
reasonable to all but himself, and so insensate and morbid that
they must have owed their origin to that original lack or sub-
sequent loss of conscientiousness, that imperfect if not extinct
perception of right and wrong which constitutes a form of
mental derangement.

Freidrich Schiller, 1759.
Genius?Dipsomania.

The author of" The Robbers," " Don Carlos," " Fiesco," " His-
tory of the Thirty Years' War," " Wallenstein," " The Maid of
Orleans," the Shakespeare of Germany, was the son of a surgeon,
who became an officer, a forest administrator in the service of
the Duke of Wurtemburg. The poet was tall, slender, squaie
about the shoulders, evidently shambling in gait, but gentle,
stately, and impressive in presence. Of kindly affectionate
nature, he was changeable, restless, susceptible, unworldly,
imaginative, excitable, ambitious?

The craving for something afar,
The desire of a moth for a star.
We find him a boy seated on the extremity of a branch of a
large tree in the forest, gazing at the lightning as it blazed from
cloud to cloud during a thunderstorm, admiring its beauty,
seeking to know what it was and whence it came, altogether
ignorant of danger. We find that, a lifetime afterwards, " as his
bodily feelings were those of languor and exhaustion, he adopted
in impatience of such mean impediments the pernicious expe-
dient of stimulants, which yield a momentary strength, only to
waste our remaining fund of it more speedily and surely . . .
Often the neighbours used to hear him earnestly declaiming in
the silence of the night; and whoever had an opportunity of
watching him on such occasions, a thing very easy to be done
from the heights lying opposite his little garden house on the
other side of the dell, might see him now speaking aloud and
walking swiftly to and fro in his chamber, then suddenly throw-
ing himself down into his chair and writing, and drinking the
while, and sometimes more than once, from the glass standing
near him."

Between these two distant periods we trace him as a docile,
intelligent boy, undergoing culture, designed and disposed to
enter the Church; secondly, compelled by his prince to give up
this choice for soldiery and surgery ; thirdly, deserting his regi-
ment, in which he was medical officer, and seeking emancipation
from royal and regimental yoke by going to Mannheim to see
and to superintend the representation of his play of "The Robbers,"
the effect of which drama was said to have been to turn the
heads of youths, and to turn them into amateur bandits and
outcasts, which caused it to be interdicted in Grermany and
denounced in Britain ; fourthly, restless or nomadic, he passes
from Mannheim to Dresden, from Dresden to Weimar, from
Weimar to Jena, from Jena, &c., forming friendships, however,
at every footstep, and leaving the fragrance, or rather the
radiance of elevated sentiments, unselfish purposes, and intense
ideality wherever he went; fifthly, spending his whole time in
composition of the most varied kind, but always within the
domain of imagination or romantic history?in the conversation
or correspondence of the most gifted spirits of his time?in
attending, regulating, reforming the drama and its representa-
tion ; sixthly, in forming many attachments, two of love which
might have eventuated in marriage, before he actually married,
and numberless friendships, none of which seem to have closed
in estrangement or feud; seventhly, living more entirely in
fancy, feeling, and transcendental thought than any other man.
He says of himself: " My mind is drawn different ways, I fall
headlong out of my ideal world if a holed stocking remind me
of the real world." He, with other poets, lived in a self-created,
ideal world. This is beautiful, or barren, or blasted, as fancy
dictates. It is peopled with fair, fantastic, or hideous beings,
in keeping with the creator's temper, temperament, or digestion.
It may be the arena of glorious or ignoble deeds, the stage on
which are represented principles and moral promptings, which
elevate men into gods; it mav be filled with the homes and
hamlets of virtuous poverty, or with the palaces of luxury,
hereditary distinction, pretentious ambition. Is all this in-
spiration the gossamer or the frost-work of a transcendental,
inventive faculty ? Are the visions of the seer supersensuous,
involuntary, and impassioned ? Does the heart bound and beat,
do the muscles thrill and burn with fervid heat, is the eye in a
tine frenzy rolling, is the mind unconscious of its own genius,
are the musical words oracular ? and is the speaker for a briet
time a sibyl, a prophet, a pythoness? It would be vain-
glorious to assert that any one save the inspired passed within
the magic circle, or witnessed the evolution of such enchantments.
It would be profane to attribute certain of the sublimities of
Byron to gin and water, or the unexciting ethics and landscapes
of Thomson to his preparatory dose of Epsom salts. But we
suspect that the process of composition is more mechanical, more
dependent upon surroundings, than what is romantically con-
ceived. Were the mind of this class sustained in constant or
frequent excitement and exultation, as their fond admirers and
imitators imagine it to be, were the brain inflamed and urged,
as it is supposed to be, during profound thinking or feeling,
why do we not find the whole race or many of them the victims
of General Paralysis.

As his faculties and his prospects expanded, discontent
arose. His medical project, like many which he formed, never
came to any issue. The primary disposition of his nature
urged him to perpetual toil. Love made Schiller crazy, as it
does all gods and men. During the whole of his life he seems
to have laboured under consumption, aggravated by angina
pectoris, under an attack of which he died, uttering as his last
words, " Calmer and calmer, many things are growing plain
and clear to me." *
Christopher Smart, 1722.
Melancholia.

It would be trite to say that the noblest thoughts lose during
translation by dilution, by the total inability of the translator
to identify himself with the thoughts, feelings, and fancies ot
the original, even if he could thoroughly appreciate and under-
stand them. But even when such obstacles are overcome, and
when the copyist has followed his model with exact fidelity, it
is impossible to determine whether the whole force or delicacy
of his brush, his burin, or his brain has been put forth, whether
a second impression is ever so fresh and sharp and bright as a
first, and whether a translation or a copy be not invariably
looked upon as inevitably and naturally inferior in merit to what
is, or professes to be, the direct and original offspring of the author.
It may be that Christopher Smart, having taken and claimed
rank little higher than that of a translator, has been tacitly
assigned his place among these valuable contributors to our
knowledge of antique models; and that the depreciatory criti-
cisms bestowed upon his English Horace may be justifiable, as
his name is not to be found in the Golden Legend of this class
of poets in Dr Hannay's article on the subject in the " Quarterly
Review "; yet it must not be forgotten that he was thanked by
Pope for his translation of the " Ode to St. Cecilia," and was insti-
gated to perform a similar office for the Essay on Criticism ; that
he was the friend of Grarrick and Sam Johnson, the latter of
whom wrote an account of his literary career. As another proof
of high gifts or attainments, it should be mentioned that he
gained the Seatonian Prize, Cambridge, in five successive years,
and that the subjects selected?the Eternity, the Immensity,
the Omniscience, the Power, and the Goodness of the Supreme
Being, would indicate an aspiring, if not a lofty genius. His
history, although doubtless embracing much of the romance and
the tragedy comprehended in each chapter of life, is simple,
short, and leads by a natural descent to that dark depth into
which so many kindred spirits have fallen.

Educated at a public school he distinguished himself by his
classical acquirements in the University, became a Fellow of
Pembroke Hall, but closed his connection with the institution
by marrying; then arrived the necessity for removal to London,
the taxing of his knowledge or imagination for bare support, and
his failure in keeping stern poverty from his door. Throughout
his whole course there had been a tendency to depression :
mortification, disappointment, and debt aggravated this gloom
into derangement, and his necessities placed him within the
rules of King's'Bench, his prison, asylum, and deathbed.
The few materials accessible as to the acts and aspirations
and surroundings of men of even transcendent powers and wide-
spread reputation, whose minds have bent or broken under
disease, have astonished and hampered me since the commence-
ment of the present inquiry; but the occurrence of such gaps
and barrenness is much more conspicuous and lamentable after
the last blow has been struck, and a living grave has closed over
one who may still for half a century thereafter exercise limited
family and social influences over the actors in the world which
lie lias left. It is true that memory may be a blank, that intel-
ligence may be shattered and shorn, that every sentiment may
be tottering to its fall; but to the mental pathologist such
wreck and dilapidation may be fraught with knowledge, and the
study of the ruins of a Buckland or a Lucretius is as much cal-
culated to inspire awe and solemnity as those of the Coliseum
or of Nineveh. Smart, in a mad-house, deprived of pen and
paper, indented the following stanzas (" than which devotional
poetry has nothing grander even in Milton," ) upon the wainscot
of his madhouse cell with a key:

SONG OF DAVID.
He sang of God, the mighty Source
Of all things, the stupendous Force
On which all strength depends;
From whose right arm, beneath whose eye
All period, power, and enterprise
Commences, reigns, and ends.
The world, the clustering spheres He made,
The glorious light, tho soothing shade,
Dale, campaign, grove, and hill,
The-multitudinous abyss,
AVliere Secrecy remains in bliss,
And "Wisdom hides her skill.
" Tell them I am," Jehovah said
To Moses ; whilst earth heard in dread,
And smitten to the heart,
And onco above, beneath, around,
All Nature, without voice or sound,
Eeplied, " 0 Lord, Thou art! "
The necessities of this penniless poet may be contrasted with
the practice now prevailing as marking the change, if not the
advance, in medical opinion upon the subject. Fifty years ago
writing materials were withheld from the insane upon the prin-
ciple that the exertion of thinking, correspondence with friends,
^c., were exciting and detrimental; now composition in poetry,
general literature, art, is encouraged wherever capacity or pre-
vious culture offer a soil, as a means of moral treatment, ot
stimulating recuperation or re-growtli. We have seen that
Clare was encouraged to write poetry; " many volumes of verses
such as the "Pilgrim of Sorrow," " Songs of the Night,' A:c., have
been produced by incarcerated lunatics, and periodicals have for
many years issued from the press of Institutions ior the Insane,
which are mainly devoted to rhyme of various degrees of merit;
of these we may cite the " New Moon," which lias appeared
monthly in the Cricliton Institution for the last forty years, of
which the 411th number is before me.

Jonathan Swift, 1(567.
Genius, Eccentricity?Mania (Structural Disease of Brain).
A tinge of romance mingles with the earlier scenes in the
life of one of the most plain-speaking practical men and mi-
sparing satirists of his age. The posthumous child of an
English family of good descent, he was, for reasons which are
not very obvious, surreptitiously stolen from his home, and for
three years concealed by his nurse : mysterious circumstances
which created suspicion, and, very absurdly, affiliated him as a
child of Sir William Temple, the Minister. At fourteen he
was entered as a student in Trinity College, Dublin ; was re-
garded as morose and unpopular by his companions, as devoting
himself to history and poetry, to the neglect and contempt of the
regular routine of study and discipline, a rebellious course which
entailed the inevitable punishment of a refusal of his degree, but
was subsequently granted that ignominious concession which se-
cures, although it cannot be said to entitle, the holder to orders.
A misconception of the character of this qualification enabled
him to enter and obtain his degree of M.A. from Oxford,
and to reside there on the bounty of relatives and benefactors.
Acting nominally as the tutor and librarian of his connection,
Sir W. Temple, he for a long period cultivated and stored his
intellect with that knowledge, philosophical and political, grave
and gay, which was ultimately utilised in such varied fields of
literature, and which gained for him a very wide, if not a uni-
versal reputation for wisdom and wit. There, however, it is
affirmed, he laid, by a surfeit in eating, the foundation of that
taint to his nervous constitution, which ever afterwards poisoned
and impaired his system, burdened him with infirmities, soured
his temper, dried up his sympathies, and eventually entailed
insanity and death. During a temporary convalescence attri-
buted to his native air, the influence of distinguished friends,
perhaps of royalty, certainly of vice-royalty, procured him the
appointment of a prebendary, which he speedily felt to be an
exile, and as speedily deserted, in order to return within the
more genial atmosphere of rank, affluence, and refined society.
Living long in expectation of his promotion to a canonry in
Westminster, which had been undoubtedly promised by the king',
and finding that his patron had deceived him, or had regarded
his services as having- been sufficiently remunerated, liis unstable,
or rather his unconscientious, opinions assumed the petty though
acrimonious revenge of condemning, caricaturing, and, it must
be admitted, calumniating all king's courtiers, and all who
aspired to their confidence, or had benefited by their influence.
His wrathful feelings were somewhat appeased when he received
two rich endowments at the hands of the presiding Lords Lieu-
tenant, and ultimately the deanery of St. Patrick's Cathedral.
It cannot of course be supposed that up to this well-advanced
stage in the Dean's progress, his sense of the ludicrous and the
grotesque, his cravings for fun and frolic, could have been con-
cealed, or have failed to blossom; but it was upon his induction
into one of his rich livings that his characteristic burst forth,
and he addressed the only one of his parishioners present as
" Dearly beloved Roger, the Scripture moveth you and me in
sundry places," &c. This layical parson might in those days
have exposed himself to a charge of innovation and ritualism,
as lie had just announced that prayers would be read every
Wednesday and Friday. It is highly probable that his youth,
jocund manner, and unclerical tendencies prevented his further
elevation. It has likewise been conceived that, notwithstanding
his acknowledged talents, his intimacy with those who shared
those gifts or could appreciate them, the flexibility of his prin-
ciples, and, above all, a change in his political creed and the par-
tisans with whom he had been formerly associated, presented a
more formidable and permanent barrier to preferment. His pene-
tration into the motives of even the Ministers whom he joined, his
recklessness as a pamphleteer, his subserviency or adaptation of
his versatile powers to objects doubtful if not unworthy of his
character, and his hard, haughty, overbearing manners, may
have contributed to the doubt which he certainly felt, and to
the intentional conversion of his deanery into a place of banish-
ment. Still another obstacle has been adduced to his elevation
to the bench. He was accused of being no Christian, and that
at a time when orthodoxy was assuredly not in the ascendant;
but it was an assertion to which his rashness, coarseness, and
speculative tendencies lent much countenance. The assumption
of his dignity was attended by great estrangement and coldness,
by outbursts of positive violence and vindictiveness on the part
of the Chapter ; but although these difficulties were gradually
softened down, giving way before great astuteness, force of
character, and gracious manners, there still remained another
source of suspicion and unpopularity, that of immorality. The
" Stella " of his verses is held by one set of controversialists to
be his wife, by another his mistress. All that has been clearly
ascertained of this extraordinary connection is, that she was the
(laughter of tlie steward of liis early patron, Sir William
Temple, who left her 1,000L; that she joined him in Dublin,
but that they never occupied the same house, invariably met
in the presence of a third person, that she was young, beautiful,
and accomplished, and that subsequent to her death, her name
was never mentioned by the survivor without expressions of
sorrow.

A marriage between these persons is said to have been per-
formed by the Bishop of Clogher. Lord Orrery has said of this
curious story, "there are actions the true motives of which will
never be known." Another lady occupied a place in his affec-
tions, or, at all events, figures in his poems under the name of
Vanessa. Sir Walter Scott treats with scorn and incredulity all
statements or insinuations that such connections were other
than pure and platonic; but Dr Johnson seems to have
entertained an opposite opinion. There is in the manners,
aspect, and attentions of certain individuals, especially if of
distinguished talents and position, so much of acceptableness
or attractiveness to the female mind, that their looks, their
intentions, even their words are misunderstood or misconstrued ;
and this may have been the case with Swift, as it is asserted
that even after he had confined himself to his house, the dean-
ery was daily beset or besieged by crowds of ladies, admirers,
who craved interviews, kind words, and, above all, scraps of
poetry. Into these MSS. double meanings, and expressions of
unchaste, if not positively erotic, meaning found their way. A
certain allowance must be made in judging of such coarseness
for the colloquial language of the day, and for the habitual
unscrupulousness of the writer; but the appearance of these
blemishes, and the bold, harsh, denunciatory style of the satirist
have tempted certain critics to deny his title to the rank of a
genuine poet. That his intellectual powers were of the highest
order, that his style was clear, rich, racy, that his powers of
invention were unrivalled and felicitous, is all admitted ; but the
range, and especially the elevation of his fancy and imagination
have been questioned, and even his claims to success in the
field of fiction have been limited to what was intended as satire
in the " Voyage to Lilliput," &c. It is assuredly a triumph of
genius thatwhatwere written with a very different object and with
different motives should be read a hundred years afterwards by
our school-children as charming novels or fairy tales in a region
hitherto untrodden. When in the full zenith of his powers,
when actively engaged in the very literary calling in which he
had become distinguished?in pamphleteering, which served
150 years ago the same purpose in political warfare, and espe-
cially in writing up or reading down a party or a person, that
newspaper leaders and public meetings now do?while in the
very act of composing- a satire he was, according to our bio-
grapher, seized with vertigo or unconsciousness, and never again
resumed his pen for the same purpose. This is pathetic and
striking, but there is other evidence to show that this petit
vial had recurred, in conjunction with other nervous symptoms,
for many years. He himself traced this significant indication
of decay to the childish freak of gluttony in eating a hundred
golden pippin apples.

It is not necessary to adopt this example of excess nor the
vague report of hereditary tendency as connected with the
development of nervous disease, nor is it certain, although the
patient repeatedly refers to his potations in his letters, that he
was addicted to drinking until he was actually insane, but to one
form of excitement he seems throughout life to have been prone,
and to have given way to such violent paroxysms of temper that
they must have resembled Mania Transitoria. This gave rise
to reports of assaults on brother clergymen, and undoubtedly
provoked and promoted that degeneration which ended in com-
plete dementia, which is supposed by one writer to have ex-
tended over a period of fifty-five years. Such a termination
was apprehended by the sufferer himself, and allusions to such
a fate are found in his writings, and its shadow has been traced
in the frequent fits of despondency to which he was subject.
An enthusiastic admirer has contended that his oddities and
eccentricities of manner cannot be attributed to nervous pecu-
liarities, and that mental disease in its true sense was never
present. I cannot, however, take so favourable a view of the
progression of such symptoms as deafness, sleeplessness from
slight causes, rheumatic and other attacks, and a tumour of the
eye which involved maniacal excitement, pervigilium, increased
giddiness and a tottering gait, prolonged periods of dejection,
and of inability even to write, estrangement from friends,
gradual loss of vision, forgetfulness of the names of particulai
Mends, even of words, and ultimately total silence. Amelioia-
tions and arrestments in the advance of his malady appeal to
have taken place, for, notwithstanding his impaired memoiy,
he gave dinner parties, and notwithstanding his infirmity in
walking he took much exercise as a remedy, and is said to have
walked nearly ten miles a day in his room almost to the close
of life. While able to take short journeys with friends occurred
the painful scene narrated by Dr Young, when, gazing long and
pointing to the blighted and decayed branches of an elm-tree
by the road, he said " Like that I shall die at the top." For
years before his death " his understanding was so much impaired
and his memory so much failed that he was utterly incapable of
conversation," and " his reason was wholly subverted, and became
absolute lunacy;" and it matters little whether his closing hours
were passed in the quiet, dreamless slumber of fatuity or in
protracted convulsions, he evidently fell a victim to the disease
which we have diagnosed.

Robert Tannaiiill, 1774.

Suicidal Melancholia.

Tannahill was a handloom silk-weaver in Paisley. He was
thin, pale, swart, as might be expected from his earnings of
10s. Qd. a week. He worked in a dark damp shop, somewhat
below the level of a narrow dingy street, where a dull yellow
light found entrance through small uncleaned windows, and
where an oil cruse hung from his loom often helped his vision.
Here for twelve hours or more of every day his shuttle sped its
weary course, moving however to the music of the poet's words
in the very act of composition, answering the voice of other
shuttles speeding on a similar errand. Yet to him this dismal,
dusty room was filled with the sights and sounds and the fresh
smell of glens, and birken sliaws, and mountain sides, where
the " bonny blooming heather " relieved the grey rock, the grey
lichen, the grey leaden sky of his landscape. Here even the
joyous seasons made their circuit, and the voices of spring speak
in such picture-words as?

Lav'rocks fan the snaw-white clouds,
Siller saughs wi' downy buds,
Adorn the banks sae briery, 0 ;
Bound the sylvan fairy nooks,
Feathery breckans fringe the rocks,
'Neath the brae the burnie jouks?
passing softly and sweetly into the " lang simmer day " when
" blaeberries " grow and the wild mountain thyme form features
of the scene?

Where the deer and the roe
Lightly bounding together
Sport the lang simmer day
On the braes o' Balquhither.
But the rays of fancy brighter than the dim twilight from
without lighted up this perfumed fairyland, and the forms of
bright and beautiful beings, known only in the heaven and
loved only in the heart of poets, glided through the wild flowers
and under the clear blue sky amidst which he dreamed; but
although these fair phantoms were many, his history shows that he
knew of only one, and that a slighted and scorned attachment.
Sombre and sordid although some of the surroundings were, it is
probable that the illusions and imagery which gilded and gladdened
and concealed their real repulsiveness formed the happiest scenes
and portions of his brief and uneventful career. He evidently de-
rived intense delight from the production of his verses, from the
correspondence with unlettered and unknown congenial spirits,
from convivial meetings with those who admired or felt with him,
ever mourning over the excitement and excess to which such
" reunions" sometimes led; but the deepest and most in-
exhaustible sources of his happiness consisted in listening to
his own words when sung by the lips of others, and in the con-
templation of external nature, especially in its woodland aspects,
as presented in the Braes o' Grleniffer, Stanley fehaw, and other
sequestered spots near his own smoky town. Of one of these
emotions he writes that the most grateful of his feelings of the
proofs of his popularity was the having his musings interrupted,
during a solitary walk, by the voice of a country girl, in an
adjoining field, whom he overheard singing by herself
We'll meet beside the dusky glen
On yon burnside.

His passionate admiration of the beauties of the outer world
differed widely from that of his prototype and idol, Robert
Burns, whom in many things he resembled. The taste of
Tannahill was entranced by pictorial beauty, by the forms and
colours of what he saw and loved; while the soul of Burns
idealised, moralised, and discovered, and was drawn to a mean-
a life, an embodiment of the Divine in every bud and
flower that adorned his path. Like the Ayrshire poet, he
enjoyed the privilege and the training of family and home, of
a selt-conducted education, which, besides culture and refinement,
imparted considerable mastery over language both in prose and
verse, and created that sensitive and sentimental nature which
Was at once a strength and a weakness. Burns maybe legai ded
as tlie type of the peasant-poet, Tannahill as the type of the
weaver-poet, but there have been shepherd-poets, blacksmith-
poets, &c., in the favoured "land of the mountain and the flood,
and in looking over the voluminous biographical notices of poets
Ayho were natives of Scotland, our astonishment is excited by the
iarge numbers who have belonged to the artisan or even servile
class who were of some pretension, or who still enjoy a posthumous
Popularity. The elevation of genius gave to Burns a sense of
equality with all ranks and manners which rendered him accept-
able alike to the polished and the powerful: but present in Tan-
nahill in a much lesser degree?and of this he was perfectly
conscious?this rare quality imparted a shyness and awkwardness
and uncertainty of position when in the presence of those
whom he regarded as his superiors, which, led him to recoil
from every upward step and from the promptings of ambition,
while it fostered so keen a craving for applause, and fame as to
become a morbid and fatal gift. Perhaps the narrowness of
the circle in which he moved increased this moral infirmity,
for, except when unwittingly following in the steps of artisan
guilds on the Continent he sought employment among his craft
in Lancashire, he never left the place of his nativity, nor added
to the humble friends and fellow-labourers in his own walk of
life. Everyone has his great man, to whom he clings as a patron,
whom he imitates as a model, or worships as a god ; but except
for one day, Tannahill's only shrine seems to have been that of
a smith who set his songs to music. This great festival in his
literary course consisted in a visit from James Hogg, the familiar
friend of Scott, Campbell, McNeil, who actually made a pil-
grimage from the sheepfolds of Ettrick to pay tribute to the
obscure songster who had the good taste to cultivate simplicity
and purity in all his compositions, and the modesty to rest con-
tent with the acceptance of his minstrelsy by the village maidens
of his northern land. This meeting of congenial spirits was
prolonged during the night, and by the gloomy and distrustful
bard accompanying the cheerful and self-confident shepherd far
on his way to Glasgow. Their parting was prophetic, the fare
well concealing perhaps a purpose as well as expressing a feeling
on the part of Tannahill. He grasped his hand, and with tears
in his eyes said " Farewell! we shall never meet again ! Fare-
well ! I shall never see you more." Bodily disease may have
contributed to this depression, for with the sturdy good sense
of his father and the tenderness of his mother he inherited the
constitutional taint of consumption of which many of his kindred
had died. But the pensiveness which many poetasters feel and
many more affect assumed in him the more positive forms of
melancholy and suspicion. " He evinced a proneness to imagine
that his best friends were disposed to injure him, and a certain
jealous fear of his claims to jealousy being impugned." To lack
ambition altogether is mental defect and pusillanimity, and
Tannahill, although the least presumptive and obtrusive of authors,
and although contented with his lowliness and obscurity, and
even desiring its continuance, craved the applause of a wider
world than his own: that his Doric minstrelsy might be chanted
on other burnsides than his own and over a wider area than
that comprised in Renfrew, Stirling, Ayr, and Dumfries, where
his songs there were and still are popular. We accordingly
find that he was a candidate for the admission of his lays to
what was in his time regarded as a temple of fame, Thompson s
"Select Melodies of Scotland." He approaches the arbiter of his
fate less as a claimant than as a suitor and suppliant by his
pleadings, but what was subsequently recognised as the genuine
merit of his poems availed nothing, and they weie placed
amongst "Rejected Addresses." It is said that Keats was " ex-
tinguished by an article," and Tannahill's want of success seems
to have been the culminating point of his destiny. It must
have been that his temperament and original constitution, his
toil in an unhealthy atmosphere, his habitual despondency, en-
couraged it may be by his imagination and the contracted range
of his enjoyments, prepared the way for the final catastiophe,
but the "fiat" of the publisher was the grand disappointment of
his life, relieved and counterbalanced though it was by the wide
circulation of an edition of his book. But unsolaced and un-
supported by the countenance and kindness of friends and ad-
mirers, he manifested such unequivocal signs of alienation, and
so keen a sense of the misery he was enduring, that he was con-
fided to his relatives as labouring under unsoundness of mind.
His return home was cheered by a gleam of tranquillity, or by
the assumption of a calm which he did not feel, and stealing
out during the night unperceived, he was next found stark and
stiff in a pool?he would have written " linn *of one of thote
burns which had doubtless often found a place in his affections
and imaginings.

Torquato Tasso, 1544.
Erotic Mania?Delusions.

Torquato Tasso has been drawn as a martyr rather than as a
madman. He has been depicted as the victim of the petty
yranny, the ancestral pride, even the literary envy of the
oveieign to whose court he was attached as a sort of parasite
0 arged with the office and functions which in former times
were consigned to bards or harpers, then to jesters and fools,
to 1 n?W *aurea^es > and whose sister he had dared to laud,
?ve, even to kiss in the presence of his master. Suffering
er such wrongs and jealous persecution, he is more con-
emPtible than as the deluded and drivelling maniac, but the
portrait is probably from the hand of a king-hater. These
discrepant hypotheses are fully discussed in able articles in the
" Journal of Mental Science," the author of which is inclined to
exonerate the sovereign, and to regard his protege as of unsound
mind throughout his whole life. Whatever the origin of this
shadow in the varied, virtuous, and glorious career of ' Jeru-
salem Delivered,' all his biographers agree that his infancy was
passed under the influences of the soft, genial skies of the
orange and myrtle groves, and the emerald sea of Tarento. He
was cradled at the side of a pious, pensive mother, articulated
when he was six months, and spoke when he was ten months old,
understood Latin at six years, and Greek at ten years old; but though
the precocious child borrowed much, most of what was bright
and beautiful in his own nature, from these first impressions, his
father was an ambitious political partisan of princely houses,
whose misfortunes and machinations estranged him much from
his home, and from bestowing such training and tutelage upon
his son as his own education and experience might have afforded,
and whose example engrafted, or at least fostered, those restless
habits, that craving for the society, the smiles, and the more
substantial gifts of great and royal personages, which afterwards
characterised him, but which, it must be confessed, was the
heritage and ignominious vocation of proud, penniless men in
the middle ages. The spirit of persecution under the chronic
internecine feelings, if not the feuds, of convulsed Italy involved
children as well as their parents; the family of Tasso is broken
up, the child is sent to his refugee father at home, where he
grew in mental stature, perhaps the spoiled pet of the patrician,
the polished, the pious, the refined in the centre of the Christian
world?perhaps having his fancy trained and tinctured by the
paintings, the statuary, perhaps by the historic ruins, even by
the very stones by which he was surrounded, but where his
practical, if not prosaic father, determined that he should study
law. He is first sent to Bergamo, and thence to Padua, where,
in place of dying or deadening his imagination over the Pandects,
or submitting to the ordinary curriculum, he gave full scope to
his perception and craving of the beautiful in nature, art, history,
romance?he delivers lectures on heroic poetry, conceives the
idea or outline of his great epic, and apparently devotes his
whole intellectual power to anaesthetics. A pasquinade imputed
to his pen necessitated a voluntary exile from Bologna, and for
years he may be traced through Mantua, Modena, Padua, every
footstep marking some advance in the path of literary dis-
tinction and towards poetic fame, although those roses and
laurels and imaginary crowns did not deceive his father or make
him swerve from his prediction of poverty, dependence, and
anxiety. Summoned to Ferrara by the Cardinal d'Este to fill
some courtly office, his course as a hanger-on, an enthusiast, and
a lover began, although to his own convictions the future was
crowded with glorious visions of the pomp and pageantry of dis-
tinction and success. It is probable that if his admiration and
adoration of the fair sister of his nominal patron was any thing-
more serious and sincere than the espousal of a name and a
colour in Chivalry as an incentive to courage, or than the
Platonic devotion expressed by troubadours to the heroines of
their verses, it was but an episode in the grand purposes of
his heart and soul. While this friendship, we dare not vulgarise
it as a flirtation, merely gave immortality to its object in com-
positions which placed their author at the head of the living-
poets of Italy, while his orations secured the ardent and unani-
mous applause of his fellow-citizens, while he confers repute on
an embassy to Paris, to which as an humble subordinate with a
threadbare coat he was attached, by saving a brother-poet con-
demned to death, his liberal but capricious sovereign delighted
to honour and enrich him. It is possible that golden opinions,
increased emoluments, the acclaim of all entitled to confer
praise, and the gentle condescension and confidence of the
object of his admiration, who granted private conferences, who
listened approvingly, and, as the theme of such poetry and such
a poet, delightedly, may have proved formidable, even fatal, to
an excitable, dreamy, yet aspiring nature, and have sown or
stimulated the germ of that moral upas tree which in part and
at times cast a shadow over his future happiness. At all events,
these favours of fortune were the last rays of sunshine which for
a season gladdened his career. Suspicion, espionage, accusations
of heresy and conspiracy dogged his steps, and although for a
brief time protected by his idol, Leonora, after a struggle with the
desperadoes who carried out the designs of aristocratic intriguers,
be was consigned to the cell of a monastery, threatened, cajoled,
watched, worried, with the design of producing that madness
which had been attributed to him. Liberated or escaping from
thraldom, lie flies in disguise to his early home ; tempted fiom
thence it is affirmed by letters from the faithful Leonoia, he
returns to Ferrara, but is there, and subsequently in Mantua
and Venice, pursued and ostracised by the stigma of insanity.
^ andering as a wretched, ragged beggar, selling the baubles
which had been the gift of royalty in his palmy days, exposed to
the various and bitter fortunes of outcasts, his devious, it may be
delirious, steps were again attracted to the vicinity of his
patroness, and of what was still more priceless and peerless, his
MS. writings, and he is again rejected, reviled, and immured in
an hospital with the wildest and most degraded captives, and in
his frightful dungeon his mind is said to have been " petrified,"
in other words, was overthrown. Even the miseries of this
chamber of horrors were aggravated by the death of Leonora,
and by the publication of " Jerusalem Delivered " in a mutilated
form; but even under these misfortunes he continued to pour
forth in lavish luxuriance as profusely as the improviscitori of
his native land the inspirations of his genius?and it is doubtful
whether, when ameliorations were conceded, when he was per-
mitted to associate with his friends, when his cell became a
shrine, to which the pilgrims and devotees and worshippers of
the divinity of genius resorted, even when he reascended the
eminence from which he had been hurled, his lays and lyrics
were more beautiful and exquisite. After five years' seclusion,
his failing health extorted not compassion, but a semblance of
leniency from his gaolers, and he was allowed to gratify his
religious feelings by visits to churches and convents, but was
still watched and warded; at other times he gazed from the
grated windows of his gloomy prisonhouse, where his pallid, calm,
statuesque countenance was visible to the crowd in the street,
and excited in such strangers that pity and sympathy for which
he yearned, but which he was denied. The remonstrances and
petitions of the princes and peoples of Italy at length obtained
his discharge from confinement, under a sentence, however, of
banishment and silence. In one sense his restoration to society
came too late: he had to contend not merely with the demons
of pride and poverty, but with a sense of deep, irreparable in-
juries, of disappointed hopes, and visions of a wasted life, and
with that placid but deep-seated melancholy which is akin to
penitence. It may have been this depressing sentiment of
pious gratitude which led him to our Lady of Loretto and other
holy spots; but it does not appear to have been dissipated,
either by reliance on heavenly .aid, by the admiration, adulation,
munificence of the wise and wealthy, or by the lovely ancl
health-restoring scenes amid which he moved?not even by the
award of that laurel crown which he must have coveted; and he
fell on sleep in the quiet monastery of Saint Onofrio, while
the streets of Eome were animated by the preparation for his
coronation in the capital, and the wreaths were fresh and green
which were to have graced the ceremonial.

But there was another interpretation of the tracings on the
pale face seen in the gloomy cell of St. Anne's. Whether intel-
ligence was crushed and clouded by persecution and captivity,
or whether his exquisite organisation, his constant intercourse
with those " things unseen," his own thoughts and emotions, the
throes to which so keenly sensible and sensitive a nature is sub-
ject in passing through even a happy and harmonious career,
initiated a mental revolution or not, Torquato Tasso was un-
doubtedly of unsound mind. He was troubled with strange
apprehensions and nocturnal apparitions?lights which were seen
shining or sparkling in the air; his ears were assailed by frightful
noises, by hissing, tingling, ringing of bells, and the ticking ot
a clock. Often in his sleep he was tormented with fantastic
visions of distress and turmoil. Amidst so many torments there
appeared to him in the air the image of the Virgin and Saviour,
sphered in a circle of coloured vapours, which was accepted as a
rainbow of hope, and as a miracle. It is interesting that Bene-
venuto Cellini saw a vision of precisely similar aspect, in a
similar cell and similar circumstances. Tasso is attacked by
fever?the Virgin is appealed to; he recovers?and a vow of pil-
grimage to Loretto testifies his gratitude as a devotee; a sonnet
and a madrigal as a poet.

The phantasm was no longer the imp, the Poletto, which
confined itself to stealing his papers and his money, but " a
celestial being, but palpable to sense, inspiring lofty and glorious
imaginings, impassioned and transcendental eloquence, which
visited him when restored to his beloved Naples, when sur-
rounded by all the pleasures and refinements which wealth,
friendship, and the profusion of princes could command, when
calm and collected, in solitude, and in society. This apparition
was no play of fancy ; to him it was a verity, a reality, in which
he believed as firmly as in his own existence ; it was no spectre,
no shadow of the past, conjured up by fear, or remorse, or excite-
ment, for although he was excited while it was present, it was
by the fervour of intellectual exercise, of a high and holy moral
purpose. His companions were sceptics, but so entire and abso-
lute was his faith that he offered, as he could not convince them
by reason, to do so by experience, " I shall cause the spirit in
which you refuse to believe, to appear before your own eyes.
" I accepted the offer," says his biographer, " and next day,
when we sat by the fire conversing, he turned his eyes towards
the window, and looking with steadfast attention, appeared so
completely absorbed that when I called to him he did not
answer. c See,' said he at length, ' see, my familiar spirit
comes to converse with me.' I looked with the greatest eai-
nestness, but could see nothing enter the apartment. In the
meantime, Tasso began to converse with this mysterious being.
I saw and heard himself alone. Sometimes he questioned, and
sometimes answered; and from his answers I gathered the sense
of what he had heard.

" The subject of his discourse was so elevated, and the expres-
sions so sublime, that I felt myself in a kind of ecstasy. I did
not venture to interrupt him, or to trouble him with questions,
and a considerable time elapsed before the spirit disappeared. I
was informed of its departure by Tasso, who turning towards me
said, ' In future you will cease to doubt.' f Kather,' said I,
' I shall be more sceptical; for although I have heard astonish-
ing words, I have seen nothing.' Smiling, he replied, 'You
have perhaps heard and seen more than ' he stopped
short; and fearing to importune him by my questions, I dropped
the conversation. And in this belief and communion he lived
and died."

But were these impressions which fell powerless on the senses
of his companions in the vulgar sense delusions ? Did not
Torquato Tasso see and hear the being to whom he responded ?
were the words and the meaning his own, or were they not as
real to his consciousness as the words and the meaning of the
witness who offered a negative testimony as to their reality ?
What proof, in short, is there that such apparitions are not as
substantial in a logical sense as the convictions by which they
are accompanied, the conditions of the nerves which are in some
manner affected, or as the vibrations of that air and light upon
which all knowledge both of an external and of a supernatural
world depend ?
