Private Asylums
================

285
Art. X.?.

There are existing in the Metropolitan district 39 Private
Asylums licensed for the reception of lunatics, the Provincial
number being 60.

During the year most unjustifiable and unwarrantable at-
tacks have been made against these institutions and their pro-
prietors by not only the lay papers, but also by the British
Medical Journal. It must be a subject for congratulation to
all those connected directly or indirectly with private asylums to
read the remarks of the Commissioners in Lunacy in their last
Report. Much correspondence has taken place on the question.
The Medical Press and Circular, when speaking on the subject
says:?

" The unjustifiable and indiscriminate attacks which a large
portion of the daily press has recently levelled against private
lunatic asylums makes it incumbent on us to expose the senseless
fallacies of those who have joined in the blatant cry against the
proprietors of these establishments, amongst whom can be num-
bered some of the greatest philanthropists of the age; and the
wholesale slanderers of a humane and honourable class should be
reminded, that it is to these we are chiefly indebted for the
great improvements which have taken place of late years in the
treatment of the insane.

" Without the slightest wish to detract from the great merits
?f our public pauper asylums, we think it fair that the special
advantages of small private asylums should be duly recognised,
and it will relieve the minds of those who have relatives in them
to learn that they are not the ' hells' that some poor deluded
individuals would lead us to suppose.

" It must be evident to every candid observer that in a public
asylum where there is a proportion of three or four medical men
to several hundred patients, it is impossible to give that par-
ticular attention to each case which it would receive where^ one
person had the superintendence of a limited numbei of patients
only. particular symptoms of some subtle form of mental
a serration must often be overlooked in so vast a crowd. In a
Private asylum the duties of the superintendent are most anxious
and arduous. His whole existence is mixed up with tbat of the
Patients; he has to share their meals and their amusements.
We is therefore necessarily subjected, not only to frequent petty
annoyances, but it sometimes even happens that his life is
placed in jeopardy. These molestations can be borne, but it
must certainly be trying to his patience to have to endure the
unprovoked slander of ignorant scribblers at a time when he
believes himself usefully and benevolently employed in relieving
the sufferings of his fellow creatures.

" The most scrutinising inquiry by the Dillwyn Committee of
the House of Commons has satisfactorily shown that no instance
of mala fides could be proved against any proprietor of a
private lunatic asylum.

" One of our contemporaries has likened private asylums in
part to hotels ; we were not before aware that a stranger could
enter an institution of this sort and order a bed and bitter beer.
" Private asylums at the present day differ very materially
from what they were some years ago before the legislature took
up the question; and in spite of what we read of in the papers,
we state emphatically that it is impossible, under the existing
state of our law, to confine or detain a person unjustly in a
private asylum.

" The unhappy sufferers are treated with the greatest kind-
ness and consideration, and it is the aim and effort of the
proprietor and superintendent not to detain his patient unjustly,
but to do all in his power to restore reason, and ' minister to a
mind diseased.'"

The Commissioners make the following remarks on Private
Asylums:?

"In our Twenty-fifth Report (for 1871) we took occasion to
describe each licensed house then open in the metropolitan
district; and in the Twenty-sixth Keport we gave particulars
of those licensed by justices, prefaced by a general sketch of
the character and condition of these proprietary establishments.
We there stated that they were very different from what such
houses had been within the memory of several members of our
board, and that their gradual improvement had been very
great.

"We can now report that, since 1872, a few only of the
houses then referred to have been closed, and those few, with a
single exception, in consequence of the death or retirement of
the proprietors. Within certain limits, beyond which activity
would defeat its object, our criticism of the details of manage-
ment of licensed houses becomes year by year more and more
searching; and although the amount of order, good manage-
ment, comfort, and attention to the wants of the patients varies
much, and is not everywhere thoroughly satisfactory, yet the
general improvement continues, and consequently the standard
aimed at becomes higher and higher.

" A good deal of unfavourable comment has lately been
made upon the licensed houses and their proprietors, both
before the Select Committee of the House of Commons (whose
report we shall have occasion presently to notice) and else-
where. Some witnesses called by the Committee went so fax-
as to ' urge the immediate abolition of all such houses, on the
ground of the temptation to keep profitable patients longer
than necessary.'

" A system which places the insane in charge of persons who
derive profit from their detention, is no doubt objectionable in
theory ; and in practice (like many other things) may be open
to abuse. But so far as regards the licensed houses in England
and Wales, which alone come under our observation, we are
convinced that, under the strict supervision and the safeguards
which the Lunacy Acts provide, no such abuses are possible as
have been in some quarters seriously alleged, such as the ' in-
carceration ' of sane persons, or the prolonged detention for
corrupt motives of insane persons who have entirely recovered
their reason.

" Nor are the proprietors of licensed houses open to the
sweeping charges of dishonesty and self-seeking which have
been brought against them as a body. It should not be for-
gotten that these persons to some extent are competing with
each other and with the hospitals in a business which, to be
remunerative, must be conducted on principles of ordinary
prudence and common honesty.

" Moreover, in the vast majority of cases (admitting that
instances to the contrary might possibly be found), the speedy
cure of an insane patient is, on pecuniary, if on no higher
grounds, an object of the greatest importance to the persons
with whom it rests to decide where to place him under treat-
ment, and every cure that can be shown becomes in fact the
hest advertisement of the establishment in which the cure is
effected.

" Our own opinion is that the licensed houses supply at
present a social want; and that their abolition, without the
substitution of other and better establishments, would assuredly
multiply cases of illegal charge and consequent neglect and ill-
treatment of lunatics, and would also lead to the clandestine
removal of many such persons to foreign parts.

" Were asylums for the reception of private patients erected
at the public cost, we doubt whether such institutions would
be more acceptable to the friends of wealthy patients than the
hospitals now registered under the Lunacy Acts, which do not
receive many lunatics of large fortune. What these substitutes
should be is a matter of more difficulty. Certainly the ex-
288 PRIVATE ASYLUMS.
perience of past years does not show any disposition on the
part of the public to increase the number of institutions such
as the present hospitals, founded on the principle of ' applying
the excess of payments of some patients for or towards the
support, provision, or benefit of other patients.' * (8 & 9 Vict,
c. 100, s. 114.)

" These views, it will be seen, are much in accordance with
the conclusions of the Select Committee appearing in page vi.
of their report. The entire passage is as follows:?
"' The Committee found the greatest diversity of opinion
with regard to private licensed houses. Some witnesses urged
the immediate abolition of all such houses, on the ground of
the temptation to keep profitable patients longer than necessary.
Others as confidently stated that such houses supplied an ac-
knowledged want, that there was a greater percentage of cures
among patients under private care than among those in public
asylums, and that it was the interest of the proprietors of pri-
vate asylums to maintain the character of their establishments;
while in public asylums, though the temptation to detain un-
duly for the sake of profit could hardly be said to exist, yet that
paid officials might lose personal interest in the good and careful
management of these institutions. Other witnesses, again,
took a view between these two extremes, and considered that no
alteration of the law in this respect was necessary, but that the
matter had better be left to the spontaneous action of the
public; that the time might arrive when there would be suffi-
cient accommodation in public institutions for all classes, such
as exist in Scotland, in Cornwall, and at Cheadle in Cheshire.f
When that time arrived it was possible that there would be no
demand for licensed houses for the upper and middle classes,
nor would lunatics be kept any longer in the wards of work-
houses, which, it was represented, are often, especially in Ire-
land, most unfit for the purpose. In this opinion the Committee
concur, and they would suggest that legislative facilities should
be afforded, by enlargement of the powers of magistrates, or
otherwise, for the extension of this system.'

" Before leaving this head of our report, we will enter into
a few particulars which may throw further light on the present
position of the licensed houses. The number of patients in
* The only two Hospitals which were not in existence in 1859, are Barnwood
House, which took its rise from the separation of the charity" element from the
""S Asylun\at Gloucester, and the Royal Albert Asylum for Idiots.
1 ]6 Comm'ttee appear to refer to:?1. The "Chartered Asylums" of
^cot and; 2. The detached building at the Cornwall County Asylum in connection
? ty' w^ere Pr'vate patients are received at low rates; and, 3. The
c 100 Manchester lunatic Hospital" at Cheadle, registered under 8 & 9 Vict.
PRIVATE ASYLUMS. 289

licensed houses (if we exclude the paupers, the inmates of idiot
institutions, and the insane soldiers received in Grove Hall
under a contract with the War Office) are 1,432 in the metro-
politan district and 1,455 in the provinces; altogether 2,887
persons. The houses in and about London are 37, but these
include four where idiots only are received. Those in the
country are 60; they also include four receiving idiots only.
Of the 33 metropolitan houses (excluding those which receive
idiot children only) 13 have 30 patients and upwards. In the
provinces, with 12 exceptions, the number of private patients
does not, in any one house, exceed 30. Many licensees in town
and country have fewer than 20 cases under their charge, and
some are limited to the reception of two or three individuals
being brothers or sisters.

" The charges for care and treatment in licensed houses of
course vary much, according to the extent of the accommoda-
tion and style of living. We find that the present average
payment for "each patient in the 89 licensed houses which
receive lunatic private patients, as distinguished from idiots, is
approximately as follows :?

" In 32 of the houses, receiving about 1,300 patients, the
average payment is under ?100 per annum.
" In 22, receiving about 750, the average payment is from
?100 to ?150 per annum.

"Thirty shillings and two guineas weekly, are ordinary
charges in houses of this class, but a large proportion of patients
are received there at rates not exceeding one guinea, while
comparatively few pay more than three guineas a week. To
obtain admission for a private patient into any licensed house
for a payment below thirty shillings a week is, however, not
easy, and it is almost impossible if the patient be very infirm,
noisy, destructive, or of dirty habits.

" In the remaining 35 houses the charges are higher.
"In 18 of these, the average payments range from ?150 to
?200.

" In 13 from ?200 to ?280.
" In 4, from ?280 to ?330, and in one house they reach ?470,
including cost of carriages, and other expensive luxuries.
"Against the highest sums demanded in the first-class
houses we should mention this set-off, viz.y that in most of
them there are cases of very long standing whose cost of
maintenance actually exceeds the small payments which can
be obtained for their support from the surviving members of
their families.

" Further particulars as to the extent of the licence of each
bouse, and as to the average number of patients resident,
during 1878, are given, as heretofore, in the Appendix (B).
" In some of these establishments are occasionally living, by
our special permission, relatives or connection of patients.
We think that the association of such persons is often most
beneficial. We also think that an additional guarantee is
afforded for the proper care and treatment of all the insane
inmates of a licensed house by the presence among them,
and sharing their everyday life and general treatment, of one
or more visitors of sound mind interested in checking malad-
ministration, acting as so many watchful eyes over the attendants,
and not restrained from complaint to us or to the proprietors
by any fear of personal consequences. We therefore do all in
our power to encourage the residence of such friends, and in
one of the larger ' private asylums' in London several are
always staying.

"In the house just mentioned, and in many others, are
also voluntary boarders residing by similar permission, being
usually persons liable to recurrent insanity who feel the advantage
of a regulated life, with constant access to medical advice. At
our periodical visits we satisfy ourselves that they have not
relapsed into certifiable unsoundness of mind, and that their
stay is entirely their own wish. The presence of these indi-
viduals in licensed houses is another valuable check upon
improper proceedings there, and affords some proof that the
general management of the establishment (of which, while
insane, the boarder has usually had experience) is not objection-
able to him."
