Mental Responsibility and the Diagnosis of Insanity in Criminal Cases
======================================================================

225
Art. IV.?
Br EDWARD C. MANN, M.D.
Superintendent Sunnyside Medical Retreat for Mental and Nervous Diseases.
At the present day medico-legal cases are becoming very
frequent, in which it is necessary to ascertain as to the insanity
of a person accused of a criminal act, in its relation to his civil
capacity and responsibility for criminal actions, and also as
to feigned or concealed insanity. It becomes, therefore, a very
interesting question as to what test of insanity the law should
recognise as a valid defence in criminal cases. This question,
although one which it seems difficult to settle satisfactorily, and
which judges, lawyers, and medical experts are constantly
disputing, assumes every day greater interest and wider sig-
nificance, owing to the increase of insanity in our country dis-
proportionate to the increase of population, which has taken place
during the past twenty years, and which will continue to take
place. Without inserting dry statistics, it is sufficient to say
that a comparison of the increase of population from 1850 to
1870, with the increase of the number of the insane during the
same period, reveals an increase of insanity over that of popula-
tion of about 12 per cent. In the foreign elements this is due
to marked changes in the habit of living, the changes of food,
increased intemperance, working more indoors, living in badly
ventilated tenements, and disappointments in not succeeding
in business, &c., as they had expected to do in America, which
are causes that, all combined, impair health, break down
the nervous system, and tend insensibly towards insanity in the
offspring. The increase of insanity among our own population
is due largely to a change from the vigorous, well-balanced
organisation, to an undue predominance of the nervous tempera-
ment, which is gradually taking place in successive generations.
The educational pressure on the young to the neglect of physical
exercise, the increasing artificial and unnatural habits of living,
the great excitement and competition in business, are all tending
to induce and multiply nervous diseases, many of which must
terminate in insanity. These causes, and the evils resulting from
them, are propagated by the laws of inheritance in an aggravated
Head before the New York Medico-Legal Society.
226 MENTAL RESPONSIBILITY AND TIIE DIAGNOSIS OF
and intensified form. Insanity is also appearing- gradually at
an earlier age than formerly. In former years the average period
at which the greatest number became insane, ranged between
the ages of thirty and forty, but an analysis of statistics shows
that this average age is coming on at an earlier period, generally
appearing between the years of twenty and thirty. This is owing
to hereditary influences, which have gradually become intensified
by the violation of physical laws during early life, want of proper
training, or too high pressure in education, and is also due
largely to the great mental activity and strain upon the nervous
system that appertain to the present age and state of civilisation,
and which tend to a rapid decay of the nervous system. With
many persons it is but a step from extreme nervous susceptibility
to downright hysteria, and from that to covert insanity. The
question of mental responsibility in its relation to criminal cases
is one of great interest, and presents a wide field for study and
investigation. The facts of criminal psychology have led the
writer to regard the impulse of criminal natures in the light of
natural laws, and there is, beyond all doubt, an anthropological
change which lies at the foundation of criminal propensities.
There is a deficient cerebral organisation which lies at the
foundation of these criminal natures, which occasions the dis-
position of an abnormal moral constitution. The dislike of work
and the love of enjoyment are impulses which, when combined,
lead especially to crime?when the ethic constitution or develop-
ment is wanting which is necessary to the foundation of a power-
ful feeling of what is right.
A further fundamental element, which stands in psycho-
physical contrast to dislike of work, is an excessive physical
consciousness of strength, which leads to arrogance, and thereby
to the pleasure of measuring strength against the weak. This
impulse leads to the love of bullying, cruelty, and murder, if
the higher intellect is absent, which should turn the feeling of
strength in a right direction, and there is also absent a complete
ethical consciousness, which should prevent misuse of power. This
ethical weakness may be congenital, as has been remarked, or it
may arise from deficient education. In the domain of vices we
meet with a peculiar condition of the central nervous system,
which results in temporary criminal impulse returning with a
certain regularity. Such criminals are temporarily seized with
the deepest remorse, and are fortified Avith the best resolutions.
Ihey behave for a time in the most exemplary manner until
they relapse again, which relapse is unanimously attributed by
them to an irresistible impulse. This state of moral epilepsy
is of great significance in the psychology of crime, as a physio-
ogist is led to institute a comparison between such cases and
INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 227
several states of disease, in which a peculiar type is observable,
consisting in the fact that attacks of illness of more or less
duration alternate with more or less long, and generally for a
time preponderant, healthy intermissions. In a broad sense, one
may designate all these pathological states as epileptiform,
hence the term " moral epilepsy" which has been adopted
above. Leaving this interesting question of the psychology of
crime, we would ask if the true basis for jurists to proceed upon
is not the protection of the existence of normal persons against
the ethically degenerate ? And the unnecessary degree of this
protection is, most certainly, an essential measure for the severity
of the punishment. The first trial of note where there was the
question of insanity advanced, was in 1723, when the trial of
Arnold for shooting at Lord Onslow occurred. Although it was
shown that Arnold had been of weak understanding from his
birth, and that he was doubtless insane, the jury brought in a
verdict of guilty, and Arnold would have been executed had it
not been for the intercession of Lord Onslow. The language of
the charge to the jury in this case was in conformity to the rule
laid down by Lord Hale, that partial insanity does not excuse a
person from the consequence of his act, and that only a total depri-
vation of reason can furnish such excuse. In the year 1800 the
celebrated trial of Hatfield, for shooting at the king in Drury
Lane Theatre, excited much interest. Although it was proved
that in 1793 Hatfield, who was a dragoon, had received a num-
ber of severe wounds which had caused partial insanity, so that
he was dismissed from the service, and that since that time he
had had periodic attacks of insanity, and had been confined as
a lunatic, the prosecuting attorney laid down the established
rule, that a total absence of memory and understanding could
alone shield the prisoner from punishment, and appealed to the
jury for a conviction on that ground. It was only through the
brilliancy of the advocate (afterwards Lord Erskine) that the
prisoner was acquitted. This trial had a good effect upon the
judiciary, as in the year 1812, in the trial of Bellingham for the
murder of Spencer Percival, Lord Mansfield laid down the law
that the capability of distinguishing between right and wrong
was the test for determining the prisoner's responsibility, thus
discarding the old theory of an entire absence of all mental
power and substituting this in its place. Afterward the theory of
a general knowledge between right and wrong was modified, and
the element introduced that the prisoner must know the difference
between right and wrong at the time of, and with regard to the
particular act for which he is on trial, in order to render him re-
sponsible, and this test has been preserved to the present time. In
the early history of our own country, the same barbarism in the
228 MENTAL RESPONSIBILITY AND TIIE DIAGNOSIS OF
treatment of the insane prevailed which darkens the pages of
English history. In Governor Winthrop's History of New Eng-
land, the case of Dorothy Dalbye is mentioned. She was exe-
cuted for killing her child. She was, beyond all doubt, an insane
woman, but this fact was not recognised by Governor Winthrop,
who says of her: " She was so possessed with Satan that he per-
suaded her by his delusions, which she listened to as revelations
from G-od, to break the neck of her own child, that she might
free it from future misery." Such was the ignorance and pre-
judice of the early history of our country. We are at the
present day very far from a correct understanding of the work-
ings of the insane mind, for in the recent trial of Scannall the
law was laid down as enunciated by the Court of Appeals in 1865,
in the case of " Willis v. The People," which held that a person
was not insane who knew right from wrong, and that the act
he was committing was a violation, and wrong in itself. This
theory of right and wrong is utterly inadequate to meet a large
class of cases. There are certain cases familiar to all specialists
in insanity which suffer from impulse in insanity with a homi-
cidal or suicidal monomania. These patients, without appreciable
disorder of the intellect, are impelled by a terrible vis a tergo,
a morbid, uncontrollable impulse, to desperate acts of suicide
or homicide. These patients are often fully aware of their
morbid state, appreciate perfectly the nature of the act toward
which they are impelled, and feel deeply the horror of their
situation, and yet, if not prevented by restraint, will inevitably
commit acts of suicide or homicide. A very remarkable case
was under the care of the writer, of a man who would at stated
times acknowledge that he felt an irresistible desire to kill some
one, and would voluntarily enter an asylum and remain there
until this morbid impulse had passed away, which was generally
a period of one or two months. He has often told the writer
that his life was made miserable by the idea that at some time
this overwhelming impulse would come upon him so suddenly
that he should commit some desperately homicidal act, but is
not prepared to voluntarily incarcerate himself in an asylum for
life, as his lucid intervals sometimes lasted for months at a time.
The law as laid down at present would not decide this man to
be insane, as he fully appreciates the difference between right
and wrong, and the nature and consequences of any homicidal
act that he may in the future commit. Such cases, which are
not at all uncommon, serve to show what fearful injustice may
be done under the name of justice, when the conclusion is based
upon a metaphysical test which is proved by medical observa-
tion to be false in its application to the unsound mind.
lhere is still another form of insanity denominated " moral
INSANITY" IN CRIMINAL CASES. 229
insanity," in which the intellectual faculties are intact, no delu-
sions or hallucinations existing, but where the moral sense seems
utterly obliterated. Such persons have no true moral feeling
This is disorder of the mind produced by disease of the brain,
and is an unquestionable form of insanity, as it often precedes
other forms of insanity, in which intellectual derangement is
well marked, as acute mania or general paralysis. In some of
these cases there is a modified responsibility, the degree of such
responsibility being determined by the particular circumstances
of each individual case. One difficult but important question
to be solved is the civil and criminal responsibility of women
who plead insanity before courts of justice, and who are often
afflicted with kleptomania, pyromania, or who are infanticides,
as a result of sexual trouble and disease of the pelvic organs.
Such women under all reasonable conditions are entitled to the
benefit of the doubt, because of their defective mental integrity,
caused perhaps by pregnancy, or by the subsequent emotional
excitement attending parturition, which intensifies the cerebral
disorder in a brain already morbidly active. With women,
extreme nervous susceptibility readily lapses into insanity. In
the sexual evolution, in the parturient period, in lactation,
strange thoughts, extraordinary feelings, unreasonable appetites,
criminal and suicidal impulses, may haunt a mind at other
times innocent and pure. It is probable also that young un-
married women guilty of killing their own newborn offspring,
are so distracted by conflicting feelings, sharpened to morbid
acuteness by the great physiological movement of parturition,
as to be hardly responsible for their acts. We come now to the
question of the diagnosis of insanity. In most diseases we
examine physical signs and symptoms, and determine by our
senses the existence of such diseases. In insanity, on the con-
trary, we have to be guided chiefly by our knowledge of the
normal functions of the mind, and in an examination have to
rely on our intellect, rather than on our senses; although, of
course, the latter are called in to assist us. It is, however, very
often extremely difficult to decide with certainty, as medical
experts are expected to do, as to the existence of mental disease.
In making an examination of a person accused of crime, and in
whom insanity is suspected, the person should be visited by the
medical examiner, who should draw him into a pleasant conversa-
tion, and inquire as to previous attacks of insanity, hereditary
history, then into any predisposing causes ot insanity, such as
intemperance, vocation, habit, &c., which may have operated in
the production of insanity. Also as to injuries of the head or
spine which may have occurred, sunstroke, &c. The nervous
system should then be examined for the existence of any such
TAUT II. VOL. V. NEW SERIES. R
230 MENTAL RESPONSIBILITY AND THE DIAGNOSIS OF
diseases as paralysis, epilepsy, catalepsy, or hysteria. The
different senses, beginning with sight, should be examined, and
in this way it may be discovered if there are hallucinations or
illusions pertaining to any of the senses. A great many cases
are on the border line which separates sanity from insanity, and
it often requires the nicest discrimination to determine whether
such a patient has passed this border line. The writer would
suggest a series of eight questions, which, if adopted by jurists
in criminal cases, would prove a most efficient and just test as
to the existence of insanity in any given case, viz.:?
1. Have the prisoner's volitions, impulses, or acts, been
determined or influenced at all by insanity, and are his mental
functions?thought, feeling, and action?so deranged, either
together or separately, as to incapacitate him for the relations
of life ?
2. Does the prisoner come of a stock whose nervous con-
stitution has been vitiated by some defect or ailment calculated
to impair its efficiency or derange its operations ?
3. Has the prisoner been noticed to display mental infirmi-
ties or peculiarities which were due either to hereditary trans-
mission or present mental derangement ?
4. Has the prisoner the ability to control mental action,
or has he not sufficient mental power to control the sudden
impulses of his disordered mind, and does he act under the
blind influence of evil impulses which he can neither regulate
nor control ?
5. Has the act been influenced at all by hereditary taint
which has become intensified, so.that the morbid element has
become quickened into overpowering activity, and so that the
moral senses have been overborne by the superior force derived
from disease ?
(j. Was the act effected by or the . product of insane delu-
sion ?
7. "Was the act performed without adequate incentive or
motive ?
8. Does the prisoner manifest excitement or depression,
moody, difficult temper, extraordinary proneness to jealousy and
suspicion, a habit of unseasonably disregarding ordinary ways,
customs, and observances, an habitual extravagance of thought
and feeling, an inability to appreciate nice moral distinctions,
and finally, does he give way to gusts of passion and reckless
indulgence of appetite ?
Some, or all of these are found generally in connection
with transmitted mental infirmity. It may be argued that
these mental defects signify not mental unsoundness, but human
imperfection. Certainly if we take these manifestations, any
INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 231
one of them singly and alone, we cannot claim such a one as
invariably an indication of insanity; but, on the other hand,
under certain circumstances, each one of them may be an
unmistakable sign of insanity, or rather of a morbid cerebral
state, which may readily lapse into insanity. The disappoint-
ments and calamities of life obviously act with greater effect
upon an unstable mental organisation, these causes of disturb-
ance meeting with a powerful co-operating cause in the
constitutional predisposition. Sometimes a crime, even when
there have been no previous symptoms to indicate disease, marks
the period when an insane tendency has passed into actual
insanity?when a weak organ has given way under the strain
put upon it. There is a class of persons, with a peculiar,
nervous temperament, who inhabit the border land between
crime and insanity, one portion of which exhibit some insanity
but more of vice, and the other portion of which exhibit some
vice but a preponderance of insanity, and it is very difficult to
form a just estimate of the moral responsibility of such persons,
especially when we reflect upon the fact that moral feeling is
a function of organisation, and is as essentially dependent upon
the integrity of that part of the nervous system which ministers
to its manifestations, as in any other display of mental func-
tion. The writer has met with cases in which, as a result of
parental insanity, there has been a seemingly complete absence
of moral sense and feeling in the offspring, and this has been a
true congenital deprivation, or a moral imbecility, so to speak ;
of course such children can hardly fail to become criminals.
In this connection it is interesting to note that moral degene-
racy often follows as a sequence upon disease or injury to the
brain. A severe attack of insanity sometimes produces the
same effect, the intellectual faculties remaining as acute as
ever, while the moral sense becomes obliterated.
When such persons are acquitted on trial of a criminal
act on the ground of insanity, they should be remanded to
medical custody, and should never be set at liberty until the
medical superintendent of the asylum deems them fully reco-
vered ; but the commonest justice plainly indicates that such
custodial restraint be of a medical and not of a penal nature.
It is a very difficult thing for the laity to realise how sane a
person may appear who all the while has a greater derangement
than was even suspected until something happens to elicit the
evidence of it, such as an attack of illness or severe mental
strain, and some unconquerable impulse seizes him, and some
homicidal or suicidal act results to the great surprise of every-
one. In the same manner inebriety often appears in maturity
as a result of ill health, mental shock, &c., and it becomes an
R 2
232 MENTAL RESPONSIBILITY AND THE DIAGNOSIS OF
interesting question as to the degree of moral and criminal
responsibility which attaches to inebriates, as inebriety often
depends upon an abnormal organic development of the nervous
system that has descended from generation to generation, gaining
in intensity until it manifests itself in active inebriety; and
there must certainly be a modified responsibility when homi-
cidal or suicidal acts are committed during periods of such
abnormal cerebration. In such cases a criminal act may be
committed in consequence of cerebro-mental disease, without
any apparent lesion of the perceptive and reasoning powers.
In these cases also, the mental disorder is of a sudden and
transitory character, not preceded by any symptoms calculated
to excite suspicion of insanity. It is a transitory mania, or
sudden paroxysm, without antecedent manifestation, the duration
of the morbid state being short and the cessation sudden. In
these cases the criminal acts are generally monstrous, unpre-
meditated, motiveless, and entirely out of keeping with the
previous character and habit of thought of the individual.
Such attacks are transient in proportion to their violence, and
transition occurs in the completion of the act of violence.
There is an instantaneous abeyance of judgment and reason
during which period the person is actuated by mad and uncon-
querable impulses.
We will consider, finally, the medico-legal importance of
epileptiform attacks, which may be partial in character, and
which may not reach convulsive activity except so far as the
mind is concerned. These attacks always display periodicity,
and after the paroxysm there is an intermediate stage, during
which, in most cases, the person remains in a confused state,
perhaps for some hours, and is apt subsequently to retain only
a vague and general notion of the preceding events. Thus in a
homicide by shooting, the murderer would be likely to be roused
by the sound of the pistol shot, and to remember it, although
he would not very likely remember the altercation at all, or
what passed between them. A case occurred recently of con-
siderable interest from a medico-legal point of view, in which a
murder was committed during an epileptiform seizure, or rather,
more strictly speaking, during a state of transitory moral
epilepsy, which was the result of a previous sunstroke, the im-
mediate exciting cause being an attack of illness and the taking
of a small quantity of alcoholic stimulus, which, it is well known,
acts as a poison upon persons who have been sunstruck. This
state of " moral epilepsy" is a morbid affection of the mind
centres, which destroys the healthy co-ordination of ideas, and
occasions a spasmodic or convulsive mental action. The will
cannot always restrain, however much it may strive to do so, a
INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 233
morbid idea which has reached a convulsive activity, although
there may be all the while a clear consciousness of its morbid
nature. The case just referred to had complained of pains in
the head and sleeplessness, which had displayed marked
periodicity, and which had been accompanied with great irrita-
bility of temper, excited by trifles and seemingly unconnected
with personal antipathies. As has been previously stated, the
person alluded to had been suffering from quite a severe illness,
and after taking a small quantity of alcoholic stimulus went out
to walk. He met a friend with whom he had been familiar for
years, and a discussion arose as to the respective merits of cer-
tain politicians, when the discussion becoming excited, the man
pulled out a revolver and shot his friend. He then went in a
confused and dazed state and sat for some hours on a dock near
a river, and subsequently went home, and burst into tears, and
informed his wife of the sad occurrence, and gave himself up at
the police station. There was no simulation of insanity by
pretending to be incoherent, or by strange actions,and no attempt,
either on the part of himself or wife, to pretend that the act was
an insane one. There was, however, a total blank in the prisoner's
mind respecting the events immediately preceding the pistol
shot which seemed to have aroused his attention at the time,
and he had no recollection of the fact that he had sat on the
dock for some time afterward, as he was seen to do. The writer
was consulted as an expert, and upon ascertaining the prisoner's
previous history, gave it as his opinion that there had existed
for months previous to the occurrence a profound moral or
affective derangement, which, from its marked periodicity, was
evidently epileptiform in character, and that the sudden homi-
cidal outburst supplied the interpretation of the previously
obscure attacks of recurrent derangement. There had evidently
been induced by the sunstroke in this case an epileptiform
neurosis, which had been manifesting itself for months, chiefly
by irritability, suspicion, moroseness, and perversion of character,
with periodic exacerbations of excitement, all foreign to the man
previous to the attack of sunstroke. It is well known among
specialists in insanity that this epileptiform neurosis often exists
for a long time in an undeveloped or marked form, and that this
neurosis is, moreoyer, connected with both homicidal and suicidal
mania. Such attacks are often noticed to occur periodically
for some time before the access of genuine epilepsy. I have
often witnessed, in cases under my charge, abortive or incom-
plete epileptiform attacks, where there were no convulsions, and
where there was no complete loss of consciousness. I have noticed
in such cases either a momentary terror, slight incoherence, a
gust of passion, or a mental blank, the patient perhaps stopping
234 MENTAL RESPONSIBILITY, ETC.
in the middle of a sentence. The patient would then be him-
self again, quite unconscious of what had happened to him.
Accompanying this confusion of ideas may be, as I have
remarked, instantaneous impulses, either of a suicidal or
homicidal nature. Owing to the writings of Hughlings-Jackson,
Maudslev, Russell Reynolds, Hammond, Trousseau, Falret,
Esquirol, and others, epileptic vertigo is a recognised disease.
There is abundant testimony to show that during such seizures
persons may perform actions, and even speak and answer ques-
tions, automatically. There are numerous examples in the
works of the above authors, proving that in an unconscious
condition persons can progress from odd or eccentric action to
deeds of violence, suicide, or murder?being unable to remember
the circumstances afterwards, and therefore irresponsible for their
actions. This class of patients I have always found irritable,
easily excited, very emotional without adequate external cause,
easily losing their train of thought, and often unable to collect
or fix their thoughts. Such cases have told me that they felt
themselves changed in character, and have acknowledged that
they often felt impelled to strange and violent acts by some
power which they could neither understand nor resist. Such
patients may entertain delusions of fear and persecution, and
commit criminal deeds as a result of such delusions. When such
cases, in their terror or distress of mind, commit some violent
deed, they either experience immediate relief, as was the case
with one patient under my care, who was only relieved by
breaking out a pane of glass, when his paroxysm would subside,
or they continued in a state of excitement, unconscious, or very
imperfectly conscious, of the gravity of their acts. When they
become conscious again, their memory is apt to be very uncertain
as to preceding events, Griesinger says: " Individuals hitherto
perfectly sane and in the full possession of their intellects, are
suddenly, and without any assignable cause, seized with the most
anxious and painful emotions, and with a homicidal impulse as
inexplicable to themselves as to others." Maudsley says: " Let
it be borne in mind, then, that there are latent tendencies to
insanity which may not discover the least overt evidence of
their existence, except under the strain of a great calamity, or
of some bodily disorder, and that the outbreak of actual disease
may then be the first positive symptom of unsoundness." The
question as to the degree of mental responsibility attaching to
such cases is one of great interest to psychologists, and also to
jurists, and one to which it is hoped, in the future, much more
attention may be directed than has been given to it in the past.
