313
MEDICAL PROPRIETORS OF PRIVATE ASYLUMS.
The remarks which have appeared in the British Medical
Journal during the year, in reference to Private Asylums and
their Proprietors, render it imperative for us to make some
observations on the subject, in order to dispel an erroneous
impression which appears to have imbued the public mind.
In the issue of that Journal for May 3 we read: " It cannot
be too much insisted upon that the allegation against the pro-
prietors of private asylums is not that of mala fides in taking,
detaining, and confining persons of sound mind as lunatics,
but that they detain persons of unsound mind whose confine-
ment within their walls is unnecessary and unlawful."
We must confess that we are at a loss to understand the
latter part of this paragraph. It is a difficult thing to conceive
how it is possible to " detain persons of an unsound mind " in an
unlawful manner. If an individual is of unsound mind, and
placed legally under lunacy certificate, surely it is lawful to
?detain such a patient until the lunacy disappears, or until the
person who signed the " order" authorises the discharge from
the institution. And yet this is brought forward as what the
proprietors of private asylums are guilty of. From the style of
the various articles, proprietors of asylums may be said to
resemble second-class hotel keepers, whose interest and whose
sole desire is to make as much profit out of the inmates with as
small an outlay as possible, and to make only an outward show,
without any consideration for those committed to their charge.
They have been styled " adventurers." In order to strengthen a
possibility of a case, the evidence given by Lord Shaftesbury be-
fore the Committee in 1859 is quoted. We may, however, remind
the readers of these articles that the treatment of lunatics at the
present time differs materially from what it did twenty years
ago, and it appears strange that resource should have been made
314 MEDICAL PROPRIETORS OF PRIVATE ASYLUMS.
to this in order to prejudice the public mind. Let us, however,
quote Lord Shaftesbury's evidence, as given before the Select
Committee of last year, as an extraordinary contradiction to
what he said in 1859, and which is quoted in the British
Medical Journal, in reference to the following question put to
his Lordship by the Chairman of the Committee, the Hon. Stephen
Cave, as to the abolition of asylums : "The case has been stated
in two ways to us; one is, that if you have all the private asylums
abolished you get rid of the interest which the superintendent
has in the insanity of the patient; but, on the other hand, you
get rid of the interest which he also has in making his asylum
popular by good and generous treatment of the patient ?"
To which Lord Shaftesbury replies: " No doubt. Their
object is, it is assumed, by good treatment and by the
number of cures, and everything of that kind, to incite rich
patients; and their object, it is also assumed, is to turn out,
the poorer patients as soon as they can. Unquestionably,
there exists a principle, and desire of profit, and so long as there
are licensed asylums on any great scale, the public will always
conceive that the principle of profit will, of necessity, predomi-
nate. And, indeed, the state of things before 1859 was very
bad indeed. But at present, from a variety of causes, the
licensed houses are in a far. better condition in every sense of
the word ; more is expended on them by the proprietors, and I
must do them the justice to say that the change is very great,
and so far as the evidence I gave in 1859 is concerned, I should
not give it now. I can speak in high terms of many licensed
houses and proprietors, but I will also add, that if you relax
your vigilance ever so little, whether it be of licensed houses or
of hospitals, or of county asylums, the whole thing will speedily
go back to its former level."
In reply to a question put to Lord Shaftesbury in reference
to the improvement in private asylums, his Lordship said :
I should like to show you what a great improvement
has been made in that respect; I do not know I should go so
far as to enact that by law. In the first place, such an enact-
ment would shut out many proprietors who keep excellent
establishments ; and, next, because it often happens that the
MEDICAL PROPRIETORS OF PRIVATE ASYLUMS. 315
proprietor is a man of capital, and can provide all that is
necessary, and then he will appoint as his medical superin-
tendent a first-rate medical man. Now we have a great
number of very first-rate medical men who have no capital at
all, and therefore could not set up a house. Therefore, though
it is desirable that the proprietor should be a medical man, yet
I would not so bind it down by law that he should be so, for
the reason I have just mentioned; I will show the honourable
Member how that system has been growing up, and with great
public advantage. Comparing the year 1845 with the year 1876,
I find that the number of resident medical proprietors was
53 per cent, in 1845 upon the whole number, and in 1876,
66 per cent. It is going on in a very satisfactory way. The
improvement in the licensed houses under the medical pro-
prietors is very great in a variety of ways, not only as to amuse-
ments that are provided, but the greater amount of domestic
life, so to speak'; the system of boarders also has been much
encouraged, and with benefit. It very often happens that a
husband comes to reside for a time with his wife as a boarder,
and the wife resides with the husband. There are a thousand
things in the licensed houses now that are of the highest
possible order for the amusement and comfort of the patients.
Somebody asked how that has arisen. It has arisen by the
influence of many things combined; it has arisen from public
opinion. Public opinion is very much alive to these things
compared with what it was. It was utterly dead ; and even as
far back as 1859 people were not easily moved to consider these
matters, but of late years it is astonishing to what an extent
they have been inquiring into it. All that movement acts
upon the minds of the superintendents and others. Again,
there has been increased visitation. Then there has been what
the honourable gentleman has just referred to, a great increase
in the proportion of resident medical men, and they are far
better men. I wish the Committee could have seen some of the
persons who were in charge of the lunatic asylums when we
first began this work; any more uncouth, more ignorant, more
coarse, and more inadequate to the duty it is impossible to con-
ceive. Then, again, the character of attendants is very much
improved indeed. I think the honourable Member for Swansea
316 MEDICAL PROPRIETORS OF FRIYATE ASYLUMS.
made a remark that he supposed it was owing to the Commis-
sioners being more attentive to their duties. I think that was
rather a harsh question, and with due deference to that honour-
able member I should like to say the Commissioners have not
been more attentive to their duties ; they were always attentive
to their duties ; they were always attentive from the very be-
ginning. That I can answer for."
Sir Trevor Lawrence put the following question to his
Lordship:
" So far as your Lordship's experience goes, are you of opinion
that lunatics are better treated in the public asylums than in
the private licensed houses??Not now; they were so, I have
no doubt, at one time. I am quite sure that there is admirable
treatment now in many of the licensed houses. There is good
treatment in' very many of the hospitals; but I should say
licensed houses vie perfectly with the hospitals."
Again, as to the abolition ? of private asylums : " I am
decidedly against their being done away with by the prohibition
of the law, because, as I said before, I am certain some licensed
houses ought to exist. There are a great number of people
who will prefer them for their relations. The treatment that
you get^ the licensed house where it is well conducted will
always be more of the domestic character. I was saying that
by the extension of the hospital system, that is of the public
system,?I believe a great number of the inferior houses will be
eliminated andf.got rid of, and the few that would survive would
be very good."
" Are you of opinion that it would be prejudicial to advance
in the treatment of mental disease to do away with licensed
houses ??Most undoubtedly."
The Editor of this journal issued a circular to asylum pro-
prietors, in consequence of which the British Medical Journal
made another attack upon asylums and their proprietors.
Dr. Winslow, however, in speaking of the remarks on the
circular, says:
" With regard to your remarks on the circular letter which
I forwarded to the proprietors of asylums, I consider that the
time has now come for the formation of some society for the
MEDICAL PROPRIETORS OF PRIVATE ASYLUMS. 317
protection of the mutual interests of those officially connected
with private asylums, as we cannot depend on receiving the
unanimous support of the medical journals, who have compared
private asylums to hotels, and who have taken up the cudgels
against us, rendering it imperative that some such society
should be formed to maintain the integrity of our call-
ing. We are all interested in one common object?the
welfare of our patients and their restoration to a sound state of
mind and body. I pronounce the base insinuations that have
been brought forward, in some of the public as well as medical
journals, as groundless and false; and I challenge those who
are opposed to private asylums to adduce one single instance of
the illegal detention or confinement of persons wrongfully in
these institutions; and what strengthens my assertion is the
fact that the late Lunacy Committee, in their report now before
Parliament, stated that, notwithstanding the several accusations
brought against private asylums, in no instance was mala fides
proved ; and this statement was not given after a trivial inves-
tigation, but after an inquiry of very lengthened duration,
extending over a whole session, and examining witnesses on
both sides.
" This of itself should have put a stop to the credibility of
the accusations that have been made, but which, from time to
time, crop up afresh, without, however, a single iota of evidence
to support them.
" You state that we should depend for our protection upon
the medical profession generally. I say, in reply to this, that
we have not received that support to which we are justly
entitled ; and we must, therefore, endeavour to obtain assistance
elsewhere. I am, consequently, forming an association for the
protection, not only of our general welfare, but of that which
to every Englishman is more dear: his reputation and his
honour. And in stating this, I endorse the opinion of a large
proportion of those medical men with whom I have been in
communication, both public and private asylum proprietors,
who naturally are indignant at the aspersions which have been
so plentifully directed against them. It is a difficult matter,
however, to suggest improvements in the system, as all asylums
318 MEDICAL PROPRIETORS OF PRIVATE ASYLUMS.
are already under such efficient supervision; but, if anything
could be done at the present time to prevent the possibility of
wrongful insinuations, by further protecting the proprietors
and medical superintendents of private asylums, it would be
hailed with satisfaction by a large body of men who have the
interests at heart of those committed to their care, and whose
only crime is to
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air, and agony with words.
What a holy and honourable calling is this! and those who
labour in the field should not be harassed and baffled in their
endeavours to ' minister to a mind diseased.' "
Is it just that the proprietors of private asylums should be
especially held up to opprobrium ? The study of mental
science is the highest specialty, and gentlemen engaged in it
are no more likely to make a market of their patients than those
engaged in any other branch of the profession. Without in the
slightest degree wishing to detract from the merits of the super-,
intendents of public asylums, who number amongst their class
some of the leading cerebral psychologists of the day, it should
not be forgotten that the proprietors of private asylums have to
deal with the educated classes, who essentially require more
intellectual acquirements to cope with their maladies than those
who have only paupers to treat, and the maligners of private
asylum proprietors should be reminded that some of the most
illustrious members of the profession have been proprietors of
private asylums, and when we mention such distinguished names
as those of the late Drs. Forbes Winslow, Conolly, Sutherland;
and of Drs. Maudsley, Blandford, Boyd, Tuke, Wood, Lush &c.;
and that of the accomplished scholar, Dr. Steward, late of
Southall Park, who was selected by the Royal College of
Physicians to deliver in Latin the Hunterian Oration in 1855;
and remembering the remarks made by Lord Shaftesbury, we
emphatically affirm that there is no justification for the asper-
sions which have been so freely cast upon the proprietors of
private asylums.
