Charles Lever, M.B., Ll.D
==========================

THE JOUENAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.?
By J. M. WINN, M.D., &C.
The literary fame of Cliarles Lever had so completely eclipsed
his medical reputation, that it was not until the publication of
his entertaining biography by Dr Fitzpatrick * that we became
aware of the noble traits he exhibited as a physician during
the fifteen years that he practised as a medical man in Ireland
and Brussels. A passing tribute is therefore due to the memory
of one whom we are proud to number as one of our profession.
If he did not distinguish himself by any great discovery in
medicine or the collateral sciences, he appears as a high-minded
physician, who held honourable and exalted notions of his
vocation, and should be held up as a bright example to those
who are about to adopt the profession of medicine; for in the
present day there are too many who look upon it as a money-
making trade, rather than a noble calling. In our reference to
incidents in the life of Lever we shall confine ourselves chiefly
to the medical aspects of his genius and character.
From Dr Fitzpatrick we learn that, after making one
voyage as surgeon in an emigrant ship, Lever was sent, in 1832,
when the cholera was raging in Ireland, with twenty other young
medical men, by the Board of Health, to Kilrush, to assist the
local practitioners in the treatment of the epidemic. Lever
here showed himself to be a thoroughly practical psychological
physician ;f for, by his cheerfulness and courageous example, he
* The Life of Charles Lever, by W. J. Fitzpatrick, LL.D., M.E.I.A. Chapman
and Hall, 193 Piccadilly, London. 1879.
+ The supremacy of the mind over the body, and its influence in disease as
?well as in health, is a fact which has been fully acknowledged by the wisest
physicians in all ages, and one that is not likely to be discredited by Professor
Huxley's recent materialistic attempt (in his address to the boys of University
PART II. VOL. Y. NEW SERIES. N
v '"6.
166 CHARLES LEVER, M.B., LL.D.
inspired a liope and confidence that were invaluable, and often
efficacious when every kind of drug had been found useless.
The inhabitants generally were wretchedly poor, and naturally
dreadfully depressed at witnessing the fearful inroads that
death was making amongst them. It was then that Lever's
buoyant spirit acted like a charm. He was never cast down,
yet always ready to attend to the calls of the sick poor. In
speaking of his services at Kilrush Fitzpatrick observes :?
" Lever made so good a name for himself in treating the
epidemic which ravaged Ireland, that he was offered the post
of chief physician to a cholera hospital in the west, but he pre-
ferred a permanent appointment, if such a thing should turn
up."
The importance of attention to the psychological aspect of
cholera was strongly insisted upon by the late Dr Forbes
Winslow, in a pamphlet which lie published in 1849, entitled
The Cholera considered Psychologically. In it he observes:
" It is a well-established fact that persons may be exposed for
a length of time to the influence of the most virulent contagion
with impunity, so long as the mind remains in a fearless,
tranquil, and unanxious condition; but if mental depression
ensues, the contagion seizes hold of the constitution, and disease
manifests itself."
It was fortunate for Lever's mental and bodily health, and
for that of his patients too, that he was able during the hours
of relaxation to enjoy the pleasures of society and indulge in
harmless practical jokes. Strange to say, these not only
justifiable, but praiseworthy recreations, brought down upon
him the censure of solemn blockheads and canting Stigginses.
With reference to this happy trait in Lever's character Dr.
Fitzpatrick observes :?
" Dickens played practical jokes from love of fun, Lever, when
jaded by work, resorted to them as a relaxation. The small perse-
cution to which he was subjected by those who condemned his
general abandon and enjoyment of passing pleasures, was clearly
in his (Lever's) mind when reviewing Physic and Physicians*
' Nothing is too severe, nothing too illiberal, to be said of the
doctor, when, the hours of a painful and laborious day passed,
should he either unbend in the lighter amusements of the
world, or avail himself of the recreations which to overworked
minds are almost a necessity of existence. No, no; we can
College) to exalt the importance of the stomach and lungs. We do not desire to
ignore it, but if the cultivation of these organs bo the chief object of academic
instruction, and if prizes for the best stomach and lungs are thrown open to all
comers, it must follow that our ape-relative?a full-grown gorilla fresh from his
African home?would distance all competitors.
* By the lato Dr Forbes Winslow.
CHARLES LEVER, M.B., LL.D. 1G7
never forgive the man who has listened to our narrative of
gouty suffering or dyspeptic ill-temper, if he be seen the same
evening enjoying himself at the opera, or the next morning
breathing the free air of the hunting-field.' It has been said
that the life of a country doctor is one either of stagnation or
overwork, but Lever took care to avoid both Scylla and Charybdis.
One of his successors in office told Major D. (from whose
manuscript we quote) that ' when he went to Derry, some years
later, he found the whole country still full of stories and
anecdotes of the wild young doctor who himself performed in
Coleraine .the feat of jumping over a cart and horse, which he
attributes to O'Malley at Lisbon. He is also described as
riding backward and forward through the entire night between
the bed of some child that was dangerously ill, and a ball given
by the officers of a regiment then at Coleraine, and that, too, in
his evening dress.' If Lever had studied appearances, and
looked solemn while his heart was glad, his purse would have
become more fat from fees Some persons have pooh-
poohed Lever's skill as a physician, but unfairly. Dr Lytton
Mclntyre, who succeeded him in dispensary duty at Portstewart,
writes: 'Dr Barr, the oldest medical practitioner now in
Coleraine, tells me he knew him well, and he speaks in the
highest terms of his medical skill. There is scarcely a resident
in Portstewart now who existed in Lever's time. Many years
ago I knew several of his friends there, and my impression, from
their description, is that he was universally esteemed, and
that for his attainments and disposition his society was greatly
sought.'"
Lever studied his profession at Gottingen as well as at
Dublin, and had the advantage of attending the lectures of
Blumenbacli. Fitzpatrick gives the account of his first interview
with that celebrity in his own words. After ascending the
steps of the professor's house, and knocking at a door, with
" Herein" inscribed on it, Lever says : " A voice of thunder
answered my small knock. I entered, and beheld a small
venerable-looking old man, with white hair flowing in careless
profusion upon his neck and shoulders. His head, almost pre-
ternaturally large, was surmounted by a green velvet cap placed
a little on one side. He was grotesquely enveloped in a fur
cloak with large sleeves, and altogether presented the most
extraordinary figure I had ever seen. I was again roused by the
sound of his voice, interrogating me in no less than six suc-
cessive languages (ere I found my tongue) as to my name,
country, &c. &c. I immediately presented my letters and
present, with which he seemed highly pleased, and informed me
that his ' guter freund,' Lord Talbot, always brought him Irish
N 2
168 CIIAELES LEVER, M.B., LL.D.
snuff; and then welcoming me to Gottingen, he seized my
hands, pressed me down upon a seat, and began talking con-
cerning my travels, plans, probable stay at the University, &c.
I now felt myself relieved from the awe with which I had at first
awaited the interview, and looked around with a mingled feeling
of admiration and surprise at the odd melange of curiosities ia
natural history, skulls, drawings, models, and even toys, which
filled the cabinet. But, indeed, the worthy professor was by far
the greatest lion of the collection." Lever remarked that the
newest English publications reposed on his table, and even some
from Dublin. " On standing up to take my leave, I asked him
whether the Gall and Spurzheim theories were to compose part
of my university-creed course of study; to which he answered,
' No; but if you will wait to October, we are to have a new
system broached;' and then chuckling at this hit at the fond-
ness of his countrymen for speculating, he pressed me soon to
revisit him and see his collection ; and thus ended my inter-
view with the great Blumenbach."
Previous to Lever's going to Brussels in 1833 he had been
appointed to the dispensary at Portstewart, having before gra-
duated as B.A. andM.B. at Trinity College, Dublin. Whilst at
Brussels he had the patronage of the British Legation, and his
professional services were greatly valued by the leading in-
habitants. Dr Fitzpatrick mentions the following curious
incident in his practice :?
" A stud-groom of the King of Holland had been under his
care for ague. He got well, and on his return to the Hague
thought proper to visit his former doctor?the king's physician
to show himself, and to extol Lever's merits. The Dutch M.D.
was amazed at what he considered a small miracle, and hearing
that the wonderful man who worked it was an author, sent
off an express to Bruxelles for Lever's works. They sent him
Harry Lorrequer and Charles O^Malley, and the luckless
leech nearly lost his senses at the shock, besides being made
the laughing-stock of all Holland, where the whole story was
known, from the king downwards."
At Brussels his society was greatly courted, and his hos-
pitable house was frequented by many distinguished guests:
amongst them were Sir Hamilton Seymour, the British Minister,
Archbishop Whately, and the present Pope. Though he had
a considerable medical practice, it was not lucrative, and a
great part of his income was even then derived from his
writings. Harry Lorrequer, which appeared in the Dublin
University Magazine, was a great success, and Lever found
himself so popular as an author that he resolved to abandon
the profession and devote himself entirely to literature. He con-
CHARLES LEVER, M.B., LL.D. 169
sequently quitted Brussels, returned to Dublin, and became the
editor of the University Magazine. Although there can be no
doubt that the novel-reading public were great gainers by this
step, Lever expressed, shortly before his death, his misgivings
as to whether it had promoted his own happiness. He said:
" Having given up the profession for which I believe I had
some aptitude, to follow the precarious life of a writer, I
suppose I am only admitting what many others under like
circumstances might declare, that I had my moments, and
more than mere moments, of doubt and misgiving that I had
made the wiser choice; and bating the intense pleasure an
occasional success has afforded, I have been led to think that
the career I had abandoned would have been more rewarding,
more safe from reverses, and less exposed to those variations
of public taste which are the terrors of all who live in the
world's favour."
Long after he gave up practice, Lever continued to take a
warm interest in the medical profession. In 1872 the Lancet,
in a notice of his death, made the following remarks: " It is
but a short time ago that we had to thank liitn for his able
and eloquent vindication of the physician's claims to honours
reserved too frequently for merit merely civic or political in its
tenour. So that, while mingling with that of the general
public our tribute of regret at the loss of so bright a literary
benefactor, we shall add another and a more poignant one for
the premature extinction of a true friend to our profession,
an ornament to it in his early years, and its vindicator to the
last."
During his editorship of the Dublin University Magazine,
the journal attained an extensive circulation, mainly due to
the original contributions which flowed incessantly from his
fertile imagination and facile pen. Scattered throughout the
miscellaneous articles in the journal we find passages of
profound and serious thought. Though no anchorite, it is
easy to perceive, too, through the atmosphere of his jovial
mirth, glimpses of the highest medico-psychological aspirations;
and, like the generality of our brightest geniuses, he had no
sympathy with heartless infidelity or cold-blooded materialism.
We quote the following passages in confirmation of what we
have stated :?" The medical man is more than any other met
by facts, whose tendency is directly the opposite [to atheism].
The recognition of the Creator in His works is to him the daily
study of his life. Those powerful arguments which natural
theology, as it is called, possesses, are to him more available,
for the experience of his profession teems with them; and even
where with the unmedical world the evidences of truth end,
170 CHARLES LEVER, M.B., LL.D.
to him a new chapter is opened. To the evidence of design
alone his belief is not limited ; he is called upon by the study
of his art to recognise a still higher attribute?the Providence of
God. . . . There is scarcely an accident of our lives, however
slight, scarcely a malady which flesh is heir to, so trivial, that
would not, in its consequences, involve our very existence
itself, were there not inherent in our bodies some antagonism to
disease and death, by which our preservation is accomplished."
These remarks were penned in 1839, when he was compara-
tively a young man, and show that it was not merely when he
was broken down by trouble and disease, as his warmly attached
friend and amanuensis, Mr. Stephen Pearce, supposed, that he
had times of graver thought. Canon Hayman bears a similar
testimony. " Poor Lever; none sooner than himself would
admit his foibles and failings. Let us hope and believe, with his
kind amanuensis, that sorrow brought him higher and better
things; and I myself possess knowledge, hidden from Pearce,
that under that wild levity, sober and sacred thoughts were not
unfrequently concealed."
To Mr. Pearce we are indebted for the following graphic
notice of his genius and virtues:?" It was all dash and go up to
the highest pitch possible, with, I think, not much thought of
the future; though in purity of morals he was certainly sans
reproche."
We have dwelt thus much on the moral aspects of Lever's
character, because in a recent review of his "life the writer has
ungenerously placed all his failings in the strongest light, and
passed unnoticed his noble and redeeming qualities.
In estimating his character, it must never be lost sight of
that he was intensely Irish, and his merits, as well as his short-
comings, were eminently Celtic, and must be judged accordingly.
Although he frequently showed carelessness of his own interests,
he never stooped to literary charlatanism; and though his society
was courted in the most brilliant circles, yet?unlike the gene-
rality of convivial wits?he continued to be the idol of his home
circle, and was a devoted husband and father.
Lever was much gratified at receiving from the University
of Dublin the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws at the time of
his last visit to that city. This induced him to resume the
title of Doctor, which he had for many years abandoned. He
attributed much of his knowledge of human nature to the
peculiar advantages which a physician enjoys in the daily inter-
course with his patients. He observes : "The life of a physician
has nothing so cheering, so full of hearty encouragement, as the
occasional friendships to which it opens the way. The doctor
attains to a degree of intimacy, and stands on a footing of
CHARLES LEVER, M.B., LL.D. 171
confidence so entirely exceptional, that if personal qualities lend
aid to the parties, his intercourse becomes friendship. "Whether
therefore, my old career gave me any assistance in new roads
whether it imparted to me any habits of investigation as applic-
able to the full, to morals as to matter or not, it certainly imparted
to me the happy accident of standing on good terms with?
I was going to say my patients?and perhaps no better word
could be found for one who has heard me so long, trusted me so
much, given me so large a share of his favour, and come to
look upon me with such friendship. . . . He, who to-day is
the confidant of his king, and to-morrow leans over the sick
bed of the starving tenant of a garret, must needs see life in
various aspects; and it would be to deny him powers that his
very position demands, not to confess that, to him more of the
romance of life is presented than to any other man/'
There can be no question that Lever had many of the attri-
butes of genius. He had great powers of observation, and
possessed that peculiar faculty conspicuous in great geniuses?
that of vividly seeing as if in a picture the scenes which he
described. Dickens not only saw the scenes he described, but
also heard distinctly the words uttered by his imaginary
characters, and his account of this fact led the late Gr. H.
Lewes to suppose that these vivid conceptions were the
product of insane hallucinations! Forster, in his Life of
Dickens, has effectually exposed the fallacy of this notion.
?>yron said that his poetical images came before him with-
out any effort of his own, as if they were objective, when
they were really subjective. Sterne also, in Tristram Shandy,
very drolly alludes to the same sort of faculty, which he calls
catching ideas. He says: " I look up, catching the idea, some-
times even before it half reaches me. I believe in my conscience
I intercept many a thought which Heaven intended for another
man."
The earlier works of Lever, like Marryat's, will ever delight
those who are in the heyday of youth, and the perusal of his
military stories has doubtless been the means of leading many
an ardent youth to become a dashing dragoon, just as Marryat's
sea novels have added many a gallant lad to the navy. It is,
however, on Lever's later works, when his style became serious
and philosophic, that his literary fame will chiefly depend.
t)r. Fitzpatrick's Biography of Lever abounds in racy anec-
dotes, and descriptions of the originals from which he drew his
characters, and its perusal will furnish a pleasant recreation in
"Hours of Idleness."
