The Localisation of Cerebral Disease being the Cfulstonian
===========================================================

145
REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.

Lectures of the Royal College of Physicians for 1878. By
David Ferrier, M.D., F.R.S., &c. London : Smith, Elder & Co.
1878.
It is now about nine years since Hitzig's and Fritsch's ex-
periments first attracted public attention to the question of
the possibility of localising the centres of motion and sensation
in the cortical structure of the brain. . Dr Ferrier has followed
up the researches of these physiologists with untiring industry,
and his deductions from experimental, as well as from clinical
and pathological observation, have met with the most indis-
criminate approval from the leading medical periodicals. That
he himself does not feel so confident of the result of his
inquiries may be inferred from the following passages from his
Lectures :?
" Notwithstanding all the laborious researches and specula-
tions which have been directed towards the elucidation of this
subject, we do not seem yet to have arrived at any general
agreement, except on a very few propositions, some of these
even now contested: a position contrasting strongly and un-
favourably with the state of our knowledge respecting almost
every other organ and function in the body."
" It is not very difficult to discover many causes of this
obscurity and confusion. Two of these only I will mention as
being specially worthy of note.
"1. It maybe asserted without fear of contradiction, that as
regards the nervous system more particularly, morbid anatomy
is far from being co-extensive with pathology. We know, and
are everv dav confronted with the fact, that the most widely
abnormal deviations from healthy functional activity of the
nerve-centres may be manifested, which leave no trace discover-
able bv ordinary dissection, or even by any of our most advanced
methods of investigation. For the sake of mental satisfaction,
we are constrained to speculate on the intimate molecular
changes in the nerve-tissues which lie at the root of neuralgia,
convulsions, and various other forms of functional nervous
disorder; but they are at present matters only of specula-
tion, and lie beyond the sphere of verification.
PART I. VOL. V. NEW SERIES. L
146 REVIEWS AKD
" 2. The organisation and conditions of activity of the
brain are such that we are naturally inclined to believe that
interference at any one point must necessarily tend to a
general functionary disturbance. The loosening of a pin in a
chronometer, it has been said, will derange the whole time-keeping-
mechanism, but we should not on that account ascribe time-
keeping functions to the one part exclusively. So in all cases
of cerebral disease, there is a continual source of doubt as to
whether the effects are the direct consequences of the lesion,
or merely the expression of general functional derangement.
"And when we examine the actual facts and records of
cerebral disease, we find in apparently similar conditions so
much diversity, that it seems almost impossible, from a clinical
point of view, to separate accidental from essential, to distin-
guish between direct and indirect consequences, or to determine
whether phenomena are related by causation, or are mere cases
of juxtaposition or co-existence. Nor do the facts of experi-
mental physiology seem so consistent with themselves, or with
the undoubted facts of clinical research, as to inspire us with
unhesitating confidence as to their accuracy, or as to their
applicability to human pathology."
Dr Ferrier endeavours to meet these objections by observing,
that it is not invariably necessary to prove that organic
lesions exist in the localised centres, because their functions
are deranged. He then proceeds to state dogmatically, "as an
axiom," that when mental aberrations, of whatever nature, are
manifested, the brain is diseased organically or functionally.
Dr Ferrier is premature in speaking so positively on this
point; there are many eminent psychological physicians who do
not subscribe to this dogma, and we would refer our readers
to an admirable article by Dr W. A. F. Browne, in the Journal
of Psychological Medicine for October 1876, entitled " Problems
for Pathologists."
When Dr Ferrier asserts that he cannot find the slightest
evidence to prove that the same parts may be destroyed in
both hemispheres of the brain without producing mental dis-
turbance, and presumes that this is in favour of a localisation
of mental functions?confounding mental faculties with bodily
functions?it is plain that he is not cognisant of all that has
been written on the subject, both at home and on the Continent.
Dr Bateman, in his " Darwinism tested by Language," men-
tions the case recorded by Velpeau, of a patient in whom both
the anterior lobes of the brain were destroyed by a can-
cerous tumour, without his speech being affected. (See Gazette
des Hopitaux from April to June 1865.) He mentions
another case?one recorded by M. Peter? of a man who fractured
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 147
his skull by a fall from a horse, and, after recovering from the
initial stupor, regained the power of speech, though after death
the two frontal lobes were found to be reduced to a pulp.
There is another crucial instance, which we first mentioned in
an article on " Materialistic Physiology," in the Journal of
Psychological Medicine for April 1877. The case was briefly
as follows: The patient was admitted into St. Mary's Hospital,
suffering from syphilitic disease of the frontal bones. During
the week that he was in the hospital, his mental faculties were
not impaired, though after death it was found that the anterior
lobes of both hemispheres were entirely disorganised. The
particulars of the case were furnished to us by Mr. Alfred
Eugenius Eoche. We therefore think Dr Ferrier very pre-
mature in affirming, as he does at page 94, in reference to
the supposed connection between aphasia and lesion of Broca's
region, that it " is no longer merely an empirical generalisation,
but a derivative law, which in my opinion is established on as
firm grounds as any other fact in scientific medicine." But we
think we have shown that he has not yet proved that the
localisation theory is a great discovery, or unquestioned fact,
like the circulation of the blood or the reflex function of the
nervous system.
Before entering upon the discussion of the clinical and
pathological aspect of the theory of localisation, he candidly
acknowledges that we are not to expect too much from it, for
he says, " but for the aid of physiological experiment, pathology
would not even yet have succeeded in arriving at much beyond
general indications."
In the motor area Dr Ferrier includes "the bases of the
three frontal convolutions, with those bounding the fissure of
Ilolands, viz., the ascending frontal, or anterior central (Ecker);
the ascending parietal or posterior central (Ecker), with its
superior continuation, termed the postero-parietal, or superior
parietal (Ecker) lobule; together with the internal aspect of
the same, which by our French brethren is generally called the
paracentral lobule." Definite portions of the motor area are
supposed to have especial influence on the movements of the
leg, hand, facial, oral, and lingual muscles of the opposite side.
Dr Ferrier affirms that after careful investigation he has
not been able to find convincing proof of a destructive lesion
in the motor area which was not associated with motor
paralysis. Brown-Sequard, however, believes that in all cases of
paralysis from cortical lesion, there is something that intervenes
between the antecedent and the ensuing effect?a sort of
inhibitor}7 influence, exercised by the lesion on the centres
which are supposed to possess the lost functions.
L 2
148 REVIEWS AND
The greater part of Dr Ferrier's work consists of detailed,
reports of upwards of seventy cases of lesions of the brain
extracted from the writings of leading authorities on cerebral
pathology, which he thinks support his views; they are
illustrated by diagrams, and we recommend them to the atten-
tion of our readers. We do not, however, consider them
conclusive, but we are far from desiring to check the spirit of
inquiry ; we only object to the hasty manner in which he has
drawn his general inferences. I may mention one instance
especially?one in which Brown-Sequard differs from him, the
theory of cross-currents. This author enumerates no less than
two hundred cases of paralysis occurring on the same side of
the brain. With this and innumerable other exceptions, the
neurologists should not be quite so indiscriminate in their
admiration of the localising theory, as if it were a recognised
law. One exception would be fatal to any law, even to the law
of gravity. They should take warning from the fate of the
theory of evolution, which is falling to pieces under the
scientific shots which have riddled it to its very centre.
The conclusion of Dr Ferrier's work shows that in spite of
the confident tone which he has assumed, he has secret mis-
givings as to the ultimate success of that part of his theory
which relates to sensory centres:?
" I have now brought under your notice a considerable
number of facts, both positive and negative, in reference to the
localisation of special sensory regions in the human brain ; and
though the 'positive clinical evidence is as yet comparatively
scanty, and leaves much to be desired', I entertain the hope and
belief that it will not long remain so. And I trust that those
who rely more on the evidence of human pathology and the
phenomena of disease .than on the facts of experiment, even on
the most human of the lower animals, and do not therefore
share my own very decided convictions as to the localisation of
special sensory regions, will take the facts I have adduced into
careful consideration, and when opportunities occur, investigate
the conditions as to sensation in cerebral disease with
rigorous care and exactitude. For only thus are we likely to
arrive at a solution of the doubts and difficulties which still
surround this important question."
A scientific worker may make a thousand experiments with-
out having the good fortune to make a valuable discovery;
therefore, though willingly according to Dr Ferrier all honour
for his industry and genuine love of science, we cannot place
him in the same rank with those who have been able to establish
a great and general principle.
? J. M. W.
