An Invention Greater Than the Telephone
=========================================

308
PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITY.
THE CEREBROSCOPE.
V
THE INVENTION OF A NEW YORK PHYSICIAN?TIIE PHYSICAL
DEMONSTRATION OF MENTAL ACTION A POSSIBILITY?.
The following is from a New York journal.
Our arrival was communicated to the _ doctor by an electric
bell, and, after an answering stroke, we were ushered into the
presence of the great man, who arose from his comfortable
high-backed ecclesiastical chair to receive us.
Upon stating the object of our visit, he somewhat reluc-
tantly acknowledged his invention and its probable value to
science. " We have many instruments of precision in medicine
?the ophthalmoscope for examining the eye, the sphymograph
for determining the variations of the pulse, the otoscope, the
stethoscope, endoscope, and various others, not to forget the
sesthesiometer, dynamagraph, and the differential calorimeter
of Lombard, which enables us to detect the slightest changes
of temperature in the human body ; but I consider none of
them half so wonderful as the apparatus I have just discovered,
to which I have given the name cerebroscope. With this
instrument it is literally possible to ' read the mind's eye
and I can predict a great revolution in the treatment of mental
diseases."
" In what does the theory consist, and upon what principle
is the instrument constructed, doctor ? "
" I have spent many years in experiments, and now that
the new purple colouring matter of the retina has been disco-
vered, I am able to definitely demonstrate that it is by no
means an impossibility to watch the various workings of the
intellect reflected upon this colouring matter at the bottom of
the eye. You are aware that with activity of thought the
blood supply of the brain is increased, but the retinal blood
supply is also augmented as well, and consequently the pigment
PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITY. 309
of the cells of the membrane behind the retina is constantly
changed. With certain varieties of mental action there is a
mathematical grouping of these pigment or colouring cells,
and by the examination and comparison of upwards of 70,000
eyes during the last eight years, I can positively say that certain
kinds of cerebration are connected with different forms of
polarisation of these cells, so that negative attracts positive
and repels negative."
jReporter. "Will you tell me, doctor, what led to this
discovery ? "
Doctor. "As far back as 1858, while at Fort Kelly, I was
enabled to make an examination after death of the brain and
eyes of a man who had been suddenly kicked to death by a
mule. In this little bottle "?and the Professor held up to the
light a very small vial containing a glistening purple substance
?" is the ' visual purple' extracted from both eyes of this
soldier. It took me forty-eight hours of laborious work to
remove the pigment from the eyes, which were immersed in
absolute alcohol, placed in a freezing mixture. My discovery
of this substance antedated that of Boon or Bael, a German
savant, by about sixteen years. I have been able since, by the
exceedingly delicate instrument of Lombard, to test the varia-
tions of temperature in and outside of the eye, and find that
a current of tepid water, circulating in a rubber tube about a
water-glass containing a few drops of a solution of this colour-
ing matter, produces an arrangement of cells, identical with
that which takes place in the eye when the increased blood in
the vessels of the eye and brain bring the retina to a tempe-
rature of less than *06341 centigrade."
With the assistance of his polite, young, and intellectual
assistant, the instrument was brought forward. It resembled
somewhat the demonstrating ophthalmoscope used occasionally
by oculists. There was a firm stand, with an upright, which
held a plano-convex mirror perforated at its centre, while about
the periphery there passed a band of copper, and from points
equidistant extended small rods of selenium which converged
towards the centre, slightly overlapping the perforation. A
?series of wires connected these rods with a delicate tangent
galvanometer which rested upon a small shelf.
Six mirrors reflected the powerful rays of an oxyhydrogen
light, the pencil of which consisted of zirconium instead of the
ordinary lime.
Converging beams of light were thus sent through the per-
foration and direct through the pupil of the person examining,
while behind the instrument sat the observer, whose eye was
placed to the central opening.
PART II. VOL V. NEW SERIES. Y
310 PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITY.
"You will observe," said the doctor, " that the rearrange-
ment of the ' visual purple ' cells at the bottom of the eye cause
the generation of heat: this and the light sensibly affect the
selenium, which, you know, is highly sensitive, and an electric
current is generated by this metal, and the copper is imme-
diately shown by the galvanometer needle. Now, please, sit in
front of the instrument and engage your mind?think ! concen-
trate your attention!"
With some misgivings the reporter took the seat assigned to
him. Concentration of thought was difficult. He looked at
different objects in the room ; at first upon a piece of old blue
and white china upon the wall; next at an Egyptian scarabseus
of colossal size, then upon a door-knob; but under the excite-
ment of the moment it was as utterly impossible to indulge in
one line of thought as to go to sleep when tortured by the cares
of the day which chase each other through the weary brain of
the overworked newspaper man who craves rest. In the midst
of this indecision of mind, our representative involuntarily
calculated the cost of certain articles of furniture and decoration
about the room, and from this the question of the fees that such
a great man must receive to pay for these luxuries came to his
mind. The doctor, whose face had worn a troubled, impatient
expression during ten minutes or more, while the needle
remained perfectly motionless, burst into a hearty laugh and
informed us that the mathematical arrangement of the cells
then visible was one quite familiar to him. " I have seen it,"
said he, " in many of my apprehensive patients, who were calcu-
lating the probable charge I would make for my services, and,
though I cannot state with absolute accuracy the nature of your
thoughts at this moment, I can say they were upon the subject
of medical fees."
Anxious to witness for himself the workings of the instru-
ment, the reporter asked permission to examine the eyes of
some person in the room, and with great amiability and modesty
the doctor consented to be the victim of the experiment. The
gas was turned on, and the oxyhydrogen light sputtered and
crackled, and with a feeling of some nervous agitation we
seated ourselves. It would be difficult to describe the appear-
ance of the great inventor's eye. There were corruscations of
brilliant purple which shot off scintillations of golden light,
while the retina resembled some gorgeous piece of Pompeiian
tesselated pavement. The figures, however, constantly changed,
though there was a certain fixation of parts which seemed to
undergo but slight alteration. " What is the curious ring of
cells which extend almost entirely about the retina ? " we asked.
" Ah !" replied the doctor, " that is the circle of self-satisfaction;
PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITY. 311
but you will observe it does not quite extend around the entire
periphery as it does sometimes when there is entire belief in
one's self. Why, in some of the lower animals this ring- is
entirely developed. In such creatures as the bull-frog- (Rcina
temporaria), the domestic cow, the ass of commerce (Asinus
vwlgai*is), or the ordinary counter-jumper (dry goods clerk
Capricornus), the cell arrangement of this kind undergoes but
little variation."
By means of a mirror the doctor pointed out a very indistinct
group of cells, and upon being questioned, stated that the most
prominent were those which indicated a peculiar inventive
genius. He had observed these quite markedly developed in
Mr. Barnum and Mr. Bunnell of the Bowery museum. " Strange
to say," remarked the doctor?" and I regard it only as the in-
consistency of the instrument?these appear in my eye to grow
larger, year by year." The middle groups of cells indicated
literary ability of no mean order, and I afterwards found that
the doctor was the author of a very successful novel, which has
been read at thousands of American firesides.
Clustered about the large central veins of the retina were
some nondescript cells. " Ah, my dear sir," said the doctor, in
reply to our interrogatory, " those are the cells of reform, as I
have called them. I have found them in the eyes of Mayor
Cooper, Mr. Comstock, the Count Joannes, and others. They
are differently developed in different eyes. In Mayor Cooper,
for instance, they only reach a certain size, when the cerebral
circulation becomes so much changed by confused thought and
the clouding of the centre of judgment and reason, that they
become blotted out or eclipsed by the cells of prejudice. In
Comstock's case the cells take an irregular form, and their edges
have a prurient aspect. In the eyes of several thousand generals,
judges, vice-presidents, leading clergymen, politicians, and
cracksmen, I have examined, these cells of reform have varied
greatly. If you were to place this piece of army blanket that I
have kept since 1865, which you see is transparent, before the
instrument, you will have an extended view. My cells of reform
you see, are one-sided and distorted, but they show that the
lunatic asylums are the objective point to be attacked. I would
abolish asylums altogether, for it is both injudicious and useless
to restrain lunatics; and besides, where is my expert business to
come from ? Now there is the famous Utica bed discovered by
a French abbe over 200 years ago " We placed the blanket
over the opening, the threads of yarn forming a micrometer,
and lo, the appliance at the bottom of the eye underwent a
kaleidoscopic change! In the upper right-hand corner we saw
a picture of a strong man attacked by robbers, while pistol balls
312 PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITY.
seemed to fly from his charmed fingers like lance points from
the cuirass of an armoured knight. Surely the doctor's most
concentrated thoughts were of a pleasant kind, for the cells had
grouped themselves so that, occupying a central position, and
covering almost entirely the field, was a large head of himself,
smiling contentedly. In his hand he held a pen with which he
was writing an " open letter," while wriggling vibrios fought
with an army moth for the possession of an old military button
and a major-general's shoulder-strap. The doctor was lost in
reverie; his mind was filled with lawsuits, convents, after-dinner
speeches, fasting girls, Manhattan Beach rambles beneath the
moon, and a host of other subjects of thought, while their
reflecting prototypes were reflected in the visual purple. We
were lost in wonderment at the dazzling genre picture, and in
our nervous excitement accidentally kicked the doctor's foot,
when suddenly the myriads of beautiful pictures vanished as
quickly as they appeared, and, with a half apologetic smile, and
wave of his graceful head as he noted the expression upon the
face of the reporter, he said, "I fear the instrument has
not shown truthfully my exact mental condition. It is not yet
perfect." But assuring him of our perfect satisfaction, and
saying we believed it had done him full justice, we left, wonder-
ing how completely the world would be metamorphosed when
the cerebroscope was generally introduced.
We understand that Manager Abbey has deferred the pro-
duction of Gilbert's " Palace of Truth " until he can personally
examine the apparatus.
