Psychology Of Hamlet
=====================

123
Art. VIII.?
BY THE EDITOR.
"Quem deus vult perdere, prius dementat.
1 he mental condition of Hamlet has frequently been discussed,
and various interpretations have been given in connection with
the subject. Shakespeare intended Hamlet to be a man of pas-
sionate disposition, of noble and gentle temperament, most
affectionate, devoted to the memory of his father, and indignant
at the absence of shame in his mother.
Frailty, thy name is woman !
A little month, or ere these shoes were old
With which she followed my poor fathers body,
Like Niobe, all tears ; why she, even she
0 God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,
Would have mourned longer?married with my unc e.
The play thus commences with a delicate youth, with feel-
ings of grief mingled with disgust, who had doubtless reflected
for some time upon a theme which was both repugnant and
harrowing to his sensitive nature, and which rendered his mind
liable to be unhinged by the slightest provocation. The primary
cause for the sudden outbreak of Hamlet's madness may be traced
to the appearance of his father's ghost, causing a state of ex-
citement, but calming down by degrees as the vision disappear.
^ he first evidence of his mental aberration occurs in the scene
^hen the apparition has left him and he is asked by Horatio
Av ^at secret has been divulged?
There's not a villain in all Denmark,
But he's an arrant knave.
which Horatio replies?
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
This is the first allusion to the wildness and unnaturalness
of Hamlet's disposition. Another early indication of his
c?ndition occurs in the interview between Ophelia and hei
father
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doubtlet all unbraced;
12, I879lnt article originally appeared in the Medical Press Circular of February
124 PSYCHOLOGY OF IIAMLET.
No hat upon his head; his stockings fouled,
Ungartered and down-gyved to his ankle ;
Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other ;
And with a look so piteous in purpose
As if he had been loosed out of hell,
To speak of horrors,-?he comes before me.
In this scene Polonius alludes to the return of the gifts
made by Hamlet to Ophelia as the cause of his madness?
That has made him mad.
In the following scene we find Rosencrantz and Gruildenstern,
both intimate friends of Hamlet, sent by the King to act as
attendants and watch over his personal liberty. From a pre-
vious acquaintance with him, it was not to be expected that a
suspicion would be cast on the motive of their visit to Denmark
and intrusion on his presence. The Queen instructs them
thus:?
Good gentlemen, ho hath much talked of you ;
And sure I am two men there are not living
To whom he more adheres.?
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son.
There can be no doubt but at this period of the play Shake-
speare regarded Hamlet as a madman, driven to desperation by
all that he had gone through. A mind embracing both gentle-
ness and firmness, naturally of a strong melancholic tempera-
ment, of a highly reflective character, stung to remorse and
terror by the villany of his uncle?the murder of his father,
and the incestuous behaviour of his mother, all acting as exci-
tants in one already predisposed to melancholy, and prostrating
by their baneful influence his mind and producing the condition
as described and depicted by the dramatist. Polonius, who
was of a crafty and knowing disposition, and ever eager to ex-
press his opinion to the King, considered that he had found out
the cause for this strange change in Hamlet's mind?
I have found the very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
Of course he here alludes to the supposed affection f?l
Ophelia, about which, however, there is a diversity of opinion as
to whether Hamlet really loved Ophelia or not. He is evidently
conscious of his condition, for he perceives that he is being
watched by Rosencrantz and Gruildenstern and under their supei"
vision, Hamlet asks them a direct question?
y?u l?0*' ^ent for ? Is it your own inclining ? Is it a free visitation ?
e, come , deal justly with me; come, come : nay, speak.
PSYCHOLOGY OF HAMLET. 125
This remark is made to them in reference to tlieii sudden
visit to Denmark. Again?
What have you, my good good friends, deserved at the hands of Fortune, that
she send you to prison hither?
It has often been argued from Hamlet's conversation here
that he was feigning madness. This, to my mind, is, however,
contradicted in the beautiful speech describing his melancholic
brooding, which frequently has been brought forward as a typi-
cal illustration of a melancholic temperament. Burton, in his
" Anatomy of Melancholy," who was a contemporary of Shake-
speare's, has also depicted this condition. He writes
. They are soon tired with all things; they will now tarry, now ?
111 M they will rise ; now up, then they go to bed ; now PloM$J*Sn,3' '
now they like, then dislike all. Scquitur nunc vivendi nunc monendi, cupula,
As Aurielianus says.
Hamlet thus describes his melancholic disposition.
I have of late?but wherefore know not?lost all my t
custom of exercise; and indeed it goes so heavily.with my dispos on that
,fot% frame, the earth, seems to me a ?teri 6 promontory this mo
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this bravo o'erhanging firmament tms
majestical roof fretted with golden fire,?why it appears no other thing
?in a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.
Suicidal tendencies are always present in connection with
Melancholia. Shakespeare, mindful of this, introduces in the
following scene a speech as illustrative:?
To be or not to be, that is the question.
F rom the context this evidently refers to the contemplation
?f self-destruction. The interview between Hamlet and Ophelia,
which she is informed that he never loved her, is chaiactei-
1?tic of a mind unhinged :?
0, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown.
His melancholic state gradually subsides into one of sub-
acute mania, reaching its culminating point in the scene with
e Payers, where he finds the account given by the Ghost of
16 rnurder of his father corroborated :?
qnauT Tuld 1 drink hot blood, and do such bitter business the day would
4 dKe fco look on.
After the interview with his mother and the muidei of
?loniUs, Hamlet is sent to England under the charge of
^sencrantz and Guildenstern, to whose protection he has been
trusted by his uncle-
And ho to England shall along with you.
126 PSYCHOLOGY OF HAMLET.
On his return home Hamlet meets the cortege bearing the
" Fair Ophelia." After this there is no history of any lunacy,
and he continues in a sound state of mind until the termination
of the play. As a substantial proof of this, I must refer to the
speech made by him to Laertes previous to their duel. It is
however, to be regretted that this is omitted in the present
version of the play. Upon this the whole question hinges as to
whether he was feigning madness.
Give me your pardon, sir, I have done you wrong ;
But pardon't as you are a gentleman.
This presence knows, and you must needs have heard,
How I am punished with a sore distraction.
"What I have done,
That might your nature, honour, and exception,
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
He declares further on in the same dialogue that he
destroyed Polonius and drove Ophelia to distraction under the
influence of insanity. He says that " his madness is poor
Hamlet's enemy."
The inference to be gathered from this is either that
Hamlet was sane and excused himself on a self-imposed plea
of madness, or that he was conscious of his previous irre-
sponsibility, and was eager to explain the reason for his
misdeeds.
There is sufficient evidence from a careful examination
of the traits in his character to ignore the first plea.
Hamlet was not a coward. He would not have made use of
deception to escape calumny and disgrace. On the contrary,
he was brave, truthful, honourable, and mentally resolute, and
I cannot admit that he was a man likely to purposely deceive
Laertes. It was contrary to his nature and to the history of
his case.
The general conclusion I have arrived at is, that there is no
evidence to prove that Hamlet feigned madness, and that,
tracing the delineations of his disposition carefully, there are
conclusive facts of the existence of mental aberration, followed,
as I have shown, by complete restoration to health previous to
the termination of the play.
I am desirous of saying a few words on the performance of
Hamlet at the Lyceum Theatre. With regard to the portrayal,
of Ophelia by Miss Ellen Terry, a character so redolent of
feminine gentleness, beauty, and grace : It has been argued by
PSYCHOLOGY OF HAMLET.
127
some critics that there is not sufficient acting in the part. It
appears to me a most perfect representation of what Shake-
speare intended, the personification of a love-sick girl, whose
mind is wrecked, giving vent, during her insane warblings, to
ideas which could never have suggested themselves to any one
but the possessor of a " mind diseased," a mind prostrated and
perverted, and to one who had lost control over her better
reason, reduced to a state of disordered instinct and imagi-
nation. All this is displayed by Miss Ellen Terry. The gieat
error to guard against in a true representation of Ophelia is
over action and exaggeration. This is carefully avoided. It
is a most difficult thing to feign madness, from the tendency to
overdo the part and exaggerate the symptoms. Exception has
again been taken to the tears shed in the mad scene as being
contrary to what is found in insanity. The now populai notion
that persons who are of unsound mind do not shed tears, is a
fallacy. It is erroneous and contrary to all experience.
The Ophelia of Miss Ellen Terry is true to nature, and may
be pronounced a most brilliant representation. Ihe masteily
Performance of Hamlet, as rendered by Mr. Irving, is so well
known as not to require any further comments from me. The
character is depicted with the skill of a consummate aitist. I
have heard that to produce Hamlet, as it is now acted at the
Lyceum Theatre, has been the study of a lifetime, and Mr.
Irving must be congratulated upon the great success of his
undertaking.
