Lunacy in America
==================

268
Art. VIII.?.
Report of the Wisconsin State Hospital foe the Insane.
This hospital was opened for the reception of patients in July
1860, and 6ince that period the total number of admissions
has been 1,377 males, and 1,264 females. Of this number
383 males and 368 females have been discharged recovered, or
considerably more than one-quarter of the whole number, which
speaks highly for the general treatment and management
adopted in this institution. At the end of the fiscal year
there were 393 in hospital, the whole number treated during
the year being 530.
Report of the New Hampshire Asylum for the Insane,
June 1879.
Dr. J. P. Bancroft is the able superintendent of this institu-
tion, and the visitors in their report speak highly of his manage-
ment of it. On May 1, 1847, there were on the register 276
patients, of whom 132 were males and 144 females. The daily
average from May 1, 1878, until March 31, 1879, has been 126
males and 143 females. We append the interesting remarks
made by Dr. Bancroft on the duties of " attendants."
" Attendants.
" Sect. 1. In all their intercourse with the patients, the
attendants are required to treat them with respect and civility ;
to be kind and gentle in manner, and avoid roughness of every
kind. They must answer, as far as they can, the civil questions
of a patient, and attend to every reasonable request. They
must be calm and quiet under provocation, never scold,
threaten, or recriminate, and make every request in a respectful
manner.
" Sect. 2. In the care of the insane, sympathy, kindness,
and tact should take the place of force and display of authority.
But if at any time the use of force becomes a necessity, the
manner of using it should take away its offensiveness ; and
force should never be resorted to without the presence of
sufficient assistance to render a violent struggle unnecessary.
" Sect. 3. A cheerful look, a kind manner, a respectful
demeanour, and expressions of sympathy will do much to quiet
LUNACY IN AMERICA. 269
the excited, and give the attendant influence and easy control
over patients, and render duty easy and agreeable.
" Sect. 4. The opposition which the insane make often
arises from delusions that lead them to believe they are to be
injured in some way; and for this reason every effort to control
them, to administer food, medicine, or baths, or do anything
for them, should be made in the most kind and delicate manner,
that their confidence may be secured and retained. On the
other hand, cross words, angry looks, or violent acts destroy
their confidence, and diminish their chances* of recovery. No
one must risk the consequences of such measures.
" Sect. 5. A blow or a kick is never to be inflicted on a
patient by any employe under any circumstances. Any violation
of this rule, will be treated as a grave offence.
" Sect. 6. Mechanical restraint must never be put on a
patient without the authority of a medical officer.
" Sect. 7. The attendant should be an example of good
manners, avoiding all rude and ungentlemanly or unladylike
habits not suited to the well-ordered household. They should
treat each other and all with civility and politeness, cherish a
high sense of obligation, and never forget the golden rule, to do
by others as, in changed circumstances, one would wish to be
done by. By these simple means the attendant is sure to gain,
not only self-respect, but an easy control and personal influence.
" Sect. 8. Attendants should hear with patience and
answer with caution ; should never promise what cannot safely
be performed, and having made a promise, be faithful in its
execution.
" Sect. 9. The peculiarities of patients must never be made
a subject of sport or ridicule, but rather withheld from pub-
licity, with tender regard for their feelings and welfare.
" Sect. 10. The attendants must rise at the ringing of the
morning bell, and at once commence the labours of the day.
On opening the sleeping rooms of the patients they shall greet
the occupants with expressions of kindness, see that they rise
(if able), are properly dressed, washed, and prepared for break-
fast at the appointed hour.
" Sect. 11. As soon as practicable after the patients have
arisen from bed, the attendants must see that the night vessels
are removed from the rooms and the beds thrown open for air-
ing ; and as soon as other duties will allow, they will remove all
soiled bedding, and see that the beds are put in good order.
" Sect. 12. Immediately after breakfast the halls and
patients' rooms must be made clean and put in good order, and
so kept at all times. Scrupulous care must be given to the
water closets, which will require frequent rinsing with hot
270 LUNACY IN AMERICA.
water, and the use of disinfectants. The same care must be
taken of the wash bowls, and a sufficiency of clean towels must
be at hand, as well as combs and brushes for the hair.
" The attendants will follow the same rule of cleanliness in
the care of the halls, windows, spaces, back stairs, and dining
rooms, never being satisfied until they are as clean as they can
be made. Patients able and willing to assist in these labours
are to be encouraged to do so, but never compelled to work.
The attendants are held responsible for the complete execution
of these requirements.
"Sect. 13. The attendants will ever be watchful of the
state of the atmosphere in the halls, and report to the office
any evidence of impurity which is beyond their power to correct
otherwise.
"Sect. 14. The attendants must see that clean linen is
put on each bed once in every week, and oftener if necessary;
and if a sufficient supply of this or of towels is not at hand, the
fact must be promptly reported to the supervisor.
"Sect. 15. The attendants must see that the tables are
properly laid; that everything about them is perfectly clean,
and that they are made as inviting as is practicable. During
meals the attendants must always be present and wait on the
table in a respectful and delicate manner, such as they would
be willing to have adopted towards themselves under like cir-
cumstances. Patients must not be hurried through their meals
to hasten the clearing of the table. The attendants must use
special care that no knife, fork, or other article is carried from
the table by any patient.
" Sect. 16. It is obviously improper for the attendants, after
the hall work is done, to retire to their own rooms and leave
the patients alone during hours of duty; their time and atten-
tion are due to the patients, and must be devoted to keeping
them quiet and tidy, preventing improper conduct of every
sort, or lapsing into listlessness and torpor; to efforts to pre-
serve their self-respect, and to carry into effect the general
direction of the physicians. These ends are to be sought by
efforts to keep patients occupied, either in work, reading, games,
or judicious social intercourse.
"Sect. 17. Visiting from hall to hall during hours of duty,
without special business, or going away to other parts of the
premises out of one's field of service, is wholly improper and
not allowed.
"Sect. 18. The attendants are expected to know how every
patient in their charge is employed, and to be vigilant, by
every means in their power, to better the condition of every
one.
LUNACY IN AMERICA. 271
"Sect. 19. The attendants must not allow a patient to be
taken from the halls by anyone employed in other departments,
unless a general or special permission from a medical officer to
that effect has been given; nor will the patients leave the halls
before breakfast or on Sunday without the same permission.
" Sect. 20. The attendants must always be alive to the wel-
fare of those in their charge, and in the night hold themselves
ready to rise and assist the night attendant, if the condition of
a patient requires it. They will come to the office for medicines
or instructions when needed, and follow all directions carefully.
After giving medicines, they should wash and return the glasses
at once.
"Sect. 21. If damage is done to buildings or property by
patients, the attendants will report it to their supervisor.
" Sect. 22. The attendants are never to give up their keys,
except at the office, on leaving, nor are they ever to admit
strangers into the halls without special permission.
"Sect. 23. The attendants will always take care that the
clothing worn by patients is adapted to the season and the occa-
sion. In case of sudden change from heat to cold, they must
make at once, the needed change in clothing.
"Sect. 24. It is particularly expected of attendants to see
that every patient is cleanly in person; that the hair and nails
are attended to; that any rent in clothing is promptly mended;
that the garments worn are kept buttoned or hooked; and that
any stains from carelessness in eating are promptly removed.
Each attendant should keep at hand a sponge and soap, and a
small stock of sewing utensils, as needles, thread, buttons, hooks
and eyes, &c., for immediate use when needed.
" Sect. 25. When the physicians visit the halls, one of the
attendants must be at hand to give any information required,
to accompany them to any patient's room, or render any other
assistance needed.
" Sect. 26. Each patient will take a warm bath each week,
unless made an exception by direction of the physician. In
particular cases of weakness or special delicacy the sponge
bath may be substituted for the tub; in such cases, as well as
those who may desire to bathe more frequently, the attendant
should apply to the attending physician for specific directions.
"The attendants must superintend the baths of patients, and
not leave the halls with the bath rooms open (unless exceptions
are made), and in no case must an epileptic or suicidal patient,
bathe without the presence of an attendant.
" Sect. 27. In suitable weather all patients who are able
will go out for exercise, accompanied by their respective atten-
dants, on such conditions as shall from time to time be prescribed.
272 LUNACY IN AMERICA.
In these outdoor exercises the attendants must see that no one
strays from the party; and so regulate the speed of walking, or
the character of other exercise, as to suit, as well as may be,
the average of persons present. They must try to avoid all ap-
pearance of restraint, and seek to make these occasions as enjoy-
able as possible. Preference should be given to walks within
the asylum grounds; but when walks are taken into the city, it
is not permitted to visit stores, hotels, railroad stations, or other
public places, except by permission previously obtained. In the
airing courts the same rules for the care of patients will be ob-
served as apply to the halls. The attendants must not allow
any rubbish to accumulate on the ground of the courts.
" Sect. 28. The attendants must shave those patients who
do not desire to wear the beard. In shaving, great care must
be taken to have the razor in good order, and to shave easily
and neatly. No other patient should be present, and the razors
be kept under lock and key in the attendant's room.
"Sect. 29. The attendants, in their respective halls, will
strictly observe the instructions of the superintendent in regard
to the time for the patients' retiring; and in assisting them to
bed they must practise the same delicacy and courtesy enjoined
elsewhere in these rules. Before closing the doors for the night
they must see that the patients are comfortably in bed; and it
is especially enjoined that they offer gentle and patient assis-
tance to the feeble and aged, and leave all with a kind ' good-
night.'
" Night Attendants.
" Sect. 1. The night attendants will visit the office at eight
o'clock in the evening to receive their instructions for the night,
and go on duty at once. They will continue in charge of their
respective sections of the house until after the ringing of the
rising bell, at the times established, after which they will be
relieved by the attendants.
They must be always awake, vigilant, and faithful, giving
their whole attention to the condition of the house and the
patients. They must make their respective rounds, not hastily,
thus leaving a large part of the time to be spent at the office,
but dividing it between the various apartments as directed.
They must pass through the halls in the most quiet manner,
being especially careful in opening and closing doors, and make
the personal observations required with the most respectful
delicacy, disturbing the patient as little as possible.
" They must be especially watchful of the sick ; minister
tenderly to their wants, carry out scrupulously all instructions
in regard to them, and report to a physician any unfavourable
change of condition.
LUNACY IN AMERICA. 273
" They must promptly attend to the call of patients, ascer-
tain their wants, and satisfy them, if practicable.
" They must do all in their power to soothe and quiet any
who may be wakeful or timid, and assure them of their safety.
" Sect. 2. They must be especially vigilant in the care of
those inclined to suicide or self-injury, and neglect no effort to
be assured of the safety of such, in accordance with the specific
directions they receive in each case.
" Sect. 3. They must be always watchful in regard to fire ;
and, if it occurs, must at once, and in the most quiet manner,
inform the officers and employes, without a general alarm, and
proceed to extinguish it. They must frequently inspect the
attics of their respective departments, and see that the iron
doors are kept shut.
" The safety, the comfort, and the lives of large numbers
are entrusted, in a great measure, to the night attendants, and
a degree of vigilance and faithfulness, corresponding to the
magnitude of the interests at stake, is expected of them in the
execution of all instructions given them.
" Sect. 4. It is the imperative duty of the night attendants
to report any irregularity or violation of the rules of the house
which may come to their knowledge, to the superintendent, and
not to make the same a subject of remark elsewhere.
" Sect. 5. During public exercises in the chapel on Sunday,
and other occasions, it is made the duty of the night attendants
to look to the condition of the halls in the absence of the
attendants."
Report of the Willard Asylum for the Insane.
During the year 1878 the daily average of the patients has
been 1,340, the number discharged as recovered being 6;
improved, 39; not improved, 28; not insane, 1; died, 87.
Dr. Chapin, the able medical superintendent, makes some
valuable remarks on the cause of insanity in the State, and on
other matters connected with lunacy.
Rei>ort of Lunatic Asylum. No. I. Fulton, Missouri.
During the two years from November 1876 to November
1878, there were admitted into this asylum 337 in all, of
which number 196 were males, and 141 females. Of those
discharged 171 had recovered.
With regard to the moral treatment of insanity, Dr. L. R.
H. Smith, the medical superintendent, makes the following
valuable remarks:?
" In our moral treatment, it has been our uniform rule to
274 LUNACY IN AMERICA.
impress upon all the paramount importance of kindness in all
our intercourse with the insane. Indeed, I have scarcely lan-
guage to indicate my estimate of its value, for without the
rigid enforcement of this regulation, it is simply impossible to
attain any high degree of success in treatment, as the influence
of all other instrumentalities would be, to a great extent,
neutralised. But with proper 4 individualised' treatment
(which includes kindness), the unbalanced mind is prepared to
receive the best impressions our varied means of occupation
and amusement are designed to make. In other words, their
curative influence would thus be intensified, and result in the
highest success. To secure such treatment, how essential that
our attendants, with fair intelligence and unblemished moral
character, should possess kind and humane dispositions, and
be conscientious in the discharge of their most responsible
duties. I have always endeavoured to select this class of
attendants, and then impress upon them, from time to time,
the obligations their positions impose, and that the success of
all other treatment depends largely upon the faithful perform-
ance of their duties. To impress upon them more deeply, if
possible, the sacredness of their obligations, I also say to them,
that we will expect you, at all times, to treat those committed
to your charge with the same kindness, forbearance, tenderness
and sympathy you would desire your own fathers, or mothers,
or brothers, or sisters, if similarly affected, to receive if placed
in the care of strangers. With this course, and the regular and
systematic daily supervision exercised over our entire house-
hold, we believe that we have succeeded in causing the law of
kindness to prevail in all the departments of this institution,
to an extent that is unsurpassed in any other of like character."
Report of the Western Pennsylvania Dixmont Hoshtal,
1878.
During the year there were 782 patients under treatment.
Of this number 183 have been discharged or died, 63 having
recovered. Dr. Deed gives us some carefully drawn up and in-
teresting statistical tables, the minutest detail being especially
mentioned.
Report of Massachusetts General Hosmtal, 1878.
The number of inmates in this hospital on January 1, 1878,
was 156. The whole number of patients treated during the
year is 334 paying, 1,578 free, and 38 paying part of the time.
Of this number 956 were discharged recovered. Dr. Jelly is
the medical superintendent, and his successful efforts are ably
seconded by several assistants.
LUNACY IN AMERICA. 275
KErORT OF THE BaTLEY HOSPITAL FOE THE INSANE, 1879.
To Dr. John W. Sawyer and W. B. Duncan (Ky.), Superin-
tendents, we are indebted for this interesting report:?
" We have no great changes to record this year. The notice-
able facts are, that we have had a larger number of patients
under treatment by 13, and a larger number remaining at
the end of the year by 14 than ever before. It is also notice-
able that the number of deaths was much larger than for the
previous year, or than for any year in our history except 1853.
We have no explanation of this, except that?
Leaves have their time to fall
And flowers to wither at the north wind's breath,
And stars to set: but all?
Thou hast all seasons for thine own, 0 Death !
" Perfect drainage, the utmost attention to cleanliness and
order, an abundant flow of pure water, with good ventilation of
rooms, and proper exercise in the open air by all patients able
to take it, has saved us from malarial and epidemic disease
of every form. Moreover the health of officers, attendants, and
servants has been exceptionally good.
" Of course we look for greater mortality among our
patients than among those sick with ordinary diseases. Many
patients come to us who are already stricken with death. To
our eye the fatal arrow is already fixed and quivering in their
hearts. The disease which has touched the brain finds its seat
in some vital bodily function ; or the paralysis which has seized
the body announces a fatally diseased brain, which no medical
skill can reach. Some of these are advanced in age. At the
best they are on the downhill of life. In the decay of nature,
unfortunately, their mental balance is disturbed or destroyed.
They do not realise it. They think all men crazy but them-
selves, and at no time show the nature of their malady so
clearly as in their excited attempts to prove themselves sane.
They resisted those restraints deemed necessary for the.safety of
themselves and their friends at home, and were brought to us
with little hope of cure, but rather for watchful care and kindly
ministry until the sands of life are fully run.
" In some of these cases?possibly of men whom we have
long known and esteemed?it is painful to mark the constant
friction between a diseased and decaying body and a disordered
mind. Each preys upon the other, and, however unwittingly,
hastens the certain dissolution.
"It is doubtless true that even in this class of cases the
lives of many patients are prolonged and their comfort pro-
moted by removal to the hospital. They could not be kept at
276 LUNACY IN AMERICA.
home with safety to themselves or the family, without some
seclusion, and constant watch by experienced nurses, day and
night; and this, where possible, would prove a cause of constant
irritation. The sentiment that ' a man's house is his castle,' is
not easily eradicated from the human mind. 'His castle'?his
fortified home?and not his prison! We remember Edmund
Burke's illustration of this sentiment: 4 The rain may enter it,
the winds of Heaven may enter it, but the king cannot enter
it, the king dare not enter it!' How great an irritant then to
a man who has any reason left, to find himself a captive in his
own house, a prisoner in his own castle, a vassal where once a
lord! This cause of irritation must, and from experience often
does, increase the malady, which of all others most ' grows by
what it feeds on.' We do not mean to say that this class of
patients in a hospital lose this love of freedom, and accept
proper restraints without resistance or complaint; but only that
the rules of an institution like this, administered by wise and
experienced men, arouse less antagonism and the restraints im-
posed are more readily accepted than they would be in their
own houses. The value, therefore, of a hospital for the insane,
as compared with any other great public charity, should not be
judged by the percentage of its deathrate, or even of its re-
coveries for any specified period of time.
" While it is a curative institution to those patients who
are within reach of the healing art, it is painfully true, what-
ever be the hopes of friends, that very many who come to us
have reached a state of mental and physical decay, which none
but the Divine hand by miraculous interpositions can arrest.
" In some of these cases the struggle for life goes on long
after the weakened will has ceased to direct it, as from the
momentum acquired or increased by delirium, while in others a
mania apparently no more violent rapidly breaks down all power
of resistance and hastens the end. It is therefore as difficult to
account for the very small number of deaths last year as for the
very large number this year.
" But even in those cases where death had set his seal, and
sooner or later come to claim his own, the hospital has answered
one of the great ends for which it was founded. It has been a
safe retreat, a comfortable home for those whose
Hearts, once bold and brave,
Now, like muffled drums, are beating
Funeral marches to the grave,
" At the same time it has relieved the families from which
they came, not alone from wearisome and thankless watching
and toil, but also from anxious solicitude and care, which once
LUNACY IN AMERICA. 277
robbed the day of pleasure and the night of repose, and the
community in which they lived from the dangers and alarms
always existing when men whose passions have survived their
reason are living without restraint."
Since the opening of the hospital, 823 patients have been
discharged as recovered, 650 improved and 323 not improved.
At the end of the year there remained 170, and during the year
26 were discharged recovered.
Keport of Provincial Lunatic Asylum, St. John, N.B.
Admitted during the year 53 males, 44 females, 8 males
and 8 females discharged recovered. The average daily number
under treatment for the year was 151 males and 135 females.
Dr. J. T. Steeves says as follows on the subject of intem-
perance :?
" The popular idea at present is to arrest this state of ill
health by education ; and if it can be proved that the educated
are less liable to disease than the uneducated, then the remedy
should be applicable. There may be a difference of opinion as
to the mode of accomplishing this part of the work of reforma-
tion, but I presume no one is bold enough to deny that educa-
tion will be an essential factor in ameliorating the condition of
that class of our fellows, viz. the unskilled workers, including all
the poor. Fortunately for us in this part of the world, but few
of the children of the poor are unable to read; this initiatory
step is therefore taken toward what would seem to be the final
great remedy?that of practical Christianity. There is one
intermediate step which is of vital importance, that is, a right
apprehension and observance of that day which God hallowed,
viz. the Christian Sabbath. But the great enemy of these
people, and obstacle in the way of progress in their redemption,
is assuredly strong drink. If a plan could be devised that
would prevent the use of liquor even on Saturday night, and
especially on Sunday, freeing them from its influence on the
latter day, an important step would be gained, rendering the
task of applying hygienic influences comparatively easy. I must,
however, leave this branch of the subject to abler pens and
heads than mine, apologising, if I have already trenched on
ground properly belonging to others.
" Before entering upon a new theme I should state that I
am not ignorant of the opinion, which is probably a fact, that
there is less insanity among uncivilised than among civilised
people. But it is admitted that the former have their full
share of idiots and fools, and that it is not civilisation which
causes increased madness, but the abominations which are
engrafted upon it."
PART II. VOL. V. NEW SERIES. U
278 LUNACY IjST AMERICA.
Report of the Illinois Northern Hospital for the
Insane at Elgin.
Admitted during the year 413, of which 215 were males and
198 females. Discharged 189 males and 162 females. The
whole number under treatment during the year has been 453
males and 423 females; of this number 36 males and 43 females
have been discharged recovered. We append some interesting
remarks on the duties of attendants :?
" It will not be out of place here to direct attention to the
delicate position in which attendants at insane asylums are
placed. While such institutions are constructed with barred
windows and other appliances, which are an admission of the
fact that many of the patients are of desperate and unruly
habits, yet the community at large entertain rather peculiar
notions as to the application of force in the management of the
insane. As far as practicable, physicians have substituted
moral for physical force, and instructions are given the atten-
dants to use the latter only as the very last resort, when the
welfare or protection of the patient shall make it imperative,
and then it must be employed with a firm but gentle hand.
Emergencies will inevitably arise in which physical force must
be used. Life itself may be in danger, and the desperate
character of certain patients renders them amenable only to the
lower form of physical control and restraint; which fact it is
necessary for all to appreciate who would judge intelligently
of these difficult cases. Of course considerable reliance has to
be placed in the judgment and discretion of the attendants, and
the utmost care ought to be employed in their selection. There
is but a limited number of persons who care to embark in this
occupation; which in many respects is unattractive, and a trial
is often requisite to find out their suitability for the employ-
ment. In some instances the attendants are found unfit for
the duties they have to discharge, and they are consequently
dismissed, and their places filled with the best available mate-
rial. Everything considered, it is somewhat surprising, making
due allowance for the shortcomings of humanity, especially in
view of the trying position in which the attendants are fre-
quently placed, that their duties are performed with such general
satisfaction. Two things should be borne in mind in the con-
sideration of this subject: that our first duty is to protect the
unfortunate inmates of asylums, and second to give to their
attendants that charitable consideration which neither prejudice
nor misrepresentation can disturb."
Dr. Kilbourne has given us a very complete report, full of
interesting data.
