What can be done with Criminal?
================================

Lunatics
128
Art. IX.? ?
This man has a code so rigid that scarcely may it he said that he would suffer
a maniac to live.?Dr Hammond, quoted by Dr Grissom in True and False
Experts, 1878.

Epidemics may decimate and devastate whole communities,
and yet have their uses and advantages. They may remove the
useless, the feeble, the aged, the unfittest members, and thus
provide a fair and ample field to those most fanciful of modern
romancists?the Evolutionists?for producing, or rather growing,
young, healthy, powerful, and productive successors. They may
exact attention to the circumstances apparently favouring or
regulating the spread of diseases, whether these be natural or
artificial, quarantine or non-quarantine, local origin or importa-
tion, 'isolation or the new Russian mode of stamping out a
plague by burning the villages or houses in which it originated
or first appeared. They may excite a paroxysm of domestic,
even civic, clearing and cleansing, of establishing new codes of
police law, and of initiating a zealous, scientific, and even wise
investigation into the laws of health, comfort, and all that
promotes individual and general vigour, happiness, and
intelligence. The course of moral epidemics presents many
features of resemblance to this description. They assail and
disturb classes or even races of men ; but they chiefly affect the
excitable, the erratic, the eccentric, the nervous?all, in fact,
whose system is so imperfectly constituted as to be intolerant
of strong impressions, physical or psychical, and as to be
incapable of resisting not merely the wear and tear of toil,
responsibility, disappointment, success, but the light and gentle
tenor of a calm and untroubled career. They may rouse
legislators and philanthropists to a sense of impending danger,
to the possibility of a whole nation becoming frantic, to the
necessity of bringing all the forces which politics, religion, or
other moral influences place at their disposal, into operation, in
order to control or cure the prevalent delirium. They may
have led to sustained and permanent efforts to neutralise the
effects of vice, intemperance, misdirected education, and of that
social ^ deterioration which provokes and aggravates mental
maladies ; and even to the institution of warnings and recom~
mendations, if not of positive rules, for the prohibition
consanguine marriages, of trades which are inconsistent with
moral or mental sanity, and with the duties and destiny of the
citizen, as amenable to the will of God and man. In former
times such epidemics were frequent and formidable in propor-
tion to the ignorance, the convictions and superstitions, the
habits and manners, and, above all, the dominant temper and
temperament of the time. Opinions, fears, fictions, delusions,
became epidemic, and swept over Europe, prostrating those of
divers lineage, language, and constitution, with a force like a
tornado. Perhaps the most striking and instructive illustration
?f a sentiment becoming universal and unanimous over the
hearts and conduct of enormous masses of men is to be seen in
the preaching of the early Crusades, when the simple words of
an aged priest, " God wills it," animated all semi-civilised
Europe, and appears to have forced the actors against their
interests, inclinations, and even convictions. In modern
times such cataclysms became more rare, more limited in their
range, less destructive in their ravages, and, consequently, less
effective in the production of social improvements, or, it would
be better to say, changes. Very recently we may have observed
avarice, fear, fanaticism, widely disseminated, and displaying many
of the characteristics of a national scourge; but, in our own day,
when a theory, a speculation, a crotchet becomes prevalent,
actuates classes or communities, and urges them on to the accom-
plishment of some common object, the completion of the move-
dent may assume the name and attributes, if not positively the
nature, of public duty, patriotism, or philanthropy. Thus there
have been magnificent outbursts of popular feeling against
slavery, against the unequal operation of laws, and against the
modes of interference with, and management of, those who can
neither guide nor govern themselves : we allude, of course, in
an especial manner, here, to the insane and the imbecile. There
have been during the present century repeated instances of a
general, if not of a national, outpouring of sympathy and active
benevolence?in 1815 and 1847. Far be it from us to stigmatise
such manifestations, or to undervalue the incalculable amount
?f benefit, mingled, it is true, with a modicum of evil and erior,
which accrued, or may accrue, from such epidemics. But know -
ing that when such instruments escape from wise and cautious
control?as must be the case when large bodies of men act in
concert, but without any common principle, in ignorance, and,
it may be, from a mere emotion of compassion oi indignation,
that their operation must be indiscriminate and their influence
inutile, or directly pernicious?it may be expedient to offer a
few observations rather on what ought to be aimed at than
what is proposed to be aimed at on future occasions. The
moment seems to be opportune for such an attempt, as it has
"become palpable, from the prodromes in many of our widely
circulated and most trustworthy newspapers, even from certain
of our medical periodicals, and from such sources as conversa-
tion and controversy, that the lunacy laws are again to be newly
modelled, or muddled ; indeed, it has been reported that certain
personages, high alike in legal and medical position and
authority, have already been entrusted with the preparation of
a programme of intended alterations or modifications. While
we would earnestly hope that the opinion expressed by the
distinguished President of the Psychological Association, Dr.
Crichton Browne, in his address (Journal of Mental Science,
Oct. 1878)?that our Specialty requires rest and repose?may be
realised, it may be prudent to advert to what may be the scope,
if not the substance, of the proposed changes, which may before-
shadowed in the address delivered by Mr. Millar, Q.C., in the
Social Science Congress in 1878.* This "Daniel come to
judgment," argues that, when lunatics are conveyed to private
asylums, the chances of their liberation are in an inverse
proportion to the truths of the accusation against them; that
this patient, or victim, as he designates him, cannot escape from
his gaolers except by a miraculous combination of circumstances,
although he admits that false imprisonment, or the illegal
detention of sane persons depends altogether upon tradition
and rumour, and that no specific instance can be adduced; that
nothing short of great acuteness on the part of friends and
inquirers can compete with the contrivances of gaolers in pre-
venting the real condition of the mind of their charge from being-
ascertained ; that even Chancery lunatics are ignorant of their
right of appeal to the Justices, and are adjudged as of unsound
mind on the private evidence of the Visitor ; and, lastly, that the
same authority should be appointed to deprive criminals and
lunatics of their liberty.

Now, it is not at present our purpose to enter upon any
defence of Private Asylums, nor to show that they cannot be
dispensed with ; that while improperly conducted establishments
of this class probably will be, as they should be, swept away,
those under the care of physicians of upright character, exten-
sive experience, and benevolent manners?who can bring all the
sources and appliances of ample means, sound medical and
psychological knowledge, and all the ameliorations for which we
are indebted to modern views, to bear upon those committed to
their care?are entitled to the fostering support of the State and of
the public for the behoof of that very large number of affluent,
cultivated, and refined individuals, who, in this country, would not and could not be placed in a General Hospital for the insane.
Beyond exposing the animus by which the author is governed,
we intend here to deal with another branch of his subject, as
enunciated somewhat in the following manner. The only
circumstances under which no false imprisonment could take
place would be by a public inquiry as to the mental condition
of the individual, conducted by a jury and judicial officer, or to
give the opinion, in his own words, as it is formulated in one
of his conclusions:?

" No inquiry into the sanity of an alleged lunatic, whether
by a Master in Lunacy or otherwise, ought to be held in
private; in order to authorise the detention of any one as a
lunatic, such inquiry ought to be public, to proceed exclusively
upon sworn evidence, given by witnesses produced for cross-
examination, and ought to be conducted by a competent judicial
officer, assisted either by a jyiry or by sworn medical accessors
at the option of the alleged lunatic, but in no case acting upon
his own judgment merely. The cost of every such inquiry
ought to be borne, in the first instance, by the person insti-
tuting the same, but he should be recouped out of the lunatic's
property (if any), whenever the case was satisfactorily estab-
lished."

On pondering this scheme, inchoate and impracticable although
it must be under the existing regime, regrets may arise that the
unfortunate Mr. Dodwell had not been subjected to such a
tribunal. But while, with many of our medical, even legal,
compatriots, we cannot accept the wild extravagance of firing
at a Master of the Kolls, whether with or without blank cartridge,
in order to attract attention?foolish and fool-hardy although
the act unquestionably was?as a proof of derangement; while
many regard the procedure by which this apparently lifelong
captive was examined without the protection or persecution of
experts, as the case might be, as a misadventure of justice or
law; and while we are by no means captivated by the course
frequently pursued by experts, or by the practice of resorting
to experts at all as at present pursued, we shall not enter into
any discussion upon this case. In order to avoid even the
appearance of local bias, or prejudice, and to eliminate the possi-
bility of any suspicion that we are contemplating or speculating
upon the issue of any special cases in this country, the venue
of these observations shall be laid first in another Anglo-Saxon
community, and there among a people, and there in a medical
school distinguished for its wise as well as ardent pursuit of
psychology. In America, Dr Hammond, who is a physiologist of
great energy at least, has advocated views which have not found
much favour with his countrymen, as, for example, in discussing un- provoked murders,perverted affection, and blood thirst, he advo-
cates the punishment of the offender?perhaps on Voltaire's
principle, " pour encourager les autres,"?but chiefly on the
plea of justice to society, and that he is competent to know
the effect of a poignard, a pistol, or garrotting. A very large
number of their jurisconsults, especially Dr Ray, whose work on
the Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity is the best on the subject
in the English language, advocate a more humane and en-
lightened course, and would shudder at the possibility of con-
tributing to hang a lunatic by mistake, or because he was
dangerous, or in virtue of a metaphysical crotchet. The same
authority, while arguing most strenuously that all forms and
phases of insanity should be recognised as symptoms of bodily
disease, and that the extent to which such conditions may affect
the human responsibility should be examined and determined,
in the first instance, by medical. men alone, offers many per-
spicuous and prudent objections to the mode in which this
investigation is at present applied, and to the circumstances
under which the inquiry is conducted. He demurs first as to
the selection of scientific witnesses at random. He exposes the
hurried and unfavourable circumstances?the cell of a gaol, the
eve of the trial, the presence of warders, reporters, friends of
the inculpated?under which the most delicate and difficult
exploration must proceed. He denounces the custom of Retain-
ing, as the transaction may be called, of hired experts on
each side, and to giving viva voce testimony in court. He recoils
from the cross-questioning, confusing, sometimes brow-beating,
of medical witnesses, and all the display of forensic dexterity,
which is intended to obscure the subject under consideration
or to perplex the jury. While admitting the admissibility of
experts in criminal cases, he warns them against system and
system-mongers, and likewise against the difficulties and di-
lemmas suggested to them by counsel. He recommends the
avoidance of particular indications; that the whole history,
conduct, and conversation of the prisoner should be embraced
?even the delicate shades of disposition which can only be
detected through long observation of mental and moral disease,
in conjunction with a comprehensive knowledge of the healthy
mind. He protests against reliance on definitions of insanity,
against dealing with supposed cases, solitary symptoms, with
the possible identity of crime and insanity, with any consider-
ation except the evidence produced in court, upon which,
whatever opinion is formed, should be expressed in scientific
and modest terms. As moral insanity is-still a qucestio vexatcc,
Dr Ray advises that it should be avoided.*

Another contribution has recently appeared upon the subject
of Criminal Lunacy and its collateral issues, in the form of a pam-
phlet by Dr E. Grissom, Superintendent Insane Asylum, of North
Carolina, Raleigh, now in circulation amongst us, and which was
originally published in the American Journal of Insanity.
Stimulated by the sanguinary treatment proposed by Dr Ham-
mond, and by the imminent dangers which threaten the life of
an accused person, whether sane or insane, attending the exist-
ing arrangements in courts of law, lie has written in a strong,
forcible, almost bellicose, style ; but has presented so important,
almost appalling, an array of facts and arguments bearing upon
the controversy, that an epitome seems calculated to bring us
nearer to the conclusion which we have in view. His preamble
is, Chief Justice Shaw, In the case of Rogers, defined the prin-
ciples of expert testimony in the following language:?
" The rule of law, on which this proof of the opinion of wit-
nesses who know nothing of the actual facts of the case is
founded, is not peculiar to medical testimony, but is a general
rule, applicable to all cases where the question is one depending
on skill and science in any particular departments. For instance,
an artist is called in, in order to deliver a judgment on a picture,
a nautical architect on a ship, in general, it is the opinion of the
jury which is to govern, and this is to be founded upon the
proofs of the facts laid before them."

Some questions lie beyond the scope of the observation
and experience of men in general, but are quite within the
observation and experience of those whose peculiar pursuits and
profession have brought that class* of facts frequently and
habitually under their consideration. " In taxing the present
system with laxity and peril, he quotes Sir Fitzroy Kelly as
having affirmed that the records of the Assizes show the execu-
tion of sixty persons in England during the present century, who
are conceded to have been lunatics in the eye of the medical
science of to-day." It is probable that the number cited is a
random estimate, an unconscious exaggeration ; but it is certain,
notwithstanding the principles of humanity and justice, and the
precautions " leaning to mercy's side," which pervade our code
in dealing with criminals of imperfect or impaired intellect,
and especially with those who morally stand rather between
than on either side of health or disease, that many persons have
been sacrificed and others have escaped in consequence of the
clumsy and unphilosophical mode of trial in use. In illustration of
one of these propositions, he adduces the fate of Bellingbam,
" a man whom nobody now doubts to have been insane, who com-
mitted his homicidal acton the 11th May, 1811, was tried,
convicted, sentenced, executed, and his body placed on the dis-
secting table on the 18th, all within one week."

And, in order to show that America, where the proportion
of criminal to non-criminal Lunatics seems to be 1 to 46*03, or
2*15 per cent.,* has an equally sombre and sanguinary record,
he mentions the cases of Cook at Schenectady, of Prescott
in New Hampshire, of Baker in Kentucky, or of Maude in
New Jersey?a man who had actually been confined as a
patient in an asylum and escaped therefrom,?and ironically
points to the cases of Cornell and Wilcox, whose sentences
being commuted, were confined, the one in Auburn, the other
in Clinton Prison, in order to convince the public of the coinci-
dence of insanity with murderous intentions and acts. Dr Grrissom
proceeds to assert that the condition of " an insane person " is
now, and long has been, a matter of great difficulty. At one
time it was held by the courts to be only such an overthrow of
the intellect that the afflicted person must " know no more than
the brutes " to be exempt from responsibility. As science pro-
gressed, the rule has been extended in modern times until it
begins to comprehend within its saving influences most of tnose
who, by the visitation of disease, are deprived of the power of
self-government. Yet the law, in its slow and cautious pro-
gress, still lags far behind the advance of sound psychological
knowledge and medical experience. He regards as a glaring
and monstrous anomaly that individuals who are not experts?in
other words, unqualified by scientific study or observation?are
permitted to speak from their personal knowledge as to the
mental condition of a prisoner. He contrasts with this rude
expedient the practice pursued in France and Germany, where
a criminal supposed to be of unsound mind is submitted, as a pre-
liminary step, to a board consisting of experts, or is sent to an asy-
lum, where both his physical and psychical state may be carefully
watched, where his hereditary tendencies and personal history
can be ascertained, and where all facts connected with his
general character and conduct may be expiscated as to whether
they are confirmatory or not of the plea set up. Such an inno-
vation is very desirable, as it appears that, even in America, the
functions of an expert have become a marketable and a profitable
trade, and that cleverness rather than capacity, or an acquaint-
ance with the diseases of the human mind, are the qualities
chiefly in request. But in order to show that such an undigni-
fied course may be followed on this side of the Channel, he
refers to the petulant remark of a Lord Chancellor, that medical
witnesses invariably frame their opinion in harmony with the
party from which they receive their pay; but he, at same time,
adverts to the extreme caution occasionally exercised in order to
restrict the evidence of medical men to facts, to the exclusion
* Provision for Insane Criminals, by E. C. Dewey, M.D., 1878.
of mere opinions, and adverts to a trial in which Baron Alderson
refused to receive the deposition of a physician who had drawn
his conclusion solely from the evidence in court as to the sound-
ness of mind of a panel. And he enforces the illustration by
advocating protracted observation in preference to single visits
paid for the express purpose of determining the mental health
of an accused person. Such prolonged scrutiny is all the more
essential, as cases often occur, and have been decided before legal
judicatories where derangement was admitted to exist, but where
the question at issue was whether the degree of the disease was such
as to exonerate from the penalties of the law. It is quite obvious
that where trivial or delicate shades of disease, or obscure
departures from correct judgment are concerned?where the
degrees of aberration are collected and measured by laymen,
mingled perhaps with miscellaneous and extraneous matters,
and presented, it may be, hurriedly, and for the first time, to an
expert, and before he has even seen the panel?there is created a
most difficult task, even where great acumen and clinical know-
ledge can be brought to bear upon the subject?in fact, a
dilemna in which the ends of justice may be completely frus-
trated. Impressed by this conviction, paramount importance
should be attached, in addition to signs merely mental, to the
history of a criminal: what has been his parentage, education,
and physical habits ; whether there has been recognised any great
physical or moral change in the man, and, if so, whether it has
been sudden or gradual; what is his organic condition ; and
whether trophic degeneration of any character is discoverable;
whether hereditary influences indicate hysteria, chorea, epilepsy,
syphilitic diathesis, or other profound disturbance of the nerve
centres ; what inconsistencies of opinion are in sharp contrast
with his usual course of belief; whether there are inordinate
ideas of grandeur attributed to his personal abilities or interests ;
whether the bodily functions are performed with regularity,
and he enjoys natural sleep ; and whether there is that due
accord of mental and physical manifestations which long
experience has shown to be in appropriate relation to each
other in the several forms by which insanity has been recog-
nised, and by which there have been efforts at its classification.
Such features are best estimated by the jury when the expert is
called upon to deal with theories propounded by the gentlemen
of the bar, and when, whatever the amount of perversion, or
deviation, there is little more to demonstrate the presence
of disease than some affection of the will; for, although alienists
may be convinced that whenever the volition is abolished so is re-
sponsibility, such is assuredly not the opinions of lawyers. When
brought face to face with such subtle and delicate inquiries it
is absolutely necessary that the expert should either have a
reputation for familiarity with minute distinctions in psychology
to fall back on, or should be able to show, 'while under inquisi-
tion, judgment, ability, and extensive experience. Dr Ofrissom
mentions, while discussing the quastio vexcita, whether epilepsy
precedes or follows insanity, it is mentioned that in the case of an
epileptic criminal who had a fit upon the day he perpetrated the
homicide, and avIio was condemned and hung, that structural cere-
bral changes were found upon dissection. It has been advanced
that if deliberation can be demonstrated to have taken place in
a lunatic before the commission of a crime, he should be held
to be responsible and subjected to punishment. Bnt Dr Grissom,
with everyother alienist, has been familiar with many insane homi-
cides who harboured revenge and malice for many years, and who
ultimately wreaked their vengance upon the unsuspecting victim.
A person so actuated and endowed with an ordinary degree ot
reticence or duplicity might defeat the most cunningly devised
efforts to expose his morbid tendency, unless these were extended
over a long period and conducted by those who were familiar
with similar examples of secretiveness. Deeply impressed by
the cumbrous machinery at present in operation, and by the
great disadvantages under which even the most enlightened and
the most intelligent judges and juries labour,Dr Grissom earnestly
proposes that insane criminals should be remitted either to a
body of scientific inquirers, or that they should be placed for
a considerable time in an asylum where they will be associated
with those recognised as deranged, subjected to hourly inspec-
tion by philosophical, thoroughly trained, and disinterested phy-
sicians, and where every test expedient may be employed in order
to lay bare the innermost recesses of their mind, and to analyse
and winnow peculiarities, oddities, and suspected delusions. But
this wish and hope on the part of the medical profession in the
United States has been to a certain extent realised, and has for
several years been successfully worked in several states. Dr.
Ray is doubtful as to whether medical witnesses should meet
for consultation previous to their appearance in court; but this
natural embarrassment has been summarily and satisfactorily
settled by the Legislature of Maine, which has enacted that
persons stated or suspected to be insane are to be examined
in an asylum, previous to trial by medical men engaged in the
study and treatment of alienation, who are not to be selected
by the counsel on either side, and whose report is to be accepted
in lieu of oral testimony in the witness-box, and in lieu of that
partisan contention, and advocacy, and hard swearing, which we
are sometimes accustomed to lament, and which is, perhaps, in-
evitable when medical men are placed in the position of counsel,
and engaged to refute or defend certain propositions, and
according to Dr Ordonaux, and according to many of liis class
of thinkers, drive a sordid and profitable trade.* In Massa-
chusetts, a commission, including one or more of the asylum
superintendents, decides upon the case of convicts, and their
removal is governed, it is believed, by the Board of State
Charities. These steps are, however, confessedly tentative and
experimental, or, at all events, are very limited in extent, and
it is now proposed to turn to the results ot such a practice in
a country where it has received a full and fair trial, and where,
after the test of years, it seems to have been crowned with
complete success. No attempt will be made to afford either a
profound or prolonged, or even a brief or perspicuous, exposition
of the law in France upon this subject, nor to draw further dis-
tinction or contrasts between what it has effected and what our
own system has left untried, or even in the most remote manner
imitated; our only object being to show the working of such
an arrangement in respect to a few notorious cases as reported in
the best known and best credited medical journal of Paris. Such
a mode of showing what we regard as a grand and philanthro-
pical movement in advance of what has been scarcely thought of
elsewhere, will inevitably be contrasted by our readers with the
characteristics, if we dare not say defects, of our English pro-
cedure ; but we willingly relinquish the invidiousness of initia-
ting the contrast.

J. A.M., one of nine children belonging to a disreputable family,
in which no alienation was known to have occurred, had received
no education and had entered upon the responsibility of a
servant at a very early age. Although she had occupied several
situations before she became connected with the family of Serat,
nothing peculiar was previously observed in her character, but
while so serving, she was accused of having suffocated two
children?one an infant, the other 4 years old.

The prisoner, having been transferred from the gaol to the
public asylum, gave in both places the same responses to the
interrogatories addressed to her, describing in a detailed manner,
without any manifestation of remorse, with perfect calmness and
as if she were describing a common and indifferent event, the
steps and stages of the double murder. . . .

The results of the medical observation were consigned to a
report by Dr Mordret, the medical man of Mans Asylum, of
which the following are the conclusions :?

" It cannot be asserted that no sense of moral responsibility
existed in the accused when putting the children to death, but
it was, at least, extremely feeble. I nm disposed to believe that
* True and False Experts, by Eugene Grissom, M.l)., LL.D., 1878. Passim.
138 WHAT CAN BE DONE WITH CRIMINAL LUNATICS?

slie was partially conscious that she was committing a crime,
although not fully able to appreciate its moral consequences,
nor enabled by the presence of any sentiment in her nature to
resist the homicidal impulse under which she acted.
" In my opinion seclusion will be necessary, rather as a
measure of public safety than as a punishment."
M. was accordingly condemned by the judge to sequestration
until she attained her majority.*

" II. P., the natural child of her mother, assassinated her
aunt by striking her with an iron bar, her parent being accused
of complicity. Immediately after the perpetration both females
were found kneeling before a crucifix in their cottage, the
instrument employed having been thrown below the bed.
Neither at that time nor subsequently did the daughter express
any penitence, pertinaciously asserting that she was impelled
by an evil spirit and by a bad motive. During the various legal
interrogatories to which they were subjected, the mother and
daughter having giving unequivocal signs of derangement, they
were ordered by the Procurator of the Republic to be removed to
the asylum, where they might be subjected to a more rigid
examination. While under medical treatment, when examined
together or separately, they adhered to their original declaration,
and presented the signs of what Legrand de Saulle has desig-
nated the Mania of Double Alienation, or what would, in
England, be pronounced the Madness of Supernatural Agency.
The results of the legal inquiries and psychological diagnosis
were: 1st, that the mother was not present when the murder was
committed, but was joined by her daughter in the cottage
after the fatal blow was inflicted; but that had she been
present, her moral state was so feeble that she could not have
been held responsible.

" 2ndly, That P., the daughter, labouring under the delirium
of persecution, under a consequent irresistible impulse, killed
her aunt.

" An alibi was proved in the case of the mother; who, having
become perfectly tranquil, and able to recognise the real mental
condition of her daughter, although retaining the superstitious
belief so prevalent among our peasants, was set at liberty ;
while the daughter, although displaying no hallucinations, was
detained as a patient in the asylum on the ground that she is
not yet restored to sanity." f
III. The following report contains the whole of the proce-
dure in the case of an individual accused of parricide.

The family of the prisoner, consisting of six members,
appears to have inhabited the country near Mauriac, living- in a
cottage let to the grandfather of B. The father, a dipso-
maniac, and latterly a Dement, was at first secluded for ten years
in consequence of furious menaces against his father and chil-
dren. The majority of the family were labourers, but one was
a travelling vendor of umbrellas. The victim had been a
drunkard of bad character and cruel, extremely parsimonious,
but living on good terms with his grandchildren, the eldest of
whom was a drunkard. On the 7tli of February 1878, the milk-
woman found the deceased lying on the floor of his cottage, with
his head almost separated from his body by some sharp and bruising
instrument, blood, &c., being observed all around. The wounds
and surroundings convinced the neighbours that the murderer
had been animated by great ferocity; it was found that a sum
of money had disappeared from a press, the key of which was
always carried by the old man?a fact showing that the assassin
was familiar with the surroundings. Suspicions at once fell upon
his grandson, B., who next day avowed himself to be the offender,
and that he had stolen 400 francs. The atrocity of the crime, the
insignificant temptation, and the previous correct conduct of B.,
suggested that, if he committed it, there must exist some defect or
derangement of the mind, and accordingly medical experts were
called in. On inquiry it was found that B. had been a spoiled child,
and was well formed and healthy, and that his intelligence was
clouded by taciturnity, laziness, and inaptitude. At school he was
marked by sullenness and mediocrity. He did not join in the
games of his companions, and was scarcely honest, but was
regarded as a good boy. Frivolous and apathetic, the choice of a
trade was difficult, especially as it was doubtful whether he could
enter into the engagement of an apprentice. He was sent to
Alsace in order to be taught umbrella making, but his uncle?his
master?finding him dull, solitary in his habits, and that neither
kindness nor other means effected any change, he was sent back
to his parents as incapable. On joining his family, sullenness,
idleness, and ill-temper were followed by attempts to poison him-
self by benzine, and to a priest whom he sent for he merely
said the words, " Will Grod pardon me?"? and to a physician he
appeared hebete, and denied all cause for his crime, except that
he was a burden to all, and he was then regarded simply as a
suicidal monomaniac. Detected preparing verdigris for a new
attempt to destroy himself, he showed such irritability that a
certificate of insanity was procured. His relatives deponed at this
juncture, to his misanthropy, love of solitude, perfect sobriety
and purity of manners, but limited intellect and disgust with his
occupation. At this stage he complained of headaches, betrayed
great hesitation and restlessness of manners. Rejected for ignorance
by the postmaster with whom he wished to engage, B. re-entered
the school of the religious community where he had formerly been
a pupil. To the brothers he appeared amiable, timid, and discon-
certed by his anticipated failure with the postmaster. He dis-
appeared for a few days, but was quite tranquil on liis return home.
On the 7th February seemed abstracted, but took food with family,
went out to see the hemp dressed, pretended that he was about
to carry news from Alsace to his friends, and was seen 110
more. That evening the crime was committed. Next day he
delivered himself to gendarmes a prisoner; confessed himself
the parricide, describing minutely the tragedy, and declaring
that he was not impelled by a voice or by blood-thirst, but by a
sudden impulse which became deeply rooted in his nature.
Against this incentive neither legal, family considerations,nor the
probable penalty availed anything: he must kill some one, hesi-
tated as to the individual, but his choice was decided by seeing
the servant of his poor relative. Entering the cottage, after a
few words he destroyed his victim, in spite of cries and sup-
plications, with a hatchet, which he found in the cottage. The
theft was an afterthought.

B. was unmoved during this recital. On the eve of the
murder he dined in an inn, was eccentric, danced before a
mirror, and throughout showed an unimpaired appetite. It is
likewise narrated that after the deed he took food at an inn,
purchased articles, changing a bill for 100 francs, and stating
his name and place of abode.

Subsequently he partook of brandy in several inns until he
became drunk. It is obvious, from his inquiries for a carriage,
that he intended to go away; but having been told of the death of
his grandfather he became agitated, went into the country, and hid
himself in a stack of grain in order to avoid the police, and a few
hours afterwards gave himself up to their custody, having been
heard previously to say that he preferred the guillotine to the
temptations to suicide to which he felt himself exposed. In various
examinations, he is sometimes pensive, incoherent; sometimes
restless, demanding liberation in order to go to Africa; some-
times silent; sometimes talkative, demanding a book of natural
history which he had left at home; then avowing his guilt, but
declaring his innocence immediately afterwards.

While in prison one of his companions saw him get up
during the night, hold his head and move it to and fro as if in
pain: to another he acknowledged his culpability, repeated the
story as to the sight of the deceased's servant having suggested
the crime, and spoke of his grandfather's funeral, his cottage,
&c., with but little regret, and seemed to believe that after a
detention of eight months he miu'ht return to Alsace. The
visit of medical men suggested to him the suspicion that
they intended to prove him to be mad, but this he denied. In
their presence he was reserved, shy, and worried; when alone
he played like a child. A letter to his friends betrayed the
same qualities, demanding food, but indicating no affection and
no regret for the act which he had confessed, calling it merely
a bad job. His manifestations were so odd and contradictory
that he was subjected to the examination of two experts, but
their report was so brief and unsatisfactory, that he was ulti-
mately transferred to the prison of Clermont Ferrand, to the
more immediate observation of Dr Hospital, who made the
following report:?" B., 19, muscular, head small, flattened
behind, forehead contracted, no beard, skin feminine-like;
physiognomy childlike and mobile, the aspect suggesting that
of a maniac, idiot, or even imbecile; solitary, walks incessantly
to and fro, murmurs, as if agitated by internal thought, but
obeys mechanically, eats voraciously, and his manners are
abrupt and repulsive; his voice and words rude and harsh, and
only uttered in reply; is restless and spits constantly; may
reply, but incoherently; forgets name and things which no
lunatic ever forgets; pretends that grandfather lives, and that
he has no knowledge of his death ; laughs, murmurs, moves
lips, utters irrelevant words when pressed in the most solemn
manner -y claims prison as his house, beats door in order to get out,
is ignorant of several relations; moral impressions faint or null,
and on speaking of his fate?of penal servitude, of the scaffold,
&c.?no impression was made; reads and writes with difficulty,
the latter incoherently. May 20. Insomnia, face haggard,
manner more restless, sees in imagination Prussian military in
a meadow, evidently a recollection of what happened in Alsace."
Under circumstances so complicated and perplexing, the medical
experts resolved that lie should be transferred to the asylum,
where his conduct and conversation could constantly be sub-
jected to examination, and where he would be provided with a
guardian more trustworthy than his fellow prisoners.

Pleased to return home, as he thought, by railway, he made
no inquiries as to the presence of the gendarmes, entered the
asylum without comment, fraternised with inmates of refrac-
tory gallery, and took no notice of former medical attendant.
Plunged into a shower-bath, with the assurance that it would
be constantly repeated until he became communicative, he
confessed his crime to the attendant saying that the old
man had lived long enough, that he had not thought of
the consequences, but knew what he was doing; that no voice
or other impulse had prompted the act, and that he had
been instigated to simulate madness by some of his fellow-
prisoners. The accused repeated all this to the reporter next
day, but with a gay and careless air, promising to tax his
memory for additional facts. Engaged in work, he was ob-
served, when alone, to stop, gesticulate towards the sky, and so
on, made no attempt; and a letter from home produced no emo-
tion. The following is an account of repeated interrogatories :?
" Q. Having resolved to speak freely, you confess this
crime, and recollect its committal ?

"A. Yes. The idea arose two or three days previously on
seeing my grandfather's servant and recollecting the position of
the axe. The money had nothing to do with it. The idea
returned often. I neither repressed it nor thought of the conse-
quences.

" Q. What was your object?
" A. As I failed in my business and in self-destruction, I
wished to be guillotined.
" Q. Why did you take the money and hide yourself ?
" A. I remembered counting the money, and determined to
take a little; then concealed myself; but returned to deliver
myself up afterwards.
" Q. Have you recalled the bloody scene in dreams ?
" A. No, never.
" Q. Why have you pretended to be foolish ?
" A. I was advised by two prisoners to act so.
" Q. Are you sorry for it ?
" A. (Speaking as if sorry for a frolic.) Yes. I wouldn't
do it again.
" Q. Have you not thought of the despair or dishonour to
your family ?
" A. No. I only thought to carry the idea out.
" Q. On the eve of crime, you visited your father. Had you
any accomplices ?
" A. I had no accomplices, and no suggestions from others.
" Q. If desiring money, why not get it from your relative,
who had been liberal ?
" A. Money was nothing to me.
" Q. Have you been moved by voices ?
" A. I have never heard voices by night or by day.
" Q. You expected an early discharge ?
" A. I try to be content.
" Q. Have you enemies ?
"A. No.
" Q. Are you a millionaire ?
"A. No.
" Q. Have you no fear of being damned ?
" A. No ; never thought of such a thing."

Considering his previous education, his attempt to escape,
his simulation of madness, and that he had a definite object in
the murder, a non-medical witness would consider the accused
as culpable. Such an observer would regard the act as that
of a juvenile malefactor.

After a full consideration of the facts and of the examina-
tions of the accused, the experts have concluded that he is of
unsound mind and the act is that of a madman.

To deal with the first proposition: there was one madman and
two eccentric drunkards in the family, proving the presence of
that most powerful factor, hereditary taint, well marked even in
this youthful offender, and which, as is often the case, is not mani-
fested until moral delinquency appears. This element was
likewise proved by his ineducability and those various eccen-
tricities which betray a pathological condition in the youthful
members of diseased families. Descriptions of such individuals
are actual portraits of B. before his crime.

He may be said to have been shipwrecked by his nonde-
velopment of puberty, and by one of those moral perversions
which so often take its place. His symptoms were identical
with those which have preceded similar homicides and suicides.
The prevention of such outrages must often be attributed to
surrounding circumstances, the act being the first symptom of
insanity, or may have been preceded by suicidal attempts.
Had B. been examined after his suicidal, and before his homi-
cidal attempts, he would have been pronounced insane. Like a
child, the deed at once followed the conception, lie having gone
unarmed. Unprompted by delirium or delusion, the act was im-
pulsive, and may have been long in preparation ; the design to
kill in order to be killed, the choice of a relation as a victim,
and the suggestive sight of the axe, are all proofs of its morbid
origin. His cunning in entering by the back of the house
coincides with that of many lunatics who ingeniously arrange
and combine their plot, which may involve a, prolonged and
frightful butchery. Thus a pusillanimous child became a
relentless murderer, described the deed coolly, and secreted the
weapon used; stole, and then concealed himself. If not insane
he would have adopted all obvious and ordinary means of con-
cealment and escape, and would not have paid out money,
joined his companions, tried to go away, and committed other
consistencies. His theft of only part of the money?the pro-
perty of the family, indeed?was another proof of obscure sense
and conscience. As to his concealment, even epileptics fly
after crime.

His cold passiveness during confession was a part of his
morbid nature. Under supervision in prison, his attitude,
expression, soliloquism, pervigiliam, jerking stolidity, were
noted as reliable signs, while amnesia was noted as a partially
reliable sign of aberration. The confession, extorted from him
b}r the douche in the asylum, that he had pretended insanity by
the advice of fellow-prisoners, does not affect his real condition, as
many real lunatics have so confessed that they were simulating.
His belief in such advice was a sign of credulity, and it is even
doubtful whether advice was given.

B. superficially, might appear, while in the asylum, cured,
although his cure would probably not last beyond the day of his
liberation ; but, to the experienced psychologist, his look, his
gestures, his murmuring, his cunning expression, even, when
lie supposed he was unobserved, liis indifference towards his
mother and to the prospect of perpetual imprisonment, must
be regarded as signs of alienation.

The disease may be described as strongly hereditary, innate
psychical weakness, weakness of intellect and emotions, absence
of moral responsibility and of a conception of the effects of
conduct, melancholia, and sudden impulse.
The conclusions arrived at were :?

1. That B. was insane before, during, and after the
murder.
2. That his antecedents foreshadow insanity.
3. The first prodrome was his natural character, the second
suicide, the third homicide, and the consecutive proofs were the
indications detailed.
4. All his symptoms are to be referred to impulsive
melancholia.
5. He must be held to be irresponsible.
G. He cannot plead in court.
7. Although ameliorated by seclusion, his disease might break
forth anew.
8. He should be placed in an asylum for an indefinite
time.

Guided by this report the court issued an ordonnance de
non lieu, and B. was detained in the asylum, is an assistant
in the infirmary, where he attends to the most degraded patients,
assists in the most disgusting operations, is humane, silent,
stolid; when alone mutters, attitudinises. Has become obese
and discoloured during detention.? Translated and greatly
abridged from the " Annates Medico-Psycholoqiques" May
1878. P. 388. ,
y
