The British Association for the Advancement of Science
=======================================================

291
Art. XI.?.
By J. M. WINN, M.D., M.R.C.P. &c.
Tiie Annual Meeting of this Society, which has been recently
held at Sheffield, was chiefly conspicuous for the revival of the
crude materialistic hypotheses of the Tyndall and Darwin
school. The ex-Presidents, Edwards and Spottiswoode, in past
years, confined themselves in their addresses exclusively to the
discussion of scientific facts ; this year, however, the President
and other members have gratified the taste of a large portion
of the public by parading extravagant theories, as improbable
as they are sensational. Physiological psychology and evolution
have again run rampant, and the prodigies of Bathybius and
brain-cells have again been held up to astonish and bewilder
the ignorant and unwary.
We cannot understand the unqualified encomiums which have
been lavished on Doctor Allman's address by the public press.
The President advanced nothing new about protoplasm, or the
effects of anaesthetics on plants ; and it was premature and un-
warrantable to say that " when a thought passes through the mind
it is associated, as we have now abundant reason for believing,
with some change in the protoplasm of the cerebral cells." The
fact is, we are not yet in possession of data to substantiate such
an assertion ; and it is of the utmost importance that a hasty
opinion should not be formed on a question so closely associated
with the independence of the human mind. This bold assertion
which has been accepted by many as an established truth, is the
keynote of those who style themselves physiological psycho-
logists, and whose endeavour it is to materialise mental
phenomena, and identify mind with matter. In our waking
moments it has never been demonstrated that a thought effects
any change in the protoplasm or ganglionic cells of the brain ;
how utterly inconceivable it is then, that a subtle intangible
thought such as flits across the mind in a dream should produce
the slightest molecular alteration, especially at the very time
when the nervous system is recuperating itself by rest, and is
supposed to be least susceptible to impressions. After making
the above bold assertion, Dr Allman is inconsistent in allowing
that there is no analogy between thought and the phenomena
of matter, and that the " chasm between unconscious life and
292 THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION FOR ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
thought is deep and impassable." In the article on " Mind
and Living Particles" in the last number of the Journal of
Psychological Medicine the same idea was expressed in the
following words: " Any attempt to bridge over the mysterious
region between mind and matter is as hopeless as the en-
deavour to span the space between our earth and the most
distant fixed star."
Having gratuitously assumed that a molecular cerebral
movement is indissolubly linked with a mental conception, the
materialistic psychologist, without hesitation, infers that
thought is a function of the brain. The mind of man which
o
perceives, thinks, and wills, is, next to the Divine Intelligence,
the grandest and most mysterious fact in the universe, and as
such we must humbly accept it.
It is satisfactory to find that Dr Huglilings-Jackson, who
was formerly a firm believer in physiological psychology, has at
length candidly acknowledged that he had been in error. We
quote the following observations from an article of his in the
Medical Press for Sept. 3, 1879 : "In a scientific investiga-
tion of nervous diseases, it is essential to keep distinct psychology
and the anatomy and physiology of the nervous system. . . .
I have been misled by not having seen the distinctness of
physical (nervous) states and psychical states, in my earlier
studies, and thus I feel bold to point out the evil results of
the confusion of the two things." Dr Hughlings-Jackson
must not think that he has acted with extraordinary boldness in
making these remarks. He has not been the first to mount the
breach. The fallacies of physiological psychology were fully
pointed out in an article on " Materialistic Physiology," in
Vol. iii., New Series, of the Journal of Psychological Medicine.
Dr Allman is not strictly logical in defining life as a property
of protoplasm (we prefer Dr Lionel Beale's more explicit term
bioplasm), and we are no more justified in the present state of
our knowledge in saying that life is a property of bioplasm
than we should be in saying that mind is a property of
the brain, because in both cases we find them associated ; and
the close resemblance between the bioplasm of plants and that
of animals, does not necessarily imply that there is no funda-
mental difference which the microscope has not yet revealed to
us. Would any biologists be so presumptuous as to say that
there is nothing in heaven or earth beyond what is discernible
by our senses ? All we know is that a principle or power called
life has been superadded to matter, and the deeply interesting
researches of the microscopists have demonstrated that this power
can be traced carrying on its operations in the minutest portions
of both animals and plants; and although Dr Allman upholds
THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION FOR ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE. 293
that" there is no dualism in life?that the life of the animal and
the life of the plant are, like their protoplasm, in all essential
points identical!?and advocates a strong- family likeness be-
tween a man and the Drosera, merely because it absorbs
nourishment from animal matter, yet he is forced to confess
that there may be a fundamental molecular difference between
animal and vegetable protoplasm. He observes : " To suppose,
however, that all protoplasm is identical where no difference
cognisable by any means at our disposal can be detected, would
be an error. Of two particles of protoplasm, between which we
may defy all the power of the microscope, all the resources
of the laboratory, to detect a difference, one can develop
only to a jelly-fish the other only to a man; and one conclusion
alone is here possible?that deep within them there must be a
fundamental difference which thus determines their inevitable
destiny, but of which we know nothing and can assert nothing
beyond the statement that it must depend on their molecular
constitution.'
Dr Allman speaks of the myth Bathybius as if it were a
reality, and of the law of evolution as if it were an established
general truth, evidently not being aware that some of its warmest
advocates are at length compelled to admit that it is not a de-
monstrated fact. One of them has recently observed, " Perhaps
it would be unwise to regard either pure materialism or the
theory of evolution as amongst the best established facts in
science " ; and it would be more consistent with common sense
and the rules of inductive philosophy for evolutionists to leave
their theory in abeyance, until they have answered the numerous
objections which have been so frequently brought forward in the
pages of the Journal of Psychological Medicine.
Dr Allman, carried away by his unbounded faith in an un-
verified hypothesis, gives the reins to his imagination, and looks
forward to a period when the human intellect will be developed
to such an extent by the agency of the god Evolution, assisted
we presume by the angel Bathybius, that it will be able to com-
prehend 'the great mystery of thought." This day we fear is
very far distant. If we may judge from the reasoning powers
displayed by the scientific men of the present time, it may be
safely averred, that the pure intellect of the philosophers of
Greece would bear comparison with them, and that the human
mind is in much the same state as it was more than two thousand
years ago.
In the biological sections, Sir John Lubbock, who, following
in the footsteps of Dr Watts, holds up to our admiration the
busy bee and the industrious ant, mentions some new and in-
teresting facts regarding the habits of the last-named insect.
PART II. VOL. V. NEW SERIES. X
294 THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION FOR ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
He thinks so highly of its reasoning faculties that he believes,
that if its span of life were not so short, and it had more time
to cultivate its intellectual powers, it would rise in the scale of
civilisation. He considers that animals possess a mind differing
only in degree from that of man.. St. Greox-ge Mivart, Dr All-
man, and the majority of those who were present, were of an
opposite opinion, and held that the difference was in kind and
not in degree. It is a saying as old as the hills that the exclu-
sive pursuit of one study is apt to warp the judgment, and
whilst looking up to Sir John Lubbock and Huxley as two of the
most distinguished naturalists of the day, it is impossible to help
noticing the egregious mistakes they fall into when discussing
questions connected with mental philosophy.
