Report of a Year's Work on Defectives Ik a Public School
=========================================================

By Helena T. Devereux.
The Wharton Combined School, Philadelphia.
On January 15, 1908, a class for exceptional children was
formed in a large school in the foreign slum district of Philadelphia.* It differed from the regular special schools, which have
been established in this city, for some time, in that it consisted
of merely one class room in a regular school and the children
were selected for retarded work and not only for truancy or
other incorrigible habits. All classes from the first to the eighth
grades were given the privilege of placing children in the class.
Only the first, second or third grades had children, however,
whom it was decided were retarded enough to need special instruction. These children were reported not only as being stupid,
but "queer". It is hard to define exactly what was meant by
this term but it did mean that the child to whom it was applied
was singled out from the other children. Other children not
placed in the class were dull and slow but still normal, while each
of these children seemed to have a personality differing from the
normal child and also from the purely, incorrigible type.
From January, 1908 to February, 1909, forty-three children
have attended the class, some for one month and some for the
year, some for both sessions and some for only one. Among
these children thirty-four were of Russian Hebrew extraction and
four of Italian . Of the twenty-six who first formed the class
six were respectably cared for. The others were much neglected, and as they lacked even the pride of the ordinary child,
they were, indeed, a forlorn looking little company, insufficiently
fed and poorly clothed. They ranged in ages from eight to fifteen
years, being from two to five years retarded as compared with
the average child.
*Organized in the Wharton Combined School, by Miss Margaret T.
Maguire, supervising principal, under the direction of District Superintendent Brelsford.?Ed.
(45)
46 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
When the class was organized, attention was of course first
given to the discovery and, where possible, the removal of physical defects. While none of the children were monstrosities
such as some of those found in institutions, all presented some
physical signs of backwardness besides the slow development of
mental powers. Of the physiological defects the open mouth,
abstracted stare, irregular aimless movements of the limbs, tremors of the body and a general lack of coordination were the
common ones. Because of the difficulty of conversing with the foreign parents, practically no definite early, history could be
obtained which could throw any light on the causes of retardation. Our school physician spent considerable time in the examination of the children and besides cases of malnutrition, rickets,
nervous disorders, skin diseases, found the following defects of the
special senses?eye 21, ear 5, throat 15, and nose 14. The parents
of these children were notified by the visitiug nurse and urged
to take the children to city clinics. But it is no small task to
make these parents see the necessity for medical attention. Not
that they mean to be unjust to their children or to deprive
them of the care which is their birthright, but chiefly because
they, themselves are too ignorant to see whither physical degeneration tends. As has been so well said, "They, are the gelatinous
children of albuminoid parents." However, by the time school
closed in June many cases had received attention. No medical
treatment was given for anything but defective special senses.
The cases of extreme neglect, often resulting from marked poverty, were visited by the nurse and advice given, and where possible, assistance was rendered. During the first months I gave
daily talks on hygiene, making them interesting enough to appeal
to the children and insistent enough to have some good effect.
So through these various channels some few ideals of health
and cleanliness were given to both parents and children and thus
the foundation was laid for the pedagogical training.
Before the class was started the idea was that the manual
work (woodwork, basketry, paper, sloyd and sewing) might be a
means of awakening the child and might form a "peg" on which
to hang the real mental training. My only idea was to immediately teach the child the rudiments of school work and so
return it to the regular grade when it was sufficiently advanced.
When I had been with the class for one week I abandoned my
scheme of memory and sense perception, training the intellect
YEAR'S WORK ON DEFECTIVES 47
only as a side issue, and I determined to base all my work on
the development of the emotions. The great need of those children as I read it then was to make them less like little animals
?to instil humanity into them. I could understand then wherein
these children were queer. They, were subnormal or rather freakish in disposition and temperament. They were selfwilled, passionate, malicious, and all their short comings were very
glaring, largely because they had not the sense of their fellows
to see when it was expedient to be "good". With each child I
picked out the moral defect or defects which were most emphasized such as selfishness, untruthfulness, stubbornness and temper,
and determined to overcome them. I tried to make them see in
every way what was the right thing to do, and not only to make
them do it but to make them want to do it. I cared less that
they should learn to write their names or finish an article in
woodwork beautifully than that they should learn truthfulness,
obedience and promptness, and truly they learned to watch, to
listen, and to do. The bearing that this phase of the work, the
training of the emotions, had upon the results cannot be overestimated. It laid the foundation for the other training?the
mental side. I certainly, agree with the educators who say that
when once the real personality of the backward child is revealed
it is more childlike in its trust, kindliness and simplicity than the
normal child. When once they recognized that the teacher was
their friend their attitude towards school life gradually changed.
When definite instruction for the purpose of advancing them in
their school work was given, the children were earnest little workers who wanted to learn. Their previous training had increased
their power of attention so that the teaching was comparatively
easy. I found each child had some serious defect, such as the
inability to do arithmetic, written language, or reading. Even
now when they are returned to the grade, some still have a persistent defect but it does not mar their entire standing. The
result of the year's work has been that twenty-nine of the children have been returned to grade work, most of them to the
same but several to higher grades than those from which they
came. They are doing by. no means the best work but quite satisfactory work with the exception of six children who are doing
really good work. Eight of the children have left, four during
the first month before they could be helped, and later four who
had been somewhat benefitted. Of the remaining six children
48 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
five have been with me for less than four months, and will I expect
shortly return to the grade work. That reduces the number to one
for whom the class seems to have been a total failure. She is a
girl fourteen years old, of marked physical degeneration, whose
home influence is too pernicious for any school discipline to overcome. Before entering the class, this girl's physical welfare had
been more throughly looked after by the school doctor and nurse
than of the other children.
This class has in one year been a blessing to thirty-three
children, children who, though never doomed by nature to spend
their lives in an institution, would surely have drifted to one,
which in some cases might easily have been a prison, had not
some interest been taken in them. This class was begun amid
many difficulties, there being no public funds provided for the
necessary materials. Then too, the work was marred by my
inexperience. The success of the class, especially as far as the
regeneration of the boys is concerned, has been achieved largely
through the wood work which was the basis of manual, emotional
and mental training, and that was made possible by the generosity
of a Philadelphia merchant. May my last word be a plea for more
classes in our city, properly equipped, where the three-fold motto
shall be interest, persistency and encouragement to aid in making
useful men and women out of "the least of God's little ones."
