Progress A1std Retardation of a Baltimore Class
================================================

:Author:  Charles A. A. J. Miller, M.D.,
Principal, Group S, Baltimore, Md.

Much has been written and more has been said about retardation in the public schools throughout the country. Many deductions have been made, many conclusions drawn that do injustice
to schools in general, and to certain school systems in particular.

The old adage, "Comparisons are odious," has much truth in it
when applied to measurements of the merits and demerits of school
systems. When men like Professor Thorndike, Mr. Ayres, Superintendent Greenwood, and Dr Cornman make comparisons, the
educational world is stirred to words, more often than to deeds.
In consequence of such agitation the public is aroused, is led to
think that the money appropriated for education is uselessly spent
or at least badly invested, that there should be radical changes in
the system, because it appears that only certain children, generally
the sons and daughters of the well-to-do, are getting the full benefits of public education. We do not wish to undervalue the work
that has been done by men of high purposes and great abilities like
Professor Thorndike and others. We wish to point out that the
data from which they have drawn inferences are very unlike, and
that all their carefully estimated allowances for errors and omissions in necessarily imperfect records cannot make the results of
their researches absolutely correct and reliable. Indeed in fairness to these men it must be said that they do not claim perfect,
but only approximate results.

If for instance the schools of Baltimore, a seaport, are to be
compared with those of Columbus, Ohio, an inland capital city
attracting to itself thousands of the best citizens of a dozen or
more smaller Ohio cities and towns, we must take into consideration the kind of American population attending the respective
schools, the almost complete absence of private schools in the latter
city and the abundance of them in the former, the proportion of
foreign elements, the great number of illiterate colored people in
the former as against a much smaller number more intelligent in
the latter, the compulsory attendance law and its enforcement, and
finally the opportunities and requirements for promotion in the
two cities. Even when all these factors are duly considered, it will
be admitted that the school statistics furnished are very incomplete, and deductions made from them can only indicate that time,
energy and opportunities for good are being wasted, and that there
is room for improvements and reforms. Until more attention is
paid to accurate statistics, and more money is spent to collect
them, educators will continue to infer, sometimes correctly, sometimes incorrectly, but always approximately.
I have been fortunate to have in one of my schools the record
of a class of forty-eight pupils. Before presenting the results of my
study, I wish to say that all the statements that will be made have
been verified. In September, 1901, there were in the first grade
of this school four classes, containing 182 pupils, of whom about
seventy (30.5 per cent) were repeaters. The rolls of three classes
were lost or destroyed; those of one class were saved. According
to this record, verified by the school register kept by the principal,
this class had forty-eight pupils, of whom five were repeaters, the
very weakest of the previous year's beginners. These five obviously belong to the year 1900, and cannot form part of the basis
upon which to reckon percentages in our investigation. It is
nevertheless interesting to know what has become of these five,
retarded one whole year, because at that time there was but one
opportunity for promotion, at the end of the scholastic year in
June. Of the five, one girl died while attending the second grade;
one left the fourth grade in May, 1906, on account of the protracted illness of her father; one boy was transferred to another
school and left the fourth grade there to go to work in his father's
blacksmith shop and to attend night school; another boy left the
fifth grade in 1906, worked for a while, and lost his life by
drowning.

I shall now take up the forty-three pupils of 1901. Inquiries
made as to the occupations of the parents show that four are tailors,
of whom two have shops; one is a druggist; two have barber shops;
three are bakers; two are plumbers; three are cabinet makers;
one is a musician; three are widows; five are machinists; one is a
tuner, one a carver; five are saloon keepers; one is an electrician,
one a shoe cutter, one a traveling salesman, one a buyer, one a
junk dealer; three have grocery 'stores; one is a carriage maker,
and one a painter. Thirteen fathers were born in this country,
thirty in Germany; of the thirteen, ten are of German descent.
During the period of almost eight years, twenty children
changed residences once, four changed twice; nine of the twentyfour did not change school on account of removal, and fifteen
got transfers to other schools, three being transferred twice. We
find therefore that 56 per cent changed residences, and that such
changes caused 35 per cent to be transferred to other schools. It is
easy to see that retardation would result. Two children were registered as living one square from school, ten two squares, five three,
one four, two five, three six, five seven, six eight, two ten, one eleven,
one twelve, one thirteen, and four fourteen squares. Ten who
lived from one to three squares away, moved and were transferred
to other schools; the five other transferred children lived more than
five squares from school. This record of distances shows that the
school is not supplied from the immediate neighborhood, which
has been encroached upon by business and boarding houses, by
colored people, and by Italians, Lithuanians, and Russians. Of
the forty-three pupils two were five years of age, thirty-one were
six, nine were seven, and one was eight years old. Both the five
year olds subsequently lost a year, and one left school after reaching the fourth grade. Seventy-two per cent were six years old, the
other 28 per cent including the five, seven, and eight year olds.
Of the forty-three pupils, twenty-eight were boys, and fifteen
girls. One girl is now a half year ahead of time in her course,
and in addition made one year on her high school course. Seven
children, four girls and three boys, are in the eighth grade A, and
two of them may make one year in the high school. Three, one
girl and two boys, are in eighth grade B. Seven, five boys and
two girls, are in seventh grade A, and three boys are in seventh
B. One girl and one boy are in sixth grade A; two boys and one
girl are in sixth B. Two boys are in fifth A. Five children, four
boys and one girl, are in fourth A. One girl died while in the
second grade. Eight children (18.6 per cent) left school to go to
work, and one left the city for West Virginia. Thirty-three (76.7
per cent) are attending school; one of these is in a private
school, and one in a county school.

Of the forty-three pupils, therefore, if we include the one girl
in the high school as being "on time," we have ten children (23
per cent) on time and thirty-three (77 per cent) retarded. Of the
number on time, eight are in school, one left the eighth grade in
October, 1908, and one left the sixth grade B, having gained onehalf year. Of the retarded pupils, twenty-five are still in school,
and of these

3 lost 1/2 year 3 lost 2l/2 years
7 " 1 " 2 " 3 "
3 " iy2 years 5 " 4 "
2 " 2 " ?
PROGRESS AND RETARDATION 139
Eight have gone to work, left the state, or died, and of these
lost 1 year in 2 years of school
a a a g a
u ? ? g u
" 2l/2 years " 7 "
" 1 year " 6l/2 "
" 2 years " 7 "
2 " 3 " " 7 "
Eleven of the twenty-five retarded pupils still in school are among
the transferred, a significant fact.

Looking into other causes of retardation besides removal and
change of schools, we discover the following facts. Two children
lost a year on account of sickness. Some would have lost a half
year less, if earlier in their course they had had semi-annual
opportunities for promotion, as is shown by the fact that six children were prevented from losing a half year more, by the halfyearly promotions in the latter part of their course.
Of the twelve children who lost from two to four years in
their course, we know that the loss was due to sickness or physical
disability in two cases; to very irregular and interrupted attendance in two cases; to removal to the country and subsequent
return to the city in one case; to total lack of application (due
to lack of home discipline caused by death of father and remarriage of mother) in one case; and to "natural stupidity" in six
cases. Another cause for retardation is to be found in some instances where English is not the mother tongue.
Of the eight at work, two had to leave on account of separation in the family; one to help in a restaurant; one, employed as
a bundle boy, to help support the family, the head of which was
out of work for two years; one, a shuttle boy, had to give up school
because his father died; one girl left in the eighth grade to take
a position in a store, because her father was out of work a very
long time; one left the seventh grade to attend catechetical instruction, and to assist her mother at home.
Three months after these forty-three children had entered
school, they were rated, in respect to their mental capacity, as
1, 2, or 3. Only those who were marked 1 are now in the eighth
grade, A or B. In the seventh grade A we find four l's and two
2's; all in the seventh B are 2's. Those who were marked 3,
if in school at all, are in the lower grades. Only two of the
original l's are in the sixth grade. This indicates that mental
slowness is certainly detected in the lowest grade; slow pupils
do not make up their deficiencies in the higher grades; and few
good pupils retrograde as they move up.

Inquiring into the future plans of these children of the original
class now in the eighth grade B, seventh A, and seventh B, I find
that it is almost certain these will finish the elementary course;
two in the sixth A will probably stay to finish the eight years'
work. If these numbers are added to the number now in the
high school and the eighth grade A, we have twenty-three (53.5
per cent) who will probably get the full benefit of the elementary
course. > If we regard this as slightly too high a figure, and cut it
down to 50 per cent, we have left 50 per cent who do not reach
the secondary school, of which number 21 per cent get as far as the
sixth grade or higher, and 27 per cent leave school below the sixth
grade. Of this number one child died and none* left below the
fourth grade. In my opinion this is a good record.

The figures and percentages plainly show:

1. The more frequent the opportunities for promotion, the
less time will be lost by the retarded pupils.
2. Permanency of residence and consequent continuous attendance in the same school increase the chances for promotion.
3. Parents in average circumstances aim to give their children
eight years of schooling, unless death or other untoward causes
interfere.

4. From 20 to 30 per cent of the children do not reach the
sixth grade.

5. Those who do not reach the sixth grade, and those who
have to leave before the completion of the eighth grade, ought to
have an opportunity to get some training for the industries which
they will very probably enter.

In this investigation we had to deal with a school attended
almost exclusively by children of German extraction, whose parents
on the whole are far from being in easy or even comfortable circumstances. We believe that if a similar study were made in a
better neighborhood, a better showing would be recorded, and it
would be found that as many as 70 per cent get the benefits of
the entire elementary course, 40 per cent of that number being
on time.
