Orthogenic in the Public Schools
==================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. III. No. 2. April 15, 1909.

An Editorial.
The Psychological Clinic publishes this month with peculiar satisfaction reports of the work accomplished with special
classes by Miss Doll in Cincinnati and Miss Devereux in Philadelphia. We wish to make plain our reasons for believing that
the publication of these articles is of special inportance at this
time for the satisfactory development of the study and educational
treatment of backward children.
Problems connected with retardation and degeneration have
already won a place in the consideration of the trained economist,
sociologist, psychologist, and medical expert. Continuous scientific progress may with certainty be predicted, which will lay bare
the social and physical causes of retardation and degeneration, and
their preventive and curative treatment.
This journal not only desires to encourage scientific investigation, it seeks also to gain the cooperation of the general public in
solving the problems which fall within its chosen province. The
community must be made to respond to something more than the
sensational elements of these problems. A campaign of education
must acquaint the general public with the specific causes which
are active in producing abnormal development in the individual
and the race. The public is keenly alive to what promises a return,
either in individual or social improvement. A social and philanthropic impulse, backed in many cases by strong religious enthusiasm, is in the last resort the motive power which drives to success
even work of a specifically scientific character.
It is therefore the prevention and cure of mental deficiency
and defect which must be made to hold the centre of attention.
To gain this advantage, we proposed the word orthogenics, as the
name of a science which concerns itself with the restoration of
those who are retarded or degenerate to a condition where normal
development becomes a possibility. This word we believe ade(29)
30 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
quately defines the field of work which The Psychological
Clinic has made its own, and at the same time reveals the social
motive which impels the cultivation of this field of investigation.
This journal has published a number of individual histories,
prepared in most instances by those who have had the equipment
of trained psychologists. These we hoped would set a scientific
standard for reporting work of this kind, as well as reveal what
could be accomplished through expert training.
The prevention and cure of retardation and degeneration on a
large scale is beyond the power of the representatives of any branch
of science. It must be undertaken by society, and above all by
the teacher in the school room. We find in these reports of Miss
Doll and Miss Devereux the first fruits of the work of skilful
teachers in the public schools. No one can read these articles
without recognizing the psychological insight shown by these
teachers in approaching their problem, and without being convinced that a high degree of success has rewarded their efforts.
The school room is a psychological laboratory, and the successful
teacher must be trained in psychological method. It would be
fruitless to demand that either the community or the grade teacher
shall recognize at one stroke the necessity for a change in mental
attitude, which means the turning of attention from questions of
pedagogical method to what clinical psychology may be able to
reveal concerning the individual peculiarities of children. The
grade teacher is interested in teaching reading, writing, and arithmetic. The special teacher must be interested in developing the
individual child. We consider it unfortunate that grade teachers
should be asked to give attention to individual cases. In the
grades, attention must ever be centered upon the curriculum,
pedagogical methods, and the result as shown through class promotions. There is a problem of mass instruction, and there is
an entirely different problem of individual development. These
two should be kept separate and distinct, and the public schools
should never give up the older ideals of mass instruction. Clinical
psychology and the special teacher will not supplant the more
general features of the public school; they, will only supplement
what is already to be found in the schools, in order to make the
work effective in meeting special conditons.
We see in these reports of Miss Doll and Miss Devereux a
still more significant fact for the progress of clinical psychology.
The special ungraded class must be the laboratory of a clinical
psychologist. The teacher of the special class must have an adeORTHOGENICS. 31
quate and satisfactory training in psychology, and must moreover
possess originality, in solving actual conditions for which she never
could have been prepared beforehand, and finally she must be
able to make her experience and results available for others. The
solution must be worked out in the special class room as it were
from the bottom up, and not from the top in the psychological
laboratory, of a university.
If the work, which doubtless many teachers are doing elsewhere than in Cincinnati and Philadelphia, is to have a vigorous
effect in changing educational opinion and in serving as an example, the teachers who are actually doing the work must become
articulate. They must be able to express in suitable language
their observations of the conditions which they find, to state the
methods which they have employed, and to report the modification
in mental and moral character which they have succeeded in effecting. The Psychological Clinic believes that it has no more
important service to render the community than to inspire teachers
like Miss Doll and Miss Devereux to make reports such as they
have prepared, and to furnish the medium through which their
methods and results may be made a matter of common knowledge.
Men and women of scientific training, such as Ayres, Falkner, Smith, Heilman, and Town, have been contributing to this
journal results which are making clear many phases of the problem
of retardation; superintendents who have found it possible to do
original work while actively, engaged in their profession, like
Bryan, Twitmyer, Van Sickle, Martin, the Indiana superintendents, and others, are establishing a basis of fact upon which
the problem may be worked out in various communities. Scientific and administrative work is only preliminary to the real work,
which must be done in the school room. In every school with an
enrolment of a thousand children there should be found a special
class. We believe that the problem has been worked out far
enough for us to be practically certain that the special school cannot
solve the peculiar problem of the backward child. It is to be
solved only through a special ungraded class in close association
with graded classes. The remarkable results of Miss Doll and Miss
Devereux in returning to the grades children whom they had had
under training for only a brief period, are convincing on this
point.
If a special class is to be formed, it is necessary first of all
to organize it under conditions which make success possible. The
teachers who are assigned to this work must have received the
32 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
proper training. Miss Devereux's success is as much a credit to
the Philadelphia Normal School, where she was trained, as to
her own skill and ability,. The Philadelphia Normal School, under
Miss Prichard and Miss Iiutchin, has probably, as progressive a
course in psychology as can be found in any normal school in this
country. An official visitor from abroad, who was examining on
behalf of his government the normal schools of the United States,
pronounced the course in psychology at the Philadelphia Normal
School the best which he had seen. There is only one foundation for satisfactory work in this particular field, and that foundation is laid by a sound psychology.
The teachers of the special class should have had for a time at
least some experience in teaching primary grades. The charge
of a special class should come to them as a promotion. After due
regard has been given to training and experience, these teachers
should be let alone by their principals and superintendents to work
out their problem as best they can in the light of their training,
their experience, and their natural abilities. For many years to
come, the young men and women who graduate from our better
normal schools will be more competent to deal with the problem
of the backward child than will those who are to be found in
administrative positions of authority, whose training of necessity
has been along the lines of an older psychology, and a more conventional pedagogy.
If these teachers are to be promoted to special class work
because they have enjoyed special psychological training, and their
work in the grade has marked them out as teachers of ability, this
promotion should carry with it an increase in salary. The special
classes will be a failure Unless the teachers of the special class
receive the highest salary that is being paid to a grade teacher.
The work is difficult, it requires ability and training, and the
special class teacher should become the school's center for the
diffusion of new knowledge gained through experimentation in the
special class room.
These teachers must not be overloaded with large classes.
From fifteen to twenty-five is the largest number that may safely be
assigned to one teacher. The class must be equipped with material
for hand work, because it is through the use of the hands that attention and moral character may be trained. All, this is expensive. The
per capita cost of the work which Miss Doll and Miss Devereux
are trying to do must be from three to five times the per capita cost
of teaching a child in the grade. There is no use trying to conceal
ORTHOGENICS. 33
this fact from boards of education. These are usually composed
of men of business insight, and their first question is rightly
enough, what is the cost, and why should this expensive venture
be undertaken ? Boards of education must themselves be made to
go to school. The material for tlieir instruction is to be found in
such articles as that of Mr. Ayres in this number of Tiie Psychological Clinic, on "The Cost of the Repeater," which shows that
fifty-five cities are spending from 5 to 30 per cent of their school
funds on children who are doing the same work for the second,
third, or fourth time. Facts like these must in time convince even
boards of education that the calculation of the per capita cost is
only the first step in forming an estimate of the relative value of
school expenditures. Falkner and Thorndike have shown that
owing to elimination only a small percentage of children are getting
an education in our public schools. From 25 to 50 per cent pass
out of the school uneducated if we believe that an education
involves graduation from the primary school. The per capita cost
may be kept so low that we fail to attain the object for which the
schools are supposed to exist.
The problem of the schools, therefore, is to educate, which
means to-day to foster normal mental, moral, and physical development during the most important years of the child's life, from six
years of age until early adolescence. The results which The Psychological Clinic is placing before the community show how
large a percentage of these children fail of normal development.
ISTor shall we rest with a mere presentation of the facts. We must
find the proper methods for restoring these children to the normal
path of development.
To-day we are feeling our way, and this is not the least interesting feature of the study of orthogenics. By some minds the
well trodden path is favored, to others it is pioneer work, the
blazing of a new path through the forest, the climbing of an unexplored mountain, which makes the strongest appeal. Even
statistics appear no longer dry and hopeless when one plods through
them without knowing where he will come out, and reaches such
unexpected results as have been obtained by Bryan, Cornman,
Ayres, and Falkner. The pioneer work which must be done by
the teachers of the special classes, presenting constantly new
problems and unexpected results, must fill those engaged in the
work with an enthusiasm which will surely be contagious to all
whose educational interests have not become too thoroughly conventionalized.
