Starvation and Mental Development
==================================

By C. Homek Bean,
Terre Iiaute, Indiana.
It is generally accepted that the conditions of infancy and
early childhood may have an effect, favorable or unfavorable, upon
the entire subsequent development of the child. It has been main-
tained, for example, that the child learns more in the first five
years than in all the rest of his life. It is seldom, however, that
the arrest of mental development which may follow upon adven-
titious physical conditions is so well established as in the case of
a boy who came under my observation at the age of sixteen years
and two months. According to the physician who was in charge
at the time of birth, this child, whom we shall call Elmer, was
born an entirely normal infant. The mother did not nurse the
child, but fed him upon one of the well-known manufactured
foods for babies. He assimilated so little of this food that growth
was stopped, and his body wasted away until he was little more
than a skeleton. When the boy was six years of age, the family
physician arrived at the conclusion that this malnutrition and
arrest of development was due to starvation alone. At this time,
according to the testimony of the parents and friends, the child was
a suffering infant, as helpless, small, and wordless as when a
month old. As soon as the cause of his condition was known, he
was taken to the country and fed upon the fresh milk of one
cow. The return to health was immediate and growth began soon
afterwards.
When my investigation was undertaken, Elmer was well pro-
portioned, and almost as tall and heavy as the average boy of his age.
A rigid medical examination found him in excellent health. He
gave no evidence of physical deformity, or asymmetry. His gene-
ral appearance betrayed no lack of normal mental development.
His voice was normal and well modulated. His manner was
pleasing and his conduct gave his parents and teachers no con-
cern, but he was not able to do the work of the sixth school year,
although he had spent five years in the public schools, one year
(78)
STARVATION. 79
in a private school, and two years in the practice school con-
nected with the School of Education of the University of Chicago.
At this point in his development I was asked to give him
individual instruction as a private tutor. To assist me in my work
and to determine his mental status in comparison with that of
other boys of his age, I undertook a series of experimental tests.
Elmer's extreme sensitiveness on the subject of his backward-
ness, made it necessary for me to conduct all my experiments as
lessons. This fact, combined with the pressure of my university
work at the time, and the early departure of his family for the
summer vacation, limited the amount of data Avhich I was able
to obtain and made it impossible to apply exact methods in some
experiments. The mode of procedure employed determined: 1.
His ability to receive impressions, to remember and correlate his
past experiences, and to express himself; 2. What he had al-
ready learned, what were his interests and what lie could do; and
3. The opinions of his teachers and parents concerning his physi-
cal and mental capacities and the history of his physical and
mental life. This order was followed in the conduct of my in-
vestigation, because I believed that the opinions of his parents and
teachers should supplement but not bias the experimental investi-
gation. In order to secure norms of comparison, two average boys
from the sixth grade, and two boys of his own age were selected
to be tested with him in certain of these experiments. The present
report concerns itself with the mental condition which was re-
vealed through the application of these methods of inquiry.
We shall first consider the condition of his sense organs,
because their sensitivity determines the amount and character
of the response which he could be expected to make to the stimu-
lation of the external world.
Sensitivity of touch was measured by the two-point threshold
upon the distai phalanx of the index finger of the left hand. The
threshold was found to lie between 2 and 2.5 millimeters and evi-
denced normal sensitivity.
Each eye was tested separately for distinctness of vision. An
oculist's chart was placed twenty feet from him, and he was
asked to tell what he could see. Title pages of books printed in the
same size of type used on the chart were also employed in like
manner in order to make sure that his spelling of the chart was not
due to some previous experience with one like it. He read one
line more than can be read by the normal eye. A second test
was made by hanging on a wall a white card on which had been
80 T1IE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
drawn two parallel vortical black lines, one centimeter long, and
one millimeter apart. The subjects were required to approach
the card very slowly, and to tell what they saw. Elmer saw two
lines at a distance of eleven decimeters. The average distance
at which the two boys of his age were able to see the two lines
was, with small variation, nine decimeters. A single horizontal
black line two centimeters long and about one quarter of a milli-
meter wide was drawn on a white card to test clearness of vision.
Elmer approached within G.5 meters of this card before lie conld
see that the card had a line on it. The average distance for the
other boys was 5.42 meters. These tests give evidence of slight
hypermetropia in each eye. ISTo test was made to find whether the
retina? were in a healthy condition, but as no pain in the eyes
was experienced after studying several hours on dark days, it is
to be presumed that they were approximately normal. Judging
from tests with the well-known figures consisting of concentric
circles and of radiating lines, no astigmatism of any significant
degree could be found in either eye. The boy sorted the Holmgren
skeins in such a manner as to show no signs of color-blindness.
He used water colors with sufficient accuracy to indicate that his
judgment of color was excellent. The abnormality in Elmer's
eyes was therefore too small to hinder perceptibly his acquisition
of knowledge.
Elmer's threshold of least intensity of sound was found by
the watch test to be 1.02 meters, and was practically equal in the
two ears. This was three decimeters less than, the average of the
thresholds of the two boys of his age. Judgment of pitch was next
tested. He thought that the two lower strings of a guitar were
tuned at the same pitch, when they gave beats of five per second.
As only one trial of this kind was made, the result had naturally
little value. Simple German ballads, which ho had never before
heard, were sung to him, and after hearing them once, he could re-
peat them without an error. When some of these tunes were modi-
fied so as to make them less melodious, lie reproduced them without
hesitation. But when a tune which he had once heard was slightly
altered, he objected. This gave sufficient evidence of fairly good
judgment of pitch.
Tests in rhythm with auditory stimuli were made by means
of a metronome. The instrument was placed on a piece of felt
in a box, the lid of which was so padded that it could bo opened
and closed without noise. Elmer was seated with his back toward
the box. The lid was raised to give accent to certain clicks of the
STARVATION. 81
metronome. Thus the most usual accents in music, those of 2-4,
3-4, 4-4 and 6-8 time were given. But he insisted that the metro-
nome merely said, "Click, click, click, click." His attention was
then called to the accented beats in 4-4 time until he could indi-
cate them. But this did not seem to aid him in discovering the
accents in the other kinds of time. Elmer seemed, therefore, to
be quite below the average in feeling for rhythm.
The examination of the higher stages of the knowledge-gain-
ing process involved an investigation of imagination, memory,
attention, and interest.
To determine Elmer's type of imagery, words and objects
were used which were famliar to him in form and meaning. Seve-
ral lists of twelve words each were prepared, and all the words of
each list were read to him at a time, or he was permitted to read
the words once on a brief exposure. He was then asked to repro-
duce all the words that he could remember. When these words
were repeated orally, he was able to remember eight words having
an auditory content, six words of visual content, two words of
motor content but none without any sensuous imagery. When
written words were exposed long enough to be read once, he
remembered seven auditory, five visual and two motor words.
Thirty small objects were exposed long enough for him to see
each object once. He remembered only nine of them. In so far
as a conclusion can be drawn from these few data, Elmer remem-
bered auditory words better than visual words; words that he had
heard, better than those he had seen ; he remembered visual words
better than visual objects.
That his memory was assisted very slightly by meaning, is
shown in his remembering broom as brooh, and lamp as lamb.
The small part that meaning played in his memory processes was
also evident in the fact that he committed a jargon of words with
rhyme and rhythm as readily, as he committed a stanza of equa?
length with meaning. The knowledge that Elmer acquired most
easily was deficient in meaning. For example, he learned pure
mathematics as readily as the average child; but he could do noth-
ing with its applied form. He could not state reasons for steps
in a process, but could follow reasons if not too difficult. He could
learn only the most mechanical elements of English grammar,
and could not write intelligently about the most familiar objects.
He spelled poorly, as did other children in the School of Education,
because spelling was taught there only by criticism of written work,
and never by drill. However, he learned spelling with surprising
82 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ease when taught in the usual way. He prepared four lessons
each day in an eighth grade spelling book, and did this so well
that frequently, he did not miss a word for five days. Several
stories of history, interesting to children, were read to him. The
only parts of these stories that he could repeat were a few names.
Two or three out of perhaps a dozen events in each story were
recognized by him when the stories were told again. People were
to him inexplicable, vacillating, inconsistent. He could not antici-
pate what a person would do under any set of controlling circum-
stances. The same was more or less true with respect to all physi-
cal objects except plants.
Through some unknown influence, he had for about a year
shown an increasing interest in plants. He knew the uses of the
various organs of plants. He had learned the names, the time of
blooming and the conditions of growth of nearly all the plants
commonly sold in green-houses, of many wild plants, and of forty
or more of those in Washington Park. In nearly every, window
of his home were potted plants of various kinds which he had
bought with his spending money. The yard about the house gave
abundant evidence of the same interest. His ignorance of ordi-
nary animals contrasted strangely with his knowledge of plants.
Geography interested him only in so far as it referred to plants.
Maps meant nothing to him; for he could not comprehend anything
that he had not seen. The larger part of a list of questions re-
garding the sources, nature, and uses of about two hundred com-
mon objects drew forth such answers as, "I don't know," "Wool
grows on the wool plant," "Pocket-knife blades are made of silver,"
"Butter is made of lard and soap," "I don't know." At first
Elmer read blunderingly even the most simple reading matter. He
hesitated over words that he could read rapidly when he was urged
to hurry. He soon learned to pronounce words readily, but he
could make his reading expressive only to a limited degree. He
could get little meaning out of simple reading matter. Hence he
could put little meaning into it. These observations and ex-
periments point toward the conclusion that Elmer comprehended
meaning with difficulty, and that therefore meaning could givs
him little assistance in memory or in any other process.
Untrained attention is a common cause of failure in school
work. In the study of attention, the subjects crossed out the a's
in a page of printed matter. Elmer and six other children of
fourteen years used the same prose selection. An effort was made
in one portion of the experiment to keep the speed constant and
STARVATION. 83
to allow the accuracy to vary, and in another portion to keep ac-
curacy at a maximum and. to allow the speed to vary. But this
effort was unsuccessful. Elmer made one omission for every 16.5
a's that he marked out, and the others made one omission for
every 3.26 a's marked out. Elmer crossed out 55.6 a's per minute.
The others crossed out, on an average, 14.2 as per minute.
Elmer's attention gave much greater speed and accuracy than the
average speed and accuracy of the others.
The capacity, for self-expression was measured in terms of
accuracy, rate, and force of movement, and in terms of fatigue.
Accuracy of movement was tested in the following manner. A
sheet of smooth white paper with ruled lines nine millimeters
apart, was tacked on a thin board of the same size. A ruler was
fastened over the paper so that its true edge was on one of the
ruled lines. The board was placed on a table in such a way tliac
the true edge of the ruler was toward the right and parallel with
the arm used in writing. The subject was then told to begin each
stroke with the pen on the paper and against the edge of the ruler,
to move the pen to the right, and to stop it on the first ruled line.
Two strokes were made per second. A rest of one minute was
allowed after each one hundred and twenty strokes. The fingers
and wrist functioned about equally in these movements. Each
boy made six hundred strokes. The boys of Elmer s age suc-
ceeded in stopping on the line in 29 per cent of their strokes, the
sixth grade boys in 17 per cent of their strokes, and Elmer in 26
per cent of his strokes. The board was then fastened to the wall
at such a height that when a boy stood up to write, his elbow and
shoulder functioned about equally in the movement. As these
joints are accustomed to a wider range of movement, the strokes
were to be stopped on the second line. The correct strokes were,
for the older boys 18.1 per cent, and for the younger boys, 11 per
cent, but for Elmer only 3.27 per cent of the total number of
strokes.
Thus Elmer appeared to have very poor control over the
larger, centrally located muscles, which are involved in this move-
ment of the arm. The complex motor act of throwing at a target
was undertaken as a further study of the control of the shoulder and
arm muscles. Quantitative results could be obtained from the throw-
ing of the other four boys, but none from that of Elmer, because
he could seldom hit a target one meter by one meter in size, at a
distance of four meters. Another indication of the relatively
greater lack of control over the larger muscles than over the smaller
84 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ones was found in his drawing. In some of his drawing lessons
his arm was stationary on the table, and his fingers and wrist
performed the movements. Other lessons were conducted in the
parks with only, a pencil and a drawing pad. In this case the
elbow and shoulder played the principal parts in the movements.
A great difference was evident in these two sets of drawings. His
smooth, legible penmanship also showed, as do the facts recited
above, that the wrist and fingers were under much better control
than the elbows and shoulders. His work in manual training
gave additional proof of the same difference. He could draw
plans, and mark off his work as well as the other boys who were
working near him. But he could not keep a back-saw within one-
sixteenth of an inch from a line, or an ordinary saw within much
greater limits. Around a nail that he had driven could always
bo seen a display of hammer marks, some of them as much as
three inches from the nail. Weaving and paper-cutting, in which
the fingers did most of the work, were tasks in which he excelled.
In the gymnasium, where the shoulder muscles are the most used,
practically every exercise that he undertook was a failure. Every
evening and every Saturday the boys played ball on vacant lots
near his home. But even when there were not enough boys for a
team, Elmer was not allowed to play, because his slow, awkward,
weak movements hindered more than they helped the game.
Power of movement, and fatigue, were tested by means of the
dynamometer. His right hand registered twenty-eight kilograms,
and his left hand twenty-four kilograms. The average readings
for sixteen year boys in the Chicago schools arc, for the right hand
forty-four kilograms, and for the left hand thirty-seven kilograms.
This indicates that Elmer was 35.8 per cent weaker than average
boys of his age. When dynamometric records were taken every
half minute, fatigue decreased his grip within the first ten minutes
nearly three times as fast as it did for the other boys of his age.
His readings also showed wide, spasmodic variations duo to lack
of motor control. In order to discover whether any of these motor
phenomena were due to chorea, Elmer was told, during a geogra-
phy lesson, to extend his right hand toward the east and his left
hand toward the west, and to tell in which direction he was facing.
There were no asymmetries in the positions of the arms and hands.
Neither in this nor in his manner of lying down and rising were
there any signs of chorea.
This investigation as a whole, inexact and fragmentary as
it is in some parts, established, at least as probabilities, a strange
STARVATION. 85
combination of psychological conditions. Tlic normal factors, on
the one hand, were found to be passive touch, clearness of vision,
color vision, health of retina, acnteness of hearing, accuracy and
rapidity of discrimination, interest in plant life, and memory. He
conld learn readily, reading, writing, spelling, drawing, water
color painting, nnisic, and pure mathematics. Slight differences
from the majority of people were found in acnteness of vision,
type of imagery, and control of hands. Astonishing deficiencies
presented themselves in the control of the larger muscles, and the
knowledge of the most common, every-day, immediate facts of life,
including that knowledge of people which makes possible the study
of such a subject as history. His teachers thought that he was
becoming more stupid every day. But the facts seem to mo to
point in the opposite direction, for the development of the control
of the large muscles and of knowledge of everyday matters, takes
place chiefly in the first few years of a child's life. It was some
time after this conclusion was reached that Elmer's father re-
luctantly revealed the story of the boy's life, of which the signifi-
cant facts have been given in the first paragraph of this article.
During the first six years of life, he had seldom moved a muscle.
This means that he did none of the lashing about that brings every
healthy child into knowledge-yielding contact with objects. Al-
though a temporary arrest of mental development during the com-
mon school period may entail only a temporary loss, this fragmen-
tary study has shown, at least, that the dropping out of the first
six years of mental development is a loss which, under ordinary
conditions, may be largely irretrievable.
