School Reports and School Efficiency
=====================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By David S. Snedden and Wil-
liam H. Allen, for the New York Committee on Physical Welfare
of School Children. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1908. ^Pp.
xi + 183.
To the great majority of people the school report is the only tan-
gible evidence of what the school administration is doing. Citizens
generally canot be expected to know what goes on in the school rooms
and in the meetings of boards of education, nor what is taking shape
in the back of the superintendent's head. Even were they afforded
the utmost opportunity and gifted with unusual perception, it is not
likely that without convenient summaries and condensed statements they
could form any idea of the public school system as a whole.
If the school report is at once the evidence and test of the school
administration it is clear that its ideal is such a marshalling of the
facts regarding the schools of the city as will give the reasonably intel-
ligent citizen a clear notion of just how well the schools are performing
the duties entrusted to them.
The book before us is a study of the school reports for the purpose
of ascertaining how far and in what manner they seek to embody such
an ideal. It is a study in comparative administration.
This study reveals so wide a diversity among school reports as to
preclude the idea of any uniformity of belief as to what they should
contain. While uniformity of scope and treatment is not to be expected,
it might reasonably be supposed that the similar purposes of the school
administration in different places would give to these reports a certain
family resemblance. In so far as such a resemblance can be traced, it
does not appear to be so much the result of parallel internal develop-
ment as the product of external compulsion or suggestion. The fact
that state educational departments are charged with the allotment
of state school funds according to a fixed unit in school work, has
led to an emphasis upon such units. A similar influence has been
exerted by the United States Bureau of Education in its request for
information along certain definite lines.
Apart from these influences tending toward a certain uniformity,
there are other forces working in the same direction, though less
effectively. The trend of current discussion in educational affairs is
not without its influence, and when certain facts are needed in any
city to point a moral or adorn a tale, the experience of other cities
(174)
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM 175
suggests investigations or arrangements of material which are new to
the city in question. Conscious efforts to promote uniform treatment
of statistical data, a theme which has been discussed almost to weari-
ness by the National Education Association and kindred organizations,
have been singularly fruitless.
With these general considerations by way of introduction the
work takes as its main theme the scope of educational statistics. In
them we find the condensation of educational experience, and here more
than in other parts of the text we should expect the experience and
practice of one city to be helpful to another. Too often, indeed almost
universally, the tables of facts are isolated from the text of the report
and no effort is made to explain their meaning or set forth the salient
facts which they present. In view of the volume of tabular matter
there is a painful paucity of interpretation.
The method pursued by the author, in recording the facts, is to
furnish specimen tables from the different reports in regard to each
matter touched upon, giving a selection of the simpler and then the
more detailed statements to be found in them. The following heads
are treated in this way: School plant, expenditure, census, attendance,
age of pupils, promotion, survival, compulsory attendance, high schools,
evening schools, vacation schools, libraries, medical inspection, teachers,
and summaries. The variety of forms exhibited is highly instructive
although, it must be confessed, somewhat bewildering. The author has
confined himself so strictly to a study of methods that he is disposed to let
the tables speak for themselves. This is all very well if one understands
their language. One cannot help but feel that in many cases some
explanation why the detailed tables are to be regarded as superior,
beyond the fact that they are more detailed, would have been illuminat-
ing and would have somewhat relieved the tedium for the general
reader of this important chapter.
No attempt is made to outline a model report. Instead, in chapter
five we have a series of questions which might be answered in a school
report. The list does not pretend to be exhaustive, but in reality it
constitutes a somewhat formidable program if it be assumed that the
greater part of these points should receive attention.
Conscious of the fact that somewhat staggering demands are made
on the school administration, the discussion of "suggested economics
and improvement" comes as an antidote. This is a brief discussion of
short cuts and methods to get at desired results, tending to a simpli-
fication of records and such forms and registers as will supply the
needed information, without excessive work. This is a very vital point
and the suggestions as far as they go are admirable.
While the subject presented in these pages is thoroughly technical,
the work may be commended most heartily to school authorities and to
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
all who are interested in the progress of our schools. It is an appeal
for exact information and should not be passed by without a hearing.
Such information in regard to our schools?one of the most important
branches of our government?is sadly lacking. It has too often been
assumed that the management of schools was a matter for experts,
which outsiders could not properly judge. Within certain limits this
is true, but it fails to distinguish between the scholastic and the admin-
istrative sides of school work. We undoubtedly need, both among our
school authorities and in the public at large, a keener perception of the
requisites of a sound and effective administration. It is not perhaps
too much to say that there is no great business enterprise of the people
of which they know so little as they do of their schools. In private
affairs such ignorance on the part of directors and stockholders would
lead to bankruptcy.
The authorship of the several chapters of the book is distinctly
stated. The general considerations herein briefly noted are the work
of Dr. Snedden; the particular application to the city of New York
is the work of Dr. Allen. Those who are familiar with Dr. Allen's work
are aware that he can always be relied upon for a readable and spicy
statement. But in view of the predominantly local interest of his dis-
cussion and the inexorable limits of space it has seemed best in the
foregoing notice to lay the greater emphasis on those larger aspects of
the subject which are from the pen of Dr. Snedden.
Roland P. Falkner.
