News and Comments
===================

Is Anything Wrong with the Public Evening Schools?
Evidently the International Committee of Young Men's Christian
Associations think that there is, for they put the question to the public
in a circular, which they have just distributed. They quote the statement of Dr. Thomas M. Balliet, Dean of the School of Pedagogy of the
New York University, and former superintendent of schools at Springfield, Mass., who says, "The whole system of public evening schools
must be reconstructed at an early date."
They further quote from an address made by Dr. Balliett about a
year ago, "I confess I was much puzzled some years ago, when I was
superintendent of schools in Springfield, to find that, in spite of all
our efforts to improve the evening schools, including a good trade
school and classes in mechanical drawing that were well taught, a goodly
number of men, instead of accepting the free tuition of the city, would
go to the Young Men's Christian Association classes and pay for their
instruction. I have made considertible investigation as to why men
should perfer to pay for instruction rather than receive it free in the
public evening school. Some of the reasons which I have ascertained
and which no doubt explain in part this preference, are the following:
''First: Instruction in evening schools usually dfaws a large number of people who are relatively young?that is, boys from fourteen and
fifteen up to twenty-five years; mechanics who may perhaps have some
reputation in their trade and who wish to perfect themselves in certain
technical lines, do not wish to be grouped with boys of that age; they
feel that such boys, having come recently from the public schools, are
likely to answer some questions better than they can themselves; they
may be able to use English better and appear to better advantage.
Mature men are often sensitive about the comparisons which the younger
members of the class are apt to make at their expense.
"Second: Some men who hold fairly good positions as skilled workmen, prefer1 not to have it known among their fellow workmen that
they are obliged to attend school to fit themselves more perfectly for
their work. In the Young Men's Christian Association classes, in some
cities at least, they are often treated almost as private students, and
are given a degree of individual help which is impossible to give in the
large classes of the public evening schools, conducted at public expense.
"Third: The public evening schools usually aim at teaching a
subject quite systematically and are modeled (possibly too much) after
the day schools. Men have intensely pi'actical aims when they come
to an evening school, and are unwilling to study systematically an
entire subject; they demand that the instruction shall lead directly to
(215)
21G PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the specific things which they want to know. If they are put into
classes in which they are obliged to spend a month or more on preliminary work, the connection of which to what they are after they do not
see, they will not attend. The Young Men's Christian Association
evening classes meet this special demand better than the evening schools
at present do. I feel quite sure that even if the public schools were
made ideal, there would be a very considerable demand for instruction
under the conditions under which it is given in the Young Men's
Christian Association classes."
Social Education Meetings.
The Social Education Club of Boston has arranged for two meetings in that city, in cooperation with section L (Education) of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science. A public meeting of a popular' character will be held on the evening of Wednesday,
December 29. On the following (Thursday) morning, a scientific and
technical session will be held with section L.
The general topic for both meetings will be "The Equalization of
Educational Opportunity," or "How may the School or College best
develop in all Pupils their Possibilities of Usefulness as Members of
the Community?" The particular subjects to be discussed include the
following:
(1) Retardation in the grades, its causes and its remedies.
(2) The recoil from work, due first to asking too great an effort
on the part of pupils, and secondly to asking too little. Does equal
work demanded of every pupil lead to this result? Do equal tasks
equalize educational opportunities?
(3) The motive for study. Can the motive for service to their
comrades be made a motive for study and expression on the part of
pupils? How can this kind of team play be fitted into the ordinary
requirements of the course of study?
(4) The differentiation of individuals, and the consequent differences of their work as cooperative members of society.
