The Psychology of Dementia Praecox
====================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

By Dr. C. G. Jung. Translated
by Frederic^ Peterson, M.D., and A. A. Brill, Ph.B., M.D. Nervous
and Mental Disease Monograph Series, No. 3, New York, 1909.
Pp. xx + 153.
The majority of existing treatises on dementia praecox present, in
reality, little more than collections of accurate clinical pictures of the
disease. Their aim is to establish a clearer and more definite concep-
tion of the limits of the psychosis, and thus to define the boundaries,
often most obscure, which separate it from other disease entities.
This study of Dr. Jung, however, stands quite apart in both aim and
method. Its aim is to reach by analysis an understanding of the under-
lying causes of the diverse symptoms, and its method is one of individual
experimental psychology. A similar study of hysteria has been made
by Breuer and Freud, and an analysis of dreams and paranoia by
Freud. The explanation which they offer of the phenomena of hysteria,
dreams, and paranoia, is claimed by Dr. Jung to be equally applicable
to all of the varied phenomena manifested in dementia praecox. The
first chapter presents a resume of the literature, tracing especially the
development of the psychological concept of the psychosis, through
the various theories which attribute the condition to impaired powers
of attention, to the dissociation theory of Gross, Freud, and the later
investigators. Gross was the first to lay stress upon the fact that the
consciousness of the patient with dementia praecox suffers a disintegra-
tion. Certain groups of ideas, he holds, are split off from the general
consciousness and remain active, though isolated and often subcon-
scious. They, however, rise into consciousness when for any reason the
main trend of thought is weakened. This conception is carried fur-
ther by Freud, who considers that the split-off ideas always center
around some thought which the subject desires to express. Such
thoughts, voluntarily shut out from consciousness, still retain consid-
erable force by virtue of their strong emotional tone, and persist as
subconscious, autonomous complexes, at times rising to the threshold
of consciousness and interrupting the train of thought by hallucina-
tions, strange fancies, etc. The explanation offered by Jung is identical.
He considers feeling the basis of personality, while thought and action
are secondary phenomena.
The fact that such complexes are always liable to recall has enabled
Jung to make some minute analyses by the aid of the association reac-
tion method. If a stimulus word is not associated with any repressed
emotional complex, the response comes readily and is remembered when
the test is repeated. If, on the other hand, it is so associated, the aroused
complex interrupts the easy play of thought, the response comes slowly
(141)
142 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
and is soon forgotten. Active thought processes are clouded and
impeded in proportion to the activity of the autonomous complexes.
The next step in the analysis is to pick out the unusual reactions and
question the subject as to what other thoughts they arouse. In this
way both Freud and Jung have been able to trace the genesis of emo-
tional complexes, the very existence of which was unknown to the sub-
ject. Jung agrees with Freud that these split-off complexes are always
purposely repressed in the beginning because unpleasant to the indi-
vidual. Such complexes often manifest themselves symbolically by
neologisms, irrelevant melodies, and puns. They are also indicated by
an unusually large number of contrast associations. In active thought
the awakened contrasts are not powerful enough to impede its course,
but when the energy of such thought is drained by the presence of
autonomous complexes, it is no longer strong enough to inhibit the
contrasts, and a state of indecision results, which reveals itself in con-
trast associations.
On the strength of the theory outlined above, supported by the
evidence of association experiments, Dr. Jung draws a most interesting
parallel between hysteria and dementia prsecox.
The parallel is traced through the following symptom groups:
disturbances of the emotions, characteristic abnormalities, intellectual
disturbances, and stereotypy. Under emotional disturbances he treats
of (1) the apparent absence of emotional response when topics well cal-
culated to produce it are introduced; (2) the seemingly causeless emo-
tional outburst and dominant mood; (3) the lack of emotional control;
(4) the lack of affective rapport. All these symptoms are found in
both psychoses. The first two he relates closely as follows: in hysteria
the emotional outburst can usually be traced to some experience
which at the time of its occurrence had failed to arouse its appro-
priate emotional tone; in dementia prsecox, though it is more difficult
and often impossible to trace such a connection, we have no reason
to suppose that it does not exist. In both cases the condition is con-
sidered as a postponed emotional reaction.
The lack of emotional control is explained in all cases by the pres-
ence of powerful autonomous complexes which are beyond the control
of the ego-complex, i. e. by a disturbance of the ego-synthesis.
The lack of affective rapport is a permanent symptom in dementia
prsecox, and a transient one in hysteria. In both diseases the condi-
tion is ascribed to the distraction caused by autonomous complexes,
which complexes are so firmly established in dementia prsecox that the
ego-complex never gains control. The patients feel themselves in a
different world from those around them. The abnormalities of char-
acter discussed are affectations of manner and speech, silly behavior,
and egotism, all symptoms common to both diseases.
Affectation and egotism in hystericals are often the result of an
intense sensitiveness, while silly behavior is a definite reaction against
an unpleasant complex. The affectation of the dementia prsecox pa-
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM 143
tients arises from delusions of grandeur, and expresses itself in speech
as neologisms and in writing as flourishes. Their egotism is the result
of the dominating autonomous complexes, and their silliness a means
of repression.
The intellectual disturbances are classified as follows:
[ Hallucinations
Hysteria \ Ecstatics
Momentary
1. Clouding of
consciousness
I Persistent
I Torpor
(Hallucinations
Impulsive acts
Thought deprivation
f Somnambulism
Hysteria j Lethargy
[ Catalepsy
iHalluci
Confusi
Stupor
f Hallucinatory states
Dementia praecox j Confusion
2. Disturbances of attention.
3. Delusions and hallucinations.
4. Obsessions.
5. Abnormalities of feeling
' Feeling of automatism
Feeling of domination
Feeling of incomplete perception
_ Feeling of insufficient emotion
The weakening of the ego-synthesis due to the presence of autono-
mous complexes results in a permanent state of suggestibility. This
condition is, however, subject to sudden more or less violent interrup-
tions by eruptions into consciousness of the submerged complexes which
come in the form of any of the symptoms enumerated above under
"clouding of consciousness."
The disturbance of attention in both psychoses is identical. It
consists of a preoccupation which prevents any real concentration. The
autonomous complexes paralyze all the psychic activities.
Many delusions of dementia praecox and obsessions of hystericals
are attributed to the persistence of the affective tone of a suppressed
complex. To explain this seemingly causeless feeling, the patients
turn to quite unrelated phenomena. Others are the indirect results of
the complexes, whose presence inhibits the full development of all other
perceptions. Such are the feelings of unreality of the self and the
external world, and the other abnormalities of feeling enumerated above.
Akin to these manifestations in hysteria and dementia praecox are
those dream states in which reality and fancy are hopelessly inter-
woven. Dr. Jung says, "Let the dreamer walk about and act like one
awakened, and we have the clinical picture of dementia praecox." Hal-
lucinations are very common in dreams, and are composed of symbolic-
144 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ally changed fragments of some autonomous complex. The same
explanation holds true for the hallucinations of hysteria and dementia
prsecox.
Finally, the phenomena of stereotypy are traced to the complex
either directly, as when habitual phrases are associated with it sym-
bolically or otherwise, or indirectly, when the complex has become so
dominant as virtually to absorb all the brain activity and leave the
patient a mere reflex machine. In spite of this close parallel between
the symptoms of hysteria and dementia prsecox, Dr. Jung is able to
make a clear differentiation between the two psychoses. The symptoms
of both are explained by the presence of emotional complexes. In hys-
teria these complexes are held to be the primary cause of the disease,
and they may yield in time to the ego-complex. In dementia there is
in addition to the complex some anomalous metabolism, possibly caused
by a toxine which is developed either as the result of the complex or
simultaneously with it, which injures the brain in a more or less irre-
parable manner. One is explained on purely psychic grounds, the other
has an additional physiological element.
Dr. Jung has in this analysis succeeded in offering an explanation
of nearly all mental anomalies. Emotional and volitional disturb-
ances, hallucinations, delusions of various kinds, including the feelings
of unreality, obsessions, neologisms, catalepsy, and suggestion are all
explained by the one hypothesis of split-off association complexes. This
is a wonderful synthesis of a multitude of diverse phenomena which
most of us have been accustomed to look upon from quite distinct points
of view. Further study alone will prove whether it is the true inter-
pretation.
This general analysis is followed in the last chapter by a complete
analysis of a case of paranoid dementia. The basis for this study is a
list of association reactions. The reactions with the time are given, and
followed by the more detailed associations obtained by using the char-
acteristic associations as stimuli for continuous associations. The long
and otherwise peculiar reactions were very frequent, showing that
autonomous complexes usurped a large part of mental activity. Three
principal complexes stand out in the analysis; the theme of the most
dominant is personal grandeur, of the next in importance persecution,
while the third is erotic. The first complex is interpreted as being a
realization in fancy of the unfulfilled hopes of a lifetime; it produced
many neologisms, called by the patient "power-words". The perse-
cutory complex also produced grotesque reactions. The third complex
was considerably concealed. The analysis is most minute, and abounds
in examples of symbolic imagery and condensation of ideas, which are
interestingly interpreted, though not always convincingly.
Practically all investigators recognize in dementia prsecox a reduc-
tion in the power to direct the thought, and the consequent usurping
of consciousness by autonomous thought. These facts are undoubtedly
sustained by the actual results of the association experiments. That
NEWS AND COMMENT 145
this autonomous thought can be resolved into repressed complexes and
these explained on some emotional basis is, however, not so clear. Dr.
Jung holds that these analyses are also supported by the association
experiments. The data here, however, are only complete when the key
is supplied by the subtle mind of the experimenter, and therefore a large
personal equation cannot fail to enter into the results. Some of
Freud's analyses of symbolic expressions (many wonderful ones are
given in his "Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens") seem to me, like
several of Dr. Jung's, rather strained and certainly not sufficient proof
on which to establish such a far reaching theory.
Clara Harrison Iown.
