Association Tests in Practical Work for the Insane
===================================================

By Claea Harbison Town,
Resident Psychologist, Friends'1 Asylum for the Insane, FranJcford, Pa.
Psychological methods of studying association have been
widely used of late to render practical service in the clinical examination of the mentally abnormal. During the last three years
we have subjected the various methods to a thorough test in the
examination of our patients, with most interesting and, we feel,
quite valuable results. The tests have proven useful, not only as a
method of securing material for a study of the association processes
employed by the insane, but also as a means of uncovering those
hidden thoughts and feelings, a knowledge of which is a necessary
prerequisite to a sympathetic understanding of the individual mind
and therefore to successful therapeutic treatment. Absolutely
nothing can be done toward establishing a saner point of view in a
mind which has lost its true perspective until the physician actually
understands the baffling perplexities which have perverted the onetime normal mind of his patient. Such an understanding has
more than once enabled us to build up in our patients' minds the
power of recognizing hallucinatory voices at their true value, and
this recognition was followed by a determined and successful effort
on their part to overcome the voices by methods of mental discipline
suggested by us. It is this adaptibility of association tests to the
study of the insane as individuals rather than as insane types that I
wish particularly to discuss.
There are two general forms of verbal association tests in use
by psychologists, each of which is capable of, and has been subjected to, various modifications. The first is the association reaction introduced by Galton, 1879, where a word is called out by the
experimenter or presented visually, to which the subject responds
as quickly as possible by pronouncing the first word which occurs
to him after hearing the stimulus word, the time being recorded by
the experimenter. In Galton's experiments the first two associations were recorded and timed. A long list of such reactions are
taken, the numbers varying with the experimenter; for instance
Galton took 75-, Jung takes 100 and Scripture 25. The second
(276)
ASSOCIATION TESTS. 277
method secures a series of written words thought of consecutively
by the subject after stimulation by a spoken or written word. The
length of the series varies with different investigators, some requiring 5 words, others 100 or more.
Much has already been written pointing out the value of the
association reaction method as an aid in the study of the individual
mind. Galton himself writes of his results, "They lay bare the
foundations of a man's thoughts with curious distinctness and
exhibit his mental anatomy with more vividness and truth than he
would probably care to publish to the world." Jung has modified
the original method both in procedure and in treatment of results,
and this modification he believes renders it capable of detecting not
only individual thought tendencies but also differences in the
accompanying emotional tone. This he accomplishes by interpreting the variations in the association reaction times in terms of
emotion. He believes that unusually long reaction times indicate
the presence of some emotional complex either directly associated
with the stimulus word, to which the response is delayed, or with
the immediately preceding stimuli or responses. Sometimes he
claims several consecutive reactions are lengthened by the effect of
one emotionally-exciting stimulus. His modification of procedure
consists in a repetition of the series of reactions Upon its completion,
the subject being told to respond as before with the first word of
which he thinks, but to give the same word as at first, if possible,
A failure to repeat the original response to a word Jung finds
indicative of the presence of an emotional complex. Moreover, he
finds in his results a correlation between such lapses of memory in
the second series and lengthened reaction times in the first. The
slight lengthening of the time indicative of an emotional complex
is supposed to be beyond the control, and in many instances beyond
the knowledge, of the subject.
Jung believes himself able by this combination of association
reaction and memory test to detect not only emotional complexes
known to the subject, but also such complexes of which the subject
himself is quite unconscious but which, nevertheless, according to
Jung, Freud and Janet, exert a powerful influence on the mental
state of the individual. The conscious realization and actual verbal
expression of the submerged emotional complex is thought by Freud
to be of great value in the treatment of hysteria and by Jung the
effect is believed to be beneficial in cases of dementia prsecox as
well. To obtain this conscious realization of the details of the
complex, however, the association test must be supplemented by
278 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the use of the analytic method of Freud. The association reaction
gives the clue which points out that such a complex exists and must
be brought to the surface; by the Freud method this is realized.
Whether we subscribe to the theory of subconscious mind or
not, we cannot but recognize the usefulness of any simple test
which will help us to penetrate to the carefully guarded secrets of
the conscious mind. In the examination of the insane, especially
paranoiacs who wish to conceal their true state of mind, such a
means of gaining information, if accurate, cannot be too highly
valued.
Our experience in using this method with our patients has convinced us, however, that although the presence of emotion often does
cause a lengthening of the reaction time, there are other factors
of quite a different type which frequently result in just as pronounced a lengthening. Many of the insane are so absorbed by
insistent ideas, delusions, and hallucinations that the stimulus word
makes little impression on their conciousness; they are aware of it
in a vague sort of way but only react after a long interval. The
delay, however, is not due to any mental process awakened by the
stimulus but to the effort required to detach themselves from their
all-absorbing mental preoccupation. This condition was noted especially in the acute hallucinatory stage of dementia prsecox Other
patients have lost all power of concentration, any trivial impression
suffices to distract their thought, and such distraction very frequently results in a much delayed reaction. Thus subjective and
objective conditions entirely unrelated to the stimulus often produce abnormally long reactions. One patient unwittingly endorsed
Jung's theory by remarking, "When you say anything that refers
to my home, my mind seems to be a blank for a few moments."
Others, however, responded very promptly to words which I knew
aroused them emotionally and more slowly to those which they
evidently received with the utmost indifference. These short
times were undoubtedly due to the fact that the stimulus aroused
a line of thought intense and near the surface, while the long ones
were the result of directly opposite conditions, an uninteresting,
non-inspiring stimulus word.
Another form of test, a modification of the second general
method described above, has proven much more useful in our work
with the insane. This greater success is largely due to its complete
freedom from external control or suggestion which makes it an ideal
medium for self-expression. This method, which is one used by
Doctor Witmer, aims to study the associations of a subject as exASSOCIATION TESTS. 279
pressed in his thought during fifteen consecutive minutes. The subject writes a list of words during this period. lie is told to write
as quickly as possible whatever words occur to him, suppressing
none and exercising no discrimination. No stimulus word is given
to initiate the train of thought, even that being left to the free play
of the subject's imagination. The value of such a list depends in
large measure upon the close attention of the experimenter to conditions surrounding the subject as he writes. He must know just
what words are suggested by sounds, by objects in the immediate
environment, or by any other transient conditions effecting the subject's consciousness. After the list is complete the experimenter
goes over the words with the subject in order to gain all possible
light on those associations which may not be clear to him.
Such lists furnish rich material for the study of the associative
processes, of the quality of thought content, and of fatigue. Our
results along these lines will be reported elsewhere ;* here I wish
only to emphasize the value of the test for the study of the actual
mental content of the individual patient.
For this purpose the words of such a list are arranged in
several classes, those suggested by the immediate environment, by
personal experience, by subjects of study, by the world environment; names of objects, concepts, proper names, and words without
thought content (connectives, etc.), classified simply as parts of
speech. Each of these classes is minutely sub-divided, so that after
analysis we know exactly what proportion of words were suggested
by visible objects, sounds, odors, etc.; what proportion referred to
history, botany, etc.; what proportion related to home, social life,
etc.; to animals, flowers, food, drink or other world objects; to emotion, religion, art, etc.; the proportion made up of names of self,
relatives, noted people or places; the proportion of adjectives,
conjunctions, etc. The actual dominance of any distinct line of
thought is by this analysis immediately discovered; if a large
proportion of words refer to religion, to business, to some personal
experience, or to self, light is at once thrown on the mental content.
Such lists taken at intervals in the progress of a disease
serve to show when certain tendencies of thought are losing their
hold and others developing. The list of one patient contained a
remarkably large proportion of words pertaining to religion, and
also a large number referring to herself. A second list secured
after an intermission of some months showed a decline of the
religious fervor, while the egoism still remained.
*"Experimental Studies in Psychology and Pedagogy," No. 4, 1909,
The Psychological Clinic Press, Philadelphia.
280 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
A patient whose mind is much occupied by some idea or group
of ideas, is, as a rule, unable to write for so long a period as fifteen
minutes without using some words indicative of those ideas. In
many instances the patients lapse into sentence form and write
fragmentary records of their mental experiences. Patients who are
habitually reticent and who divulge nothing even when questioned
often lack the control necessary to avoid doing so in the course of
such a test. They lose the idea of the purpose of the writing and
write for themselves, expressing what they feel. I have had a
patient look up while writing her list and say, "I am talking to you
now", and the words she wrote proved to be a personal confession.
One patient who was passing through a silent engrossed state
in which she said little and appeared to casual observers almost
normal, wrote a list which, beginning with her own name and
address and the names of several towns in which she had lived,
launched out after the first five minutes into the expression of the
belief that she had died the previous spring and had been raised
from the dead, that since that time she had died and been raised
four times, that she is at present engaged in saving souls, that she
saved one hundred and seventy on the previous night, that she was
the mother of one hundred and twenty-five children, etc. Having
written so much she was for quite a while willing to talk and
enlarged greatly on all that she had written. It was impossible to
gain much information about this patient by the Jung method. Her
longest reaction, following one of average length, was that which
measured cat?dog, while words which evidently did effect her
emotionally met with a more prompt response. Her mind was so
engrossed by her thoughts and emotions that words in line with
them evoked a quick response, while other words received little
attention and resulted in slow reactions.
From another list written by a patient suffering from melancholia one could build up the picture of a hopelessly sad woman
who had passed through some great trouble, who was tortured with
regret and self-accusation, who believed herself possessed by some
evil spirit and destined never again to see her home, who thought
herself incapable of affection and yet who, in reality, mourned and
longed for her family. There was not a word in the entire list of
eighty-two words which did not refer to her own condition or its
.cause; and not an idea or delusion of all that persistently haunted
her but was expressed therein.
Another woman in a greatly confused, delusional state, wrote
a long list in which references to her home, husband and family
ASSOCIATION TESTS. 281
abounded, and in which she expressed certain peculiar delusions in
regard to colors and to sin, betrayed auditory hallucinations by
recording what the creaking shoes of a passer-by said to her, and
wrote of her own condition and fear of becoming insane.
One woman, reserved, evidently from a fear of the consequence of speaking out, wrote a list of one hundred and seventy-six
words in which the name of a certain man appeared forty times,
the word man thirteen times and in many other words referred to
the same individual. This was the first intimation she had given
of the presence of any such complex.
In another list the following group of words appear: "Occult,
astrologer, necromancer, clairvoyant, slate, write, pencil, think,
Dr. Ilyslop, book, dreams, thoughts, mind, reason, art, mind, intellect." The writer had read Doctor Hyslop's book and had been
greatly impressed with his ideas. She had subsequently tried to
develop occult power in herself and had succeeded in receiving
mysterious messages on the slate, and also without it in states of
passive reverie. She encouraged this state of mind to a greater
and greater extent until she reached the point where she would sit
up most of the night engrossed by the mysterious thoughts which
came to her. Finally she completely lost control of her mind.
Many more examples could be quoted, but enough have been
presented to demonstrate that in this method lies another means of
discovering the actual mental condition of our patients, a means
that is often adapted for use in cases where certain mental complications make the Jung method valueless. The Jnng method, on the
other hand, can sometimes be used satisfactorily with patients
whom it is impossible to induce to write. In using the Jung method
with the insane, however, too much significance must not be
attached to the length of the reaction. Long reactions due to preoccupation or lack of interest in the stimulus word must be carefully distinguished from those due to the presence of an associated
emotional complex.
