Civics and Health
==================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By William H. Allen, with an introduction by
William 1. Sedgwick. .Boston and New York. Ginn and Company, 1909. Pp. xi -f- 411.
"Civics and Health" is just what the publishers have called it, a
"handbook on getting things done." It is a splendid campaign document. Not the least of its merits is its easy quotability. We shall search
through it in vain for any admission that there are two sides to a
question, but it is as full of catchwords and battle cries as an egg is
of meat. It is more than a book; it is an exhibit, where every chapter
is a booth hung with striking placards and pictures displaying in the
most convincing manner the conditions which are found to be in need
of reform. It would be impossible to find any single volume which can
give so much help to those who are already working for the health of
the community. Superintendents who are urging their boards to
provide for medical inspection will find in it arguments to strengthen
their appeal. Societies working for the passage of child labor laws may
turn to it for facts and figures to convince their legislatures. Health
officers who are asking for the appointment of school nurses to enforce
their recommendations may obtain from the book statistics that will
justify their demand. Finally, and this is perhaps where the book will
do the most good in an inconspicuous way, the grade teacher may learn
from it the knack of presenting facts of everyday hygiene more vividly
to her class, and by becoming observant herself of the signs of health in
her pupils, may train them to habits of greater cleanliness and alertness.
The author has organized his material excellently for presentation.
The book is divided into five parts:?
I. Health Rights.
II. Reading the Index to Health Rights.
III. Cooperation in Meeting Health Rights.
IV. Official Machinery for Enforcing Health Rights.
V. Alliance of Hygiene, Patriotism, and Religion.
Chapter XVII makes clear the difference between merely "doing
things" and "getting things done." Doing things is wasteful at best,
while getting things done is simply the most effective and economical
way to bring about a hygienic millennium. For instance, "It may take
a year to convert a police magistrate whose sympathy for delinquent
parents and truant children is an active promoter of disorder, but a
magistrate convinced, efficient, and interested is worth a hundred volunteer visitors. To get things done in this way for a hundred thousand
children costs less in time and money than to do the necessary things
for one thousand children."
(114)
NEWS AND COMMENT 115
The opening chapter on "Health a Civic Obligation" is one of the
best, if it be possible to choose the best chapter in a book whose
standard throughout is high. The last chapter is probably the poorest.
When Dr Allen quotes the dictum of Agassiz, "A natural law is as
sacred as a moral principle," and brings in patriotism as a motive for
cleanliness, he carries the reader back to the still recent period when no
advertisement, whether of "ships, or shoes, or sealing wax," was considered complete without a picture of the American flag, and when no
public gathering could be adjourned without first singing the "Star
Spangled Banner."
The chapter on "Dental Sanitation" is particularly valuable because
so little that is really trustworthy has previously been written on the
subject. Here as elsewhere Dr Allen goes straight to the root of the
matter. He finds the reason for the social inferiority of the dentist
as compared with the physician to lie in the former's lack of public
spirit. He says, "The fact that it took the medical profession centuries
to begin to feel responsibility for community health is no reason why
the social sense of the dentist should be dormant for centuries or
decades." . . . "Of fourteen dental journals in America, only one
has the advancement of dental science as its first reason for existence.
Thirteen are trade journals." He advocates the establishing of free
dental clinics as a means of educating the public to take care of their
teeth, and at the same time of educating the dentists themselves to a
more dignified and less commercial attitude toward their profession.
In the very strength of the book lies a weakness. Those who are
in the thick of the social fight will exult in the crashing blows of their
champion's sword upon the armor of the conservatives, but the casual
reader who wishes to maintain a dispassionate judgment upon the questions at issue, may perhaps be antagonized by the vehemence of Dr.
Allen's demonstration.
A. T.
