The Making and the Unmaking of a Dullard.
========================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Thomas Edward
Shields, Ph.D., LL.D., Associate Professor of Psychology in the
Catholic University of America. Washington, D. C. The Cath-
olic Education Press, 1909. Pp. 296.
This little book bears eloquent testimony to the possibility of
training backward children, for it is the autobiography of one who
was himself a backward boy. The introduction tells us, "The story in
its entirety is a faithful transcript of the record that was burned
into the heart and brain of the omadhaun and read by himself years
after he had fought his way back to the company of normal and intel-
lectual men." The later fame and high position of the dullard give
a vivid interest to his story. It is modestly offered as a contribution
toward the solution of the backward child problem. To give it popular
interest, it is cast in the form of a dialogue,?not the frozen utter-
ances of some Philomathus, Theophile, or Philosoph, but the lively
eloquence of the Studevans, O'Briens, Russells, and Shannons. They
sit around the wood fire and talk modern psychology, humanized by
the interest in school-boys and girls. They know what is going on,
discuss familiarly The Psychological Clinic, and note with approbation
Dr. Witmer's work for the last thirteen years at the University of
Pennsylvania in the training of backward children, as well as other
movements of like nature.
The story of the dullard gets well started in Chapter VII. The
first stage is downward,?and three years of school training result in
turning a fairly bright and healthy boy into an imbecile. The trouble
began in jumping the pupil from Wilson's Second Reader into the
National Third Reader in order to save the teacher the work of
holding an extra class session. From that moment the "humiliation
of defeat began to settle into a permanent distaste for reading and a
permanent discouragement concerning my ability in that direction."
Although there was for a time a fair degree of efficiency in other
branches, the failure in reading gave rise to a growing "sense of shame
and discouragement." This, coupled with the teasing of the other
boys, led to the removal of the dullard from school at the age of nine.
At that time he was growing rapidly. At thirteen he weighed one
hundred and sixty pounds. At fourteen he was five feet ten inches
tall, his adult height. The lack of balance between physical growth
and mental development, described by the author as "alternating
phases," was in his opinion the real cause of his backwardness, aug-
mented by bad pedagogical methods.
(21)
22 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Rapid physical growth made it possible for the overgrown boy to
be put to work on the farm. This proved his salvation. Good her-
edity, a strong body, five meals a day, open-air work, deep sleep, and
mental rest were his, until he awoke from his long intellectual
slumber and began his own eduation at sixteen. A brief experience of
school at the age of thirteen had meanwhile served to establish more
firmly the belief in his hopeless stupidity.
His self-education began with perceptions of numbers, not as
abstract relations, but as bushels of wheat, sacks of corn, fence boards,
and barn timbers. His study of mechanics began with an "old oaken
bucket" swung from an iron pulley, progressed through the grind-
stone stage to the mechanism of a reaper, to the profound discovery
that the turning of a small gear moved a larger one more slowly but
with greater power, and finally broke out into an ecstasy of delight
over his invention of a stump-puller. The success of the stump-puller,
though reckoned of little merit by the family, lodged in the dullard's
mind and stuck there. That success brought self-reliance; it nerved
him to withstand an elder brother's domination; it fired him to go
to the city alone and visit every machine shop and ask to be taken on
as an apprentice.
That he was refused is not to be wondered at, for at sixteen his
vocabularly was so small that he could not tell what he needed to
finish his machine, and had to go all the way to the city in order to
point out the ropes, chains, pins, gears, etc., which he required. The
family's fondest hope was that he might some day be able to support
himself by farming. Nobody talked to him seriously. He had for-
gotten all he had learned in school. He could not multiply, though
he could add a little; and he could neither read nor write.
He learned to read only through heroic effort, stimulated by his
curiosity to know the remainder of a thrilling Irish story, which his
brother refused to continue reading to him, leaving the robbers in a
cave in the midst of a highly exciting melee. However, the print was
large, the haymow offered a safe retreat, and there in secret the
"omadhaun" laboriously took his first real lesson in reading. The
Fire Side Companion, and New York Ledger furnished forth his fur-
ther instruction, after a prelimiary course in "Buffalo Bill," "Rosebud
Bob," and the "The Giant of the Gulch." Of these he says, "These
stories were short; the print was large; the paper poor. In fact they
were cheap in every sense of the word. The language was ungram-
matical and vulgar; the moral tone was low; but they were all action
. . There was not a dull line for me nor a passage above my com-
prehension." Eventually the book "Self Raised, or From the Depths,"
gave him the final and mighty impulse which bore him out upon the
course of intellectual and moral training which resulted in an honored
and useful life.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 23
Dr. Shields in his introduction voices the growing protest that
is being heard throughout this country against limiting the work of
the public school to the "three R's." He shows that the school must
take the place of the industrial home of the family, which has been
swept away by modern economic conditions. Yocational studies
must be added to the school curriculum. His story of the dullard's
progress lends strength to this modern movement in education. We
are more doubtful of his attitude concerning the value of race customs
and denominational training. In a preface to the book, Dr. O'Con-
nell, Rector of the Catholic University, calls attention to the earnest
efforts which the Catholic Church has made from the earliest times
to bring the blessings of education within the reach of those to whom
nature seemingly refuses the power or the opportunity of learning.
As Dr. O'Connell observes, we have enjoyed in the past the benefits
that accrue from the earnest efforts of the Church to alleviate the
miseries of humanity. What we have missed in the past, and what
we must strive for to-day, is to bring scientific knowledge to bear upon
the solution of the problem. Neither in this country nor abroad have
church schools or charity schools been distinguished by a sounder scien-
tific foundation than non-denominational schools. If the church and
charitable institutions are able to sympathize with and procure the
best that modern science affords, they may be expected to do all the
better work by reason of the enthusiasm and social interest that often-
times characterize the religious impulse.
A. H.
