Mental Healing and the Emmanuel Movement
===========================================

(Conclusion)
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
4. As a System of Psychology and Philosophy.
We are prone to judge men by the company they keep. The fact
that reputable psychologists are contributors to Psychotherapy will be
accepted by many as a guarantee of the psychological foundation of the
system. Three American psychologists appear in the list of contributors
to this publication, Professor Angell of Chicago, Professor Jastrow of
Wisconsin, and Adjunct Professor Woodworth of Columbia. The contributions of Professors Angell and Woodworth have already made their
appearance. Neither of these articles affords the slightest support for
the principles which underlie the psychotherapeutic work of Worcester
and his associates. The unreflecting public, however, without even
reading these articles, will assume that these professional psychologists
have lent the force of their academic position and personal authority to
promote the Emmanuel Movement. Why should reputable men of
science be represented in a publication which permits the president and
founder of the English Society of Emmanuel to make the following
statement:
"The Society of Emmanuel has now a secure position. Its work
has gained public and authoritative recognition. During the last
year, for example, 1,086 treatments have been given to the suffering.
The results have been most encouraging. Among the cases successfully treated may be mentioned one of cancer, in which case the
specialist called in had given the sufferer only three months to live.
By means of the laying on of hands in prayer a complete cure was
effected.
"Again, there are cases of rupture, rheumatoid arthritis, locomotor ataxia, colitis, and numerous cases affecting more directly the
mental, moral and spiritual nature, in all of which a complete cure
was brought about by the same means. In all these cases there is
complete evidence as to the disease, and subsequently as to the
recovered health of the patient. And these are but a fraction of the
actual number of cures."1
1Psychotherapy, Vol. I, No. 2, p. 89.
(282)
REVIEWS^AND CRITICISM. 283
We recall that some years ago an institution in the state of New
York, calling itself the American School of Science, published a work
on "Hypnotism, the World's Greatest Power." This work contained
articles by a number of well-known psychologists. The articles were
scientific and conservative statements of fact and theory, but their
employment in this publication was intended to give a false reputation
to an institution whose object was the instruction of the general public
in the art of hypnotism. "When," says the prospectus, "a few traveling
hypnotists more or less deft in the art but ignorant of the science, were
the only votaries of hypnotism, there was room for doubt as to its
genuineness, but when the leading universities of the civilized world
speak through their professors of psychology and philosophy to an intelligent public, all doubts must be dispelled. When our universities recognize this branch as a part of their curriculum, hypnotism takes its
place as a branch of education."2 It appeared later that the authors of
these articles had been induced to write them through misrepresentation,
and subsequently they made a formal protest against the use to which
their contributions had been put. Do Professors Angell and Woodworth
fully appreciate the interpretation which may be given to the association
of their personal authority and academic position with the active exploitation of this Boston system of psychotherapy?
Sometimes without warrant a great name may be used to support a
weak cause.3 Thus the claim is made that Dr Worcester is a trained
psychologist and a student of Wundt's. This means a great deal, when
we consider that for years students of psychology have gone to Wundt's
laboratory at Leipzig to complete their professional training. It therefore becomes necessary for us to inquire in what sense Dr Worcester is
a psychologist and a student of Wundt's. It appears from "Who's Who
in America" that he took a doctor's degree in philosophy at the Univer2In answer to a letter from an applicant, the president of this institution writes, "I asked my secretary to send you our new treatise on
personal magnetism, hypnotism, magnetic healing, suggestive therapeutics,
and allied phenomena. I am now writing to ask if it reached you safely.
I know you will find this booklet interesting; it tells of the marvelous
possibilities which can be attained through a knowledge of these sciences.
If you have read it you will then understand why progressive business and
professional men are absorbed in the study of personal magnetism and
hypnotism, why our instruction is endorsed by scientists of world-wide
reputation as the most practical, thorough, and comprehensive course ever
given to the public.
''For the first time the leading colleges and universities of the world
have through their specialists made all the secrets of these wonderful
sciences public. Men like Professor   of Yale,   of Harvard,
of Princeton, of the University of Berlin, and others equally
noted, thirty in all, tell you just how you can develop and use the most
mysterious power known to man. How well their efforts have been appreciated may be judged by the chorus of grateful praise which is coming from
thousands of successful students in every quarter of the globe. It matters
not what you business is, you can use this secret knowledge to your
advantage."
3As, for example, Dr S. Weir Mitchell's in connection with the Emmanuel Movement.
284 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
sity of Leipzig, but this would not necessarily mean that he had received
instruction in psychology. It is also true that Dr Worcester taught
philosophy and psychology while acting as chaplain at Lehigh University.
This likewise has little 01* no bearing on the question, because certain
institutions of learning assign the task of teaching philosophy and
psychology to anyone they please, ix-respective of previous training and
professional equipment. Since Worcester taught psychology at Lehigh,
our standards of professional training in psychology have been raised.
In the world of science, fitness to teach psychology rests upon adequate
training in experimental method and upon the possession of scientific
capacity as shown in original contributions to the science. When we hear,
therefore, that Worcester was a student of Wundt's at the University
of Leipzig, we naturally infer that he was entered as a student in the
laboratory of psychology and partook, to some extent at least, of laboratory training in methods of experimentation. A careful reading of
"Religion and Medicine," however, does not reveal the slightest trace of
the influence of the psychological genius to whom we owe before all
others the development of modern psychology in its many diverse
aspects. An examination of the catalogue of Lehigh University for the
year 1893-4 discloses the probable explanation of this failure of Wundt
to leave an impress upon his pupil's thought. In the announcement of
a course entitled "Outlines of Physiological Psychology," Dr Worcester
states, "These lectures are founded principally on Wundt's lectures 011
the same subject given at the University of Leipzig in the summer of
1888," after which he cites eight different standard works which together with Wundt's lectures served as the basis for his course. The
sources from which Dr Worcester's lectures were drawn have been so
freely cited that there is little reason to doubt that if he had done any
work in Wundt's laboratory, he would have mentioned it. It is perhaps
unnecessary to say that no psychologist would feel justified in claiming
that he was a student of Wundt's, if his work had been limited to attending a course of lectures given during a single term.
The psychology of the Emmanuel Movement is not the psychology
of Wundt, nor indeed of any psychological laboratory. It is the psychology of Hudson, Bramwell, and Myers. It is from Hudson that Dr Worcester gets his notion of the subconscious mind, which he commends as
an explanation of double personality. It is from Bramwell that he takes
over, among other absurdities, the opinion that in the hypnotic state a
subject cannot be induced to commit an act which is contrary to his
moral sense. It is from Myers, who has given expression to an ancient
theory under the modern concept of subconsciousness, that he derives
his belief in a hypnotism which brings us in direct contact with a larger,
purer, and nobler consciousness.
As a matter of fact the psychology which underlies Hudson's, Myer's
and Worcester's thought is as old as human thought itself. It appears
variously as neoplatonism, animism, psychism, anthropomorphism,
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 2S5
occultism, mysticism. This type of psychology, moreover, has always
manifested a special interest in mental healing. Mr. Myers, apparently
ignorant of the history of thought, has simply labored to give a new
expression to an ancient doctrine. It is in fact a very primitive conception that we find underlying Worcester's psychotherapy and Myers' theory
of subconsciousness. Our primeval ancestor, when he saw the moon
shining upon him in a friendly manner, felt that he was beholding a
personality like his own. Not only the moon, the stars, and every stick
and stone, but each organ of the body was supposed to be animated by a
separate spirit. Between these spirits there was supposed to exist a
subtle sympathy by virtue of which one was capable of acting upon
another. Thus, Descartes found it necessary to explain that when the
magnet attracted iron filings, it was not because of any sympathy between
the magnet and the filings, but through the operation of certain mechanical forces. The notion that the stars exert an influence upon human
destiny dies hard, and in medicine the efficacy of mystical signatures
and the doctrine of essences and potencies still continue to play a popular role beyond the pale of science.
While the psychology of "Religion and Medicine" is the psychology
of Myers, Hudson, and Bramwell, the driving force which has brought
conviction to Worcester and his associates is Professor William James.
"This distinguished writer," says Dr Worcester,4 "goes on to show how
levels of new energy which have remained unutilized may be tapped
by the will set to work by various suggestive methods. Thus modern
psychology puts its imprimature on a very ancient doctrine." Without
questioning for the present the propriety of identifying in this manner
Professor James and modern psychology, we proceed to inquire whether
Dr Worcester is justified in thus bringing to his support a distinguished
authority.
That James has not been misrepresented, clearly appears from his
appraisement of Myers' contributions to psychology.5 James considers
Myers' investigations and his theory of the subliminal consciousness
a contribution of great value. He says, "Looking back from Frederic
Myers' vision of vastness in the field of psychological research upon the
programme as most academic psychologists frame it, one must confess
that its limitation at their hands seems not only unplausible but in
truth a little ridiculous." He adds, "Myers' conception of the extensiveness of the Subliminal Self quite overturns the classic notion of what
the human mind consists in." "The outlying Subliminal represents according to him more fully our central and abiding being." And
again he says, "In one shape or another the Subliminal has come to stay
with us." Although Professor James accuses "official" science of refusing to attend to subconscious phenomena, as a matter of fact, science
4R. and M., p. 104.
6Popular Science Monthly, Vol. LIX, p. 380.
286 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
lias concerned itself with subliminal phenomena since the days of Descartes^ to whom we owe the theory of automatic and reflex functions of
the nervous system, which made possible the development first of modern
physiology and then of psychology. Every few seconds the eyelid sweeps
over the eyeball, removing dust and keeping moist its anterior surface. Is
this the work of a beneficent consciousness or merely reflex action ? Where
are we to draw the line in ascribing consciousness to the lower nerve
elements? For example, the heart muscle through its nervous ganglia
shows remarkable powers of spontaneous automatism, keeping up its
ceaseless rhythm with but slight modifications throughout a life-time.
Should we not then recognize within the heart a soul which does its
duty nobly without personal interest or gratification? Some one has
said that the first cry of the newborn child is the wail of a pure soul
thrust into a world of sin. Shall we permit theories of subconsciousness
to revive fanciful speculations of this kind, or shall we continue to follow
the development of physiological and psychological science, and ascribe
the cry of the child to purely mechanical processes? If we are to
accept Myers' theory of subconsciousness, Descartes labored in vain,
and the sciences of psychology and physiology have been erected upon
an insecure foundation.6
In this issue, therefore, it is William James versus science. To
uphold his side of the contention, James is compelled to attack current
psychology just as Worcester is compelled to attack current medicine.
Like Worcester, also, he proceeds to the attack by accusing psychology
of narrowness. "I record my bare opinion here," he says in another
place, "unsupported by the evidence, not, of course, in order to convert
anyone to my view, but because I am persuaded that a serious study of
these trance phenomena is one of the greatest needs of psychology, and
think that my personal confession may possibly draw a reader or two into
a field which the soi-disant 'scientist' usually refuses to explore."7 And
all this from an acquaintance with the trances of one medium, Mrs. Piper,
whom Professor James calls "my own white crow," who upsets for him the
general law that all crows are black, meaning all mediums are frauds.8
It is not our intention to show that Professor James wilfully misrepresents the attitude of scientific men toward these phenomena. Men of
science have explored this field, and some have had their fingers badly
burned by playing with the fire of charlantary and deceit. Almost all of
them have gained enough acquaintance with the methods of James,
Hodgson, and Myers, to feel that these men utterly fail to appreciate
BTo appreciate the scientific conceptions which have but recently been
outgrown and to which Myers and James would have us return, consult
"A Sketch of the History of Reflex Action," by G. Stanley Hall and C. F.
Hodge, American Journal of Psychology, Vol. Ill, pp. 71 ff., 149 ff., and
343 ff.
'"Principles of Psychology," Vol. I, p. 39G.
8"The Will to Believe," p. 319.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 287
the first principles of scientific experimentation.9 Our purpose is not
to answer James, but to define his position. He does this best himself
in an article entitled, "What Psychical Research Has Accomplished,"
published in the Forum for August, 1892. In this article, James makes
"Nevius gives frank expression to the conditions which are usually
insisted upon in these experiments. "Any experiment to be successful must
conform to all the conditions of the case. An experiment with spirits can
never be like one made in chemistry or physics. A spirit is an intelligent
and moral being who may be supposed to have some choice as to where
and how to exhibit its presence and power. A spirit must be sensitive to
the moral conditions and atmosphere that surround it, and must be governed by moral affinities and antipathies. Things that a spirit will do in
one company it cannot or will not do in another. If spirits have anything
to do with these phenomena they have some purpose in what they do, and
are seeking to accomplish some end. They will naturally do most where
the conditions are most favorable to this end. . . . Yet in the presence
of persons in whom there may be recognized a sufficiently pronounced moral
antagonism, the medium or spirit may be utterly helpless, or so guarded
that nothing is done." ("Demon Possession and Allied Themes," pp. 317318.)
Dr Horace Howard Furness found that Professor James considered
"unfair to the medium," questions involving an alternative, where the
alternative lay between very strong contrasts. Spirits always prefer the
remote to the near, the extraordinary to the ordinary. For example, a spirit
is announced; Dr Furness asks, "Is it the spirit of a white man or an
Indian?" The answer will invariably be, "An Indian." A spirit informs
the sitter through the medium that when in this life he was always interested in books. "Are they ordinary sized books or large books?" The
answer will be, "Large books." "Are they books to read, or books to write
in, like keeping accounts." The answer will be, "They are books to keep
accounts in." "Are the accounts kept in dollars and cents, or in pounds,
shillings, and pence." The answer will be, "In pounds, shillings, and
pence."
I had an opportunity personally to ascertain Hodgson's temper and
attitude. On one occasion he travelled from Boston to Philadelphia to
examine a medium who had been discovered by my colleague, Professor
Newbold. My method with mediums is passively to await developments,
and, wishing neither to interfere nor give suggestions, I took no part in the
proceedings until Professor Newbold announced that the writing hand of
the medium was calling for me. I then went to the medium from the
corner of the room where I was otherwise occupied, and saw that the
medium had written words that looked like "my boy." I took special care
not to read these words myself, and forced the medium to write them
several times. Professor Newbold announced from the appearance of these
words and of a word that looked like "father," "It's your father speaking
to you; ask him what he wants." I then asked, "Is this my father who
wants to speak to me?" and the answer came, "Yes." I then said to the
hand, "What do you want to say?" In reply to this and other questions the
hand gave me a lengthy communication involving a watch, a dog, my
brothers and sister. Throughout, I asked no leading question whatever, but
took simply what the hand gave, without suggestion. At the end of the
seance, which thoroughly disposed of this medium, for my father was still
living, Mr. Hodgson was extremely indignant, contending that I had treated
the medium unfairly. I claimed that in the presence of a communication
from a supposed spirit, I must receive in utter ignorance the information
given me, no matter how startling it might appear. I must not be supposed
even to know that my reputed father was my real father. Moreover, I knew
so little about the behavior of spirits, that I was just as ready to receive
a communication through the medium's hand from a living father as from
a dead relative. This single experience of Hodgson's attitude toward what
I believe to have been a sound scientific procedure, was sufficient to destroy
any confidence I may previously have had in his methods of experimentation.?Editor.
288 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
his confession of faith, and announces himself the leader of an antiscientific revolt. We quote the crucial statements of this article as
they are given by the author of a book on "Demon Possession and Allied
Themes/'10 who seized upon them to support a belief in the existence
of demons, in much the same way that James' general attitude toward
science is used by Worcester to sound the key-note of "Religion and
Medicine."
"We believe in all sorts of laws of nature which we cannot ourselves understand, merely because men whom we admire and trust
vouch for them.
"If Messrs. Helmholtz, Huxley, Pasteur, and Edison were simultaneously to announce themselves as converts to clairvoyance,
thought-transference and ghosts, who can doubt that there would be
a popular stampede in that direction? We should have as great a
slush of 'telepathy' in the scientific press as we now have of 'suggestion' in the medical press. We should hasten to invoke mystical
explanations without winking, and fear to be identified with a bygone regime if we held back. In society we should eagerly let it be
known that we had always thought there was a basis of truth in
haunted houses, and had, as far back as we could remember, had
faith in demoniacal possession.
"Now, it is certain that if the cat ever does jump this way the
cautious methods of the S. P. R. (Society for Psychical Research)
will give it a position of extraordinary influence.
10Nevius, "Demon Possession and Allied Themes," p. 431. The general
conclusion of this book is,?"It would seem that every age and country
present phenomena which exhibit, in some variety of form, the reality
of demon intercourse with men, and of demon-possession. The demoniac
is an involuntary victim of possession. The willing subject becomes a
medium." P. 332. James says of this work: "This interesting contribution to mental pathology would probably fifteen years ago have gained for
its author a reputation for nothing but mendacity or childish credulity in
scientific circles; but now, thanks to the 'apperceiving mass' which recent
investigations into trance conditions have prepared, probably few readers
of this journal [The Psychological Review, September, 1895] will be
seriously tempted to doubt its being a trustworthy report of facts. . . .
Epidemics of possession like those recorded in Savoy by Constans and
Chiap e Franzolini are not related by Dr Nevius. The phenomena are
among the most constant in history, and it is most extraordinary that
'science' should ever have become blind to them. The form which they
take in our community is the benign one of mediumship. Dr Nevius is a
believer in the reality of the alleged demons, and in the objectivity of
their driving out in the name of Christ, etc. Such questions cannot be
fairly discussed, however, till the phenomena have been more adequately
studied. Dr Nevius gives a large amount of collateral material and
bibliographical information; and we have to thank him for an extremely
good contribution to a really important subject."
The writer of a supplement to the third edition of "Demon Possession
and Allied Themes" says, "And so its use to psychology has been highly
approved in the Psychological Review by Dr William "James of Harvard
University, a physician whose eminence in psychology is international,
whose writings are the most fascinating and the most read in his field."
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 289
"Now, the present writer (not wholly insensible to the ill consequences of putting himself on record as a false prophet) must candidly express his own suspicion that sooner or later the cat must
jump this way.
"The special means of his conversion have been the trances of the
medium whose case in the 'Proceedings' was alluded to above.
"I find myself also suspecting that the thought-transference experiments, the veridical hallucinations, the crystal vision, yea, even
the ghosts, are sorts of things, which with the years will tend to
establish themselves. All of us live more or less on some inclined
plane of credulity. The plane tips one way in one man, another
way in another; and may he whose plane tips in no way be the first
to cast a stone!
"But whether the other things establish themselves more and
more or grow less and less probable, the trances I speak of have
broken down for my own mind the limits of the admitted order of
nature. Science, so far as science denies such exceptional facts, lies
prostrate in the dust for me; and the most urgent intellectual need
which I feel at present is that science be built up again in a form in
which such facts shall have a positive place."
In these words, William James deliberately opens a campaign for
occultism. He essays, alone, what he predicts will let loose a flood of
scientific "slush,"?the task which he asserts Helmholtz, Huxley, Pasteur,
and Edison might have accomplished. In one respect at least, James is
undoubtedly right. Most men are incapable of independent thought,
because sound logical conclusions follow only upon a right method of
thinking, and the necessary training in right method requires experience
and painstaking effort. It is therefore highly creditable to the thinking
portion of the American people that so few converts have been made
to these new superstitions on James' authority. Seventeen years have
elapsed since James opened his campaign, and we still await the
announcement that the first American scientist has jumped with the cat
after Mrs. Piper, thought-transference, veridical hallucinations, crystal
vision, and ghosts.
Thus far we have shown Professor James in the attitude of an
individual authority versus the science of psychology, but we shall see
that he has called to his aid an even higher authority than his own. In
the year 1898 he appeared before the joint committee of the Massachusetts legislature on Public Health. He is reported to have said,
"I am here having no axes to grind except the axe of truth, that 'Truth'
for which Harvard University, of which I am an officer, professes to
exist. I am a doctor of medicine, and count some of the advocates of
this proposed law among my dearest friends, and well do I know how
I shall stand in their eyes hereafter for standing to-day in my present
position. But I cannot look on passively, and I must urge my point.
That point is this: that the commonwealth of Massachusetts is not a
290 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
medical body, has no right to a medical opinion, and should not dare
to take side in a medical controversy."11
Professor James' appearance before the legislature was for the
purpose of opposing a bill which was intended, according to the secretary
of the Board of Registration in Medicine, to protect the citizens of the
commonwealth of Massachusetts from the Christian Science practitioner
and other charlatans. It must be left to those more nearly concerned
to determine whether an officer of an institution of learning is justified
in using the name of his institution in such an adventure. But we feel
at liberty to take exception to Professor James' right to speak in the
name of Truth spelled with a capital T, and in the name of the profession of medicine. Obtaining his medical degree from Harvard University in 1870, Dr James, so far as we know, never engaged in the
active practice of medicine. He taught from 1872 to 1880 in the
Harvard Medical School as instructor and assistant in comparative
anatomy and physiology. Since 1880 his path has widely diverged from
that of the medical practitioner. Professor James had scarcely more right
than any recent medical graduate, to speak before the state legislature
of Massachusetts as a doctor of medicine, which doubtless meant to
his auditors a practitioner of medicine.
The recognition which Professor James has obtained as a psychologist is also used at times to support his individual opinions. In the
article on Frederic Myers, Professor James says, "As for years I occupied
the chair of Professor of Psychology, the suggestion has been made
and by me gladly welcomed, that I should spend my portion of this
hour in defining the exact place and rank which we must accord to him
as a cultivator and promotor of the science of the mind." Using as he
does in this passage, the academic position of professor of psychology,
it is quite in place for The Psychological Clinic to examine the basis
of Professor James' claim to speak in this authoritative way as a
representative of the science of psychology. Is William James a psychologist, is he a scientist?
The son of a Swedenborgian mystic and writer,12 William James
was born in the year 1842. He attended the Lawrence Scientific School
but took no degree, and subsequently graduated from the Harvard Medical School in 1870, where he taught from 1872 until 1880 as instructor
and assistant in comparative anatomy and physiology. Professor James
may therefore be said to have had at least the training of a man of
"From "Hearings on Proposed Medical Bills in Massachusetts and New
York," reprinted from the Christian Science Journal, April, 1908.
"William James' mysticism and intellectual nonconformity may be
attributed to his Swedenborgian parentage. Henry James, the father,
"studied law for a time and then, in 1833, entered Princeton Theological
Seminary, though he no longer assented to some of the articles of the
Calvinistic Creed. The effect of his unorthodox opinions upon the other
students being objected to, he withdrew in 1835, and, going to England,
there pursued the study of theology and of philosophy. In that country he
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 291
science. In 1880 he became assistant professor of philosophy and in
1885 professor of philosophy. In 1889 he assumed the chair of psychology which he held until 1897, when he again returned to the chair
of philosophy. Alone of the larger universities of this country, Harvard still fails to make a definite distinction between the departments
of philosophy and psychology. Their philosophers teach and write psychology, and their psychologist teaches and writes philosophy. A philosopher-psychologist, temperamentally interested in mysticism, professionally engaged in philosophy, and temporarily assuming the role of a
psychologist, Professor James represents to-day the survival of an academic tradition. In addition to his eight years occupancy of the
chair of psychology at Harvard, his claim to recognition as a psychologist
is based upon the publication in 1890 of a work entitled "The Principles
of Psychology." Gifted with a charming literary style, a keen sense
for the dramatic in presentation, and a love of speculation without any
positive determination to arrive at a solution, James has produced the
most popular text book in psychology. This book is accepted by many
as a standard work on the subject. As a matter of fact, it represents a
transition between old and new psychology, and partakes more of the
spirit and methods of the old than of the new.
We turn now to a characteristic attitude of James towards distinctly
scientific problems. Modern psychology is distinguished by the experimental method. James certainly is not an experimentalist in the sense
that he has conducted experimental investigations of any importance.
It is possible, however, to call a writer scientific, if he systematizes experimental results obtained by others, and, with a sympathetic appreciation of what has been accomplished, presents views serviceable for the
further development of the science. At the time when James' book on
psychology was written, there was one problem which held the center
of interest. This was the problem of Weber's law, which became of great
importance after Fechner's researches and theoretic formulations, and
which really served as the starting point for the definite development of
experimental psychology. Worcester takes cognizance of this position of
Fechner and Weber in the following words: "We believe with Professor
James that the subconscious powers of the mind really exist and that the
recognition of them forms the most important advance which psychology
has made since the days of Fechner and Weber." While James would
accept this statement so far as the subconscious powers of the mind are
became acquainted with the sect of the Sandemanians, and after his return
(1839) he published an edition of Sandeman's 'Letters on Theron and
Aspasia.' In 1840 he put out a pamphlet, 'Remarks on the Apostolic
Gospel,' in which he affirmed the divinity of Christ, though denying the
doctrine of the Trinity. Revisiting Europe in 1843, Mr. James became a
convert to the doctrines of Swedenborg. He objected, however, to the
ecclesiasticism of the New Jerusalem church, and formulated his opposition
in a lecture delivered in Albany, 'What is the State?' (1846) and in a 'Letter
to a Swedenborgian' (1847)." (National Cyclopaedia of American Biography, Vol. XIII, p. 66.)
292 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
concerned, Worcester scarcely expresses James' opinion of Fechner and
Weber. For the work of these men, James himself has nothing but
half-liumorous contempt. "Those who desire this dreadful literature,"
he says, "can find it; it has a 'disciplinary value'; but I will not even
enumerate it in a foot note."13 Professor Titchener, to whom we owe not
only the newest but also the most exhaustive work in the English language on experimental psychology, replies that it depends on the measure
of interest one takes in the subject matter, whether or not a literature
appears dreadful. Titchener finds it necessary to devote two volumes
to the presentation of this literature, and after analyzing James' views
in detail, comes to the conclusion that they "have done real harm to the
cause of experimental psychology in America."14 While the truth of this
statement is doubtless realized by other psychologists, it has not elsewhere been so frankly acknowledged. In the early nineties of the last
century some of the most important investigations connected with the
problem of Weber's law and the psycho-physical methods, made their
appearance in this country, and for a brief moment American science
led in the development of the psycho-physical theory. This lead could
easily have been maintained, but after these early publications, nothing
of any importance appeared until Titchener's, an Englishman's, book.
It may be a mere coincidence that interest in these problems was suddenly lost at the time of the appearance of the "Principles of Psychology," but it is more likely to have been due to this book, since American
students would naturally be unwilling to waste their time upon problems
known to them only through the contemptuous remarks of an authority
whom they consider competent, because he. holds a professor's chair and
has published the most popular text book in the science.
James' attitude, even toward more general problems of psychology,
is one of utter weariness at the difficult task of investigation on a
scientific basis. It looks like intellectual asthenia, but it is really the
boredom of an emotional and mystical temperament forced to dig when
it would like to fly. Naturally, therefore, he gives expression to such
debilitating opinions as the following:?"Perhaps you will ask me what
are the practical benefits conferred on the world by this interesting
science. So far as I am able to discern, absolutely none."15 Thus
might a poet feel toward the progress that has been made in the
science of electricity from Faraday to Edison. The poet's opinion would
scarcely influence the course of science or the feelings of the practical
man as he turns on the electric light. But a clever writer with a poet's
make-up, backed by an academic position, is capable of arresting to an
""Principles of Psychology," Vol. I. p. 549.
""Experimental Psychology," Vol. II, Introduction, p. cxvi. Titchener
adds, "Young students must be urged to 'plough through the difficulties' of
Fechner's books, if they are presently to become psychologists: and James'
criticism, which is mainly a criticism of temperament and not of reason,
gives them an excuse to shirk these difficulties."
15R. and M., p. 15.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 293
appreciable extent the progress of a science which has still its place
to win in the world.
While James contributes neither in fact nor in spirit to the results
and methods of modern experimental psychology, the science might
yet owe him much for the development of its theory. James' contributions to the theories of the science appear to be important. A theory
of the emotions goes by the name of the James-Lange theory, but the
difference between James' method and that of Lange is well known in
this connection. James has contributed a phrase, a paradox, and literary
expression, whereas Lange has contributed results which, whether they
be accepted or ultimately rejected, have played a determining part in
the development of the analysis of the emotions. James' exposition
of the theory is chiefly useful to arouse to a newer point of view those
in whom reflection is moribund. Throughout the "Principles of Psychology," the dramatic, the sensational, and the unusual, have played
the leading roles. For this reason the work is a stimulus rather than
a treatise?a book for the beginner, and not for the scholar. That it
has had a tremendous influence in arousing an interest in psychological
questions and has assisted in the development of the science is only an
evidence of the low level of scientific work in this country. Wundt's
Grundzuge der physiologischen Psycliologie is still the great compendium of information in modern psychology. The last edition of
this work appeared in 1903. To make it an authoritative record, the
entire literature of psychology has been scanned for worthy contributions
to the science. In this encyclopaedic work not a statement of fact nor
an acceptable theory is reported on the authority of James, unless we
except the statement that deaf mutes whose labyrinth is destroyed do
not seem to be exposed to dizziness.16
18Wundt refers to James nine times in the course of three volumes:?
I, 357. In a footnote, James is cited as an opponent of the analytic
method, who is yet compelled to resort to a partial analysis of the stream
of thought, because otherwise a psychological investigation would be impossible; but J. does not carry out the analysis so far as to arrive at the
"simple elements," stopping short at a point which he fixes arbitrarily.
II, 26. In a footnote, J. is cited as one of the supporters of a theory
which W. calls suspect (psycliologiscli bcdenklich).
II, 40. In a footnote, J. is cited as one of the supporters of a view
which W. considers to rest upon an obviously insufficient acquaintance with
the facts.
II, 307-8. The only reference of any length. After quoting J., "we do
not cry, because we are sad, but we are sad, because we cry," W. says in
effect, "Even the paradoxical inversion of the causality of feelings, given
by James and Lange, has at least the relative merit of emphasizing the
intensifying effect which is exerted upon sensations of strong feeling-tone
accompanying the emotions, although this effect was known long ago." W.
then proceeds to discuss the fundamental defect of these and all other
physiological theories of feeling.
II, 478. In a footnote, J. is cited as one of several authorities for the
statement that deaf-mutes whose labyrinth is destroyed do not seem to be
subject to dizziness.
294 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
We therefore find little warrant in fact for considering James a psychologist,17 in the meaning which must be given to this term since G.
Stanley Hall brought "psychology" from Germany and established the
first laboratory of the science at Johns Hopkins University. James'
propaganda for occultism forces us reluctantly to question his authority
as a psychologist, but we have no desire to detract in any way from his
distinction as a litterateur, whose work is characterized by a pronounced
interest in psychological subjects. The art of William James resembles
that of his brother Henry, although the medium in which they give
expression to their thought and feeling differs greatly. William James
may be something far better than a psychologist. The science of philology is a very different human product from the drama, and yet both
concern themselves with words. In the estimation of the world, the
dramatist takes a higher position than the philologian, but this does
II, G55. In a footnote, J. is enumerated among the representatives of
a certain type of nativistic theories of space, all of which theories W.
asserts involve hopeless contradictions.
III, 241. J.'s theory of the emotions is mentioned as a radical expression of the "sensational theory," emphasizing the mimetic and pantomimic
accompaniments. W. calls the sensational theory an entirely arbitrary
hypothesis which corresponds neither with the entrance (into consciousness) and course of these acompaniments nor with the facts of introspection.
Ill, 298. In a footnote, J. is cited as a representative of one of the
theories of the will which are essentially transcendental.
Ill, 568. In a footnote, J. is cited as one of those present-day psychologists who follow Hartley in theorizing on the physiology of sensations.
"In discussing some of James' contributions to the psychology of religion, Hall says: "Although the most brilliant litterateur and stylist in
philosophy since Schopenhauer, unless it be Nietzsche, whose diathesis his
so resembles, our leading American in this field, a most copious and
judicious quoter and such a masterly describer of his own even flitting and
evanescent subjective psychic processes, with both person and page invested
with such irresistible charm, his method, and many of his positions here,
seem to do no less violence to fact than do his dicta concerning sex. Most
of the cases and experiences which constitute so large a part of his volume
are abnormal and some teratological, from which true religion, I believe,
saves its followers. These pathological varieties of religious experience
can explain piety itself no more than the mental and physical freaks of
hysteria explain true womanhood, the Wiertz museum explain art, or the
effects of music on the insane show its real nature. That God is proven
by an hallucinatory sense of presence, that the religion of the healthyminded is mind cure, that immortality is demonstrated by ghostly telepathy,
and that the lurid experiences of pious Streberthum, saturated by affectation, impressionism, and the passion to be unique and interesting, described
in colors laid on with a trowel and all marked by an abandon and superlativeness that throws scientific caution and moderation to the winds, and
which, at the best, are only a few of the most superficial phenomena of
the adolescent ferment?this seems to me the babel of Babylon or of
Walpurgis night, and not the music of the heavenly city. True, the
psychopathic temperament has advantages, but they are at best only
literary, and it is itself essentially both anti-religious and anti-scientific.
Many if not most of these 'experiences' are the yellow literature of religious
psychology." "Adolescence," Vol. II. pp. 292-3.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 295
not warrant the dramatist in using his position, real or assumed, to
establish standards of criticism for the philologian. As a matter of fact,
James belongs to the list of semi-scientific, semi-imaginative writers
of whom Maeterlinck is one of the best examples.18 In biology the place
of Burroughs, Maeterlinck, Thompson-Seton, and others is fixed beyond
the confines of the science. Full credit may be given to the work which
these men do, although its effect upon the science itself may be small.
Psychology, however, is not yet so far advanced that the natural history
attitude and method may be clearly distinguished from the strictly
scientific phases of development. James himself commends the natural
history method, which he so conspicuously exemplifies. He says, "Behind
the minute anatomists and the physiologists with their metallic instruments, there have always stood the outdoor naturalists with their eyes
and love of concrete nature. The former call the latter superficial, but
there is something wrong with your laboratory biologist who has no
sympathy with living animals. In psychology there is a similar distinction. Some psychologists are fascinated by the varieties of mind in
living action, others by the dissecting out, whether by logical analysis
or by brass instruments, of whatever elementary mental processes may
be there."19 We cannot eat our cake and have it too, nor can we dissect
the human mind and at the same moment palpitate with emotion over
its fascinating varieties. It is as foolish to attack the psychologist
upon this score as it would be to assert that the physiological chemist
who analyzes the contents of the stomach ignores the fact that there
is such a human sensation as hunger. Tiddledewinks and picture puzzles differ essentially from the game of chess. Perhaps they are better
games. Certainly they make a wider appeal and are socially more
useful, but none the less when one is playing chess it is desirable to
play the game according to its rules and for all there is in it. Professor James' criticism of science, if allowed to stand, would brush aside
the logical and experimental methods which the human intellect has
developed as rules of the game.
With unusual charm of manner and literary style, with an outspoken
sympathy for every human interest, William James has won recognition as our leading American psychologist through sheer force of
personality. Nothing but a realization of the danger to the public
and of the injury to psychology, which result from his using his professional authority to build up a modern occultism, would justify us in
questioning this authority. The spoiled child of American psychology,
exempt from all serious criticism, and the beau ideal of a large and
cultured circle, Professor James, since the publication of his "Principles
of Psychology," has apparently relaxed the intellectual inhibition which
every man should exert over his desires. The wish, from being father
18For example, "The Life of the Bee."
19Popular Science Monthly, Vol. LIX, p. 388.
296 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to the thought, becomes father to the fact as well.20 Characterized
throughout a long life by an unusual fairness of mind, we find him at
last becoming so tolerant of all beliefs that he is willing to exalt the
value of systems which to the common-sense judgment contain but very
few grains of truth. "Our scientific respectability keeps us from exercising the mystical potrions of our nature freely. If we are doctors,
our mind-cure sympathies, if we are mind-curists, our medical sympathies
are tied up.21 The "Will to Believe" throws down the ordinary canons
of truth and offers emotional value as a substitute. "Faith in a fact can
help create the fact."22 In "Pragmatism" James practically asserts that a
principle is true because it appears to work. Pragmatism affords a good
philosophic basis for Christian Science, but a very insecure foundation
for real science.23 It says in effect that the difficulties of arriving at
truth are too great, and that scientific methods carry us forward too
short a distance. Therefore a short cut is made, which does not solve
the difficulties, but like Christian Science, sidesteps the issue and refuses
to acknowledge their existence. Dr Worcester is a follower of James
into this field of philosophic speculation. "In spite of John Stuart Mill,
the most powerful motive of religion will ever be the Practical Motive,
and by the Practical Motive we mean believing because it is good
and useful to believe, believing what is good and useful to believe. We
are never at a loss to find reasons for what we wish to believe.24 Flammarion also exhibits an hypertrophied "will to believe." In discussing
20As for example in.?"As regards prayers for the sick, if any medical
fact can be considered to stand firm, it -is that in certain environments
prayer may contribute to recovery and should be encouraged as a therapeutic measure." (Quoted in R. and M., p. 309.) Surely we may believe
in the therapeutic efficacy of prayer without believing it to be a medical
fact as well established as the physiological action of castor oil.
James himself says,?"All depends on the character of the personal
contribution x. Wherever the facts to be formulated contain such a contribution, we may logically, legitimately, and inexpugnably believe what
we desire. The belief creates its verification. The thought becomes literally
father to the fact, as the wish was father to the thought." ("The Will
to Believe," pp. 102-103.)
21"The Energies of Men," Philosophical Reviciv, Vol. XVI, p. 3. It is
curious to find James accepted by people of orthodox religious belief. For
example, this opinion is widely and favorably quoted, "It is quite obvious
that a wave of religious activity, analogous in some respects to the spread
of early Christianity, Buddhism, and Mohammedanism, is passing over
our American world.'' To understand the significance of this passage it is
necessary to take it in connection with the context, which is as follows,
"We are just now witnessing?but our scientific education has unfitted most
of us for comprehending the phenomenon?a very copious unlocking of energies by ideas, in the persons of those converts to 'New Thought,' 'Christian
Science,' 'Metaphysical Healing,' or other forms of spiritual philosophy, who
are too numerous among us to-day. The ideas here are healthy-minded and
optimistic; and it is quite obvious that a wave of religious activity, analogous in many respects to the spread of early Christianity, Buddhism, and
Mohammedanism is passing over our American world." ("The Energies of
Men," The Psilosophical Review, Vol. XVI, pp. 16-17.)
22"Tlie Will to Believe," p. 25.
2Tliis refers only to the James variety of pragmatism.
24R. and M., p. 11.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 297
the disclosures of fraud on the part of the medium, Eusapia Paladino,
he says, "When one has the conviction that something real exists, one
always returns, in spite of incessant trickery."25 Philosophy may be,
as James believes, "more a matter of passionate vision than of logic,20
but usually, pasionate vision has been the sphere of the poet and prophet,
while philosophy has concerned itself with the logical foundation of whatever visions, true or false, may come to man.
We pause to consider one more instance of the scientific "slush"27
whose source is to be found in James' example and teaching. A fervid
imagination, unrestrained by logical method, has swept a physician
out of his clinic into the philosopher's chair.28 It is remarkable that it
does not seem to have crossed Dr Putnam's mental horizon that for
him to give birth to a system of philosophy which antagonizes the current
trend of scientific thought is analogous to a clergyman's picking up a
theory like the similia similibus curantur and building thereon a complete system of therapeutics. We marvel at the naivete of such statements as the following: "Philosophic doctrines leaning toward 'idealism'
of some sort have indeed made of late much progress, and many men
who might deny them verbally are ready to die, if need be, in behalf
of the truths for which such doctrines stand?the reality of love and
justice and freedom of the will."29 Idealism, as a matter of fact, has
made not a little continuous progress since the time of Descartes. An
outspoken determinism like Huxley's may rest upon an idealistic foundation. Whether Huxley, or anybody else, has ever been ready to die for
the reality of love, we are unable to say. A mother may show her willingness to die for the concrete love of her child, but to die for love in
the abstract, even for justice in the abstract, and above all to die for
such an abstraction as the freedom of the will, would seem to require
a very unusual measure of the instinct of useless self-destruction.
The substitution of emotion for thought so characteristic of the
philosophy of James, appears in the following gem: "At first sight the students of the exact sciences seem safe guides. But in fact the worlds conceived of by biology and physics are but fictitious and conventional figments. The materials for their construction are but heaps of atoms,
piles of stones, with nothing between them but blind 'forces,' really
another set of 'facts,' a poor substitute for the human consciousness heav?H. Addington Bruce. "The Progress of Psychical Research." The
Forum, Vol. XL, p. 579.
26Hil)J)ert Journal, Vol. VII, No. 2, p. 294.
27In addition to current periodicals, which are full of it, see Baker, Ray
Stannard, "New Ideals in HealingFallows, the Rt. Rev. Samuel, "Health
and Happiness, or, Religious Therapeutics and Right Living;" McGomb, S.,
"Healing Ministry of the ChurchMacDonald, R., "Mind, Religion and
HealthSanford, Dr A. E., and Drum, Rev. Walter, "Pastoral Medicine."
-sJames J. Putnam, M.D., "The Philosophy of Psychotherapy." Psychotherapy, Vol. I, No. 1, p. 17 ff.
29Psychotherapy, Vol. I, No. 1, p. 19.
298 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ing with emotion."30 We try our best to imagine the process of construction when between the piles of stones, instead of the customary mortar, we
place a human consciousness heaving with emotion.
When arguments fail Dr Putnam, poetry helps him out. He incorporates a poem of Schiller's which advises us to get into our boat, and,
without a pilot, but with inspiration as our guide, sail on, just believing
and daring, for thus only through a marvel can we reach the land of
marvels.
Thus inspired, Dr Putnam finds that the world which the physicist
considers "heaps of atoms and of forces" is really "a world of 'persons,'
and the streams of atoms and of forces are signs and symbols of the
constructive, purposeful activity of some unifying consciousness, partaking, like all symbols, of the actual nature of the thing they stand
for. This cataract of waves, assumed to be but particles of inert
matter, reveals itself as human voices instinct with reason and emotion.
In lieu of 'sequences' we find causality and creation actually at work."
We need Dr Putnam's assurance that this is "a world of 'values,' and
one in great part approved by common sense." We rejoice with him
that this world in a measure satisfies his longings, and we learn with real
regret that "When we strive to live wholly and permanently in this newfound, timeless world of 'values,' we find that it is impossible." After
all, "we must accept the physicist's devices as admirable and indispensable, even when we cast aside their claim to represent reality." Even
though Dr Putnam is confident that he has found a better and surer
way to grasp the "inner meaning of the universe," he admits what the
perusal of his philosophy has already led us to suppose,?that the task
is "too difficult for reason, difficult even for faith."
While this cosmology of Putnam's is a museum specimen, we note
throughout its exposition the reverberation of obscurantist elements from
Professor Royce's philosophy. We are therefore not surprised to find
that Professor Royce is one of the "well certified authorities," whom he
"principally" followed in piecing together this travesty on metaphysics.
In Worcester also, we find an obscurantism of similar origin. "We
often hear men say, 'Faith belongs to religion; knowledge is the mark
of science; the weakness of religion is its uncertainty; the strength
of science it its firm standing on the bed-rock of observation and experiment.' Yet as Professor Eoyce has abundantly shown, the whole
structure of science rests upon a body of great faiths, of beliefs which
must be trusted but cannot be proved. . . . Such a faith which lies
behind all the great scientific advances and discoveries of the modern
world must be first accepted and relied on, and in proportion as it is
accepted and relied on it evinces its genuineness."31
30Psychotherapy, Vol. I, No. 1, p. 34.
81R. and M., p. 290; referring to Royce, "The Religious Aspects of
Philosophy," pp. 291-324.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 299
Professor Royce has been more guarded in indicating the popular
implications of his obscurantist attitude than James has been in exploiting the occult and mystical elements of his psycho-philosophical theories,
or than Miinsterberg in the application of psychological methods and
results to law, medicine, and everyday affairs.32 Royce's work, moreover, has been thought out in more deliberate fashion, and presents a
point of view and a system of philosophy which would require, in order
to do them justice, an exhaustive treatment not suitable to this journal.
Nevertheless, in these pragmatic times we may justly judge a tree by
its fruits, and in the work of Worcester and Putnam, we discover Royce's
obscurantism performing its appointed task. In the preface to the
"Philosophy of Loyalty," Royce mentions Dr Cabot and Dr Putnam
among the friends to whom he is indebted for "direct and indirect aid"
in preparing the book, and for "criticisms and other suggestions."33
However Royce may feel toward Putnam's perspicuous display of
philosophic absurdities, there has been an admitted interchange of
intellectual inspiration. Moreover, Royce is announced and pictured
as a contributor to Psychotherapy, and promises an article on "Idealism
and Spiritual Health." The gifts which the three wise men of our most
venerable institution of learning lay at the feet of the infant science in
this country are obscurantism, occultism, and bluff.
If any supporter of the scientific "slush" whose outpouring Professor
James predicted, flings at us such stones of rhetoric and false logic as
"materialism" and "soulless psychology," we appeal, in reply, to the
practical outcome of our psychology,?the social forces with which
we believe ourselves to be aligned. Many shades of opinion are represented in the multiplicity of current movements toward social and
individual betterment. To the aid of these diverse movements, The
Psychological Clinic wishes to bring the best that modern psychology
can offer. They include the Emmanuel Movement itself, so far as its
spiritual, moral, and social elements are concerned; the Y. M. C. A.,
which for so many years has proved a healthful influence in the lives
of adolescents; the combination of religious, social, and economic
forces represented by modern philanthropic work, by church labor
organizations, prison reform work, public hygiene, the anti-tuberculosis campaign, the Juvenile Court, special schools, the agitation for
child labor legislation, play-grounds, and social settlements. In other
words, The Psychological Clinic stands for everything that the Emmanuelists appear to advocate, except the unbridling of our intellectual
inhibitions, the depreciation of science and of the human intellect, the
32For a complete disposal of Miinsterberg's pretensions, so far as the law
is concerned, see "Professor Miinsterberg and the Psychology of Evidence,"
by John H. Wigmore, in the Illinois Law Revietc, Vol. Ill (No. 7, February,
1909), pp. 399-444.
^"The Philosophy of Loyalty," preface, p. xi.
300 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
recrudescence of occultism, the popularization of hypnotism, and the
practical developments of the theory of subconsciousness, represented by
Worcesterism and the thousand and one cults which revive primitive
animistic beliefs.
If Dr Worcester's book and the periodical called Psychotherapy had
been isolated phenomena, if they had not made pretensions to represent
the science of psychology, and if these pretensions had not been apparently justified, no attention would have been paid to them. They have
been subjected to a critical examination, because they are typical examples of the intellectual flotsam borne along on a rising tide of occultism,
and because the force of lunar attraction which is lifting this tide to
its present high water mark radiates from the philosophical department
of our leading American university. The tide which is now at flood
will presently ebb. The moonbeams of "anti-science" will fade in the
full light of frank discussion. In contributing to this discussion, the
purpose of The Psychological Clinic has been to shift the burden of
adverse criticism from psychology to those who misrepresent its ideals,
methods, and practical results.
