A Lesson from Medical Inspection of Schools
============================================

By George H. Martin, Litt.D.,
Secretary State Board of Education, Boston, Mass.
IS
Medical inspection of school children has been continued
long enough and has become sufficiently widespread to justify
some rather sweeping generalizations. No large group of children has ever been examined without finding numerous physical
defects and disabilities, serious enough not only to affect their
school work but to form, a real handicap in their after efforts to
secure a livelihood.
These results have been so universal as to warrant the assertion that a community which has not provided through its proper
authorities for a thorough-going inspection of its schools is guilty
of criminal negligence.
The aggregate amount of discomfort and pain experienced
by school children is enough to awaken universal sympathy. The
hindrances to school advancement and the consequent waste of
effort and of money are matters of serious concern, but the ignorance which lies back of it all and causes it all is a matter of much
greater moment.
When by school inspection it is discovered that of more than
400,000 children examined in the schools of Massachusetts, 81,000 are defective in vision and 22,000 in hearing; when it is
stated on reliable authority that 90 per cent of the school children
of Germany have defective teeth and examination shows the same
proportion in American towns; when 137 cases of adenoids are
reported for a single city; when whole schools are infected with
head-lice; we get much new light on school problems, on the subject of backward children, and, perhaps, of delinquent children.
Then we consign the unfortunates to the care of the family
physician, send them to the public dispensary or the public clinic, _
or send the school nurse to look after the cases in the home and by
these means we patch up a few. Some glasses are provided, some
teeth cleaned and filled, some adenoids removed, some heads shaved
and petroleumized, and many children begin to know the joy of
living.
(9)
10 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
All this is good. It is worth many times what it has cost.
But is it enough ? Have school people done all their duty when
they have admitted the school physician and the school nurse to the
sacred precincts of the school room, when they have sent out the
warning notices to the parents ?
Supposing that all defects have been discovered and. remedied, so that school life goes on without aches and pains. Must
we go all over it next year and the next and forever? The Massachusetts law says that every child shall be examined annually for
defects and disabilities. There is no statute of limitations. Is
there any hope of limitation? Is there any mode of limitation?
Or is the social mill to go on grinding out diseased and enfeebled
children by the thousands indefinitely!
This is a more fundamental question than how we shall modify and adapt school work and school life to these defectives. That
is an immediate and important question. But it deals only with
symptoms, while it leaves the disease itself untouched. The disease isi ignorance complicated by wilful neglect.
That the ignorance of the laws and conditions, of health is
less dense than it once was is undoubtedly true. The standard of
intelligence in these matters has been slowly rising. When Horace
Mann wrote his Sixth Report, in which he urged the necessity of
instruction in physiology and hygiene, he satirized a school girl
of the period:
"Shall a young miss of sixteen, elated with the idea that she is just
finishing her education, study rhetoric, and analyze scraps of the
speeches of Grecian and Roman orators, when she does not know that the
fumes of burning coal will destroy life; and thinks, because she swallows
her food and inhales her breath through her neck, that they both pass
on to one common cavity in the chest, and hence concludes that respiration and digestion are functions of the same organ? Neither of the
above is an imaginary or an extreme case."
Perhaps we are warranted in thinking that such school girls
are not to be found.
When twenty years later Herbert Spencer sent out his hook
on education everybody knew that his gibes at the English country gentleman were based on facts, and that he might have included American gentlemen as well. ITe said:
"When the country gentleman has paid his daily visit to the stable,
and personally inspected the condition and treatment of his horse; when
he has glanced at his minor live stock and given directions about them;
how often does he go up to the nursery and examine into its dietary, its
hours, its ventilation?
MEDICAL INSPECTION OF SCHOOLS. 11
''The raising of first-rate bullocks is an occupation on which men of
education willingly bestow much time, inquiry and thought. The bringing up of fine human beings is an occupation tacitly voted unworthy of
their attention."
There is 110 doubt, that more thought is being1 given to personal
and domestic hygiene. There are more bath tubs and tooth brushes
and clinical thermometers in family use; more family dietaries
are prepared with regard to the laws of health; architects are
more willing to make concessions in the matter of ventilation of
public and private buildings. Wells for the family water supply
are more remote from sink spouts and privies and barn yards.
Communities are more critical as to their water supply and the
disposal of their waste, and there is more belief in the necessity
and efficiency of pure food laws.
That this improvement is general is shown by the reduction
of the number of cases of diphtheria and typhoid fever and tuberculosis,?preventable diseases.
More hopeful still is the changed attitude of mind towards
diseases. Some cobwebs of superstition have been brushed away
and some theologic mists have been dispersed. Probably nowhere
to-day, even in the churches which adhere most closely to the
ancient formulas, would we hear the lines by Watts found in all
the old hymn books:
Diseases are Thy servants, Lord;
They come at Thy command.*
The educational forces by which this general uplift has come
are many. The medical profession has devoted itself with the
finest public spirit to the enlightenment of the people. The campaign against tuberculosis is a splendid example of the energy,
the ingenuity and the self-sacrificing ardor of the doctors. The
press has had a powerful influence in this direction. There are
few magazines and few newspapers which do not discuss with
great, frequency and, on the whole, with intelligence and force,
questions which pertain to public and personal health. Discussions in women's clubs and parents' associations of various kinds
liave helped.
To all these must be added the influence of the public schools.
Physiology and hygiene have been included in the curriculum of
many schools for many years, and some of the instruction given
has been well selected, well arranged and well presented. To this
extent the schools are entitled to credit.
*This hymn was marked, " For Sickbed Devotions."
12 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
But when we have admitted all this and congratulated ourselves
upon the improvement, the disclosures made through medical inspection still confront us and call for action.
The lesson which I have learned is that, in addition to all
the other forces making for a better understanding of health conditions, it is the imperative and immediate duty of the schools
of all grades to broaden and make more vital their teaching of
physiology and hygiene.
Compulsory laws exist in nearly all the states, making instruction in these subjects obligatory, but unfortunately the circumstances under which these laws were enacted left the conservative school people everywhere irritated and cold. The law in its
purpose and scope was too narrow, limited as it was to the effects
of alcohol and narcotics, and the methods prescribed in most states
tended to make the work abortive.
The opportunity now exists, and the results of medical inspection furnish the argument, for a now propaganda in favor
of health instruction. It should begin in the lowest grade, because
the little children not only need to be taught how to care for themselves, but how to care for children still younger. The majority
of children of the poorer families, especially of the more recent
foreign immigration, have the burden early laid on them of "minding the baby". The following facts are typical:
In a class of fifty children, thirty have the daily care of
younger children.
That such care is inevitable is shown by the fact that, in the
families represented by these fifty children, thirty-four have four
or more children.
The instruction here needs to be simple, direct and sympathetic, absolutely free from technical anatomy and technical physiology. To instruction should be added insistence upon practice,
for the end sought is the early formation of right habits. The
results of the right sort of teaching will not be found in answers
to questions, but in clean hands, faces, teeth, bodies and clothes,
in clear eyes and a responsive brain, in a frame erect and elastic,
with all the signs of an abundant supply of good red blood. The
teaching will also show itself in the luncheons the children bring
and in the way they spend their pennies.
In the higher grades the same ends are to be sought, but the
instruction should be less purely dogmatic, and knowledge of the
organs of the body and their function should furnish a rational
basis for hygienic rules. Anatomy should still be kept subordinate.
The hygiene of the home and its relation to personal health should
MEDICAL INSPECTION OF SCHOOLS. 13
be taught. The personal habits of the pupils must still be an
object of the teacher's success.
It ought not to be true in any school, as the reports of a school
physician show was true in one set of schools, that the pupils in
every grade up to the senior class in the high school had on an
average four or more decayed and decaying teeth, and the teachers
did not know it.
It ought to be said to all teachers and said with emphasis,?
"These things ought ye to have done at the risk of leaving some
other things undone." We hear much about "essentials" in school
education. A sound body kept sound by right living is the essential which underlies and conditions all the rest.
In the high schools now a most anomalous condition exists.
Not only is physiology not included in the course of study in
many high schools, but when it is included it is not required of
college preparatory students. So that these people who are to
represent the superlative culture of the times are left in ignorance of the means by which they acquire all their learning.
They are expected to translate the maxim of Solon, TvcoOi seavroy
into "Know thyself," and never to obey it. The instruction is
less intelligent than that of Mr. Squeers: Bottiney, noun substantive, a knowledge of plants. When he has learned that bottiney means a knowledge of plants, he goes and knows em. ^
No school system can justify itself, if it fails to require as a
major subject in high schools the study of human physiology.
It should be so based on the other sciences and so correlated with
them as to appeal to the intelligence of the most advanced students, and its relations to sociology should be shown through
public hygiene to be so intimate as to fill it with genuine human
interest.
Two hindrances have been found to the successful prosecution of this work in the schools. The text-books have been poor,
and many of the teachers uninstructed. Text-books are improving and normal schools are making personal and school hygiene
more prominent in their training. Much, however, remains to
be done.
To-day the physicians, general and special, are more alive
to the needs of the times than are the school people. o permanent results of the present agitation for better sanitary conditions,
domestic and public, can be hoped for unless the schools cooperate
with all the other agencies. The universal need is for a higher
order of intelligence respecting all the things that make for health,
and the foundation of such intelligence must be laid in the schools.
