A Monkey with a Mind
======================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1909, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. III. No. 7. December 15, 1909.

By Lightner. Witmer.
It was no special interest in Peter1 which took me to a per-
formance at Keith's Theatre in Boston on the evening of September
fourteenth last. I was then interested only in ascertaining the
extent to which the anthropoid apes could be trained and perchance
educated. Sometime during the past winter, in conversation with
Dr. Furness,2 I had maintained that there was no reason why an
ape who could be trained to ride a bicycle might not be taught to
articulate at least a few of the elements of a language, and I ex-
pressed the desire to undertake this experiment the outcome of
which, whether successful or not, I thought would be an important
contribution to animal psychology. As a result of this conversation
Dr. Furness brought for me from Borneo an infant orang-outang,
between one and two years of age, which we had begun to train as a
scientific experiment. I therefore sought to discover what had
been accomplished with a closely related species, the chimpanzee.
As I entered the theatre* my feelings were commingled interest
and doubt. My doubts were bred from knowledge of the difficulty
of judging the intelligence of an animal from a stage performance.
So-called educated horses and even educated seals and fleas have
made their appeal in large numbers to the credulity of the public.
Can any animal below man be educated in the proper sense of
the word ? Or is the animal mind susceptible of nothing more
than a mechanical training, and only given the specious counterfeit
of an educated intelligence when under the direct control of the
trainer ?
My doubts were not allayed by the public announcement
claiming that Peter had been "born a monkey and made himself
1Peter is the name of a chimpanzee who is being exhibited on the Keith
circuit. The opportunity to study him was obtained through Mr. Barnes
of Keith's theatre in Philadelphia, to whom I am indebted for this
courtesy. My authority for calling Peter a monkey is Murray's New Eng-
lish Dictionary, which defines the word in its general application as "an
animal of any species of the group of mammals closely allied to and
resembling man, and ranging from the anthropoid apes to the marmosets."
2Dr. William H. Furness, 3d, the explorer, author of "The Home-life
of Borneo Head-hunters."
(179)
180 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
a man." I knew before I entered the theatre that I should be
unable to judge from a mere stage performance whether Peter
had been in any real sense educated or simply trained to the blind
performance of a few tricks. Nevertheless the performance deeply
impressed me, as it must anyone, with the expertness of the animal
in skating, riding a bicycle, drinking from a tumbler and eating
with a fork, threading a needle, lighting and smoking a cigarette.
From such mere expertness, however, remarkable as it was and
accompanied by very human changes of facial expression, I would
A SATISFACTORY DRINK.
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 181
nevertheless hesitate to draw any conclusion as to the animal's
intellectual appreciation of what he was doing. Idiots capable
of unusual dexterity and possessed of musical or even mathematical
ability, yet in other respects markedly subnormal in intelligence,
are not unknown. Despite the fact that a high degree of motor
training in children implies ordinarily an equivalent intellectual
development, I felt inclined to do little more than marvel at an
AN ANXIOUS MOMENT.
'DON'T I GET MY DRINK?"
182 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
animal who could be trained to such expertness of performance.
Every feature of the stage performance might have been carefully
planned and any departure from it might, as I thought, have
thrown the animal on his own resources and disclosed the limita-
tions of his intelligence.
Yet it must be admitted there were details of the public per-
formance which suggested intelligence. For instance, in riding
up an inclined plane and down a small flight of steps, he allowed
himself to go very close to the flies, and to save himself put out
one 'hand and cleverly pushed himself away, while still retaining
his balance. I also saw him ride as close as possible to the side
wall of the stage setting, and take a very short turn with the
evident purpose of seeing whether or not he could do it. From
time to time I observed that he made the work more difficult for
himself than was needful, seemingly out of mere bravado and in
pure enjoyment of the task.
Since that day I have seen Peter in five public performances,
have tested him at my Psychological Clinic at the University of
Pennsylvania, and privately on three occasions. I now believe
that in a very real sense the animal is himself giving the stage
performance. He knows what he is doing, he delights in it, he
varies it from time to time, he understands the succession of tricks
which are being called for, he is guided by word of mouth without
any signal open or concealed, and the function of his trainer is
exercised mainly to steady and control. At one stage performance
he reached the top of the incline with insufficient speed to carry
him "on even keel" down the steps. He jumped from the wheel,
landing on his feet, and when the wheel fell to the floor he quickly
picked it up, mounted and dashed up the incline and down the
steps successfully. He gave every appearance of possessing deter-
mination, courage, and self-directed interest.
I am also prepared to accept the statement of his trainers,
Mr. and Mrs. McArdle, that Peter's proficiency is not so much the
result of training as of downright self-education. They assert,
for example, that a few months ago, when he was brought from
England to this country, roller skates were fastened to his feet
for the first time. This was done merely for the purpose of keep-
ing him on deck and out of the rigging of the ship. In two days'
time he was skating all over the deck. By the time the ship
reached New York, he had acquired sufficient expertness to justify
them in giving a public exhibition of his skill. They also tell
me that he threaded a needle the first time he tried, and further-
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 183
more, that they have never taught him to use hammer and nails,
screw driver and screws, but that he has picked up their use while
playing with them. He unlocks and locks a padlock on the stage,
but I am told he can open any lock and is not safe in a room with
the door locked, so long as the key is within his reach. Give him
time and he will, from a number of keys, select the right one and
undo an intricate lock. The difficulty is to restrain him, on the
stage and off, rather than to urge him to display his accomplish-
ments. At the Psychological Clinic there was
a washstand with running water in an out-of-
the-way corner. While I was talking with his
trainers, Peter bolted unobserved to the wash-
stand, lifted himself up on his hands, turned
on the water, applied his mouth to the spigot,
and drank before he was snatched away by his
trainers. In these actions Peter showed an
intelligent employment of acquired skill, very
unlike the mechanical performance of a few
carefully prepared tricks.
I hesitated long over the advisability of
testing Peter's intelligence at the Psycholog-
ical Clinic, fearing lest erroneous conclusions
might be drawn should it become known that
I had presented a chimpanzee to a clinic de-
voted to the examination of backward and
defective children. I assumed that this ape, no matter what grade
of intelligence he might show, would be inevitably compared with
the human child, and consequently I might be put in the position
of claiming for Peter a human intelligence which I hardly thought
him to possess.
Now, however, that Peter has been tested at the clinic, I no
longer fear such imputations, and am willing to assert that it is
well nigh impossible to give an adequate account of the intelligence
shown by this ape, who cannot be more than five or six years of
age, except in terms of comparison with the abilities and dis-
abilities of the human child. Peter not only has more intelligence
than any animal hitherto reported in the annals of science,?his
intelligence is not in the class of animal intelligence, as we psy-
chologists understand the term. The study of this ape's mind is a
subject fit, not for the animal psychologist, but for the child
psychologist.
Speculation has at times arisen concerning the existence of a
"t
:
*
THE FAUCET WHICH
rETER DISCOVERED, OPEN-
ED FOR HIMSELF, AND
DRANK FROM.
184 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
"missing link" between the higher apes and man. Such a "missing
link" ought to present an anatomical form intermediate between the
highest anthropoid ape and the lowest type of man. This gap has
been partly filled by the discovery of the Neanderthal man and the
apelike remains found in Java. The chasm between the mind of
the highest anthropoids and the mind of man has been held to be
not less than the chasm between their structures. This chasm
Peter's mind practically bridges. I should hesitate to report the
facts disclosed at the Psychological Clinic if my individual testi-
mony were the only evidence. The nature faker is one who
accounts for animal behavior in terms of human thought and feel-
ing. Prom being classed among the nature fakers I shall be saved
by the fortunate circumstance that most of the tests which I shall
report were made in the presence of a group of over one hundred
persons, many of them scientifically interested in the study of
animal intelligence, and fully capable of making an independent
interpretation of the facts.3
On the morning of October ninth Peter skated into the clinic
with a breezy rush. He was clad in black cloth trousers, waist-
coat, and Tuxedo coat, and wore a starched shirt and collar with
a red neckerchief instead of a cravat, which he later pulled off.
He had on striped socks and patent leather oxfords, as well as
skates, and on his head he wore a small silk hat kept on by elastic.
He dashed straight for an open window, which had to be closed
immediately. During his stay at "the clinic he looked often at the
window, apparently interested in the passing cars which he could
plainly hear and just catch a glimpse of. His excursion to the
window over, he skated about the room, apparently ready to shake
hands with the company present. My secretary, who took steno-
graphic notes of all that occurred, bent down and offered her right
hand; he took it, and after giving it a shake, put the back of her
hand to his lips in the most courtly and gallant manner. Then he
skated off,- round and round a platform, pursued by Mr. McArdle,
turning expertly and dodging with remarkable celerity, from time
to time stopping to thump the platform in apparent fun and
bravado. He then climbed upon a dhair and began to examine
a camera with great interest, tried to turn the screws, squeezed
the bulb, manipulated the shutter, and felt the bellows. These
movements were executed witli precision and dispatch, and with
no attempt at destructiveness, but rather in a spirit of pure investi-
3Among those present and close observers of the tests were Drs.
Abbott, Donaldson, Fnrness, Greenman, Holmes, Reichert, Twitmyer, and
others.
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 185
gation. During his stay at the clinic he skated at intervals about
the room, apparently for the sheer love of it. After one test which
involved a considerable strain upon his attention his trainer said,
"You may now get down and run around and play." He instantly
darted off, skating round and round the room, from time to time
inciting Mr. McArdle to pursuit by thumping upon the platform.
During the tests he sat upon a small three-legged stool, eight
or nine inches high, which was placed upon a low kindergarten
table. Being on skates 'lie was thus confined to a small area. He
stood and moved about on the table from time to time, never once
slipping or losing his balance.
The Cigarette and Match Test.
The trainer gave him a cigarette and offered him a box of
matches. The cigarette was tipped with cork; without hesitation
Peter placed the tipped end in his mouth, took a match from the
box held out to him, and struck it on a side of the box. I then
had the trainer take this cigarette from him and I handed him one
of another make with a hollow tube as a mouth piece, which
I purposely offered with the wrong end towards him. ITe at
POSING FOR HIS PHOTOGRAPH AT THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
IN HIS RIGHT HAND PETEIt HOLDS THE PADLOCK USED IN THE STAGE PER-
FORMANCE, UNDER HIS LEFT HAND IS THE CORD WITH WHICH HE TIES AND
UNTIES KNOTS ; HE IS SITTING ON A LOW KINDERGARTEN TABLE UPON WHICH HE
STOOD TO WRITE ON THE BLACKBOARD. THE ROLLER SKATES KEEP HIM WITHIN
REACH AND YET GIVE HIM REASONABLE FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT. HIS POSE IN
THIS PICTDRE WAS LARGELY SELF-ASSUMED AND HE GAZED STEADILY AT THE
CAMERA AS THOUGH COMPREHENDING THAT HE WAS SITTING FOR HIS PORTRAIT.
186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
once reversed it and put the tube in his mouth. It was taken from
him and again presented in the same fashion. He again turned
it. This time he tasted both ends and recognized the tobacco end,
either by the sense of taste or touch. I gave him a match from a
box of my own and held the smooth top of the box toward him. He
rubbed the match twice on the top of the box, then tried to strike
the match on the rough side which I was partly covering with my
finger. It was difficult for him to find enough surface whereon to
strike it, and after one attempt he sought with the head of the match
the opposite side of the box, which was either partly or wholly
concealed from his view. There can be no doubt that Peter lights
and smokes his cigarette as intelligently as a man. While smoking,
his poses and facial expressions are very human and assumed with-
out any self-conscious intent.
Told to spit by his trainer, he leaned forward and spat on
his shoe. The trainer remonstrated with him and told him to
spit over the edge of the table. He leaned farther forward and
spat on the table. The trainer then passed him a handkerchief
and ordered him to wipe the spit off the table. He directed his
efforts first to his shoe, but with the same indifference and half
attention which a child might show under like circumstances.
When he had wiped off his shoe, the trainer pointed to the table
and said, "Now off the
table," whereupon he
reached down and wiped
the table clean.
Stringing Beads.
I took a shoe string on
which had been strung a
number of wooden beads,
such as are used in kin-
dergartens. This is one of
the tests wherewith I de-
termine the intelligence
of children brought to the
clinic. I held the string and the beads before Peter, and
taking a bead from the box, strung it before his eyes and said,
"Look, Peter, this is what I want you to do." I repeated this
with two other beads; then handing him the string and
a bead I said, "Now string one of these for me." The monkey
promptly put the bead in his mouth, feeling it with his lips and
tongue. The trainer said, "JSTo, no, it's not a cherry," whereupon
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 187
Peter took the bead out of his mouth and strung it. I held the box
toward him and he took one bead after another from the box, feel-
ing each one first with his lips and seeming to assist himself in
this way to get the hole in the bead into the proper position for
stringing. When the beads were
taken away he clapped his hands as
if applauding his achievement.
The spectators joined in the ap-
plause, and then at the trainer's
verbal suggestion he kissed his
hand to the ladies. The trainer
objected to my making the test so
easy, saying I ought merely to have
passed him the string and the beads
and told him, without demonstrat-
ing it, what I wished done.
The Pegging Board.
I gave him one of the large peg-
ffinp- boards used in kindergarten
work. He immediately passed it over his face. I put three pegs
in a row. Peter instantly wanted to pull them out, but stopped
when told to let them alone. Then I gave him the pegs one by one,
and he put them into the board. He did not place them in a row,
as I had done, but irregularly over the board. I am confident,
however, that a few trials would suffice to teach him to peg regu-
larly in rows.
Oyening a Lock.
At my request the trainer had brought the lock which Peter
used in public performances, an old-fashioned padlock with a large
key; he is seen holding it in his hand in the photograph of him
taken at the clinic. He locked and unlocked this swiftly and with-
out any apparent interest in his work, gazing in the meantime
about the room and forced to resume the task from time to time
by his trainer. It might have seemed to those who did not know
Peter well, that the task was a difficult one and he was being forced
to exercise unusual attention to accomplish it. As a matter of
fact, the task is too easy to occupy his mind. This was brought out
clearly when I offered him a smaller padlock of a different type,
one with a bar like a staple, which must be pulled entirely off at
the end of the lock opposite the key hole. The key was a small one,
188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
difficult to insert and difficult to turn after it had
been inserted. As soon as Peter saw this lock, it
absorbed his entire attention. He reached for it
and even partly rose from his chair in his eager-
ness to get it. I unlocked it for him and took out
the staple attachment. I put the staple back and
locked it, withdrawing the key. I was about to
reinsert the key, thinking it too difficult a test to
start him with, when he reached for the key, and
turning the lock into the correct position, promptly
inserted it, and unlocked it more rapidly than I
had done a moment before; he then pulled out the
staple with a look I cannot but term triumphant,
expressing, "There! you see I have done it." I
then told him to put the staple back and lock it.
He inserted one prong of the staple, but unfortu-
nately had not solved the problem of putting the
two prongs in at once. He kept turning the staple
around, but it would not go into place. Mrs.
McArdle said, "Don't be stupid," and boxed his
ears, adding, "That's not right." I then employed
a test which demonstrated his intelligence most
clearly. Holding the lock before him, I pulled
the staple slowly out, moved it several inches away,
and reinserted it. I repeated this performance
two or three times, and then passed the lock to
Peter. He seized it eagerly, slowly and carefully
pulled out the staple until it was not more than a
quarter of an inch beyond the lock, and then care-
fully reinserted it in place, shoving it home with
a smack of his hand. There could be no doubt that
he appreciated the danger of losing the combina-
tion and was taking no chances on getting the staple
too far away from the body of the lock. He then
turned the key in the lock and at my verbal request
handed the lock back to me.
Opening a Box.
I brought out a small wooden box with a
tiny keyhole. The key was on a ring contain-
ing a number of different sized keys. The key
which opened the box was the smallest on the
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 189
ring. I was about to show him the key when the trainer said,
"Let Peter pick it out. When he was given the box lie turned
the keyhole toward him immediately. lie then tried the largest
key first, holding it momentarily
in liis mouth. He then tried
the next largest, and then a third
large one. He did not proceed
deliberately to try one key after
another until he had found the
right one. It must he remem-
bered, however, that he was
excited, and the tests were made
in rapid succession and with
quite a crowd standing close
about him. I then opened the box, showing him a few lumps of
sugar inside, and pointed out the small key on the ring which
opened it. As I was about to close the lid, Peter put his hand
on the edge of the box to keep it from being locked again, appar-
ently wishing to investigate its contents. The box was locked, the
bunch of keys shaken up and handed to him. He tried to find the
small key but without success. The key was shown to him again
and he was allowed to put it in his mouth. He then opened the
box with the key and obtained a lump of sugar. When the keys
were handed to him for a third test, lie failed again to find the
right key, but his attention was no longer on the work. He
wanted to play with the keys. The sugar which I thought would
inspire him to open the box lid did not prove to be much of an
incentive. A new and difficult problem stimulated him more
than sweets.
Hammer and Screw Driver.
While skating about, two or three rubber balls were thrown at
him. He picked them up but made no effort to throw them back.
When I bounced one on the floor, he seized it and thumped it on
the platform, but did not throw it down. He put the rubber
balls in his mouth and bit them with an air of satisfaction,
probably owing to the fact that his second teeth were just coming
through, and his gums ached.
He was brought back to the table and allowed to sit cross-
legged upon it. A hammer and a piece of board, on which were
some nails and screws, were given him. The hammer had a
reversible head, a round one for buffing and a flat one for driving
nails. It differed from the hammer which I saw him use at a
190 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
private interview in Mr. McArdie's room at the theatre, and
probably was unlike any he had ever seen. I gave him the
hammer in such a way that when he grasped it in his hand he
held it in position for striking with the round head. Hesitating
a moment, he brought the round head to his mouth, felt it with
his lips, turned the head about,
felt the flat end, and instantly
proceeded to drive several nails
into the board with the proper
head. He never mistook a
screw for a nail. He soon
threw down the hammer and
jumped to the floor, plainly-
signifying that he had had
enough.
Again he was brought back
to the table and given a screw instead of a nail. lie stuck the
screw into a small hole in the board and at once selected a screw
driver, paying no attention whatever to the hammer lying on the
table. The screw was a long one and wabbled as he tried to turn
it. There were three screw drivers on the table and he first picked
out a medium sized one, which was a little too large for the pur-
pose. He next tried the smallest one and made several turns of
the screw, always turning the screw driver in the right direction.
He did this as a child might do it, or an adult not very expert in
handling tools. He used both hands on the screw driver instead
of employing one hand to steady the screw.
While hammering in the nails he steadied the nail between
two fingers of his left hand, using the hammer with the right hand.
Once he pounded one of his fingers, which he instantly put in his
mouth, and afterwards exercised great care in hammering the nail,
moving his fingers away quickly whenever he brought the hammer
head down.
Reason or Instinct?
Perhaps it is only man's self-conceit which inclines him to
assume that he is distinguished from the other animals by the
possession of reason. He denies reason to the lower animals, and
explains their behavior, when remarkable or even intricate, as the
result of a blind and invariable instinct. The experiments of the
animal psychologists are doubtful on this point, and of relatively
small value. An animal confined in some unaccustomed environ-
ment and required when half starved and acting under the stimulus
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 191
of hunger to work his way out of a maze or into some curiously
contrived box, can hardly be expected to display the powers of
reason which he might employ readily enough to solve equivalent
difficulties if he were in a normal environment and better physical
condition.
The animal psychologists appear to be discovering that reason
plays but a small part in controlling the actions of the lower ani-
mals. But the human psychologist in turn is arriving at the con-
clusion that man, too, reasons very little. When we present a
human being with a new problem, his reason may show itself as
impotent before the new conditions as is the animal in some cun-
ningly contrived maze. Not more than a month ago a graduate
student in my department ruined an electric motor because he went
to a great deal of unnecessary trouble in order to attach the con-
ducting wires to a part of the apparatus not intended for that pur-
pose, and overlooked two binding posts which stared him straight
in the face on the top of the machine. Another student, a woman,
possessed of ample powers of reasoning in her own specialty, was
asked to connect a small dry cell with a bell and a key, as an intro-
ductory laboratory exercise. The battery has two binding posts,
around which the ends of the wire are first twisted, and then a
thumb screw projecting from the top is turned so as to push the
screw down upon the wire and hold it in place. To test her
ingenuity I gave her the battery and the requisite pieces of wire,
and said, ''Attach one piece of this wire to each binding post of the
battery." After working with it half
an hour, she reported she could not
make the wire stay on. She had been
laying the end of the wire on top of
the post, and naturally as soon as she
left it, it fell off. She had not even
sense enough, if I may so express it,
to take the wire, bend it near the end, and hang it around the neck
of the screw, which would have enabled her to keep it in place and
get a current through it. I explained, "You want to bend the end
of the wire around the post," and went away and left her with it.
After a while I came back to see how she was getting on, and she
reported, "Well, it seems to work a little better, but I have trouble
in getting it to stay in place." She had bent the wire once about
the post, but had still failed to solve the use of the screw which she
might have turned once or twice and thus held the wire firmly in
place. I had to show her every stage of the process, as I showed
192 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Peter how to string the beads or put pegs in the board. She never
acquired facility in the manipulation of apparatus. She lacked
what is called "mechanical ability". The impotency of reason
when some persons are confronted with a simple mechanical task
teaches us as much concerning the ability of man to reason, but no
more, than do maze and trap experiments in the laboratory inform
us as to the natural intelligence and reasoning of the lower animals.
The Form Board.
The form board is one of the best tests rapidly to distinguish
between the feebleminded and the normal child. To place the
various blocks in position with rapidity and precision, requires that
the form of the space into which the block is to be inserted shall
be associated visually with the form of the block. Peter did not
succeed with this test. There was quite a crowd about him at the
time, the room was not well lighted, and Peter himself obscured
the form board by, casting a shadow. It is difficult to see the
shallow spaces or grooves into which the blocks are to be fitted, and
Peter moreover appears to be near sighted; I have no doubt that
he was unable to see clearly and distinctly the spaces let into the
board.
This test, however, was a noteworthy illustration of Peter's
ability to imitate and perform an action which he supposes to be
the one desired. After I had placed two of the blocks in position,
I removed one of them, the oblong in the center of the board, and
gave it to him; he fitted it in place, and then thrust it home by
A SIMPLE DEVICE FOIl TESTING INTELLIGENCE.
MADE IN THE SHOP OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL LABORATORY AND USED AT THE PSYCHO-
LOGICAL CLINIC TO DISTINGUISH THE NORMAL AND THE FEEBLE MIND.
? A MONKEY WITH A MIND 193
pounding it down with liis fist. But this success was apparently
an accident, for Avhen I took the block out and gave it to him again
to place in position, he failed as does many a child tested at the
Psychological Clinic, shoving the block aimlessly over the board.
The trainer then picked it up, placed it in the right groove, and
for emphasis struck the board with it twice in rapid succession
before handing it to Peter with the words, "That's it, Peter." He
immediately took the block and rapped the proper groove twice,
exactly imitating her movements, but without trying to make it
fit. He then looked up into her face as if proud of what he had
done. Now that lie bad accomplished what he thought was required
of him, he seemed to lose all interest in the task, and refused to
give his attention to further repetitions of the test. He became
excited, jumped to the floor, and skated about in his usual
exhilarated manner. Iiis close imitation of the movements of his
trainer prepared me for the more remarkable result of the next test.
The Writing Test.
I drew forward a blackboard, the writing surface of which he
could easily reach when standing upon the table. He took a piepe
?Drawn and photographed by Dr. E. B. Twitmyer, to whom I am
indebted for the other photographs used in this article, except those of
Peter which were made by W. II. Rau.
9s
a
0/
WRITING ON THE BLACKBOARD.
(a) the letter w drawn twice, one tracing over the other; (b) a scrawl
FOLLOWING THE FIRST TRACING ; A1, PETER'S COrY AFTER THE SECOND TRACING J
A , PETER'S SECOND EFFORT WHEN TOLD TO MAKE A W AO A IN. *
194 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of chalk eagerly, and before I had made any mark upon the board,
began to scrawl in a corner of it. I took the chalk from him and
said, "Peter, I want you to do this," and rapidly, made the letter
W in four strokes. Peter's attention had not been fully given
Avhile I made the letter. He took the chalk and scrawled beneath
in much the same manner as he had done before. I picked up
another piece of chalk and said, "Now look, this is what I want
you to do," and traced another W over the one which I had just
drawn. Peter watched the operation intently, then with the chalk
in his hand, he quickly made the four movements and drew a fairly
perfect letter beneath the W which I had traced. After a brief
interruption due to the excitement of the spectators at this per-
formance, Peter's interest in the board still remaining as appeared
from his continued scrawling, I asked him to try again, and he
made at some distance from the first letter another W, somewhat
less perfectly, formed.
Prom his general behavior, and especially from his manner of
executing this test, I believe that Peter is what the psychologist
calls "motor minded". Pie imitated the movements of my writing
hand. I doubt whether he could copy a W on the board if he had
not first seen me make it. In this, however, he does not differ from
the child whose writing usually begins as an imitation of move-
ments, and only becomes secondarily a copying of the visual form.
Articulation.
Peter is able to articulate the word "mama". He does this
apparently with great effort, and it is the one task which he per-
forms with seeming unwillingness. At the Psychological Clinic,
and also at the private examinations, a tumbler of water was
employed to force him to this effort. He seemed always ready
for a drink. Mrs. McArdle would hold a tumbler of water in her
hand and order him to say "mama". He would make many efforts
without succeeding. The trainer would then say, "Well, I am
going away," and make a feint of starting. At this Peter always
became much distressed, whimpered, and at the clinic fairly wrung
his hands. The trainer would turn back and say, "Now will you
say 'mama' ?" He would then make a v^ry. evident effort, and
always succeeded in saying fairly distinctly, "mama". At the
clinic, she pretended to be dissatisfied with his first effort, and
asked Mr. McArdle if he thought it was good enough. Mr. Mc-
Ardle shook his head, and Mrs. McArdle then turned to Peter with,
"He says it's not good enough, Peter, try again." Peter tried
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 195
again and articulated "mama" with great distinctness. He was
then given a drink, and said "mama" several times. The articula-
tion of the m sound is perfect. I am somewhat doubtful whether
the ah is voiced or not. It seems to be usually, a vowel produced
by an inspiration, possibly at times an expiration, of the breath
without bringing the larynx into action. He uttered the word in
a loud whisper, rather than with voiced articulation. During one
test, however, I thought I heard more than once a distinct, high-
pitched, voiced vowel, sounding more like ah-ee than ah-aa.
Peter's chief fault is one I have found occasionally in young
children showing an arrest of speech development. He tries to
speak with the inspired and not with the expired breath. At a
private examination I taught Peter to articulate the sound of p
- ?
A DIGNIFIED PLEADER.
peter's expression and pose suggest the after-dinner speaker, he is
PROBABLY ASKING FOR A DRINK OF WATER OR SOMETHING TO EAT.
196 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
with the expired breath. I am confident from his behavior as well
as from what his trainers told me, that he had never before been
practiced in this. I first obtained the proper position of the lips
by getting him to blow out a match, which he could do readily
enough. I then blew into Peter's face and he blew into mine. I
made the puffs shorter and the action of the lips more vigorous
until I was saying peh-peh with breath but without voice. Peter
imitated this exactly, using no voice but a breathed, i. e. whis-
pered, peh-peh sound. To accomplish this took but five minutes.
I tried him with no other articulated elements, as this experiment
was enough to convince me that Peter can be taught to articulate
a number of consonantal sounds and probably to voice correctly
some of the vowels.
Comprehension of La?iguage.
When Peter is asked, "Where is Mama ?" he points to Mrs.
McArdle. When asked, "Where's Dada ?" he points to Mr. Mc-
Ardle. When asked, "Where's Peter ?" he taps his shirt front.
At the clinic he tried once to jump down from the table and
run away. The trainer cuffed him over the ears because he was
naughty, and said, "ISTow beg pardon." She whispered in his ear
for a second, while he listened penitently and with that exaggera-
tion of rapt attention which may be seen on the face of any. child
in whose ear we whisper. "Kiss Mama," she then said, and he
turned his face toward her and did it like a child. "Kiss Dada,"
and he leaned over and kissed Mr. McArdle. "Now Peter, hit
Dada," and he slapped Mr. McArdle two or three times with his
hands. All this was done without any observable gestures being
made by the trainers, simply in obedience to spoken commands
which were instantly carried out, without waiting for any other
signal.
While drinking from a tumbler the trainer said, "Give Mama
a drink," and he extended the tumbler to her and held it while she
drank. When she said, "Give Dada a drink," he held it for Mr.
McArdle in the same way. "Now aren't you going to give the
Doctor a drink ?" turning towards me. Peter promptly handed
me the tumbler, all the more willingly perhaps because no water
remained in it. When I passed the tumbler back to him, he took
it readily.
During a private examination, Mrs. McArdle showed Peter
a scratch on her finger, and said, "Oh, Peter, it hurts," with the
sharp indrawing of the breath which is customarily used to express
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 197
pain. Peter looked at the hand with an expression of human
sympathy. "Now kiss it, Peter; and make it well," without a
gesture of any sort. Peter leaned forward, put his lips to the spot
and kissed it.
The Interpretation.
The ascent of man to higher levels of intellectual attainment
has been conditioned by, the discovery and use of tools. From the
first use of the club, on through the invention of one weapon of
offense and defense after another, down to the modern aerial war-
ship, man supplanted brute force with the force of intellect and
thereby made intellectual achievement a controlling factor in
natural selection and survival. His discovery and use of fire
carried him far beyond the merely animal intellect and made
possible human civilization and culture. Steam and electricity
have initiated a new era of intellectual development.
A tool may be the product of organic evolution. The foot,
the hand, the binocular eye, these are all instruments with which
man is better equipped than any of the lower animals. Of no
small importance, also, was the acquisition of right-handedness,
the development of a dextrous or preferred member for the execu-
tion of the more intricate manual operations. Last in order but
not least in importance is the development of that faculty which
most serves to distinguish man from the lower animals, and which
has been and remains his chief instrument for the acquisition of
power whether by the individual or the race. It is the possession
of an articulated language, the peculiar tool of the intellect, em-
ployed to convey and even to develop thought, which has made man
what he is and raised him to such heights above the mere animal.
Reason develops from many sources but chiefly on foundations
which are built upon the use of language. Reason may appear as
an attribute of the animal mind, but in the absence of language its
manifestations must remain so insignificant as to be practically
negligible in comparison with its varied employment by man.
Considering his age and opportunities, Peter reasons well
enough within the range of his understanding and activities. He
can use a club; he can use even a hammer. He knows the use of
fire, and can strike a match and light a cigarette. There are
indications that he is right-handed. Right-handedness is resident
within the brain. It is the manifestation of a superior functional
use of one side of the brain. Speech also is dependent upon a
congenital physiological function of the brain. The human child
198 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
comes into tlie world with a brain ready to initiate speech when the
proper stimuli act npon it, just as he comes fully equipped to
breathe and cry. A child is encouraged to talk, but is no more
taught to talk than a bird is taught to fly.. It would be more
difficult to keep him from talking in his normal environment than
it is to induce him to talk. Peter shows every sign of failing to
possess this natural faculty. What might have happened if from
his birth he had associated freely with human beings and if he now
associated with them as children do, it is impossible to say. But
until such an experiment is made we must believe that a chimpan-
zee is born without the instinct or physiological faculty of speech.
Could he nevertheless be taught to talk? There are children
of five, six, or even older who have never talked. Deafness and
sometimes even adenoids and enlarged tonsils will cause an arrest
of the development of speech. The deaf child need no longer be
mute, because the methods are now known by which he may. be
taught without hearing the sounds to move the organs of speech
into the proper position for their articulation. Where adenoids
or enlarged tonsils have caused an arrest of speech development
and have not been removed till late in the child's life there is often
unusual difficulty in acquiring articulate language. If a child
without language were brought to me and on the first trial had
learned to articulate the sound of p as readily as Peter did, I should
express the opinion that he could be taught most of the elements of
articulate language within six months' time.
The results of the writing test, during which Peter's imitative
capacity enabled him to form the letter W, justify the opinion that
he could be taught to write at least a few words after a year of
training. There can be no doubt that to some extent he already
understands spoken language. The mere possibility of acquiring
the three modes of language, i. e., articulation, hearing, writing,
and let us add, reading, does not suffice, however, to indicate that
he could be taught to employ language as the human being employs
it. Helen Keller tells how she first grasped the idea that certain
touches upon the palm of her hand were the name of the object
water. Peter has already reached the stage where he comprehends,
even though it be only to a limited extent, that certain sounds are
the names of objects. If he can be made to comprehend that certain
symbols traced upon the board represent these sounds and are
also the names of objects, and if he can also be taught to
articulate these symbols, then he will be prepared, as the child is,
to use speech as the staff by. whose aid he may climb the pathway
of intellectual development.
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 199
While my tests of Peter give no positive assurance that he
can acquire language, on the other hand they yield no proof that
he cannot. If Peter had a human form and were brought to me
as a backward child and this child responded to my tests as credit-
ably as Peter did, I should unhesitatingly say that I could teach
him to speak, to write, and to read, within a year's time. But
Peter has not a human form, and what limitations his ape's brain
may disclose after a persistent effort to educate him, it is impos-
sible to foretell. His behavior, however, is sufficiently intelligent
to make this educational experiment well worth the expenditure
of time and effort.
The ability to talk, to write, and to read is a prerequisite for
the intellectual development of a child. They do not, however,
assure us that such intellectual development will take place. Many
a child is able to perform these tasks more or less mechanically
without being able to employ them as the instruments of an educa-
tion. Such a child remains in the mental status of a low or middle
grade imbecile. We grade children with respect to their ability
to develop in the peculiarly human way. If we judge Peter in this
fashion, it must be acknowledged that there is no evidence that
Peter could rise above the level of a low grade imbecile, though
his behavior suggests that he could attain the level of at least the
middle grade imbecile. Above the middle grade imbecile is the
high grade imbecile, capable of acquiring much of the education
that a normal child receives in arithmetic, history, geography, but
incapable of exercising normal mental activity in free association
with his fellows. To predict the outcome of the educational process
with a normal child is often a hazardous proceeding. To do this
with certainty for a defective child requires usually some asso-
ciated physical symptoms, a malformed or under-sized head, for
example. It has been my experience that some children present
the appearance of a limited capacity for mental development,
owing perhaps to a malformed head or other physical stigma, who
yet are capable of a surprising development which contradicts the
original diagnosis. If in such cases there is reason for holding our
final judgment in suspense until a satisfactory educational experi-
ment is undertaken, so it would be unfair to Peter to define the
natural limits of his mental development until a consistent effort
has been made to educate him. With our present knowledge of
the mental quality of the anthropoid apes, however, it would be
safe to say that Peter is very unlikely to understand and acquire
the recognized subjects of the school curriculum.
.. ,*
W
202 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Peter's age and life history have naturally an important
bearing on his possibilities of development. I know nothing of
Peter's origin excepting that he probably came from the west coast
of Africa and the McArdles say they have had him under training
for two and a half years. They, think he was three or four years
.old when they got him, but they have not informed me how they
?obtained him nor do I know whether he is male or female. I only
know that he is called Peter. lie certainly has not from birth
been subjected to the educational and formative treatment of the
human child. Much of his time is passed locked up in a box. His
environment is of necessity extremely, limited, and before the
McArdles got him his life was probably that of an animal in
strict confinement, excepting for the brief period of infancy before
?his capture. His training has been mostly directed to the per-
formance of tricks on the stage. Peter has therefore not only his
birth to contend against, but also his bringing up.
Fortunately his age can be determined within somewhat
narrow limits. When I first saw him at a private interview, Mon-
day, October 4, 1909, he had lost one and was just losing the
second of his two temporary central upper incisors. When I last
saw him, one of the permanent central upper incisors was wholly
through, projecting about an eighth of an inch and the other was
just showing. A child gets his permanent or second teeth at about
the age of seven years. Peter's physiological age is therefore about
the same as that of a seven-year-old child. This does not deter-
mine, however, the number of years Peter has lived. A chim-
panzee's life is supposed to be shorter than man's. If the chim-
panzee lives to be about thirty years of age, he probably, acquires
his permanent teeth at four years. If, however, the chimpanzee
averages more than thirty years, the permanent teeth may be
acquired later. Peter is certainly not less than four nor more
than seven, and probably, is in his sixth year. His mental life is
therefore measured by not more than five or six years; in physio-
logical development he is at the stage of a seven-year-old child.
This ape equals if he does not exceed what is known of the average
child of six or seven in his ability to skate, to ride a bicycle, to tie
a knot, and he executes other movements requiring a high degree
of coordination and motor development. In view of the treatment
to which he has been subjected, Peter within the limited sphere of
his activities is precocious in comparison with the normal child.
In imitative capacity also he is the equal if not the superior
of many a child of his own age. In language and in the peculiarly
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 203
human sphere of activities he about equals a child in its second
year. As time goes on, the natural process of development will
undoubtedly increase the distance between Peter and the child.
Personality.
Peter is a downright engaging personality. He possesses
energy, initiative, and a fair amount of persistence. His constant
activity impresses itself upon the spectator like the grace of an
accomplished dancer. He is vital, the most mobile individual I
have probably ever seen. Apathy is the most hopeless and least
attractive characteristic of child or animal. The active child who
will do things, however objectionable they may be to his elders,
engages our interest and can be developed. Peter's activity is not
the result of mere animal spirits; he is mentally alert and possessed
of unusual power of concentration, not merely for an animal but
for a child of his own age. He exhibited at the clinic the exuberant
vivacity of an obstreperous boy. On the stage he performs difficult
feats in skating or bicycling with nonchalance and seeming indif-
ference to the possibility of failure. Left to himself he will
usually seek some sort of occupation.
The play of interest and emotion can be read upon his face
as readily as, I was about to say, upon that of a human being.
The six illustrations in this article give some idea of the human
changes in his expression. At the Psychological Clinic he posed
himself to be photographed, and his pose in a human being would
be called dignified, unconstrained and alert. At the flare of the
calcium light he fell back and threw his hand up as though to
protect his head from a blow, but showed his courage by remain-
ing seated and watching with intent interest the cloud of smoke.
In giving his trainer a light from his cigarette his expressions are
those we often see on the faces of our friends under like circum-
stances, and the two expressions are quite dissimilar. His expres-
sion in the picture on the third page of this article is one of
inquiry, protest and distress; when his distress increases, if for
example he is long deprived of a drink, the lips protrude in a
pitiful but to us ridiculous pout, he then begins a curious gruff
whimper, and eventually may even wring his hands. He does
not laugh, to be sure, but at times he has something very like a
momentary grin of humor, albeit ghastly because of the cavernous
mouth and huge jaw.
He is affectionate and demonstrative. In playing about the
roomjihiring a private examination, while T was talking with his
204 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
trainers, he amused himself with one occupation or another, coming
up reassuringly to me from time to time to take hold of my hand.
Once while I was seated on a box talking with his trainers, he
jumped up beside me and put his arm confidingly on mv shoulder,
sitting quietly thus for many minutes. His behavior at every
private interview was more remarkable than on the stage. Given
a tumbler of water to drink Avhile sitting on his box, he emptied
the glass and then in a quite indifferent manner, barely turning
his head, reached far out to one side and partly behind him and
placed the tumbler on a shelf. Many a child would have thrown
it on the floor. Happening to find a cigarette on the floor he
picked it up while we were paying no attention to him, struck a
match, lit the cigarette and after a few puffs reached back and laid
it down beside the tumbler.
It would be hazardous to conclude from Peter's demonstration
of affection or his general behavior that he would be susceptible to
moral training. He responds to verbal commands, but he is only
to a very limited extent submissive to the kind of discipline which
we think appropriate for the child. A whip is still the constant
incentive to good behavior. He is the aboriginal, primeval truant.
When taken abroad, roller skates are put on his feet to keep him
from escaping. When placed in the automobile after leaving the
clinic, he was out over the other side in an instant, scurrying
across the lawn as rapidly as his skates would permit. Neverthe-
less, his trainers assert that they brought him back not by forcible
capture but by holding a pocket handkerchief to their eyes and
calling out that they, were going to leave him.
While there can be no doubt from Peter's examination that
there is in him the basis for something like moral discipline and
training, it is not to be expected that he could ever reach that stage
of development where moral character begins in recognition of the
difference between right and wrong. Even though we may grant
a fair prospect in the direction of intellectual development, we
must assume from our present knowledge of men and apes that
Peter is and will remain morally imbecile. It would be a night-
mare flight of the imagination to suppose that an ape could
acquire a will determined consciously by moral motives.
A Genius among Apes.
Is Peter the one genius among apes ? The McArdles believe
that he is. They, have trained others, they say, and they maintain
that in their experience he far exceeds any other chimpanzee in
A MONKEY WITH A MIND 205
initiative, courage and tenacity of purpose. The attitude of the
McArdles toward Peter is no less noteworthy than Peter himself.
They are naturally interested in his performance as a valuable
financial asset, but more than this they show in their relationship
towards him the attitude of fond parents towards an infant
prodigy. They claim that no one really knows how intelligent
Peter is and they appear to believe that Peter excels the human
being in quickness of action, thought and comprehension. If they
are right, Peter should become the ward of science and be sub-
jected to proper educational influences. He has been trained, he
is partly educated, but no effort has yet been made to give him
what an education really stands for. I venture to predict that
within a few years chimpanzees will be taken early in life and
subjected for purposes of scientific investigation to a course of
procedure more closely resembling that which is accorded the
human child.
