Retardation and Elimination in the Schools
of Mauch Chunk Township.
===========================================

By Alvin E. Wagner, A.M.,
Supervisory Principal of Schools, Nesquehoning, Pa.
It is some time since the following table relating to pnblic
school attendance appeared in the various educational papers of
the country. It was prepared by W. C. Smith, of the Winona
Technical Institute, Indianapolis, Ind., who took the data from
the report for 1903 of William T. Harris, Commissioner of Education.
Grade Age Number of Pupils
1 7 5,149,296. Children enter first grade.
2 7 2,912,462. Nearly one half have dropped out.
3 8 2,426,263. Still leaving school.
4 9 2,168,956.
5 10 1,288,814. Breadwinning by the children
begins.
6 11 705,885. "The call of the dollar."
7 12 405,693.
8 13 323,697. About 17 per cent of the pupils
finish the eighth grade.
9 14 243,433. Enter high school.
10 15 147,192.
11 16 101,903.
12 17 73,596. A very small portion complete
high school.
Over 10,000,000 children leave school to go into the trades
without a complete common school education. There are
32,000,000 breadwinners in the United States, 2,000,000 of whom
do brain work, and the remainder, 30,000,000, are employed in
the manual labor trades.
According to this table only 17 per cent of the pupils who
enter the first grade of the elementary school remain to complete
the work of the eight grades; 6.25 per cent of these enter the high
school, and only a lamentably small portion, 1.25 per cent of
(164)
RETARDATION AND ELIMINATION 165
those who enter, receive the honors of graduation. From the
same table it may be seen that 4,225,599 children annually leave
school without receiving the training and advantages which the
nation is preparing and equipping schools to furnish.
That so many children should enter the various industries
to make their living, who do not have the essential elements of an
education is a matter of serious concern. The causes which effect
this elimination are a serious menace to the commercial, industrial, and social welfare of the nation. It was to try to determine
what these causes are, and to study the possibility of their removal,
that this investigation was undertaken at Dr. Witmer's suggestion.
In trying to determine the causes of elimination the investigator does not proceed very far before he is confronted with the
fact that many of the eliminated children at the time of leaving
are not in the grade where according to their age and time of
school attendance one would naturally expect them to be. This
raises the question as to the cause of their retardation, for it is
altogether likely that their retardation is one of the reasons for
their elimination.
As used in this article, retardation signifies a subnormal
rate of advancement on the part of any pupil in doing an amount
of work which has been prescribed for a given period of time, and
acceleration on the other hand is used to indicate a rate of progress
more rapid than that at which the prescribed work is performed
by the normal child. If we grant that the normal child under
normal conditions can complete the work prescribed for a given
time in the period assigned, then for all practical purposes the
rate of progress of the normal child represents the normal rate;
and all who advance more rapidly than this average are accelerated, while those who lag behind it are retarded. The unit of
acceleration and retardation most convenient for all practical purposes is the single grade or year.
Teacher?
J. K. Mulligan
School?
A Grammar
Pupil's Name?
James Crossin
a Z
O OS
3Pt
a!
55 o
? .d
cs J*
Em
12-9
1900
MS
0) ?
?a ai
Sc
ow
*13
ft
wo
"3 o
3"S
O ti
<!0
j3>0
O O
Sg
?< ?
3"?
W
HO
<X> C
32
a! ?
Otf
?a o
a o
03 ?
The above is a copy of the blank form which was used for
collecting the data. The sheets were large enough to furnish
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
recording space for each child in the room. The cause of retardation was recorded as one of the following:
1. Irregular attendance.
2. A somewhat lengthy absence owing to sickness.
3. Changing from one system of schools to another or to
several others.
4. Beginning to attend school after six years of age.
5. Slow learning due to the lack of brain development.
6. General indifference.
7. The difficulties which foreigners have in mastering the
English language.
8. Feeblemindedness, requiring institutional care and treatment.
In the cases of acceleration early start and special aptitude
for learning were always found to be good and sufficient reasons.
In order to get as definite a knowledge as possible of the
situation, the record for each child was taken by myself. My
duties as supervisor during the last five years have brought me
into rather close relation with each individual cl$ld so that I
knew all of them by name and had a fairly good idea of the mental
status of each one of them, having on many occasions marked
examination papers which they prepared for me in my presence.
All the data used relate to school conditions as they existed during
the school term of 1908 and 1909.
From the item on nationality was gleaned the following:
1. Total number of children in attendance, 842.
2. Number of children whose parents were born in America,
507.
3. Number of children whose parents were born in Europe,
314.
4. Number of children who were born in Europe, 21.
The number of children of American parentage as compared
with the number whose parents were born in Europe is perhaps
rather alarming. The homes of many of the children whose parents are not naturalized are not what they should be. This is
especially true of those located in the Italian and Hungarian settlements. There are, however, only a small number of children
whose appearance is not at all times presentable and in general
the children of foreign parentage, who from the major portion
of those retarded, advance about as rapidly as do the American
children when once they have mastered the difficulties of the
English language.
RETARDATION AND ELIMINATION 167
The table at the foot of this page gives all of the children of
each of the grades divided into groups according to ages. The
numbers at the top of the table represent the ages of the children,
and the numbers in the second row represent the number of children of a given age in the first grade. The same applies to each
grade up to the twelfth. From this table the following facts were
gleaned:
Number Retarded.?One year, 205; two years, 46; three,
24; four, 7; five, 6; six, 2.
Number Accelerated.?One year, 118 ; two years, 19 ; three, 2.
When the data were consulted for causes of retardation, and
the results tabulated, the following condition was found:
Number Retarded.?Causes of retardation: Poor attendance,
20; sickness, 16; changing schools, 22; late start, 36; slowness in
learning, 52; laziness and indifference, 16; language difficulty^
123; feeblemindedness, 5. Total, 290.
Out of a total attendance of 842, 290 or not quite 34.5 per
cent were found to be retarded. This is very likely a much better
showing than would have been made some years ago before the
present truant officer, who really enforces the Compulsory Attendance Act, had been regularly employed.
That so large a number should be retarded because of language
difficulty will probably surprise no one. The wonder is rather
that the number should not be larger, especially when consideration
is given to the fact that over one half of those who are retarded
because of the language difficulty, attended the school at "Little
Italy," where for three terms one teacher had been "keeping
school" with over fifty little Italians enrolled.
25
25
80
100
92
112
10
15
31
31
7T1
2
101
101
12 13
87
74
15
27
16
17
18
Age
First Grade
Second Grade
Third Grade
Fourth Grade
Fifth Grade
Sixth Grade
Seventh Grade
Eighth Grade
Ninth Grade
Tenth Grade
Eleventh Grade
Twelfth Grade
Total 848
168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Twenty pupils, or a little over 2 per cent of the present
school population, are retarded by poor attendance. The law fixes
the minimum of attendance at TO per cent, but allows school boards
the privilege of requiring any per cent of attendance beyond this
that they may see fit to select. The school authorities of Mauch
Chunk Township, realizing that those children get most out of
school who attend it most regularly, fixed 90 per cent as the minimum, and with this as a standard the law is effectively enforced.1
The children less than eight years of age to whom the law does not
apply do not attend irregularly since their help at home amounts
to very little, and they are sent to school whenever the weather
permits. This gives them an attendance of reasonable regularity.
That there should be fifty-two slow learners or children bordering on feeblemindedness among eight hundred and forty-two
is but corroborative evidence of what The Psychological Clinic
has often stated in its advocacy of special schools. There are
no funds available in the district to provide special classes for
these children, even if it were possible to overcome the difficulty
of transporting them from the various localities of a mountainous
district covering twenty miles square. All of these slow learners
acquire the ability to read, write, and do elementary number work
before they leave school, and until the population becomes denser
or the means of transportation better, this is probably all that can
be accomplished.
The tendency on the part of the majority of foreigners is to
send their children to school before they are six years of age, the
legal time of starting, rather than give them a late start when they
are beyond this age. The major portion of those who are retarded
because of a late start are the children of parents who were born
in Europe, and who failed to send them to school when they came
of school age. In a somewhat flexible system of grading, children
having no handicap of language or inferior brain development,
who start late, usually overtake the regulars before they reach
the end of the course, so that this cause of retardation may safely
be considered a negligible factor.
Of the twenty pupils who were retarded because of changing
schools, all came from rural districts where the term was short,
the teacher's wages low, and the organization which supervision
would bring was entirely lacking. Better organization and management by the state would remove this cause of retardation.
lAct of May 29, 1907, Pennsylvania School Laws, p. 40.
RETARDATION AND ELIMINATION 169
Until rural schools are centralized, medical inspection in them
will be well nigh impossible; and it is doubtful if a corps of
inspectors and school nurses would ever be able to keep the schools
and the community so free from various kinds of infection, that
some pupils would not become retarded because of school time lost
through sickness. Children's diseases are ills that human flesh is
heir to, and while everything should be done to prevent their
spread, when it is remembered that less than two per cent of the
whole school population is retarded through sickness, it is probably Utopian to expect to reduce this percentage further.
The sixteen children to whom indifference is ascribed as the
cause of retardation are boys and girls of American parentage
whose home environment is not what it should be. These children
(two are girls, fourteen boys) spend their evenings on the streets,
and in the moving picture parlors. Individual attention and the
personal touch of the teacher, it is hoped, will give them encouragement, inspiration, and the sense of something to be achieved, and
by this means the number may be very much reduced.
That there are some pupils in every system who are retarded
is quite natural, and in any system which is reasonably flexible
accelerated pupils are equally to be expected. The investigation
brought to light the following facts:
Per cent of the whole number of children accelerated, 16.6;
per cent of the whole number of children accelerated one year, 14;
per cent of the whole number of children accelerated two years,
2; per cent of the whole number of children accelerated three
years, 0.35.
When it is remembered that in cases of rather unusual acceleration the child has done almost no supplementary work, that
usually he has but little knowledge of the background of the facts
which in a more or less mechanical way he has mastered, it
becomes evident that to be in advance several years is not without
its disadvantages.
The law allows children between fourteen and sixteen years
of age, who secure a working certificate, to be employed at some
remunerative occupation, and during the year under consideration
in this article the issuing of these certificates was the function
of the civil authorities and not of the school officers. Certificates
were issued in Mauch Chunk Township to almost every child
whose parents were willing to affirm his age to be fourteen years.
This tended to put a premium upon misrepresenting the child's
age, especially among the foreigners whose birth records were
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
not available, and so led to abuses. As a result there were fiftythree children who were permitted to leave school on a working
certificate.
The grades in which they stopped and the number of children
who left from each grade follows:
Ninth grade, 8; eighth, 14; seventh, 15; sixth, 12; fifth,
4; total, 53.
All but eleven of these children according to their classification at the time of leaving school were retarded. Nine of them
were retarded two years; two, three years; and thirty-one, one
year. Just how effective this retardation was in causing the
elimination, it is impossible to determine. Going to work for
these children meant assisting in the family support, evenings
without study to enjoy the attractions of the street and the
amusement places, more liberal allowances of spending money,
associations with older and larger companions, freedom from; books
which had for them but little utility and less interest, and relief
from the drudgery and routine of the school room. It is easy to
see that the effectiveness of retardation in causing elimination
when associated with an array of motives such as these may easily
be overestimated.
Of the fifty-three children who left school to go to work,
some are employed about the mines or the coal companies' offices,
some are working in the silk mills, some are engaged by the tradespeople, and the remainder are doing domestic service. By actual
investigation it was found that their wages varied from 30 cents
to $6.50 a week in the silk mills, from 60 cents a day to $1.25
about the mines, from 75 cents a week to $1.50 among the tradespeople, and the remainder are doing domestis service.
It is not within the province of this article to discuss whether
many families are really in such stringent circumstances as to
need so small an amount as the earnings of many of these children
represent, or whether such stringency is caused by involuntary
idleness, or low wages, or intemperance in some form or other on
the part of the parent. The parents of all the eliminated children
when interviewed, stated directly or indirectly that the earnings
were a necessity to the family maintenance, and in most cases
the presence of such a necessity was perceptible in the home.
Necessity as a factor in elimination can only gradually be removed
since .the causes producing it are as complex as our social institutions and as indissolubly interwoven with them. Especially is
this true now that the increase in the cost of living is in no way
commensurate with the increase in wages.
RETARDATION AND ELIMINATION 171
CHART
Showing Graphically the Results of this Investigation.
Whole number of children
Number of American parentage.
? i European
born m Europe
Number of cht/dren retarded
Number of retarded ctn/dren offoreign parentage
Number retarded one gear
two gears
three years
more, than three years
Number retarded bij language d/ff/cutty
? mental s/owness
? ? tote sfari
changing schools
poor
a/tendance
?? sickness
? ? laziness and indifference
" ?> ?? feeblemindedness
Number acce tera/ed one gear
two years
three years
Number who [eft grades fo go t? ysorf
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The investigation next concerned itself with trying to determine what, in the opinion of the people who employ the eliminated
children, the schools might do in order to give these children a
better training and a fuller preparation for the work they will
probably do, and the life they must live.
The managers of the silk industry responded that the schools
can do nothing by way of direct preparation. They would prefer
to teach their employes right in the mills while the individual
being taught is actually doing the work to be performed or seeing
it done by their representative who is an expert. They contend
that so far as the individuals whom they employ are concerned,
the function of the school is rather to instil and inculcate habits
and ideals of industry, honesty, sobriety, and reliability, than to
teach the doing of things which would develop the kind of dexterity
they require. Let the school give to the child as much knowledge
as the time he may remain permits and let it be given in such
a manner as to cause the formation of right habits and ideals; let
the school do its utmost to attend to the proper development of the
child's physical organism and then the processes and acts requiring
dexterity can soon be learned and best be taught by the manufacturers themselves.
The mine superintendents and bosses considered that the
schools by giving a fairly good knowledge of the elements of geology
and physics could materially enhance the interests of the future
miner. Those who employed the girls for domestic service in
hotels and boarding houses when consulted as to their opinion concerning what the schools might do to better prepare the girls for
this class of work, first emphasized the necessity for rectitude of
character, but when the idea of introducing into the school curriculum courses in buying, serving, and cooking as well as house
decoration and sanitation was suggested, they admitted that such
training, if it could be given, would be very valuable to the girls,
and would have a tendency to keep them in school longer.
The most serious cause of elimination in the mind of the
investigator is that contained in the following question which frequently confronted him and was repeatedly asked in some form
or other: "What is the use of my child's going farther ?" "How
will the things which it will get in school help it in the silk mill ?
In the mines ? In being a dressmaker ?" "I have sent my boy to
the high school three years already, and all he can get to do is
drive mules and tend switches, what is the use of sending him
longer ?"
RETARDATION AND ELIMINATION 173
Of what real use to people who work with their hands is the
abstract arithmetic, technical grammar, dead lumber geography,
dissociated historical facts, the spelling of words which cannot
be used, and the impractical physiology, which constitute the
mental diet of the great majority of the children of the upper
grades in the elementary schools where the elimination usually
occurs ? The things which appeal to the natural instincts of
children are excluded from the school and obsolete notions and
ancient customs are emphasized. There is excluded almost everything which fits a child for the kind of life that most of them will
have to live, and the vast majority will want to live, and there is
included a lot of matter which to them is as dead as a door nail
and as useless and as obsolete as the grain cradle of their ancestors.
Only special schools teach the things needed to make a living.
Industrial history, treating of the present status of the great
moving forces of steam and electricity, books about modern customs and social usages, farming, millinery, salesmanship, care of
babies, the chemistry of house keeping and the art of home making,?all these could be taught to the children who to-day are being
eliminated by thousands after being taught to read, write, and
cipher.
No investigation with parents can be carried on very far
before one begins to realize that a large majority of the children
are removed from school because the schools do not give them the
practical and everyday things which both parents and children feel
the children need and want. The investigator is soon made aware
that the plans which the school authorities are trying to carry out
do not hit the mark, and that children are wasting time and finally
being eliminated because these plans are ineffective; that if children are to be kept at school, such plans and means must be
adopted as will attract and hold them. Investigation will reveal
the needs, and once the needs are known it behooves the school
authorities to modify the system so that these needs may be supplied. In order to make the required changes, it may be necessary to abandon some well established and aristocratic usages
and to learn valuable lessons from the correspondence schools and
industrial institutes.
