Mental Healing and the Emmanuel Movement
=========================================

( Continuation)
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
3. As a Curative System and Propagandist Movement for the Church.
"The object of the book called 'Religion and Medicine,'" says Dr.
Worcester, "is to describe in plain terms the work in behalf of nervous
sufferers which has been undertaken in Emmanuel Church, Boston."
This work, according to Dr. Worcester, has been confined to a large
group of maladies, known as functional nervous disorders, in which field
"all its real victories have been won." Dr. Worcester devotes a chapter
to the subconscious mind, one to the value of suggestion, another to
the types of functional neuroses, two chapters to the causes of nervousuess and one to the outlook of the Church. Dr. McComb has contributed
chapters on auto-suggestion, fear and worry, abnormal fears, faith and
its therapeutic power, suicide and its prevention; while Dr. Worcester
and Dr. McComb jointly write on prayer and its therapeutic value and
the healing wonders of Christ. Dr. Coriat, a neurologist, writes on the
nervous system in health and disease, the disease of the subconscious,
the nature of hypnotism, the therapeutic value of hypnotism, psychic and
motor re-education, and the general principles of psychotherapy.
It is disappointing not to find in all this one thorough or detailed
description of a case treated or a victory won. There are some vague
references to cases, and in two instances grateful letters are quoted, but
if the object of the book is really to describe the work in plain terms,
then its authors have failed of their purpose.
The apparent object of this book is to make propaganda, to exploit
the methods of the Emmanuel Movement in order that these methods
may be taken up by the Church in other parts of the country. Exploitation is more frankly disclosed, however, in the publication entitled
Psychotherapy, of which the first of twelve promised numbers has made
its appearance. The volume is very attractively gotten up, in a manner
suggesting a high-grade prospectus of some patent medicine. Psychotherapy justly attributes great influence to personality, but is this sufficient reason for publishing the likenesses of Dubois, Putnam, Jastrow,
Fallows, Peterson, Woodworth and Powell? And side by side, in a
single frame suggesting fraternal co-operation, the Rev. Loring W.
Batten and Professor Royce? ISTot satisfied with these smaller likenesses,
Dr. Putnam, Dr. Peterson and the Rev. Dr. Batten appear also in hand(239)
240 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
some full-page illustrations. From these men and a number of others,
whose personal appearance remains for the present in the background,
appear articles or the promise of articles, dealing with subjects more or
less closely related to psychotherapy. If the contributions which appear
in the first number are an earnest of what is to come, we cannot expect
to find much in the way of a scientific and accurate report of a series
of therapeutic experiments. Much less can we look for the development
of sound psychological and philosophical principles, for these do not
underlie the particular brand of psychotherapy represented in the
Emmanuel Movement. The article by Professor Angell is a sound
enough expression of the opinion of a trained psychologist, but its
contents offer small encouragement to the Emmanuel Movement, while
its sober garb of science seems singularly out of place amidst the
flamboyant coloring of the other articles.
Dr. Worcester and his collaborators have resorted to an unfortunate method of exploitation. Here is a plan of therapeutic procedure
undertaken as recently as the year 1906. Habitual drunkards are reported
to have been cured; persistent insomnia, which had resisted the best
efforts of the neurologist, has been successfully treated; grave forms of
hysteria, neurasthenia and psychasthenia, have disappeared as soon as the
patient came within the sphere of suggestive influence exerted by the
study chair of those reverend gentlemen. In a similar situation a
neurologist, careful of his reputation, or a discreet psychologist, would
have waited five years, perhaps ten, before publishing the discovery of
a panacea for what he considered the most serious disorders of modern
civilized life. If, at the end of this period of observation, experiment
and reflection, he felt impelled to proclaim to the world that he had
cured eighty per cent of all drunkards who had come to him for treatment,1 he would have announced this result with much hesitancy and
with the expectation of being asked for an exact statement of the condition before treatment was undertaken, for the details of the treatment
employed and for a report of the results accomplished, the failures as well
as the successes. No one jealous of his scientific reputation would care
to publish, without an exact history of each case, such marvelous cures
as those reported to have been accomplished through the Emmanuel
Movement. These gentlemen reveal their slight acquaintance with the
methods of the sciences which they criticise, by their ignorance of the
fact that the prime object of a scientific experiment is to eliminate the
factor of personal authority. There is no one who stands so high in
any science that his unsupported word wins acceptance from the body
of the profession without satisfactory demonstration and proof. When
^'In a lecture recently given in New York City on "Alcoholism," Dr.
McComb was asked what percentage of cures they had made. He replied,
"Eighty per cent." He was then asked the total number of cases treated.
He answered that be could not remember at the moment, but quite a
number."
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 241
Dr. Worcester claims his system of record to be that of the Masachusetts
General Hospital, supplemented by notes on the moral and spiritual
advice given and the effect of that advice, it is to be hoped the reading
public will not hastily conclude that Dr.. Worcester's methods of presenting his results are also those of the Massachusetts General Hospital. As
a matter of fact, these are the methods of Christian Science, and also
of the quack who is usually to be found outside of, but occasionally even
within, the ranks of legitimate medicine and psychology.
It is humiliating for psychology to be forced to admit the close
resemblance between Dr. Worcester's methods of exploitation and the
jaunty way in which the profesor of psychology at Cambridge goes about
the country, claiming to have treated in his psychological laboratory
hundreds and hundreds of cases of this or that form of nervous disease.
The resemblance is probably the result of a conscious, perhaps a subconscious, imitation. For Dr. Worcester might easily enough have considered himself justified in accepting as sound the methods of one of
our most widely known experimental psychologists. He would have
found it difficult, however, to discover within the legitimate profession
of psychology, another example of these methods of exploitation. Since
Elmer Gates subsided into philosophic calm at Chevy Chase, it is the
clarion voice of Miinsterberg which has been most heard crying his
psychological wares in the market place. We do not mean to suggest
that Miinsterberg is a supporter of Worcester and the Emmanuel Movement. On the contrary, he conducts at Cambridge a rival shop of psychotherapy, but in both the methods of public exploitation are the same.
Thus, in McClure's for August, 1908, Miinsterberg says, "If I look back
over the last years in which I often studied the effects of suggestion and
hypnotism on habitual drunkards, I do not hesitate to say that it was,
in most cases, an easy thing to cure the social drinker of the large cities,
but very hard to break the lonely drinker of the temperance town." Up
to the present time, the reports of cases presented by Professor Miinsterberg do not warrant us in believing that he has cured any drunkard whatever. We do not wish to cast the slightest suspicion upon the truth of Professor Miinsterberg's claim. We only contend that no one is justified
in believing a statement of this kind until an adequate report has been
given to the scientific world, and while awaiting this report, the situation,
so far as science is concerned, is the same as though the statement had
never been made. Miinsterberg is not only presenting false standards of
scientific method, which we believe are being imitated by the projectors of the Emmanuel Movement, but this kind of work is throwing
discredit upon the science of psychology. Thus his methods of applying psychology to law have probably postponed for many years the
acceptance of the psychological expert in the courts. In July, 1907, he
asked the public, who had become critical of his methods of reaching
the conclusion that Orchard was telling the truth, to wait until the trial
was over, when he would report in "scientific archives" what he had
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
found. This report lias not yet been made, and surely the profession
of psychology may ask that Professor Miinsterberg will reveal the
methods of distinguishing truth from falsehood which he employed so
successfully and which he claims are on a par for exactitude with the
chemical tests for arsenic in the stomach. This and other so-called
applications of psychology to the methods of legal procedure have earned
the sobriquet of "Yellow Psychology," given by a writer in Law Notes
for October, 1907. They have also called forth an energetic protest,
under the caption of "A New Peril," in the Bookman? for August of the
same year.
We can scarcely blame Dr. Worcester, with the example of so distinguished an authority before him, for a failure to realize the requirements of science in the presentation of his results. None the less we
find it necessary to point out the defects of this method of presentation.
To pick out a few successful cases for inadequate report, to claim an
unusually high percentage of cures, to give no heed to the failures, are
methods which do not encourage the serious consideration Dr. Worcester's work deserves. One reason why Dr. Worcester hesitates to
publish his failures as well as his successes is due to the fact that his
failures will increase in number as soon as his patients are made aware
that his system is not infallible. As hypnotic and waking suggestion
is the dominant feature of his system of psychotherapy, perfect confidence and faith in the operator are necessary for its successful operation.
The victim of insomnia must be told that no one ever sits in the
operator's study chair without going to sleep. If the patient knows
that in two cases out of five, or even in one case out of five, the suggestive influence of the chair and the operator are ineffective, he is the less
easily influenced. Inevitably there gathers around the constant employment of hypnotism an element of charlatanry. The operator must to
some extent dupe the patient.3 No man can keep this up day after day
^'Psychology is being badly overworked in these days. In the sphere
of education it has become ridiculous, and in the sphere of criminal lawit is now becoming perilous. This thought is suggested by the appearance
of Professor Hugo Miinsterberg as a psychological expert in the Hayward
trial at Boise City. The astonishing testimony of Thomas Hogan alias
Harry Orchard naturally made one doubt whether such a tale could
possibly be true. But, of course, the only sane and sensible way of testing
its truth lay in the comparison of it with the other testimony given in the
trial. Professor Miinsterberg, however, was called in to determine the
veracity of Orchard by psychological formulas and psychological lore.
Had the case not been so shocking the professor's methods would have
had a purely comic aspect. He did not hear Orchard give his testimony.
He conferred only with persons engaged in the prosecution. He saw the
prisoner for only a short time. Then he went off and wrote a sort of
horoscopic screed to the effect that Orchard was undoubtedly telling the
exact truth."
""A curative suggestion is an effect obtained through the conviction
that it is about to take place. I tell a young girl she is blushing and the
chances are that she will blush immediately. I place a man in a comfortable reclining cbair, cut off the stream of external sensations by darkening
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 243
and escape a feeling of moral deterioration. It is for tliis reason, quite
as much as for the reason that hypnotism as a therapeutic measure has,
according to competent opinion, a large percentage of failures that the
medical profession has hesitated to recommend its general adoption.
Hypnotism is a very satisfactory agent for occasional use, and we
have no objection to offer to its employment by Dr. Worcester or any
other hypnotist competent to use it. But if he does employ it as an
element in the spiritual and moral treatment of his patients, he should
say very little about it, and this should have been the very last feature
of his work to bring to the attention of the public. Dr. Worcester has
followed the opposite course, and has made hypnotism the predominant
therapeutic measure exploited in "Religion and Medicine." It is owing
to this great emphasis upon the hypnotic feature of his work that popular
enthusiasm has been aroused; but the usual result in such cases is first
a number of miraculous cures, followed by a rapid subsidence of interest,
and finally disappearance in a cloud of suspicion, chicanery, and quackery. We leave it to the clergy to determine whether it is desirable for
those, who stand before the community as representatives of the highest
morality, to play such a dubious role as that of the professional hypnotist.
So far, therefore, as it is possible to pass judgment upon the Emmanuel Movement, after reading the prospectus, it stands for the general
employment by the clergy of hypnotism and suggestion, and it is precisely this feature of the work which merits disapproval. Certainly the
claim that there is something new in Dr. Worcester's psychotherapy
is not justified, with the possible exception of the methods employed to
appeal to religious feelings and beliefs. The book is in effect a garnering of undigested material from various sources dealing with hypnotism
and allied phenomena, and the sources upon which chief reliance is
placed do not constitute the best literature on the subject. What is
known as "crank literature" is a constant psychological phenomenon
present at every period in the world's history. A typical book of this
sort, which Dr. Worcester seems to look upon as an authority, is Hudson's "Law of Psychic Phenomena." Another work, scarcely a shade
removed from this type of literature is Bramwell's "Hypnotism," in large
part a compilation, not very well done, from the literature on that subject, together with addenda of doubtful validity embodying the author's
own experience and point of view. A third writer whose views are woven
the room and insuring quiet, and I earnestly tell him that in a few moments
he will be asleep. If he knows that hundreds of other persons have undergone this experience he will be more certain to accept my assurance and
to obey the suggestion. . . . Another patient is suffering from acute
pain. I divert her mind, place my hand on the suffering part to heighten
the impression that something is about to be done for her, or to direct her
subconscious mind more strongly to it, and I confidently inform her that
the pain is diminishing, that it is going down by degrees and that in a
given time, five minutes, it will have disappeared. This also is completely
successful."?Dr. Worcester, in "Religion and Medicine," pp. 44-45.
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
into the warp and woof of Dr. Worcester's theory is the pseudo-psychologist Frederic W. H. Myers. If Dr. Worcester continues to follow
his chosen authorities in matters of concrete detail as well as in theory,
he may find himself some day in an unpleasant situation. Thus Worcester enlarges upon Bramwell's opinion, cited in "Religion and Medicine,"?"Where the act demanded is contrary to the moral sense, it is
usually refused by the normal subject and invariably by the hypnotized
one,"?and arrives at the conclusion that we observe in hypnosis "an
elevation of the moral faculties, greater refinement of feeling, a higher
sense of truth and honor, often a delicacy of mind which the waking
subject does not possess.4" It is a question for speculation how long
Dr. Worcester can safely ignore the well-known effect of hypnotism and
even etherization in producing sexual excitement in some women.
Physicians who are well aware of the physiological effect of hypnotism
upon the sexual function, quite without any suggestion on the part of
the operator, preserve themselves from unjust suspicion and attacks by
refusing to hypnotize women except in the presence of some third person,
although the presence of an observer distinctly diminishes the effectiveness of the hypnotic method. That this danger is perceived by at least
one follower of Worcester, appears from the somewhat enigmatic words
of the Rev. Lyman P. Powell,?"Sooner or later Mrs. Potiphar is sure to
follow Mrs. Gummidge to some spiritual clinic, as she, alas, too often
follows her into the office of the doctor. But if, like Joseph, the Emmanuel worker leaves nothing more than his reputation in her designing
hands, no lasting harm can come to him or to the cause."3
The practice of hypnotism as proposed by Dr. Worcester contains
specific elements of danger to the community. It is also based upon
principles which are subversive of the morality professed by Christianity
and developed through the philosophic systems of western Europe. This
morality, in strong contrast to Worcesterism, presupposes a very different
training, one which prepares the youth for a strenuous personal combat
against the forces which make for evil in himself and in the world.
An appeal to his reason is supposed to awaken in the young offender an
intellectual appreciation of the nature and consequences of wrong action.
The effort is made to build up conscious and volitional inhibitions of
"'Nor lastly do I deny that a perversion of character might take place
in hypnosis through the repeated efforts of a cunning and wicked person,
though the corruptor would meet with far greater difficulty than if he
attacked his victim In his or her normal consciousness. But I do assert
with distinctness and confidence that no virtuous man or woman will accept
a suggestion which is repugnant to his or her moral nature. On the contrary, what we observe in hypnosis is an elevation of the moral faculties,
greater refinement of feeling, a higher sense of truth and honor, often a
delicacy of mind which the waking subject does not possess. In my opinion
the reason for this is that the subconscious mind, which I believe is the
most active in suggestion, is purer and freer from evil than our waking consciousness."?R. and M., p. 73.
'Psychotherapy. Vol. I, No. 1, p. 93.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 245
instinctive, automatic and reflex activities. Spiritual growth is cultivated through training, which is supplemented by an intimate acquaintance with the thoughts and actions of the great moral leaders of the
world. To do right, men must, to an extent, think right, and Dr.
Worcester to the contrary notwithstanding, neither right thinking nor
right acting proceeds from the consciousness of a hypnotized subject.
The systems of belief which represent the antithesis of the intellectual
and moral ideals of our European civilization, namely oriental mysticism
and theosophy, cultivate a laxness of spirit characteristic of this dream
state, and consign the will and character to the automatic, i. e. subconscious, currents of imagination and emotion. There is something
repugnant in Worcester's theory that the subconscious mind, which is
most active in suggestion, is purer and freer from evil than our waking
consciousness. A woman recently asked help of the Psychological
Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania in controlling the actions of
her son, a youth of eighteen or nineteen years. She claimed he showed
110 respect for her opinions, no regard for her feelings, declined to work
at any profitable employment, refused to do small chores about the house,
and appropriated to his own use any sum of money she might not have
under constant guard. And yet her view,?and this was the view upon
which she had trained the boy,?was that he was subconsciously refined,
noble, and admirable. It was only his actions, she said, that were abnormal and wrong, and she wanted to know whether we could not, by absent
treatment (as she could not get the boy to come to the laboratory), cause
his subconscious self to gain control over his conscious activities. She
had apparently tried to dream the boy into paths of rectitude instead of
compelling him thereto by the force of stern moral discipline. The
hypnotic consciousness, the dream consciousness, the relaxed moments
of revery, the alcoholic and drug consciousness, the so-called subconsciousness,?these are closely allied. "The blessed path of auto-suggestion" may remove inhibitions or checks on the activity of the will, but
auto-suggestion is certainly not the will in action, as Dr. Worcester
would have us believe. On the contrary, the personal will of the individual is momentarily in more or less complete abeyance. Worcester's
idea that there is no better aid to the education of the will than the
practice of auto-suggestion, would serve to raise a smile, did we not
reflect on the practical outcome of a theory in comparison with which
the principles of Christian Science are a harmless bit of child's play.6
s" 'The education of the will,' says Emerson, 'is the object of our
existence.' And there is no better aid in this education than the practice
of auto-suggestion. For what, after all, is the will? It is simply the
effort to concentrate our attention on and thus select one idea rather than
another. Now in auto-suggestion the predominant element is the concentration of thought on, or the narrowing of the consciousness to, a single
idea. So that in a sense we might say that auto-suggestion is simply the
will in action. It is a roundabout way of getting the will to work. And
the blessed path which auto-suggestion takes is that of the removal of
246 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
After a perusal of "Religion and Medicine," one is convinced that
Dr. Worcester and Dr. McComb have, at all events, removed the inhibitions which the logical faculty ought to exercise over imagination and
thought. They appear to have ignored the fact that logical analysis
and critical revision are necessai-y to develop soundness of judgment,
conservatism in the statement of facts, and adequate expression free
from contradictions. As an example, take the explanation of the
miracles of Christ as the work of an artist in suggestion, accomplished
without the direct intervention of the Deity, and contrast with this, their
claim to be able to put the patient into a condition where the Deity
directly intervenes to work what is in effect a therapeutic miracle.
When by hypnotic or waking suggestion patients have been put into a
state of complete repose, we are told that many moral changes occur
with little effort on the patient's part. Dr. Worcester states that men
and women have asserted again and again that this change did not take
place through their own effort or volition, but through the instrumentality
of a higher power. "We may call this suggestion, but I can hardly
believe that the mere assurance of a human being can effect moral
changes so stupendous and to the unaided victim so impossible."7 Dr.
inhibitions or checks on the activity of the will. Here is to be found the
secret of that new sense of power which has come into so many lives to-day
through the medium of Christian Science, Faith-healing, Metaphysical
Mealing, the Raja Yoga of Indian theosophy, and other forces of mental
gymnastics. These systems are so many aids to the training of the will
by auto-suggestion so that the reserves of mental and moral energy within
us may be made available for physical and spiritual health."?R. and M.,
p. 103.
I ought perhaps to admit that I personally attach a religious importance to this state of mind. When our minds are in a state of peace and
our hearts open and receptive to all good influence, I believe that the
Spirit of God enters into us and a power not our own takes possession
of us. Thus I am tempted to explain the marked moral and physical
improvement which I have frequently seen follow such brief periods of
complete repose, and especially moral changes which occur with very
little effort on the part of the patient. When a man who has struggled
unsuccessfully for years against sexual vice or alcoholism suddenly finds
himself free, it is evident that one of two things has happened to him.
Either the old temptation has died within him. or a new spiritual energy
has entered into him which lifts him above its power. Again and again I
have heard men and women who had undergone this experience express
surprise that it had taken place with so little effort of their own and, like
the woman whose letter I have cited, they say this change has not taken
place through their own effort or volition, but through the instrumentality of a higher power. We may call this suggestion, but I can hardly
believe that the mere assurance of a human being can effect moral changes
so stupendous and to the unaided victim so impossible. A woman who had
been bedridden for years through a form of hysterical paralysis, and who
had been apparently restored to health and strength, told me that when she
became profoundly still and concentrated her mind on the thought of God's
presence within her, she frequently felt such a sudden increment of
strength that it frightened her. In this connection it is to be remembered
how earnestly Jesus warned men against injurious agitation and passion,
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 247
Worcester therefore inclines to the belief that in the hypnotic state a
new spiritual energy may enter into man which lifts him above the
power of some vice against which he has successfully struggled for
years. "To-day," he says, "we recognize the universe to be a great
storehouse of invisible energy, contact with which has enormously increased the potentiality of human life. Is it probable that all those
energies are mechanical? Does not the whole moral and religious life
of man testify to the existence of unseen spiritual powers which are
friendly to us?" Why not also unseen spiritual powers which are unfriendly to us ? If we are to return to a belief in the beneficent activity
of ministering angels whose aid we may procure through the church
clinic, how can we prevent a similar return to a belief in the malicious
activity of demons, which the afflicted may seek to ward off by a visit
to the witch doctor?
If a general acceptance of this function of the church clinic to
act as a direct intermediary with the unseen powers of darkness and
light, of evil and good, shoidd result from the propaganda of the Emmanuel Movement, we shall see, not for the first time in the history of the
Church, rival clerical groups and individuals disputing with one another
for public recognition as preferred dispensers of the divine favor. There
are those who contend that the Church fosters superstition, but history
shows that the Church itself has eradicated more superstitions from the
human mind than it has ever fostered or propagated. In fact, we consider that the Church lias contributed in no small measure to the development of civilization by serving as a bulwark against the rising tides of
popular superstition. In this connection we refer the reader to an
article by Dr. Joseph Collins in the Medical Becord for July 4, 1908, on
"The Miracles at the Tomb of B. Frangois de Paris," showing the active
part played by the Church in the suppression of this outbreak of suggestive healing, which finally assumed the form of miracle working. A
marvelous cure effected through clerical suggestion and hypnotism may
be so easily construed as a miracle wrought directly by God through the
intercession of the priest, that the sponsors for the Emmanuel Movement
here stand on very delicate ground. They have failed to make clear their
position, as we can gather from the following statement from the pen
of Dr. McComb: "If we regard faith simply as a psychical process or
mental attitude, history and experience alike testify that it has healing
virtue. Not only does it form an indispensable factor in the various
against anger, fear, and anxious cares, anil the importance which He
attached to calm and peace. We have just begun to fathom His motives,
but there can he no doubt that in His colossal task of the moral regenera
tion of the world He counted on a higher power than man's unaided will.
To-day we recognize the universe to be a great store-house of invisible
energy, contact with which has enormously increased the potentiality of
human life. Is it probable that all those energies are mechanical? Does
not the whole moral and religious life of man testify to the existence of
unseen spiritual powers which are friendly to \is?"?R. and M., pp. 07-08.
248 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
healing cults from those of ancient Egypt and Rome to the mesmerism
of the eighteenth century and the Christian Science, the spiritualism and
the ecclesiastical pilgrimages to this or that sacred shrine in our own
time, but also it may be said to enter into all modern scientific psychotherapy. What indeed is psychotherapy at bottom but an elaborate
system of suggestion, and what would suggestion avail were it not met
with trust on the part of the sufferer? Faith is as necessary in a
psychological clinic as at Lourdes or St. Anne de Beaupre. 'Confidence,'
says Feuchtersleben, 'acts like a real force.' Hence it is not so much the
quality as the strength of the faith that is of vital moment so far as
the removal of a given disorder is concerned. The relic of a dead superstition, a bone from the supposed skeleton of a medieval saint, may
achieve as great things in the cure of physical disorders as faith in the
living God."8 If Dr. McComb and Dr. Worcester fail to make clear the
difference between the therapeutic value of the clergyman's study chair,
and some relic of a dead superstition, how can they expect the layman in
religion, medicine, and psychology, to read this distinction into their
theory ?
Another false position into which the supporters of the Emmanuel
Movement have been forced in making propaganda, is the exaggeration
of the prevalence of nervous diseases. Nervousness in its manifold
forms, Dr. Worcester tells us, is even called a disease of civilization. He
sounds the warning that "unless we find some better means than we
possess at present to calm and simplify our lives, the end of our civilization is in sight, for we cannot continue to use up our forces faster than
those forces are generated." But there is hope, for he continues, "relief is
already in sight. It will come in the discovery and use of those inexhaustible subconscious powers which have their roots in the Infinite."9
Bishop Fallows, in "Health and Happiness," draws the bow-string a
notch or two tighter: "The functional disorders of the nervous system are
quite modern. They appeared some time in the last century, and were
never known before in the history of the human race. They are so
common now that the physicians designated as neurologists can not take
care of one-tenth of one per cent of these cases."
Experts on the force of suggestion, like Dr. Worcester and Bishop
Fallows, should show some mercy for the frailties of the human mind,
and not use their best endeavor to cultivate the very diseases they set
out to cure. As a matter of fact, the consensus of neurological opinion
and the verdict of history point to a decrease in the functional disorders
of the nervous system, especially those which are most easily affected
by hypnotism. If Dr. Worcester had opened his church clinic several
hundred years ago, it is reasonable to suppose from what we know of
historic epidemics of hysteria that the Emmanuel Church could not have
8R. and M., p. 293.
"Op. cit., pp. 133-134.
REVIEWS AND CRITICISM. 249
contained the tide of humanity which would have swept into the city
of Boston. From all appearances the race is progressing toward a greater
functional stability of the nervous system.
We wish to give Dr. Worcester the heartiest support in the employment of such measures as will contribute to the growth and influence of
the Church, and at the same time administer to the spiritual and physical
welfare of mankind. But we can not perceive the wisdom of taking a
leaf from the book of Christian Science because, according to Dr. Worcester, "while most other religious bodies are decreasing or barely holding
their own, it grows by leaps and bounds." We object to the admiration
implied by imitation, with which Dr. Worcester views the "solid and
enduring temples" which have been reared all over this country "by
grateful hands, and consecrated to the ideal and name of Mrs. Eddy."
If temporary worldly success constitutes sufficient ground for imitation,
then why not turn also to Dowie and the Book of Mormon ? As far as the
claim of disinterestedness goes, we can see no objeotion to a clergyman's
charging a graduated fee for services rendered to patients who can afford
to pay. The personal motive is necessarily and inextricably interwoven
with social and altruistic motives. The frank acceptance of a fee to be
retained by the clergyman or turned over to the Church would have
provided a sounder basis for the development of the Emmanuel Movement than the claim that "the Christian character of our undertaking
is to our mind guaranteed chiefly by the fact that it is absolutely disinterested. We neither ask nor accept any reward for our services."10
The position of taking with the left hand what is rejected by the right
is frankly enough expressed by the Bev. Lyman P. Powell in Psychotherapy. "Church attendance," he urges in advocacy of the adoption
of the church clinic by the minister, "will increase with the increase
of the number who have found the clinic a veritable Peniel from which
they have come down singing with Jacob, 'I have seen God face to face
and my life is preserved.' Church finances will be less of a vexation to
minister and people, as gratitude forbidden to express itself in monetary
compensation to the minister breaks its costly alabaster box on the Church
he loves."
Much as we commend and admire the social service work of the
Emmanuel Church, and also the determined effort to appeal to religious
impulse and to make spiritual and moral training really effective, we
believe on the whole, since the publication of "Eeligion and Medicine"
and Psychotherapy, that the further development of the Emmanuel
Movement is likely to accomplish more harm than good. Whatever Dr.
Worcester's practice may be in his own church clinic, the principles of
psychotherapy to which he and his associates adhere, are based upon
neither sound medicine, sound psychology, nor to our lay mind, upon
sound religion. The Emmanuel Movement has already lost the support
10R. and M., p. 6.
250 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of Dr. Putnam, one of a number of able physicians in Boston, without
whose assistance Dr. Worcester claims he would not have proceeded to
the treatment of nervous cases. It seems to us inevitable that Dr. Cabot,
to whom is chiefly owing the social service idea, will also be compelled
to withdraw his support if the movement gains the momentum which its
present exploitation seeks to give it The loss of its scientific supporters
we consider inevitable, because the publications we have had under
examination reveal the false system of philosophy upon which the movement is based, and to which we shall give our attention in the following
section.
(To be concluded.)
