Conservation of Health in the School Boom
==========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. III. No. 5. October 15, 1909.

By S. L. Heetek,
Superintendent of Schools, Saint Paul, Minnesota.
Despite the advance made of recent years in school architecture
and in tlie mechanical equipment of schools by modernizing our
plumbing, heating, and ventilating; despite the scientific methods
of municipal boards of health in dealing with contagion and infection; despite the fact that our schools are better to-day than ever
before in the history of the world, our teachers better trained,
better informed and more conscientious than ever before, we cannot
refute the charge that we do not properly protect and promote
health in our school rooms. Great crimes of ignorance and
neglect are committed against health in our city homes, flats,
schools, churches, office buildings, railway coaches, and all places
where people congregate.
So far as the public schools are concerned we have not yet
met the problem of sanitation. I believe it is largely due to the
fact that we have not placed the responsibility where it belongs.
I believe we have too long held teachers exclusively responsible
for matters that should be under the supervision of some one else.
We certainly cannot consider our teachers responsible for the choice
of a building site, for the condition of school grounds, for bad
architecture, lack of drainage, defective plumbing, unsanitary
water supply, the care of our school buildings and the spread of
contagious and infectious diseases. And I have been forced to
conclude of late that we cannot and should not ever trust our most
conscientious teachers to regulate heat and fresh air in our school
rooms.
Here arises the proverbial quarrel between engineer and
teacher, caused by the need of fresh air on the one hand and the
inadequacy of mechanical devices on the other hand. She must
have fresh air and the windows go up. He cannot heat "all out
(121)
122 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
doors" and the success of his mechanical device depends upon
hermetically sealed rooms.
There is one question no longer in my mind. It is not a
teacher's business to sweep her own floors, scrub her own blackboards, dust her own erasers, empty her own waste basket, regulate
her own dampers, do messenger service day after day to engineers
and janitors. We should not make sweeps and scrub-women of
our teachers. I wonder if we should hold that teacher culpable
who becomes so interested in the training of a child, that she
forgets winds, dampers, registers, thermometers, and thermostats.
Teachers and children alike should be furnished buildings properly heated, properly ventilated, and properly cared for from
morning to night. The time must soon come when our engineers
and janitors will be men of good health and good habits. They
will then not only present a respectable appearance during school
hours, but see to it that our school rooms are kept at a temperature of sixty-eight, that a constant current of fresh air is supplied
to every room either by the new patent mechanical devices or by
old-fashioned methods, all with due regard to health in our school
rooms.
My point is that it is incumbent upon school authorities, not
the teacher, to provide for our schools such physical environment
as will both protect and promote health. Our laws will some day
fix the responsibility and require that the heating and ventilating
of every school building shall be in the hands of an expert,?
engineer, janitor, or even the school principal,?some one other
than the teacher doing active educational work,?who should 110
more be permitted to expose children and teachers live hours a
day to a poorly heated and ventilated room than to expose them
to small-pox in an unfumigated room.
The physical environment of the child will therefore be put
under the vigilant supervision of some oi?e other than the teacher,?
but there is a different responsibility that belongs to the teacher.
She must come more and more to realize her obligations to the
physical child. I am strong in the conviction that we as teachers
have been giving more consideration to the minds of our pupils
than we have to their bodies. We have made a specialty of psychology and have slighted physiology. Except in extreme cases,
we take but little note of physical abnormalities?those defects
of mind and body which undermine health and defeat school
progress. Wo have thought more about the subjects taught,
methods, devices, courses of study, than about sleep, diet, physical
habits, exercise, and a score of bodily ailments common to childCONSERVATION OF HEALTH 123
hood. Class room instruction rather than the child and the direction of his daily life still engrosses our attention. We still crowd
our children into uniform, non-adjustable desks; we fail to detect
incipient cases of physical ailments and ignore the retarding
effects of abnormal physical conditions; we fail as yet to
adapt our requirements to the period of adolescence. We continue
to classify our children according to mental attainments or years
of age, and not according to physiological age; we have thus far
made but little investigation into fatigue, its causes, symptoms and
alleviation; we are making only a beginning at a study of the
problem of defective children, retardation and elimination. Only
within the last few years have we known what is meant by an
adenoid face; we have just begun to discover the corrective effect
of play on fatigue, malposture, defective breathing, poor circulation and similar evils; we deny our children outdoor recesses and
offer no organized play and group games in the open air. The
school life of the child has been lengthened, our population is congregated in cities, contagion and infection are more difficult to
control, attendance is seriously interrupted by children's ailments,
and yet we make our chief concern the course of study, examination, tests, promotions and graduations.
A new responsibility is laid upon us,?not the responsibility
of school room sanitation, dealing with the environment of
teacher and child, which should be left to board of health,
school board, architect, engineers and janitors,?but a responsibility in meeting the physical needs of the individual child.
Health must come first in our education scheme. Mind and body
can no longer be separated in our educational process. All education must have its beginning in the physiology of the human body.
For twenty-five years our American schools have endeavored
to break away from the lock-step, intellectually. All children
were received too long on an equality and treated alike regardless
of varying mental capacities. Our American schools have developed on the supposed democratic theory that all children are equal
in mental attainment; but they are not equal, never have been,
and never can be.
So, the next movement in education will break the lock-step
physically, and will lead to the adaptation of the schools to meet
the physical needs of our mouth-breathing laggards, and our palefaced anemics,?boys and girls in our schools who fall behind in
our intellectual programs, become disheartened, grow into an utter
dislike of school, and drop out as truants only to become delin124 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
quents and incorrigibles, filling our parental schools, juvenile
courts, detention homes, and state training schools.
Here is the problem before every city school system in this
country, that of providing for the actual physical needs of the
unfortunate half whose progress in school is defeated by abnormal
physical conditions of body and brain.
We have opened the doors of five hundred thousand school
rooms in this country, have offered the means of an intellectual
education to the millions, have extended our school year from three
to ten months; we have lengthened our courses of study and
advanced our standards. We have passed our compulsory education laws and have attempted to force a modicum of learning upon
every child whether he will or not. Hundreds of thousands of
teachers in the length and breadth of this land make their monthly
reports to parents, grade the intellectual progress or failure of
children, and with it all, close their eyes to diseases, abnormalities
and defects impairing school work.
Meanwhile, one-third of the youth in this land drop out of
our schools with the sixth grade. They come to a point in our
culture programs where they stop short. They are physically and
mentally and socially incompetent to go farther. They arrive at
a state of arrested development even inside our school rooms.
They clog our educational machinery, constitute a drag on our
school systems as an army of repeaters, or else they leave our
schools as failures and join the rank and file of idle youth, or run
up and down our city streets from one trifling job to another.
Who dare in the face of these facts count the cost of a single
school physician and a school nurse, and disregard the cost of
ill-health, stifled ambition, inefficient and dependent lives, wrecked
homes, and despondent families? The scientific physical examination of every child who enters our schools represents not expense
but economy. Who dare say that the state has no right and no
duty in this matter? We stand for a strict enforcement of compulsory education, and yet the law that compels school attendance
of all kinds of children will be dangerous indeed if the larger
assembly of pupils is not followed by closer physical supervision.
