News and Comments
===================

Second International Course for Legal Psychology and Psychiatry.
The second international course for legal psychology and psychiatry
will be held at Giessen (Grandduchy of Hesse), Germany, April 13-18,
1909. The course will be under the direction of Professor Sommer, with
the co-operation of Professors Mittermaier and Dannemann of Giessen,
and Professor Aschaffenburg of Cologne. All inquiries should be
addressed to Dr. Sommer, Professor of Psychiatry, University of Giessen.
Meeting of the American Academy of Medicine.
The thirty-fourth annual meeting of the American Academy of
Medicine will be held at the Hotel Dennis, Atlantic City, N. J., on
June 5 and 1, 1909. The session on Saturday afternoon, June 5, will
be open to educators and others engaged in work among children. The
topic for discussion will be?"Exceptional children not needing segregation from society: what municipalities, schools, physicians, homes should
do. How often do such mature into tramps, criminals, cranks, geniuses ?"
Reports of cases in private practice, and reports from juvenile courts,
schools for truants, backward, and incorrigible children will be welcomed,
especially if they include results of treatment.
A National Children's Bureau.
A bill to establish a bureau in the Department of the Interior to be
known as the Children's Bureau, has been introduced in the House of
Representatives. This bill reads as follows:?
"Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, That there shall be
established in the Department of the Interior a bureau to be known
as the Children's Bureau.
"Sec. 2. That the said bureau shall be under the direction of a chief,
to be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate, and who shall receive an annual compensation of five
thousand dollars. The said bureau shall investigate and report upon
all matters pertaining to the welfare of children and child life, and
shall especially investigate the questions of infant mortality, the birth
rate, physical degeneracy, orphanage, juvenile delinquency and juvenile
courts, desertion and illegitimacy, dangerous occupations, accidents and
diseases of children of the working classes, employment, legislation affecting children in the several states and territories, and such other facts
as have a bearing upon the health, efficiency, character and training of
(301)
302 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
children. The chief of said bureau shall, from time to time, publish the
results of these investigations.
"Sec. 3. That there shall be in said bureau, until otherwise provided for by law, an assistant chief to be appointed by the Secretary of
the Interior, who shall receive an annual compensation of three thousand
dollars, one private secretary to the chief of the bureau, who shall
receive an annual compensation of one thousand five hundred dollars;
a chief clerk, who shall receive an annual compensation of two thousand
dollars; one statistical expert, at two thousand dollars; four clerks of
class four; four clerks of class three; two clerks of class two, and six
clerks of class one; five clerks, at one thousand dollars each; two copyists,
at nine hundred dollars each; one messenger, at seven hundred and
twenty dollars; two special agents, at one thousand four hundred dollars
each, and two special agents, at one thousand two hundred dollars each.
"Sec. 4. That the Secretary of the Interior is hereby directed to
furnish sufficient quarters for the work of the bureau at an annual
rental not to exceed two thousand dollars.
President Roosevelt has sent to Congress a special message recommending the establishment of a Federal Children's Bureau as proposed
by this bill. In the course of his message the President asserts that the
conclusions of the recent conference in Washington on the care of
dependent children "constitute a wise, constructive and progressive program of child-caring work," and he adds, "if given full effect by the
proper agencies, existing methods and provision in almost every community would be profoundly and advantageously modified."
