Medical Inspection in the Saint Paul Schools
=============================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. III. No. 3. May 15, 1909.
By S. L. IIeetek,
Superintendent of Schools, Saint Paul, Minn.
In compliance witli instructions received from the Board of
School Inspectors, more than two years ago, I have made careful
study of the subject of medical inspection in schools as established
and maintained in other cities. I find in this connection one of
the most extensive and significant movements in school administration of recent years. More than four hundred towns and cities
in the United States report one form or another of medical inspection in their schools. Several states have passed laws requiring it
and legislation is pending in several other states.
More than a year ago, I solicited the assistance of Mr. C. J.
Herrmann, physical director in the schools of this city, in the
consideration of the following topic: To what extent are school
authorities called upon to investigate and meet the physical needs
of school children ? The report of Mr. Herrmann's investigations
is given on pages 103-106 of the recent Manual and Biennial
Report.
I submit herewith a series of paragraphs showing the nature
of medical inspection in other schools and a brief statement of the
findings of such inspection.
A physical examination recently conducted in the New York
city schools shows that not less than 30 per cent of all the pupils
in the elementary schools are suffering from ocular defects alone,
demanding correction, and not less than 17 per cent have ocular
defects so severe as to be a serious menace to their progress in the
schools.
*Report submitted to the Board of School Inspectors of Saint Paul,
Minn., March 31, 1909. The report has since been adopted and the department of medical inspection will be established in September.
(CI)
G2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Dr Cronin, chief mcdical inspector, New York City, in a
paper read before the School Hygiene Association of America, says
that all children reported as backward by various teachers were
examined and out of these 95 per cent were found to have physical
defects.
B. F. Dyer, superintendent of schools of Cincinnati, states
that 20 per cent of the school children of that city are behind their
proper grade in the schools because of defective eyesight, hearing,
and other ailments.
Dr Risley examined the eyes of 2422 school children of
Philadelphia and found that 44.7 per cent had some deficiency of
vision.
Dr Sexton examined 570 school children of New York City
and found that 13.3 per cent had deficient hearing in one or both
ears. Of these, only one was known by the teacher to bo defective,
and only, ten knew themselves to be deficient in this sense.
Examinations of 40,000 school children by school physicians
in the duchy of Saxe-Meiningen, Germany, in 1900, showed that
23 per cent were myopic, 10 per cent or more had spinal curvature and GO per cent had teeth which needed attention.
In a medical examination conducted last year in the Franklin
School, Minneapolis, the following results were found: Malnutrition, 115; enlarged cervical glands, 170; St. Vitus dance, 1; cardiac diseases, 9 ; pulmonary diseases, 5 ; defective spine 4; defective
palate, 1; enlarged tonsils, 112; post nasal growths, 4G; pediculosis,
18; trachoma, 2; conjunctivitis, 2; blepharitis, 14; scabies, 2;
acute coryza, 8; bronchitis, 15; enlarged thyroid, 2; epilepsy, 1.
By school inspection it is discovered that of more than 400,000
children examined in the schools of Massachusetts, 81,000 are defective in vision and 22,000 in hearing; it is stated on reliable
authority that 90 per cent of the school children of Germany have
defective teeth and examination shows the same proportion in
American towns and cities; 137 cases of excessivo adenoid growths
are reported for a single city; whole schools have been found
infected with head-lice.
While no medical examination of school children has ever
been undertaken in this city it is probably safe to assume that the
percentage of physically, defective pupils is not much, if any,
smaller than that found in the above mentioned cities. I recently sent to all the schools, carefully prepared tables calling for
tabulated reports from principals on the ages and grades of pupils
in the various schools. These reports indicate that 12,G72 cliilMEDICAL INSPECTION. 63
dren in the Saint Paul grade schools or 56 per cent of the average
enrolment are one year or more behind their grades. Of these
6328 are one year behind; 3650 two years; 1689 three years; 651
four years; 221 five years; and 133 six years or more behind their
grades. To my mind here is a serious situation inviting the
earnest consideration and investigation of the school authorities
of this city. There are evidently many causes for this phenomenal
retardation, such as late entrance, foreign birth, ignorance of the
English language, irregular attendance, failures in promotion, congested courses of study, over-emphasis of intellectual subjects, etc.,
and yet it seems likely that one of the largest factors entering into
this backwardness of our children is physiological, and that more
attention given in our schools to the bodily conditions of children
will throw new light on our educational problems, and even on
the subject of backward children, and of deliquency itself.
It appears that the schools have been too exclusively concerned about the minds of children and too little concerned about
their bodies. Much time and energy and money have been wasted
in trying to make all children equal in mental power, without
regard to physical inequalities, until now waste products aie clogging our educational machinery.
Physical degeneracy too frequently leads to mental and even
moral degeneracy and the school of the future must be moie concerned about its under-fed and pale-faced dullards; its oxygenstarved mouth-breathers, and its flat-chested anaBmics, and so fai as
possible aim to increase the working efficiency of pupils by the
discovery and the correction of the fundamental physical defects
which bear directly upon their work in the schools.
I am convinced, therefore, in the light of such consideiations, that the physical examination and inspection of children
in the elementary schools is a matter of vital importance not only
to the individual child and the home but to the school system
itself, and that the Board of School Inspectors of Saint Paul can
do more in building up a rational, economic, and efficient system
?f education, having for its basis the physical well-being of the
individual child.
It is just here that the schools need the expert advice and
counsel, and the periodical visits of a school physician, who is
employed to spend this time in the schools.
In reaching this conclusion, and in making the recommendations that follow, I am not unmindful of the effective work that
has been done for a number of years, and is still being done in the
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
schools by the Department of Health. But medical inspection
in the schools should contemplate far more than the discovery and
control of infectious and contagious diseases. Oversight of such
diseases should remain fundamentally, the duty of the board of
health, and all matters relating to the means of detecting communicable diseases, and the means of combating their spread should continue to be regulated according to the rules and laws established
by that body.
Medical inspection should be established and maintained by
the board of education, however, for the purpose of bringing to
the knowledge of teachers and parents the physical defects of
individual children which stand in the way of health, and defeat
the mental progress.
Medical inspection should be considered in the light of an
educational problem, rather than a medical problem pure and
simple. It should involve the following of the child from grade
to grade, the constant attention of the teacher to all of the
school work and the conduct of the child.
Medical inspection should be dealt with not by physicians
only. Its work should be under the control of the board of education and immediately under the direction of the superintendent
of schools. The medical inspector should appreciate the relation
of -his work to the work of the teacher. lie should, in fact, be
as much of an educator as a physician. lie should consider himself a part of the school corps, not merely to discover and report
physical ailments, which affect the health of children; but to increase the physical and mental capacity of pupils, to add to the
happiness of their lives, to render instruction more effective,
and to increase the efficiency of the school system.
I therefore recommend that a department of medical inspection be created and maintained in Saint Paul under the rules
and regulations herewith submitted.
1. A medical inspector of the schools shall be appointed each year
at the annual meeting of the board in June. He shall be elected to
serve for the school year only and his salary shall be fixed in accordance with the high-school teachers' schedule. No one shall bo deemed
eligible to this appointment except he be a graduate of a recognized
medical college and hold a license from the State Board of Medical
Examiners of the state of Minnesota.
2. The medical inspector of schools shall give his entire time to
the work of this department from 8:30 a. m. to 12 m. on school days,
lie shall not engage in any other practice during the above stated hours.
MEDICAL INSPECTION. 65
3. At the beginning of each school week, he shall transmit to the
superintendent of schools a program of visits to be made by him during
the week, and shall do his work under the direction of the superintendent
of schools and in compliance with the rules and regulations of the
Board of School Inspectors.
4. He shall keep office hours at the offices of the Board of School
Inspectors on not less than three school days of each week, from 4 to
5:30 p. m., for free consultation with principals, teachers and parents.
5. The medical inspector shall have charge of the examination and
inspection of children, aiming essentially to report to the teachers and
parents physical conditions on the part of children which affect their
health, and retard mental or moral progress. He shall cooperate with
the Health Department of the city in the discovery of communicable
diseases in their incipiency, and in bringing about prompt isolation of
pupils suffering from contagious infectious diseases, and in securing
the prompt return of such pupils upon recovery.
G. Within the first semester of each school year he shall make
a thorough physical examination of all pupils in the elementary schools
reported to him by the teachers and principals and such others as he
may suspect of having physical ailments. Within the second semester
he shall make a sccond examination of all pupils found physically defective in the first, and such as may be recommended for special examination by the teachers and principals.
T. Card records shall be made by the medical inspector of all children affected with physical ailments or diseases needing treatment, and
duplicate records shall be made and forwarded as a report to parents
carrying such recommendations as the medical inspector deems to the
interest of the child.
8. The medical inspector shall not be permitted to give any treatment to children except temporary assistance or in cases of emergency,
nor shall he recommend to parents, except upon request, any physician,
dentist, oculist, or specialist for treatment of any case.
9. The medical inspector shall be assisted in his work by a school
nurse who shall be employed to give her entire time during the school
year to the schools and whose salary shall be fixed in accordance with
the grade teachers' schedule. It shall be the duty of the school nurse
to accompany the medical inspector of schools and assist in the physical
examination of the pupils, to assist the inspector in recording health
defects and in reporting to parents, to follow up cases reported to the
homes; to visit such homes as may be deemed necessary in the judgment
of the medical inspector.
10. The medical inspector shall also send notice to the parents or
guardians of pupils lacking in cleanliness, or needing treatment; he
shall be authorized to exclude from school any pupil for physical defects and diseases until such time as, in his judgment, the pupil can
60 THE.PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
be safely reinstated. He sliall see that principals and teachers do not
permit the return to school of pupils from quarantine without the proper
certificate from the Department of Health.
11. He shall meet the principals, as well as the teachers of each
grade at least once each semester and give such instruction to principals and teachers as will make them familiar with the more conspicuous
symptoms of physical and mental deficiency, to the end that they may
suggest only those who are really atypical to the inspector for examination. Ho shall give instruction to teachers respecting vision and
hearing tests, and on such matters relating to the physical inspection
of children as will promise the assistance and cooperation of teachers
and principals in the work of his department.
12. The medical inspector shall make recommendations, when requested by the superintendent of buildings or by the board, on matters
respecting the phvsical environment of school children, such as the
building lot, the drainage, heating, plumbing, ventilating, water supply,
drinking facilities, sweeping, scrubbing, use of disinfectants, deodorizing, fumigating, etc.
13. He shall report regularly to the superintendent of buildings the
necessity of change in the seating in any building or room to meet the
physical needs of a class or of individual pupils.
