News and Comments
==================

Some Orthogenic Agencies.
The current number of The Psychological Clinic emphasizes
some general factors in the treatment of retarded and normal children.
Mr. Ayres calls attention to attendance, Dr. Martin to preventable phy-
sical defects and adverse environmental conditions, and Mr. Johnson to
the necessity of playgrounds. These are orthogenic agencies of great
importance.
The Schoolroom Thermometer.
It is difficult to give concrete definiteness to the regulations for the
enforcement of hygienic conditions in the schoolroom. This may be
done with respect to the temperature of the schoolroom through the
employment of a thermometer. The principal of every school should
receive authority from the Board of Education to hang a thermometer
in every room and to require the grade teacher to keep the temperature
between 67 and 70 degrees Fahrenheit and to announce that a teacher
is liable to discharge if the temperature is allowed to exceed 70 degrees.
It is easy enough to open windows and it is better to have a surplus of
heat and open windows than to have a deficiency of heat. This regula-
tion would teach hygiene more effectively to pupils and teachers than any
amount of text book instruction.
Fresh Air in the Treatment of Disease.
In the February number of Archives of Pediatrics are two good
articles on this subject, the first by Dr. Edwin E. Graham, professor of
children's diseases in the Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, and
the second by Dr. William P. Nortlirup, of New York.
Dr. Graham reports his experience with the fresh air treatment,
which he introduced eight years ago in the children's wards of the
Philadelphia Hospital. Before that time the children did not do well.
He says, "A frail infant, perhaps premature and under normal weight,
would gain for a few weeks at best, then remain stationary in weight,
finally gradually lose weight, begin to have diarrhea, and die. Robust
infants on admission often did well for three months. The same
symptoms after this period began to develop as in the infants admitted
in a condition of malnutrition, and in spite of my best efforts, many of
these robust children died. The same type of infants in my private
(24)
NEWS AND COMMENT 25
practice were almost without exception doing well. Convinced that
neither the food, nursing nor general care of these hospital infants was
at fault, and that the so-called hospitalism was nothing but lack of
fresh air and lack of out-door air, I ordered these children, in the month
of January, placed for two hours each day on the fire-escapes."
The infant mortality decreased immediately. For the next two or
three years, during Dr. Graham's service in January, February, and
March, he had the children placed in small hammocks in the yard for
several hours a day, unless it was raining or snowing. Five years ago
the children's wards moved into their new building, where "the infants
practically have an abundance of fresh air day and night, and they do as
well as could be hoped for."
In the new Jefferson Hospital, where Dr. Graham is on duty all the
year round, he has a roof garden for the children, and the results are
most encouraging. lie has had great success in applying the fresh
air treatment in cases of pneumonia and typhoid fever. The rooms
where these cases are kept have large windows on two sides and an
open door 011 a third side. The children are well wrapped up and sup-
plied with hot water bags, and the door and windows are kept open
night and day, excepting for a few moments when it is necessary to
uncover the patients for bathing, etc. Many other diseases have been
successfully treated in a similar way.
In private practice Dr. Graham has had equally good results. "On
my first visit to the child," he says, "I, if possible, instill into the mother
the principle that fresh air differs from impure air as much as fresh
milk from impure milk. Once gain her consent, and the treatment is
an assured fact. I am more than surprised to see the willingness with
which most mothers, no matter what their social status may be, enter
into the treatment." He quotes Wachenheim as authority for the state-
ment, "Indifferent temperature feels neither warm nor cold, and is most
restful. In children, indifferent temperature is about 75 degrees F. in
summer in summer clothing, and about G5 degrees F. in winter in winter
clothing, and varies with age and vitality. Temperatures above indif-
ferent are not sedative, but cause a continuous stimulation that is
harmful if prolonged, ending in exhaustion."
In conclusion he says, "Let \is all join hands and preach fresh air;
vote for open squares, endorse roof gardens, have adenoids and tonsils
removed, and if we are willing as a society [the American Pediatric
Society] to endorse and work for the fresh air treatment with the same
zeal and enthusiasm as we have worked for fresh and pure milk, our
results will be as great a success as has been secured by our milk
enthusiasts."
Dr. Northrup would like to see the term "fresh air" made more
explicit, and suggests, "If it ever is entered in the U. S. P. [United
States Pharmacopeia] and standardized for therapeutic use, it should
26 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
read something like this, 'Open air, or cold, fresh, flowing out-door air,?
dosage regulated to individual needs.'" He emphasizes the point that
in fresh air treatment, "The patients and nurses should be made com-
fortable all the time," and tells how they make beds out-of-doors at the
Presbyterian Hospital. He concludes by saying, 11 Open-air treatment
has hilled no one, has injured no one, has helped everyone, and deter-
mined a cure in a few."
The Social Service Department of the Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania.
On January 21, 1909, the committee appointed by the Medical
Faculty of the University of Pennsylvania submitted to the Board of
Managers of the University Hospital the first annual report of the social
work of the out-patient department of the Hospital. The chairman
of this committee is Dr. J. H. Musser, who procured the funds necessary
to carry on the work and first undertook its establishment in the fall
of 1907.
This work, following the plan of the Social Service Department at
the Massachusetts General Hospital under the guidance of Dr. Cabot,
was made possible by the contributions of a friend interested through
Dr. Musser. The services of Miss Mary M. Ogilvie were secured
as social worker and director. Miss Cannon, one of the leaders in
similar work in Boston, gave two weeks of her time and energy in
starting the work in Philadelphia. Miss Ogilvie is assisted by a staff
of volunteer social workers. Dr. Fussell and Dr. Meyer Solis-Cohen are
the physicians in charge of this department of the University Hospital.
The report is an extremely interesting and suggestive document of
nineteen pages. The work of the first year was chiefly taken up with
tuberculosis. A tuberculosis class was established and patients were
instructed in keeping records of their daily doings, including the
character and amount of food taken, the number of hours spent in the
open air, the hours of sleep, the amount of exercise or work, the number
of bowel movements, the amount and character of the cough and expec-
toration, their spirits, etc. The patients provided themselves with
clinical thermometers and took their temperature three times a day,
recording it in a book. They obtained from the hospital at cost price
Japanese napkins, paper bags, sputum cups of paste board and holders.
The class meets once a week; instructive talks are given by the leader and
also by the patients themselves. The records are gone over and are criti-
cised by both the class leader and the members. "The benefits of this
method are many. The patients become proficient in giving talks on the
prevention of tuberculosis and the management of the consumptive and
learn to repeat accurately to their relatives and friends what they have
learned in the class, thereby carrying on an active educational campaign."
In some instances the husbands of patients. have repeated the talks
NEWS AND COMMENT. 27
heard at second hand to the men at their places of business. This has
resulted in the ventilation of the work room and in the admisssion of
fresh air to the rooms of fellow workmen. Some of the patients visit
other persons known to have consumption or supposed to have a cold
or chronic cough and have given them valuable instruction. The influence
exerted by these optimistic, enthusiastic, improving tuberculosis patients
on the people whom they meet is of inestimable value.
This education of the community alone would be sufficient justifica-
tion for the establishment and maintenance of a social service depart-
ment, but the direct result of this treatment is shown in the history of
improvement in a large number of cases. "Another case, who, in
addition to his pulmonary lesion had two different severe attacks of
bone tuberculosis with necrosis, now works eight hours every day and
during the summer plays on a ball team every evening and Saturday
afternoon."
In addition to this work Miss Ogilvie visits the homes of the patients,
giving instruction in hygiene and the preparation of food; and often
discovers new cases, mostly children, while visiting in families of
patients referred to the department.
The social work department refers cases to the proper agencies and
acknowledges assistance received from them. These include the Society
for Organizing Charity, Wayfarer's Lodge, the Protestant Episcopal
City Mission^ the Society of United Hebrew Charities and the Children's
Bureau. Various agencies are beginning to rely upon the social
service department for assistance in the medical and social treatment of
their cases. The report ends with a plea for a combined effort in solving
some of the complex problems of charity and civic life by such agencies
as the Medical Department, the Wharton School, the University Hospi-
tal, the University Settlement House, and the Psychological Clinic
conducted by the Psychological Laboratory of the University- of Penn-
sylvania.
The Application of Modern Methods to Records for Public Schools.
Readers of The Psychological Clinic who have followed the
various articles appearing therein from time to time on the subjects of
retardation, and elimination of pupils from school, will have formed
ft very real appreciation of the necessity for more complete and avail-
able records of school data, and will know how to appraise the work
reported in Mr. George II. Chatfield's article in the February number
of School Work.
Committees from the Association of Women Principals and from the
Principals' Association of the City of New York have joined forces in an
effort to introduce a more satisfactory system of keeping and filing the
school data which under the present system are hidden away so securely
that they are for all practical purpose lost. Mr. Chatfield, as chairman
of the two committees, gives an account of their recommendations.
28 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
They have proposed radical changes in the methods of keeping
most of the records. The most important suggestion is that in regard
to the "Pupils' Record." This record is kept on a card 5x8 inches,
blue for boys, white for girls. On one side space is provided for the
name, address, date and place of birth, and school records in regard
to grades, attendance, lateness, conduct, work, special aptitudes and
deficiencies for the entire school life of the individual child. The
other side is devoted to the record of the physical examination made
under the auspices of the Board of Health. Two such cards are filed for
each pupil, one set of cards being arranged alphabetically, one according
to classes. When a child is transferred from one school to another one
card is forwarded to the school and the other transferred to a file of
discharged pupils. Thus the record of any child who has ever attended
a school may be found at once in the files of that school.
This is only one item in a very comprehensive system of record
keeping which aims to present data in reference to pupils, teachers,
books, supplies, etc., in such a clear, simple, and available way that
their value for practical school use and for statistical purposes will
be much enhanced.
The system seems to have been carefully worked out and will
doubtless prove of great practical value to the New York schools.
The Use of Anatomical Models in Courses in Psychology and Education.
The laboratory method of instruction had brought with it a recogni-
tion of the importance of models, specimens, and similar demonstration
material. When psychology achieved an independent position in our
leading universities, the employment of models became a matter of
course to demonstrate the anatomy of the nervous system and sense
organs, and the comparative development of the human and animal brain.
The extent to which large demonstration models, and models for the
individual use of students are employed, even in educational courses,
at the present day, is scarcely appreciated. In addition to a number
of medical departments and eight universities, among them the psy-
chological department of the University of Pennsylvania, using the new
Ward model of the spinal cord, this model is to be found in at least
seven normal schools, the Philadelphia Normal School for Girls, the
State Normal School at Bridgewater, Mass., the Colorado State Normal
School at Greeley, Colo., the Idaho State Normal School, the Northern
Illinois State Normal School, the Minnesota State Normal School at
Duluth, Minn., and the State Normal School at Oshkosh, Wis. The use
of these and other anatomical models bespeaks a progressive educational
policy in many training schools for teachers, widely distributed through-
out the country.
