The Playground as a Factor in School Hygiene
=============================================

By George E. Johnson,,
Superintendent of Playground Association, Pittsburgh, Pa.
Scarcely twelve months ago tlie whole country was shocked
by a disaster to school children so horrible in its details that men in
distant cities wept in street-cars as they read the account in the
morning papers. Immediately, everywhere, school buildings were
inspected and hundreds of thousands of dollars were expended in
alterations and fire escapes.
Since then, in the city of that sad disaster, and in every city
of equal size, many times that number of children have perished
and scarcely a comment lias been raised. It would take four
disasters like that at Cleveland every school day in the year to
keep pace with the march of death among the school children of our
land.
During the coming year more than one hundred thousand
school children will end their young lives, the bloom of babyhood
scarcely yet faded from their cheeks, and tens of thousands of
Rachels will mourn for their little ones and not be comforted.
During the next ten years millions more will lay the foundation of weak constitutions to succumb to some great white, black,
red or yellow plague before life's meridian has been reached.
To those who rejoice in the living, Dr. Hutchinson's cheering declaration that "it, isn't so very dangerous to be alive" will
bring its reassurance, but to those who mourn for the dead, it will
lend an added pathos. The unnecessary loss is the hardest to bear.
And this loss, inconceiveably great as it is, is largely within our
power to prevent. For not only is it not so very dangerous for a
child from five to fifteen to Ik1 alive, it is the natural and easy
thing for him to remain alive,?if he has a fair chance.
These are the years when the life forces are at flood. It is
as if Mature endeavored to repeat in each young life at this age
the observance of the Passover and had sprinkled upon the gate
posts of these ten hopeful years the sign of immunity that the
Angel of Death seeing might pass by. We school men often con(14)
THE PLAYGROUND IN SCHOOL HYGIENE. 15.
gratulatc ourselves that the years which constitute the school age
for the great majority of children are the years when the death rate
is the lowest. And yet the aggregate preventable loss through
death, in these most favored years, is enormous, and the sad processions that follow abandoned hopes to the grave outnumber in the
a?S regate the armies of the world.
But there is another and far more serious loss than this.
It is not the death rate during the school age, however great or
small, that is the significant thing for us. The significant thing
is whether in these years of Nature's smiles, strength or weakness
is being laid by for future years. We are learning more and
more certainly every year that our skulking foe, the microbe, of
whatever tribe, strikes when a man is down. Patiently he Jbides
his time, gathering his forces in secret until the time to strike.
No better illustration could be given than that of tuberculosis.
According to Newsholme, only three children in ten thousand,
from five to fifteen years of age, die of consumption, but from
fifteen to forty-five more than one person in four dies of this
dread disease. Speaking along this line, Dr. Tyler says:
"It would seem highly probable that the increased deathrate of girls at eighteen and thereabout from consumption and
other diseases of relatively slow action is the culmination of an
attack begun at thirteen or fourteen. If we are to diminish this
death-rate, we must fortify the girl against the periods of greatest
weakness when she is most likely to receive hospitably the germs
of fatal diseases. To accomplish this we must not wait until the
twelfth or thirteenth year, but meet the difficulty in childhood."
Hnber, also, in his work on "Consumption" says: "There is the
long period of latency in which, if the child be well nurtured and
if he live hygienically, he will be likely to overcome such tendency
to disease as he may have begun life with."
When at some future time posterity looks back upon the conditions that prevail in our day, it will behold no darker picture,
no more disgraceful thing than our weak surrender of our children to sickness and death. What excuse can then be offered for
the fact that even in this land, more than one-half of all the children born into the world die before they have reached man's
estate; that seventy per cent of school children suffer some physical
handicap, more or less serious, at the very threshold of life's opportunities; that our schools not only do not fortify the children
against known enemies, but actually betray them, in their innocence, to their deadly foes ?
16 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
To the American School Hygiene Association belongs the
great credit of an organized effort to free us from this national
error, but may I present the humble claim that the advocates
of the playground offer the most promising single means for its
accomplishment ?
From amoeba to man the essential conditions to life and
health have been few and plain. Through all the ages of that slow
ascent, but with varying emphasis, these have been food, air, sunshine, exercise. Upon the supply of these in proper kind and
amount depends the health of amoeba, worm, fish, bird, dog or
man.
Omitting the first of these for obvious reasons, let us consider the importance of each of the others in school hygiene and
the office of the playground in supplying them.
Air. The playground is the only place where a school child
gets air in the proper amount and kind, the only place where he
obtains full and complete aeration of the blood. A despicable
fraction of school rooms have standard ventilating apparatus,
and the rooms that have do not always adequately benefit thereby.
I have personally tested a score of school rooms almost under the
shadow of the capitol of a state that has the best of existing laws,
and found the supply of air to equal the standard in only two of
the rooms and in some it fell to less than one-fourth of that amount.
But even could ventilation be perfect in a school room, there
would not be the same aeration of the blood in a seated studying
child as in a child on the playground. There must bo the exhilaration of joyous exercise, the strengthened pulse, the quickened, deepened breathing, the full chest of sustained effort that drives the
air to the very apexes of the lungs, to meet the needs of the growing child. The school room may be made less and less objectionable, but so long as it remains a school room it can not escape the
imperative need of the playground as a factor in school hygiene.
As is well known, it is not only the lack of oxygen but also
the presence of organic poison in exhaled air that makes ventilation
so important. It is a fact noted by biologists that all animal life
excretes a poison destructive to itself. This is as true of the singlecelled animal as of higher life. Bacteria may thrive luxuriantly
for a time in culture media, but if they are not transferred to fresh
culture media they pass into a period of lessened activity and
finally die poisoned by their own excretions. A child's body is an
accumulation of a vast number of cells, each of which by its very
functional activity likewise excretes products so poisonous to itself
THE PLAYGROUND IN SCHOOL HYGIENE. 17
and the system generally, that accumulation beyond a certain limit
results in death.
Now nature has gradually placed more and more emphasis
upon this cleansing process. If you trace the evolution of the vital
organs from the single cell to man, you will find a general increase
in the number of the excretory organs. The newer organs have
developed as supplementary to the older, and all together they
form a cooperative system, a weakness in any part of which places
an added burden on the rest. Nature here gives us no uncertain
hint as to the needs of the child. Playground activities not only
purify the blood through the increased activity of the lungs in the
pure air of out-of-doors, as the activites of the school cannot do,
but also stimulate the healthful activity of all the excretory
organs, preserving a well balanced system.
Sunshine. "Where the sun does not go, the doctor does" is
an Italian proverb quoted by Koetelmann. Try as we may, we
can not get the sun sufficiently into all our school rooms, and if we
could we would shut it out again as soon as we let the children
in to study, because we say it hurts their eyes.
Where then shall the children bathe in the sunshine as they
should, but on the playground? We do well to debar contagious
diseases from the schools, but let myraids of bacilli fly over our
children's clothing and the most malignant perish in a short time in
the joy and the sunshine of the playground. Few disease germs
have been discovered that can survive even for one hour the streaming sun on the face of a laughing child.
You remember the experiment with the tadpoles. They were
placed away from the sunlight for thirty days and during all that
time ceased to grow. Returned to the sunlight, they resumed
their growth and advanced farther in one day than in all the
previous thirty. Placed once more away from the sunlight and
again returned to normal conditions, they grew to stunted froghood. Just such an experiment, Society tried with babies in the
dark rooms of New York's tenements, and every baby, almost without exception, born and kept in those rooms, died. But when
Jacob Riis tore down the windowless walls and the light of Heaven
streamed in, the babies began to live.
In our cities and larger towns everywhere, we are still repeating, in a measure, the same experiment, and place our children,
like the unfortunate tadpoles, in darkened homes, in narrow,
shaded, and smoke-enveloped alleys, and in school rooms into which
the sun seldom if ever enters,?nay! often in school rooms lit
18 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
even in the middle of the day by natural or artificial gas. Bring
to these little ones medical inspection, examine their eyes, remove
their adenoids, protect them from measles and all the rest, but
shall we not also provide a playground, where for a part of the
day they may bathe in the sun as God Almighty has said they
must, if they are to live!
Exercise. I have just examined the indexes of two famous
books, on school hygiene and in them was no such word as exercise.
But exercise is life, and the absence of it is the sure sign of death.
By exercise came evolution. Exercise shaped the body, determined
the vital organs, built the brain. By exercise the child takes possession of his inheritance from the race. To him it is the past,
the present, and the promise of the future.
But that exercise no man can dictate, no teacher devise, no
scholar fully define. It comes forth unbidden from the child,
declares his nature, discovers him to himself, defines his relation
to his mates, shows him the world. It^is his play, it is himself.
Can the school alone do this, be this ? In the long process in which
exercise shaped the body and built the brain, there was determined
for all time the path by which the child must come into his own.
In that shortened process we call childhood, every faculty, every
power, every organ that fails to receive its due exercise shrivels,
and health by so much suffers and by so much the man becomes
less a man. It would require a book to speak in full of the exercises of the playground that meet the needs of health, physical,
mental, moral, [esthetic, social health, for all these are elements
in the health of the body, as we all have come to understand. But
in many respects, in the very nature of the case, these exercises are
impossible in the school, they are possible only on the playground.
Once upon a time the people of a certain city really believed
what I have just been trying to say, and when the question arose
as to whether they should build a great public school or open a
playground, it was decided to open a playground. Now it came
to pass, in the course of years, that the citizens of that city advanced
so far beyond the rest of the human race, that, in all the centuries
since, the nations that have gone on building public schools and
neglecting to open playgrounds have not been able to catch up with
them even to this day.
This is fact, not fancy. At seven years of age the Athenian
lad entered the palaestra, which was essentially a playground. All
the first and better half of the day was spent in gymnastics, dancing, games and play. In the afternoon there was singing, some
THE PLAYGROUND IN SCHOOL HYGIENE. 19
writing (the beginners wrote in tlie sand box or in sand strewn
upon the ground), some reading, all in the open air, and then came
a long period of play again. Such was the schooling of the Greek
lad up to the age of ten or eleven and it did not differ essentially
up to the age of sixteen except in the severity of the exercises. And
yet, the world lias not ceased to marvel at the results of the Greek
education. It produced the highest type of man, physically and
intellectually, that the world has ever seen, which Galton says was
as far in advance of the modern Englishman as the modern Englishman is in advance of the native African. In physical beauty,
courage and patriotism, in philosophy, literature, architecture and
art, the Greeks have been the unsurpassed models of the ages and
are still the inspiration of our schools to-day. But they placed the
emphasis upon hygiene, exercise, games and play, which we neglect,
if not ignore. They cared for the strong and sometimes left the
weak to perish. We care tenderly for the weak and often leave
the strong to perish.
This also is fact, not fancy. In the state where I had the
privilege of acquiring most of my experience in educational work,
a child to obtain the best educational advantages must be blind,
deaf, feeble-minded, incorrigible or a truant. T hen he is given
exercise, playgrounds, gymnasia, baths, fresh air in abundance,
gardens and play-shops. The great majority of normal children
get along the best they can without them. And now in Pittsburgh
they have an open-air school for children with a tendency to tuberculosis. So consumption seems to' be another of the list of ills, one
of which a child must have in order to enjoy the best educational
advantages. I am not disapproving of this care for the weak. I
believe in it with all my heart, but this we should have done and
not left the other undone. There are thousands and thousands of
children in the regular schools of Pittsburgh who have no place to
play, no recess, no really fresh air to breathe, little sunshine and
less genuine life-giving exercise.
We have reversed the order of importance in education as it
was observed by the Greeks. The Greek education was essentially
a playground education and the education most nearly approaching it to-day is that supplied by the playgrounds of America. To
that classic demonstration of the educational value of the playground has been added in our day an avalanche of testimony
from biology, physiology, anthropology and sociology. Of the
$10,000,000 playgrounds of Chicago', President Roosevelt says:
"They are the greatest civic achievement the world has ever seen."
20 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
To sum up:
First, we do not take care of our children.
Secondly, we need to improve our care along four lines,
namely better food, better air, more sunshine, better exercise.
Thirdly, in the very nature of the case, the playground alone
can adequately supply the last three of these to the child.
Fourthly, this is no new experiment. We have the classic
playground along with classic literature, architecture and art.
Finally, just as we have awakened to the fact that the
school provides but a small fraction of a child's education, and
that the environment, which includes everything that comes into
the child's experience, is teaching him every waking moment of the
day (perhaps every sleeping hour of the night, if we agree with
Dr. Worcester), so we have come to understand that the activities
of the school provide but a small fraction of the exercise necessary
for the health of a child in this larger meaning. In the long
process of race development, every organ and instinct with which
a normal child is born has been tried and found good, has been
refined and passed on, and some yet higher function, some yet
nobler conduct shall spring from their roots. Not in the school
but on the playground can these deep instincts of workmanship,
imitation, rivalry, cooperation, find their true and genetic expression and build more stately mansions in the soul as the swift seasons roll. These instincts calling from the deeps of the child's
nature are not voices calling him astray, or to delay his upward
progress. They are the voices saying to him and to the race:
"Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul,
As the swift seasons roll,
Leave thy low-vaulted past,
Let each new temple, nobler than the last,
Shut thee from Heaven with a dome more vast,
Till thou at length art free,
Leaving thine outgrown shell by life's unresting sea."
