The Effect of Physical Defects on School Progress
==================================================

By Leonard P. Aykes,
In charge of Backward Children Investigation, Ilusscll Sage Foundation,
Nciv York City.
One of the studies which has been conducted by the Backward
Children Investigation of the Russell Sage Foundation in New
York City is a careful investigation of the school records of 20,000
children in fifteen schools of Manhattan. Among these there were
nearly 8000 children who had been examined by school physicians.
When the records of their physical examinations were tabulated,
the astonishing condition was brought to light that nearly 80 per
cent of the children who were of normal age for their grades were
found to have physical defects, while only about 75 per cent of the
retarded children were defective. Ihis feature was a surprise to
the investigators.
Another noteworthy point was that the percentage of defective
children in the lower grades was decidedly greater than in the
upper grades. The discovery of these unlooked for results led to
further study of the figures. The data were retabulated by ages,
and the results showed a very marked and consistent falling off
of children having each sort of defect from the age of six up to the
age of fifteen. Defective vision alone increases slowly but steadily
with advancing age.
Moreover, these decreases were not due to the falling out or
leaving school of children suffering from defects. Ihis might be
put forward as an explanation if we had to do with children above
the age of compulsory attendance, or if the characteristic decrease
did not take place until the ago of fourteen or fifteen; but such is
not the case. The children were of from six to fifteen years of
age, and the marked decrease began with the eight, nine, and ten
year old children and continued steadily.
Were further data not available, it would certainly be difficult
to explain the seeming anomaly that retarded children have fewer
defects than do children of normal age; but the data showing the
decrease of physical defects with increasing age are illuminating.
It is evident that here age is the important factor. The importance
(71)
72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of this on all investigations into the influence of physical defects on
school progress is at once evident.
Whether the term "retarded" is used to express a condition
or an explanation, it will always follow from the definition itself
that retarded children will be older than their fellow pupils in the
same grades. In all cases it will always be true that the "backward" pupils will be the older pupils. Now, the older pupils are
found to have fewer defects. This is true whether they are behind
their grades or well up in their studies. Therefore, it is not surprising that we find that 80 per cent of all children of normal age
have physical defects more or less serious, while 75 per cent of
the retarded children are found to be defective. This does not
mean that pupils with more physical defects are brighter mentally.
It simply means that those who are above normal age are older, and
that older pupils have fewer defects.
In order to ascertain what correlation may exist between physical defects and school progress, the records of the children have
recently been retabulatcd, using as a basis age instead of grade, so
that the results should not be vitiated by the heterogeneous age
composition of the grades.
It is well known that in our schools there is no exact correspondence between grades and ages. Children of twelve years of
age, for instance, are found in all the grades from the first to the
eighth. A child of twelve in the eighth grade is unusually bright,
one of the same age in the first grade is unusually dull. It is then
of interest to us to discover whether the twelve year old child in
tho first grade will have more or fewer defects than the one in the
eighth. In order to study this, the records of all the children at
the ages of ten, twelve, thirteen and fourteen were retabulatcd.
These ages were taken because at all of them children arc found
scattered through the grades from the lowest to the highest.
There were 3304 of these children. Those ten years old numbered 910, the eleven year olds 84-2, those of twelve years 6G4, those
of thirteen years 49G, and of the fourteen year olds there were 392.
The following table shows how they were distributed among the
grades, and how many were suffering from each sort of defect:
PHYSICAL DEFECTS. 73
Physical Defects of 3304 Children in New York City.
Graph
Total
-a .5
iS
w
33
263
COS
892
019
453
299
137
3304
. ~ <U
6
40
96
200
230
104
87
30
919
rt CJ
KQ
27
223
512
032
383
289
212
107
2385
ui-a
a
a ej
12
103
127
99
52
18
13
11
435
4
G4
142
233
157
110
84
39
833
> S
??5^3
O -w
a> <3
"S ?
PW
389
0> CJ
*SH
Q
17
139
334
304
198
141
77
45
1315
h ?
c.H
11
81
148
195
104
59
43
18
059
G8
82
108
41
17
17
5
343
7
50
90
140
30
42
30
14
427
A child of ten in the first grade is so badly retarded that we
may. fairly call him dull and we shall be wrong in only a few cases
of children who entered school very late indeed. We may feel even
surer that a child of eleven, twelve, thirteen, or fourteen in the
first grade is dull. A child of ten in the second, third, or fourth
grade is normal. In the fifth or sixth grade he is bright. By
making appropriate changes in the grades, similar statements can
be made for the other ages. Using this as a basis, the following
schedule was drawn up for rating our children at the ages of ten to
fourteen:
Division of Pupils into Dull, Normal and Bright Groups by Ages
and Grades.
Ages.
Grades
10
dull
normal
normal
normal
bright
bright
bright
bright
11
dull
dull
normal
normal
normal
bright
bright
bright
12
dull
dull
dull
normal
normal
normal
bright
bright
13
dull
dull
dull
dull
normal
normal
normal
bright
14
dull
dull
dull
dull
dull
normal
normal
normal
Using this as a basis, the records were retabulated, the pupils
distributed among the three groups and the results worked out in
percentages. They are shown in the following table:
74 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Dull, Normal, and Bright Pupils Suffering from each Sort of
Defect. Ages Ten to Fourteen, Inclusive. All Grades.
Dull. Normal. Bright.
Number of children examined. . 407 2588 309
Defects per child  1.G5 1.80 1.07
Percentages.
Enlarged glands  20 13 G
Defective vision   24 25 29
Defective breathing  15 11 9
Defective teeth   42 40 34
Hypertrophied tonsils . . . . 2G 19 12
? Adenoids   15 10 G
Other defects  21 11 11
Defective  75 73 G8
jSTot defective   25 27 32
Here the results are very different from those discussed so far.
In every case except in that of vision the children rated as "dull"
are found to be suffering from physical defects to a greater degree
than the "normal" or "bright" children. It is true that 75 per
cent of the dull children arc defective as compared with 73 per
cent among the normal and G8 per cent among the bright children.
These differences are very slight. But the defective dull child has
on the average 1.G5 defects as against 1.07 for the bright one. In
other words, the number of defectives among the dull children does
not differ widely from the number among the bright ones, but the
dull child is found to be much more defective in degree.
That hypertrophied tonsils and adenoids have a distinct bearing upon retardation seems to be clearly indicated by the fact that
the former arc found in 2G per cent of the dull children and only
12 per cent of the bright ones, and in the case of the latter the
percentage falls from 15 to G. A similar condition is found in
the cases of enlarged glands, defective breathing, and defective
teeth. In each the falling off is sharp and consistent as wo move
from the dull to the normal and bright groups. It is too consistent to bo dismissed as accidental or not significant.
The case of defective vision, however, is far from being so
clear. Found in 24 per cent of the dull pupils, 25 per cent of the
normal ones, and 29 per cent of the bright ones, it is difficult to
account for it. We have already seen that defective vision increases
PHYSICAL DEFECTS. 75
slowly with advancing age. A computation of the individual ages of
the dull and bright pupils in the groups here studied shows that the
dull ones are older than the bright ones. ^Nevertheless they have
better eyesight. The explanation may be that we are here dealing
with extreme cases. The pupils we designate as bright are very
young indeed for their grades and in all probability include a
number who have injured their eyes through undue use and strain.
Even a small percentage of such cases would account for the difference observed.
The computations establish in a convincing manner the close
connection between certain physical defects and school progress, but
they do not tell us just how great the retarding influence is or
what part the different sorts of defects contribute .to it. To throw
light on these problems, computations were made showing the
average number of grades completed by the ten year old pupils
who were found to be free from physical defects, the grades completed by those suffering from enlarged glands, and so on for each
of the other kinds of defects. Similar computations were made
for the eleven, twelve, thirteen, and fourteen year old children.
Finally the central tendency for the entire group was ascertained.
The results are illuminating.
Average Number of Grades Completed by Pupils Having no Physical
Defects Compared with Number Completed by Those Suffering
from Different Defects. Central Tendency Among 3304 Children, Ages Ten to Fourteen Years, in Grades One to Eight.
Children having no physical defects .... 4.94
" " enlarged glands 4.20
" " defective vision   4.94
" " defective breathing .... 4.58
" " defective teeth  4.G5
" " hypertrophied tonsils. . 4.50
" " adenoids   4.24
" " other defects  4.52
The notable feature of the table is the fact that in every case,
except that of defective vision, the children suffering from each
sort of physical defect made less progress in their school work
76 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
than did those not so handicapped. The seriousness of these handicaps in terms of percentages is shown below:
Table Showing the Extent to Which Children Suffering from each
Sort of Physical Defect Progress more Slowly than do Children with no Defects.
Per cent of
Kinds of defects. loss in progress.
Enlarged glands   14.9
Defective vision  none
Defective breathing  7.2
Defective teeth  5.9
Hypertrophied tonsils  8.9
Adenoids  14.1
Other defects  8.5
Average    8.8
In this table the average loss of 8.8 per cent which appears
in the last line is not, of course, the numerical average of the percentages of loss corresponding to the different sorts of defects, but
rather the general loss of progress discovered among all the children having physical defects. In other words, the children suffering from physical defects made on the whole 8.8 per cent less
progress than did those having no physical defects.
These figures are important, not so much because they represent typical conditions, for they undoubtedly do not, but rather
because they constitute almost the first quantitative measure so
far secured of the retarding force of physical dcfects. The New
York examination establishes the important principle that except
in the case of vision, older children have fewer defects; and it
shows that when children who are badly retarded are compared with
normal children and very bright children in the same ago groups,
so that the diminishing of defects through advancing ago does not
enter as a factor, the children rated as "dull" are found to have
higher percentages of each sort of defect than the normal and bright
children. In this generalization defective vision must be excepted.
Moreover, the New York investigation gives us quantitative
measures of the retarding forces of the different kinds of defects.
In general, children suffering from physical defects are found to
make 8.8 per cent less progress than do children having no physical
PHYSICAL DEFECTS. 77
defects. Children suffering from enlarged glands and adenoids
are retarded most. Hypertrophied tonsils, defective breathing, and
defective teeth are in general somewhat less serious in their effects.
No statistical correlation is shown between progress and defective
vision. It must be remembered that these results are from a few
schools in one city and are not presented as representing general or
typical conditions. Moreover, the same, child is often suffering
from several sorts of defects, so that the figures do not really show
the retarding influence of each sort of defect separately. For
instance, we find that children suffering from enlarged glands are
retarded to about the same degree as are those with adenoids. But
these are to a great extent the same children. Most of those having
adenoids also have enlarged glands. Thus the figures while having
distinct value as revealing general tendencies, must not be interpreted as showing with exact precision the relative retarding force
of each separate sort of defect.
