Ast Analysis of Guislain's Work on Insanity
============================================

No. I.
The author informs the public that these lectures were delivered extempore,
in the midst of a population of lunatics; and that they were collected by
Dr. Vermeulen, his assistant. He has published them in all the simplicity,
or rather, as he says, in all the naivete, of their original form. M. Guislain
admits, however, that upon several points where it was required by the actual
state of science he has made additions.
In the ample analysis which we propose to make of this work, we think it
desirable to retain, as far as practicable, the graphic and didactic character of
the original; and with the view of better preserving the author's arrange-
ment of his subject, we find it convenient to retain the division into lectures
and parts. The first volume contains seventeen lectures, and embraces the
mode of examination of patients and the diagnosis of insanity; the classifica-
tion of the forms of insanity; melancholy; ecstasy; mania; alienations which
may be comprised under the denomination of insanity, including suicide;
delirium; dementia. Then follows the anatomical diagnosis?the morbid
anatomy.
The second volume treats of the occasional and predisposing causes of
mental diseases; the utility of establishing a mental pathogeny ; and the
prognosis of mental diseases.
In the third volume the treatment is considered at great length. This
concluding volume also contains descriptions of various instruments or appa-
ratuses subservient to treatment; and several lectures are devoted to the
subject of the construction and organization of lunatic asylums.
The first lecture commences with a general survey of the study of mental
diseases. The author relates^ the difficulties he encountered at his outset in
the investigation of these diseases. " I have spent," he says, " ten years of
my life in interrogating the living man and the dead body; ten more have
been given up to meditation upon what I saw: during the latter years only
have 1 learnt how to cure the insane." He forcibly lays before his pupils the
* " Lcctures, Theoretical and Practical, on Mental Diseases, being a Course delivered at
the Cliniquc of the Asylums for the Insane at Ghent." Ey J. Guislain, Professor in the
University of Ghent. 1852. 3 volumes.
AN ANALYSIS OF DR. GUISLAIN'S WORK ON INSANITY. 257
advantages attending an accurate acquaintance with insanity, reminding
them of the numerous occasions which arise to call for the decision of the
physician.
He thus refers to the position of the insane in Belgium :?" Strange things
pass in this country: hitherto the insane have had nothing but vows and
words, for the most part sterile enough; they are pitied, but that is all."
"Even the capital has no asylum for the insane!" Years pass on, and no one
hears the complaints of these unfortunates. Ihey remain forgotten, shut up
in gloomy prisons. They are the object of an infamous traffic. Between the
commune, the province, and the government, nothing is done: all evade a
troublesome question. " The physicians who specially cultivate the study of
mental diseases are limited in Belgium to a very small numier. I have
thought that by forming a band of able men, by showing what may be done for
the holy cause in which we are engaged, there will arise a means of hastening
the advance of reform. For ten years this course ought to have been given,
but an obstacle has always interposed. Must it be spoken ? Your presence,
the presence of young men, has been feared, in the midst of this population
of afflicted patients. I have spoken of you as I ought; I have combated
erroneous opinions ; I have overcome this difficulty. Thanks to the enlightened
and powerful intervention of the Administrative Inspector of the University,
and the efforts of the Commission des Hospices, I have succeeded. It is for
you, gentlemen, so to conduct yourselves that there be no room for reproach :
you must have prudence; you must not address indiscreet questions to the
patients; you will wait till I invite you to examine them; you must not
excite them by your discourse, or by your looks; they must not feel your
presence." M. Guislain says that twenty pupils were admitted at a time;
and he bears the same pleasing testimony to the result which is recorded by
M. Falret and other physicians, who have pursued a similar course. " Their
presence," he says, "has not given rise to the smallest inconvenience; on the
contrary, their arrival was always followed by a marked good effect among
the patients."
How to proceed in the practical examination of the insane.?The practical
examination of a lunatic is altogether different from that of a patient suffering
simply from a bodily disorder. The direct investigation of the organs loses
immensely in value. You do not say to the lunatic, "Where are you in
pain? What do you complain of? How long have you been ill?" This is
what he will answer you?"lam in no pain. I am very well. What do
you want with me?" Or else he does not answer at all; or his speech is out
of joint.
We are but imperfectly acquainted with the condition of the diseased
organs of the insane ; we are but imperfectly acquainted with the functions of
the brain. The anatomical knowledge of this organ fails to guide us to the
knowledge of the seat of these functions. But if we know not the seat of the
intelligence, of the impulses, of the passions, we know that there are these func-
tions ; we are conscious of a personal identity and of passions. First of all, I
must address myself to these manifestations, and not to the cerebral pulp. It
results from this truth, that symptoms are of extreme importance in the
analytical appreciation of mental alienation. You will more frequently
interrogate these symptoms than the brain or the alterations of its tissues.
You will practise the analysis of the functions of the intellect, the physiogno-
mical expression of the passions, the value of ideas, the bearing of acts and
words. You will do all this, taking for your guide facts and the living man.
These must be your finger-posts in the clinical study of mental diseases:
I. The physiognomy.
II. The action.
III. The speech.
IV. The viscera.
V. The commemorative history.
25S AN ANALYSIS OF DR. GUISLAIN S WORK OX INSANITY.
A. The physiognomy.?As the very foundation of the estimate of a patient,
you must bring to bear the medical coup d'ceil. I will define it: it is the art
of seeing in an assemblage of phenomena a crowd of details where others see
nothing but generalities, and sometimes nothing whatever. But the oculus
medicus?do not deceive yourselves?is only a reality when it presents itself
as the fruit of practice and of study. Do not believe that the most subtle,
the rarest intelligence, will recognise a given disease better than the most
ordinary physician, if this intelligence has not been initiated into the secrets
of science and of observation, and if it knows not how to transform into
scientific ideas the impressions supplied by the senses. Tact is only developed
in the physician by time. He learns quickly enough to recognise the signs
of certain organic alterations?that is, the science of the amphitheatre. But
the purely dynamic disorders aie entirely different. It takes long years to
qualify him, in a prognostic point of view, to judge well of the curability or
incurability of diseases. In the midst of all this there is nothing like a
compass, and in this respect the cardinal points I have indicated are sure guides.
Before thinking of any plan of treatment, the physician must submit the
lunatic to sustained observation ; he must dwell upon numerous sources of
information. In the presence of his patient he seeks, in some way, to discover
the impression he himself produces upon him. He sees him much, and for a
long time, by day, by night; and it is only at the end of some time that he
will know him, and be able to decide upon the character, the nature, and the
issue of the disease. This observation?do not lose sight of it?is, above all,
important in cases of medico-legal investigation.
The assemblage of phenomena, the details of the features, the attitude of
the patient, his gesture,?this, above all, must claim your attention. It is
the expression of the face which will reveal to you the emotions, the passions,
which govern the lunatic. Every kind of alienation has its fades. Every
madman has his features, his peculiar gestures. These features are so many
signs which direct you in the appreciation of what is going on within. This
expression of the face I will call the mash of mental alienation. It is
eminently significative ; it alone can show whether a person is or is not
insane. The pantomime relates to the general gesticulation, and is not less
important.
It is extremely useful to know the different shades of this play of the
physiognomy, in order to appreciate a predisposition; to determine the
existence of insanity at the outset; to determine the transition from one form
of alienation to a different form; when there is a question of liberating a
patient who has recovered ; in the case of medico-legal investigation of simu-
lated insanity, for example, and on a hundred other occasions.
The^ mask furnishes different signs:?First, the complexion; then the
condition of the hair?its greasy covering, its firmness, its direction; the
signification of the lines which mark the forehead and the cheeks, the eyes?
the mirror of the soul; the mouth, and the movements of the tongue; the
general expression of the features, the physiognomy.
I will bring before you a series of patients. Here is one whose eyes
indicate the disorder which reigns in his understanding. His fixed looks
hardly change their direction ; winking takes place only at long intervals.
In this other patient all the lines of the face are strongly marked ; there is
. something very strongly drawn in the eyebrows, in the furrows which mark
the cheeks and forehead.
The abnormal contraction of the muscles of the face alters the features to
such a degree, as often to render^ the patient not recognisable. He appears
older; he is uglier than before his illness. This is the reason why we seldom
meet with handsome faces in lunatic asylums. In convalescence, when the
morbid tension ceases, the features are more regular, the skin acquires fresh-
ness, the eye is more calm, the wrinkles disappear.
AN ANALYSTS OF DR. GUISLAIN'S WORK ON INSANITY. 259
The folds of the forehead have a speaking meaning; they announce affliction,
anxiety, and moral suffering. The lines which define the eyebrows, the
eyelids, the eyes, furnish the most precious indications. Astonishment, anger,
jealousy, hatred, translate themselves in the eyebrows and the eyes. The
aspect of the eyes alone sometimes suffices to disclose a leaning to suicide. In
effect, there is in the look of that patient whom you see there, a quite peculiar
expression, which, added to the bluish tint of the lips, gives to his face a some-
thing that is frightful. He is a madman who seeks to destroy himself.
Grief reveals itself in the eyes. The eyes alone announce this condition.
Irritation, discontent, wants, are also read there, as you may witness in the
maniacs around you. This epileptic bears in his astonished, vacant, stupid
look, in his open eyes, the characters by which a practised eye may recognise
him at a glance.
The Features. In certain conditions the face seems to swell, the nervous
centres seem to cease to innervate the muscles. Often during the passage from
one form of alienation to another, we see a relaxation spreading over all the
muscles of the body. This condition is not a paralysis in the strict accepta-
tion of the word, but it constitutes a condition bordering upon paralysis. It
implies a giving way of the state of tension, a want of nervous influx of tone.
Here is a patient who exhibits a marked change in the complexion of his
skin, which has become olive-brown. This sign is important when the ques-
tion arises, whether a particular patient is in a fit state to be restored to his
family. It often occurs to me to say: this man must stay here a little longer;
his skin has not recovered the complexion of health.
Here is another patient who shows pallor, especially whiteness of the lips.
This sign has its importance ; it indicates concentrated passions.
The Hair. In serious cases, the hair undergoes a striking alteration of
colour, of texture. Black hair acquires a reddish tinge, as if it had been
dyed. Light hair grows pile; I have seen it sometimes look as if it had been
burnt, breaking at the slightest touch, leaving the cranium bare, whilst the
root remained in the bulb. Sometimes the hair becomes woolly, or silky. I
have seen it sometimes quite dry at the ends, whereas the patients naturally
had it very greasy.
The movement of the tongue deserves especial attention. Slowness of speech,
a defect in accentuation, hesitation in pronunciation, disorder in the succession
of the words, are so many phenomena of great value in diagnosis. They
indicate very serious cases. The patient I now present to you is struck with
what is called general paralysis: I wish you to observe the hesitation he
manifests in pronouncing his words, and in linking his phrases. These signs
are important in prognosis : they announce the extreme gravity of the disease,
and the probable existence of alteration of the cerebral tissue.
B.?I will now present a series of patients, illustrating the meaning of
attitudes, gestures, and movements.
From the examination of the face, you pass 011 to that of the general bearing.
The locomotive muscular system is to the moral principle what the tongue is to
gastric affections. It is, if I may so express myself, the pulse to be consulted
in mental derangements, when we seek to determine the condition of the force
of the sensorium commune. Instead of seizing the wrist, as in the examination
of any other disease, the physician will direct his attention to the muscular
action, especially to that of the extensors. It is by the appreciation of the loco-
motive acts that you will often be able to determine the degree of curability,
or of incurability of the disease.
Cerebral excitement, exhaustion of the moral forces are, expressed by the
action of the voluntary muscles. You will find in all lunatic asylums a certain
number of maniacs who refuse to seat themselves upon the benches or chairs,
but whom you will always meet crouched down, with the chin resting on the
NO. XXII. T
2G0 AN ANALYSIS OF DU. GUISLAIN'S WORK ON INSANITY.
knees. This position announces a fatal progress of the disease, an enormous
diminution from the quantum of curability.
The inclination of the head forward is almost the first indication of an incur-
able dementia; it is owing to relaxation of the extensor muscles of the neck.
When you have examined the patient in order to ascertain the extent of his
disease, you will also examine him with reference to the state of his strength,
and in this respect, I repeat it, it is not the cardiac pulse, but the pulse of loco-
motion which will guide you.
But the condition I have just described must not be confounded with other
conditions which may present a certain analogy. There is in the insane a
tension, an immobility which must be distinguished from the muscular relaxa-
tion of weakness and paralysis. In many insane patients who appear to be in
a state of prostration, there is a muscular tension. In taking the hand, the
arm of the patients, you experience a certain resistance, a certain difficulty in
extending the limb. This condition is far from possessing that signification
which it presents in the case of which I have just spoken; it announces an
irritation of a peculiar kind of the nervous system.
Nothing is more rare among the insane than partial paralysis of the muscles
of the face or of the limbs. You will seek in vain in this establishment for
contortions of the mouth, partial dropping of an eyelid, deviations of the tongue.
You will witness muscular prostrations, paralysis of the whole life of relation ;
you will also see convulsions, epileptic or epileptiform ; but isolated paralysis,
the paralysis of a muscular group, is what will seldom be observed.
Occasionally there exists an astonishing energy of muscular action. This
is the result of mental exaltation
What is not less worthy of attention is the ease, the suppleness, the co-
ordination with which all the movements of the body are accomplished. This
state often presents itself as the precursory symptom of a more violent state.
It announces, during the lucid intervals, that a maniacal attack is about to
explode, and during convalescence it is the forerunner of complete restoration.
In others, an exciting principle flows from the centres like a motor influx.
It is not a muscular excitement, an exaltation of the irritability : in similar
cases we should rather have the convulsive mode. But here the action is not
spinal, it is cerebral, mental; it consists in impulses continually transmitted
to the instruments of locomotion.
The gesture often betrays the passion which governs the patient. Every
passion has its gesture. The erotic madman affects a languishing air. The
proud madman is recognised by his bearing; his head drawn up, and the
stiffness which reigns throughout his frame. The religious madman proclaims
himself by a peculiar attitude of humility and of concentration.
Sometimes there is nothing but this appreciation of the gesture to aid the
physician in determining the real situation of the patient. This exterior
expression reflects the internal state with striking accuracy. Thus there are
situations in which the insane patient refuses to answer; others in which he
speaks a language you do not understand. A short time ago a boy was brought
to me; he spoke a gibberish which no one here understood. The directors of
the prisons considered him insane; the administration of the town believed him
a vagrant. The police wished for a decision. It was necessary to decide the
question by answering yes or no. I said yes, he belongs to the insane. I was
guided by the exterior expression. This lad had the air of imbecility; he
carried his hands in his pockets, his head on one side ; he did not look at me,'but
almost turned me his back; one foot was turned in, the other out. He came
as if out of a sleep when I spoke to him. He was an idiotic vagrant who had
passed the frontier; he had come from France, and had been arrested by the
authorities.
AN ANALYSIS OF DR. GUISLAIN'S WORK ON INSANITY. 201
Second Lecture.
C.?Appreciation of the Speech. When an insane patient is presented to you
who announces in his exterior neither sorrow, nor discontent, nor imbecility,
nor joy, nor fear, most often you will not fail to discover a serious disorder.
Nothing is so astonishing- as the answers. Scarcely has this patient, upon
whose countenance there is nothing to betray aberration, uttered a single
word, than we at once understand his disease. It is an accusation against
some authority or another?against his brothers or sisters. They have, he
says, cast a spell upon him; they have made him miserable.
We must learn to familiarize ourselves with the discourse of the insane.
We must learn to seize the morbid expression inherent in their speech. When
the madman says he is a lost man, that he has offended heaven, that he has
failed in his duty, you must for the most part believe nothing of what he
says. These are pathological phrases.
The question calls for a still more serious examination when we have to
ascertain the reality of a cure, and to restore the patient to his home. His
disease may appear to have left him ; he speaks not a word that is irrational;
he is thought to be cured. But he passes by you without saying " Good
morninghe remains quietly retired in his room ; he does not come forth
to meet the physician; he refuses to see an old friend, a relation. Ilis coun-
tenance betrays a certain irritation. His disease is in a manner condensed.
You speak to him : "He knows (says he) their machinations; he is not their
friend; he has been made aware of all. He knows there are freemasons
around him; that there is a God; that he is not of those who have no reli-
gion." This patient is not healed ; from time to time his conversation betrays
the disorder, which will break out.
The speech sometimes expresses nothing but confused and incoherent ideas:
but in othersit announces a remarkable clearness in the ideas, although they
are delirious. One would say, that the faculty of creating images had doubled
or tripled in energy. We must, therefore, learn to dive into the domain of
ideas, and to discover there the morbid conceptions. For this purpose, we
must take for our guide the great motives which determine human actions.
We must sound in the direction of erotic ideas, of the ideas of religion, of
propriety, of progress, of ambition. We must stir up motives deeply hidden;
we must run through the links of the many misfortunes which afflict man-
kind. It is in this field that you will work, and then you will make impor-
tant discoveries. I will use a metaphor to make myself understood. You
must cast the plummet into the receptacle of the feelings, of the ideas, of the
passions. You must morally percussate the understanding. You must
know how to explore the moral pulse.
You will consult the different functions of the intellect. You will seek for
information in the ideas, the reasoning power, the judgment, and the power
of calculation. You will sound the memory to its very depths. You will
let the imagination speak. You will address yourself to the will, to the
attention. Above all, you must ascertain the condition of the intelligence.
But what is the value of this term ? what is the function it indicates ?
Intelligence is taken in two acceptations: as a general term; as a special
function. We consider it here under the latter point of view. The intelli-
gence is not the reasoning power; it is not the judgment; it is an appreciating
sense, a psychical sense which perceives, understands suddenly, without effort.
As soon as there is effort, calculation, weighing, there is reasoning.
You will, therefore, interrogate the patient, to learn the state of his intelli-
gence, that of all his mental faculties. You will seek to learn how far the
faculty of understanding is impaired; is he conscious of his position ? does
he know that his mind is disordered? has he notions about the cause, the,
T 2
262 AN ANALYSIS OF DR. GUISLATN'S WORK ON INSANITY.
invasion, and the progress of his disease ? He has intelligence if he knows
how to l<eep his room in order; if he takes care of his clothes; if he accounts
to himself for what he sees. But his intelligence may be impaired in one
point, and remain intact in a large sphere of mental operations.
A patient may show a perfect intelligence for all the objects which strike
his senses, he may be perfectly intelligent as to all that constitutes his rela-
tions, his external impressions; and yet he may be quite unable to understand
an abstract motive, or his own situation as a lunatic.
This is often the punctum ccccum of the intellectual retina. We shall see
that a man may be insane, and yet not cease to be intelligent. If the faculty
of understanding is weakened, this condition re-acts upon the questioner, and
generally causes him to raise his voice. Here, then, is a moral thermometer,
which marks the degree of conception possessed by the patient. There is a
deafness of the intelligence, as there is a deafness of the ear.
The patient who no longer recognises his brother, his sister; who knows
not where he is; who no longer knows that three and three make six; who
when you speak white, answers black ; has lost intelligence, and at the same
time memory, and the reasoning power. In this situation he may present regular
features, and retain the integrity of the functions of the senses. He may see
his father, and not know him; he may see him die, and feel no emotion.
The absence of moral liberty may be deduced from the general acts of the
patient, from his extravagances, and his errors. It may also be deduced from
his answers; as when he tells you he cannot conduct himself as he would wish.
It may be deduced from the trials to which you will subject him. You will
promise him his liberty, on condition of his ceasing to exhibit such or such
an idea, or act. He will not be able : the morbid manifestations will always
return, in spite of his desire to repress them.
In the interrogations to which you subject the patients, there is one point
to which it is important that I should direct your attention : it is the memory.
Frequently this faculty presents an astonishing exaltation. This condition
usually coincides with a general exaltation of the ideas and of the will. It
properly belongs to mania. It is enough to make the patient talk, to be
assured of this condition. Let it be observed, that so long as this exaltation
of the memory continues, you must recognise an active state of the mental
forces; you must conclude that the understanding has not yet undergone a
real loss in point of strength.
On the other hand, a great impairment of the memory indicates frequently
a serious disorder. It marks a great loss of intellectual energy; and often
characterizes the incurability of the disease, especially when it is the expres-
sion of a chronic state, or if it accompanies hesitation of speech, and other
signs of general paralysis.
In these interrogatories, it is important not to put questions at random;
you must learn to direct them in such a manner as to percussate the different
moral functions. You begin by gaining the good-will of the patient, and
by placing him at his ease, and driving away all suspicion from his mind.
[Next, you endeavour to group questions around certain words, out of which
you make questions interesting to the patients. These words are :
Why? How? Since when? Where? Plow many? The why, serve
to measure the degree of intelligence of the patient. Why are you here?
Why did you leave your house? Why don't you go home? The how
reveals more particularly the faculty of reasoning, of the judgment. How
do you do this? How do you do that? Since when, where? are addressed
to the memory. Row many? refers to the power of calculation. How much
do you earn a day ? and so forth.
To appreciate the value of the method I now indicate, one must have expe-
rienced how embarrassing is the position of the physician in the presence of
a patient to whom he knows not what to say.
AN ANALYSIS OF DR. GUISLAIN'S WORK ON INSANITY. 263
As a general rule, if a patient refuses to answer, cease to question him.
For the purpose of ascertaining how far the morbid condition has impaired
the will, that power of commanding the muscles, and of taking a resolution, you
may say to the patients: Look at me. Get up. Sit down. Take off" your
hat, and so on. Tlou must press him to make his bed 5 to mend his clothes.
You must observe which patients come to the dining-rooms at meal-times,
and who do not. The laggards are men profoundly afflicted, indocile, or
weakened by illness. They are characterized by a want of initiation; an
inaptitude to work ; and the impossibility of taking any resolution.
If the patient obeys, he manifests intelligence, and" a certain freedom of
will. If he gets up at the proper hour in the morning and dresses himself
he has a certain amount of spontaneity.
The exaltation of the impulsive forces of the brain, of the will, is remark-
able in many forms of mental alienation. It is the signal of the return of
morbid attacks. Patients who for several months had kept themselves aloof
and quiet, suddenly present themselves, pretending they must go out on busi-
ness ; that they must look to the purchase of a horse, an estate ; that they
must see their wives, their attorneys; they get up early in the morning, and
are met everywhere. These patients manifest an exaltation of the will.
Do you wish to know if the patient is attentive? Do not lose sight of his
eyes when you speak to him. If he listens to you, his visual axes meet yours;
if he answers without hesitation, he is attentive. The want of attention and
of will does not generally announce an exhaustion of these faculties; fre-
quently, the incapacity is connected with functional disturbance; sometimes
with a very active condition. To be enabled to say that certain phenomena
are the expression of exhaustion, we must have also signs drawn from the
observation of the features, and the pantomime of the patients.
D.? The state of the Viscera. After the foregoing examination, we have to
consider the various degrees of activity, of retardation, of volume, and
rhythm, which the pulse may present.
In the insane, the pulse affords no certain indications; its anomalies are
but little varied, and hardly furnish information of much importance in the
treatment. The pulse, however, has a certain practical value. In many
cases, the patient may present all the symptoms of a state announcing a bodily
disease. The exploration of the pulse alone warns the physician of the return
of an attack, or informs him of the approach of complete convalescence.
There is a pulse peculiar to the insane, which may be of incontestable
value.
You next pass in review the viscera; you 'nterrogate the stomach, the
intestines, the liver, the kidneys, the lungs, the heart, the spinal cord, the
organs of the senses ; and you must learn how the patient sleeps.
E.?The history. Facts in commemoration.
The commemorative facts constitute one of the most important elements in
the examination of the insane. They comprise the leading points of the
patient's life, his education, vocation, the length of his illness, and the relapses
he may have experienced. They comprise all that may elucidate the causes
of the illness.
Letters ?written by the insane. The letters written by a patient supply an
excellent means of learning his inmost thoughts. Even when no act or
spoken word announces a morbid state, his written words often betray it.
His letters frequently contain a series of expressions accurately designating
the kind of disease which afflicts the patient. They are often incoherent, and
full of wants. They are generally addressed to the magistracy, to the minis-
ters, to the king. They frequently run upon the most extravagant projects.
The very paper employed, the address, furnish useful indications. Thus,
264 ON THE EXTENT OF THE SURFACE OF THE BRAIN, AND
letters are written with a very bad pen, and full of blots; they are scraps of
paper; the margins of a journal, folded with the greatest negligence; the
letter is sealed with bread-crumb; it is addressed to the king, or some dis-
tinguished personage. This behaviour reveals the absence of the sentiment
of propriety, a want of perspicacity; it indicates, in the majority of cases,
an advanced stage of disease. Well! if you speak to the authors of these
letters, upon the subject of their morbid ideas, you will see how they will
break out.
(To be continued).
