 The Decline of Life in Health and Disease
============================================

The important subject of longevity lias been but little investigated in this
country. It cannot, therefore, he otherwise than gratifying to our feelings, to
find that a gentleman of admitted scientific and practical eminence has been,
for a scries of years, devoting his mind to the study of the art of prolonging
life. Arc we not, as a body of professional men, too much disposed to neglect
the subject of hygiene? and are wc sufficiently alive to the importance of
studying with carc and attention the causes that shorten or promote longevity?
That we have the power of prolonging life much beyond the scriptural limits
by the adoption of judicious hygienic measures, is an indisputable fact; and he
who is able to suggest the best means for accomplishing so beneficial a result,
is entitled to our warmest gratitude. Dr Van Oven's workx is replete with
valuable data, having a direct and important bearing upon the subject of
longevity. It is written with elegance and good taste. The rules laid down
by the author for the prolongation of human life are based upon an accurate
knowledge of the principles of medicine, and an enlarged experience of the
treatment of disease at the bed-side.
Wc subjoin the following, observations relative to a point of psychological
interest:?
" When wc speak, then, of the growth of the mind, wc do not mean the
growth of the actual mental powers, but, the augmentation of the stores of
knowledge which arc gradually acquired by the mind, and which arc essential
to its daily action. Now these stores of knowledge are gained only through
the organs of sensation, and it is therefore evident that the perfection of these
organs is necessary for supplying the mind with wholesome food; to promote,
not the growth of its abstract power (which, being incorporeal, may be always
equal), but the accumulation of those clear impressions from without, which
enable it so to exert itself as to act in that manner which we call wisely. The
organs of infancy cannot convey correct impressions to the mind, nor is the
brain, perhaps, sufficiently consolidated to rcceivc them properly; it is neccs-
* On the Decline of Life in Health and Disease ; being an Attempt to investigate
the Causes of Longevity, &c. By Barnard Van Oven, M.D. London : Churchill,
1853.
THE DECLINE OF LIFE IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. G05
sary that a certain maturity of organization should exist, in order tliat the
impression conveyed to the mind be clear and definite, that many various and
repeated impressions should have been made before it can have gained an
adequate store of knowledge, an adequate mass of materials whereon to exert
its powers. Perception, memory, imagination, and judgment, are usually re-
garded as the four great powers of the mind. Of these perception is the great
supplying power on which the others depend. The eye perceives all that passes
around it; and by the use of letters it is enabled to peruse the records of past
events, and thus, as it were, to see all that has ever been, and all that now is,
throughout the world. Nay, more, to commune with the bygone raccs of man-
kind, and learn all that they saw, heard, read, or thought. In the same way
the car, the touch, the taste, the smell, minister to the mental storehouse,
carrying valuable impressions to all around. Memory is but the power of
calling up, from the well-arranged stores of knowledge, past impressions, and
the effects produced by them."
We,would direct the particular attention of our readers to the chapter on
apoplexy and hemiplegia. It contains some valuable suggestive matter.
Dr Van Oven concludes his very interesting and important work with the
following sensible remarks :?
" If a complete system of public hygiene were established, pestilential and
epidemic diseases would cease to appear; a wise physical as well as moral
training in early youth woidd be universal, and would gradually eradicate
hereditary faults of organization, and thus, by a combination of wise legisla-
tion 011 the part of the government, and of prudence and obcdicncc 011 the part
of the people, the nation might be rendered more healthful, more vigorous,
more virtuous, more happy. Oh, may this soon be ! May this great country,
distinguished as it is in arms and arts, the queen of commcrce, the home of
freedom, the refuge of the oppressed, become remarkable for health fulness,
even in its crowded cities and manufacturing towns! May her inhabitants be
distinguished alike by the perfection of their physical development, the com-
pleteness of their mental powers, and the purity of their moral conduct?a
model for the admiration and imitation of mankind?a free, a healthful, and a
happy people!"
To this we say, Amen. We sincerely trust that the author of this able and
philosophical work will continue his investigations into this much ncglectcd
branch of medical literature. His work should be studied by non-professional
as well as by professional readers.
