Psyciiotherapeia, or the Remedial Influence of Mind
=====================================================

208
BY \V. C. DENDY, ESQ., AUTHOR OF THE " PHILOSOFHY OF MYSTERY," &C.*
When Plato wrote these words?"nec totum corpus (curabis) sine anima," he
recorded a truth which few probably will deny, but the principle of which, in
the practice of medicine, has been constantly blinked or set aside. This error
has been committed, not only from deficient appreciation of the influence of
mind, and especially that one of its faculties we term volition ; but also from a
notion that the psychologist speaks and writes of intellect as an abstraction,
and not as that intimate union of mind and matter which has laid the basis of
modern psychology, and especially of the theory of insanity. What the blood
is to a secreting gland the spirit is to the brain?the gland forms its especial
product from blood; the brain acting with spirit, so to write, produces mind.
Now, whatever the nature of this union may be, we know there is a constant
reciprocity or mutual influence between the two elements : and to show how
mind acts on tissue let us take the course of a simple thought, the subject of
which is sufficiently potent to cause sensible effects; we may call it emotion.
The sensations it often induces are those which if in greater degree or more
permanent, would be the very symptoms or indications of disorder. What is
a chill (as of fear), but a rigor, like that of ague, and its cause is cardiac conges-
tion. What a throb, but that exalted innervation, which if protracted would
probably induce cardiac hypertrophy. What the flush, but that hyperaemal
condition, which if not quickly subsiding might terminate in inflammation.
The true psychologist, therefore, discards metaphysics entirely from his
vocabulary. With him, mind and brain indeed are almost convertible terms;
their influence on the heart being almost instantaneous; a fact which has
indeed caused that organ to be conventionally, though absurdly, referred to as
the seat of the sentiments. It is true that the innervation of the heart is chiefly
ganglionic, but its association with the brain, the power of will over even inci-
dent or reflex innervation, is proved by its obedience, as in the cases of Coma,
of Fontana and Colonel Townsend: and the heart pays back this compliment
in kind : Dr Wardrop enumerating twenty disorders which result at once
from this mutual influence of brain and heart. We know that this influence
also is both special and common; if thought be concentrated on one organ,
it may there at once induce an especial disorder, or by affecting the heart
itself primarily, it may soon derange the condition of the whole vascular
system. Intense emotion, even constant thought, will often disorganize the
cerebral tissue, and disease of the brain may gradually derange or instantly
annihilate the manifestations of the mind.
The pathological influence of mind is as deeply interesting as it is evident
on the structures of the body. The effect is often as it were electric, altering
at once not only the feelings but the secretory apparatus of an organ; the
colour of the hair has been changed from black to grey, even in a few hours
as in the case of the young Sardinian fowler, and of Marie Antoinette, whose
beautiful locks, it is stated, became almost white during her return from
Varennes to Paris. The same is stated of Lebeny, the man who stabbed the
Emperor of Austria a short time ago. At other times the constant anticipa-
tion or foreshadowing of a coming evil will often reduce the system so much
as to incapacitate it for bearing that evil with impunity. Cases are recorded,
by Mr. Iravers and others, of-patients having either dreamed of the fatal
result of an operation, or brooded over its perils, and thence dying soon after
Read, March 12, before the Medical Society of London.
PSYCH0THE11APEIA, ETC. 269
its performance, every step of which was seemingly propitious. Shock will
often at once strike down as it were the very life of a being, inducing
syncope, trance, or epilepsy : or by a more severe mental blow on the brain, the
organic power may be permanently paralyzed, and death be the result. A few
years ago, just previous to the death of Sir Astley Cooper, he was called in to
reconcile the difference of opinion between another surgeon and myself,
regarding the propriety of operating on the scirrhous breast of a lady who
came from the country, not to consult me regarding her malady, but to request
me to operate on her at once. Her expressions were most cheerful, and she
was evidently buoyed up by a confident hope of being speedily relieved by
the operation. On Sir Astley's announcing somewhat abruptly his disap-
proval of the operation, the lady almost started from her seat, and soon after
fainted. From the moment of return of consciousness despondency took pos-
session of her mind, and gradually declining she sank in three weeks from
the delivery of the verdict.
The effect of fear we know will be frequently to induce diuresis and diar-
rhoea ; anger and jealousy will soon clog the bile ducts, and originate jaundice
and melancholy. Murat was directly in a state of jaundice if he heard bad
news from Naples, while in Russia. One of my mercantile friends almost inva-
riably dislodged from his stomach the whole of a hearty breakfast, if on his
adjournment to his counting-house he opened a letter containing accounts of
any mishap to his freights or his ventures. The proper secretions, as that of
milk, are constantly checked by grief: alarm and dread will suppress the
salivary flow; a truth of which the Indian magician often takes an ingenious
advantage in the discovery of a criminal. Mere anxiety also, by reducing the
vital energy, will render the body at once prone to malarious infection, or
parasitic development. Terror, even induced by illusion, may in a few mo-
ments prove fatal, as in the case of the criminal who died under the erroneous
notion that he was being bled to death.
The sexual stimulus is constantly influenced by those feelings and emotions
which interfere with or neutralize instinctive passion. An excess of esteem,
as well as a doubt of virility, may destroy for a time the sexual energy; and
I am aware of more than one instance in which the act of coition can only or
more efficiently be performed in the morning, when consciousness, being lost
in slumber, has left the spinal or animal influence unrestrained.
In the female, also, intensity of sensibility or sensation, or the hyperesthesia
of erotic passion, will in a moment induce syncope and impotence. Some
years ago I was several times called in the night to a young married lady, who
although having gone to bed well, was suddenly attacked by acute hysteria,
the prominent symptom of which was complete aphonia. The period was
midnight, and as I learned in confidence, the paroxysm came on at the onset
of the connubial embrace of her husband. Valerian with anodynes, and tem-
porary sexual abstinence, though not separation, were the remedies.
The chronic yet woeful effects of the overwrought mind are multiform.
How many are the melancholy instances of suicide in the subjects of over-
strained genius. Remember Ariosto, Collins, Cowper, White, Byron, Cole-
ridge, Paganini, Malibran ; the spirit of each might exclaim with Manfred?
" Look on me?there is an order
Of mortals on the earth who do become
Old in their youth, and die in middle age,
Without the violence of warlike death;
Some perishing of study?
Aud some insanity."
In this penalty of genius we see, however, the balance of happiness beau-
tifully adjusted; the exaltation of mental as of corporeal pleasure being
followed by despondency and peril. Mind is in these instances a hard and
I
270 PSYCHOTHERAPEIA, OR THE
cruel master, but by discipline and culture it may often be made a valuable
servant.
The psychological and prophylactic, and, may we add, therapeutic influence
of the mens sana are as clear as the pathological effect of mind. It would be
easy to fill many pages with illustrations of this truth : it is of course these
influences which constitute the remedial powers of mind even when disorder is
established. It is often deeply interesting to mark the salutary changes which
result from the influence of a devout and philosophic spirit, and also of the
lighter and more joyous states of the mind when brought to play even on
structural disease. As we know that mental states induce disorder, we may
also perceive, that prevention and cure may be effected simply by inducing a
contrary condition of mind. A sthenic disorder excited by excess of emotion
will often subside on the supervention of an asthenic state of the mental organ.
Even the secreting tissue may be obedient to this principle, the whitening of
the hair may subside on the removal of its cause of fear or grief; the reduction
of hernia has been easily effected when the body is under the depressing influ-
ence of alarm.
The principle of John Hunter may thus be applied even to psychology?one
thought displacing another, and it were not difficult to construct on this basis
an allopathic table of psychological antagonisms?opposing, for instance, the
effects of anxiety, or pride, fear, melancholy, envy, hatred, remorse, by devo-
tion, cheerfulness, self-control, piety: contrciria contrariis curavtur.
In following up this argument we cannot, I think, deny a certain influence
of other minds on our own, although the real truths are so unblushingly
warped and exaggerated to favour the views of the empirical impostor. What
was the principle of tractors?of potions?of electro-biology?of the shampooing
of Valentine Greatrex, but the effect of mental impression ; a change nervous and
vascular is induced, and its consequence must be some change of action, it
may be morbid. An acknowledgment of this truth would soon take the remedy
of mental influence from the hands of the impostor, and gain for us a valuable
aid in our ministration.
I was some time ago attending a young lady with typhoid fever, to the
friends of whom one of the most notorious mesmerizers had been strongly
recommended; indeed he was brought to the house during one of my visits.
I was not at all reluctant to argue the question, and my arguments prevailed
of course with the enlightened members of the family; but for fifteen minutes
while I was explaining, and indeed convincing as I believed, the professor was
playing a deep game with me. In profound silence and abstraction he fixed
his hawk's eye on mine, and I confess and declare that the sensations of extreme
heat and something like vertigo caused me no slight fear, lest I should in the
end be practically floored by my antagonist. It was evidently his scheme to
put himself, as he would call it, en rapport with me.
When the mind is pleasurably excited, the emotion of jo}T, the circulation
and innervation are of course more healthy. Even the organic functions
dependent on spinal and ganglionic influence may be instantly excited. I had
a patient in whom the peristaltic action was directly induced by a brief glance
at the Times newspaper; and I know a gentleman in whom the same effect
instantly results from the study of a map ; it is very rare indeed that this
expedient fails. We know, too, how instantaneously a thought will stimulate
the salivary, the spermatic, and other glands.
Now as one ot the immediate effects of grief or fear is, as we know, to
reduce action and secretion, they might thus possibly be converted into a
remedial agent in the suppression of haemorrhage, and also in those cases of
acute neuralgia which depend on plethora or increased determination, as
inflammatory toothache, &c. It is by the production of analogous sensations
that remedial effects are induced by the hand of the hanging criminal, the
drinking of warm blood, the toad amulet, &c. Probably the sense of shame
REMEDIAL INFLUENCE OF MIND. 271
may thus be auxiliary in the removal of internal hyperemia by the rush of
blood to the surface of the body?counteraction or derivation.
When, however, this emotion of fear is heightened into terror, very opposite
and most eccentric consequences may be produced. The previously speechless
son of Croesus is recorded by Herodotus to have exclaimed, "Kill not
Croesus," on the uplifting of the assassin's arm; and Battus, according to
Pausanias, recovered his lost speech at the sight of a lion at his side.
The contrasts of fear are hope, faith, confidence. As hope casts a couleur de
rose over the heart and mind, faith and confidence will often effect more for
disorder than a bevy of physicians with the whole materia medica at their
command. Yet how is this influence disregarded in practice. For hope is
not only felt in the heart, but it is synchronously the immediate- cause of a
vigorous circulation. It is recorded, on the contrary, how deeply the circula-
tion and energy of the soldier are aftected, so soon as the army turns on its
inglorious retreat. The pulse is irritable and languid, the respiration slower
and irregular, and the asthenia of disappointment at once sets in. In the
hospital of a defeated army the healing process is far more slow and imperfect
than in that of the conquerors. And why is this ? The thought in the brain
at once oxygenizes the blood in the first case, and carbonizes it in the other;
the extreme of these states being liable to rise or lapse into conditions of
inflammation or melancholy: these contrasted phenomena have been indeed
noticed in the same subject. The drivelling idiot has, under acute cerebral
fever, as the excited circulation has lighted up the brain, become half rational
for a time; that which would by excess make another mad brings out into
relief his asthenic or apathetic intellect, which again dwindles as the action
subsides.
In obstetrics this is daily proved. We know, too, that as the sudden entrance
of a strange accoucheur will instantly annihilate the parturient effort, so the
arrival of the favourite doctor will directly set all the functions going again.
In Lord Anson's voyage, despondency and hope were proved to be the
exciting cause and remedy in the most malignant attacks of scorbutus. And
in that most severe epidemic scurvy, at the siege of Breda, the pious fraud of
the Prince of Orange in vaunting the miraculous powers of an elixir really of
the most simple composition, very speedily, by the imparting of hope and con-
fidence, established healthy action, and cured the patients who had been for
months completely disabled.
Joy, the contrast of grief, is of course a feeling of still deeper intensity, and
the wisdom of Solomon was aware of its salutary influence, when he wrote
the proverb?" A merry heart is the life of the flesh." Yet excess of joy may
madden or kill; insanity has often been induced by sudden accession of pro-
perty, and the widow fell dead on the unexpected return of her son. I was
some time ago one of a long list of doctors who had endeavoured in vain to
restore the power of speech to a young lady, who had for many months been
afflicted with hysterical aphonia. During this course she was promised one
of the jewels in the Exhibition if she would pronounce its name; with extreme
effort she gained her prize, but the strain directly aggravated the malady for
some time afterwards. The nearest approximation to remedy or cure was
effected at last by the cold water douche, as a forlorn hope, the essence of
which was, I believe, as much shock as the refrigerating influence of the cold
fluid.
True love is the highest, deepest, and holiest source of joy, as it is the most
unselfish.
Blighted love and jealousy constitute the most fertile sources of indispo-
sition, "the worm i' the bud" which foils our study and efforts in the cases
of chorea, hysteria, amenorrhcea, and melancholy, and even the development
of intellect. r
Mutual affection, or happy love, is at once its antidote. Even in a few
272 PSYCHOTHERAPETA, OR THE
hours, we have probably all known the protean symptoms of organic asthenia,
as well as of psychical depression, disappear as if by the spell of an enchanter;
and all this from the mere assurance in the mind of a woman that she is
beloved. The remedial influence of mind is in nothing more immediate or
striking than in this. A reprieve has often been granted even at the eleventh
hour. The physician is constantly consulted in the cases of young women,
in which he sees at once the remedy, but of which he cannot propose the
adoption. The mental counteraction of the more violent passions may often
effect a very sudden cure. Yan Swieten records the sudden relief of acute
gout by extreme fright induced by a ghost; and Haller, from a violent
paroxysm of anger; and Valerius Maximus, from the same cause and its
consequence?increased innervation, even to the restoration of a paralytic
limb. We are all aware of the instant alleviation of an excruciating toothache
by the mere touch of a dentist's rapper.
One of the most prevalent errors of the human mind consists in the
conception of wrong notions of one's-self. It has passed into a proverb,
e ccelo descendit, yvcodi creavrov: but how rarely, if ever, does this divine
emanation find entrance into the heart or mind. The world will scarcely allow
it. But the principle obtains as well in physics as in morals. Like evil
thoughts, the illusive belief that disease exists in a part, will sometimes, by
concentration of nervous and muscular energy, so influence the body as to
become a very fertile source of indisposition; and it may, indeed, in time
even induce the very organic disease which it had merely imagined.
It is in hysteria especially that this awfo-mania, or morbid thinking of
one's-self, chiefly occurs; although it is probable that few are altogether
without it. To one lady especially would I allude, who came under my care
for acute hysteria?the surface of whose body, the abdomen especially, was
so intensely sensitive, that a feather dropped on it caused her to scream with
agony ? nay, even the approach of the finger would induce an extreme
degree of this hyperesthesia. No medicine was of avail, but her great
relief was procured by psychical treatment alone. Although a sudden touch
was then agonizing, delicate and gradual pressure was soon borne without
suffering, and the mind being brought to think rightly of the nature of' her
malady, the lady was relieved at least of one severe affection.
Somewhat of this nature are the cases of hysterical spine and knee, as
they are termed, especially by Brodie and Todd. These two neuroses are
particularly distinguished from inflammatory affection, by the sleep of the
patient being undisturbed, whereas in structural disease the patient is con-
stantly awoke by pain during the night.
I believe that if, on this principle, the current of morbid innervation be
intercepted or kept in abeyance long enough, by insensibility, or slumber, or
even by protracted diversion, many of the neuroses might be thus alleviated
or dispelled. The mind would forget the malady, and it w ould cease, accord-
ing to the Berkleyan theorem, to exist.
I am now attending a lady in Camden villas, whose sensory condition is
most eccentric ? probably illusory. She believes that the most offensive
odours issue from her mouth and nose, although her husband, of course a
very competent judge, is perfectly convinced to the contrary. De Boismont
refers to the case of Madame L., who was affected by this depraved sesthesia;
she sniffed the most disgusting odours with perfect ecstasy. If my own
patient could sleep for a week, and the mind lie perfectly fallow, she would,
I think, be well. Closely allied to this fallow of the mind is the state of
insanity, which is often a prophylaxis, and a remedy for those physical
derangements which commenced in the previous condition of sanity. The
lunatic's mind is almost^ a tabula rasa, and not thinking of danger, it is also
so far capable of resisting the impression of malarious influence. I adduce
these negative states^ of mental etiology, to point thus, by the way, to th?
obvious mode of treating these illusions.
REMEDIAL INFLUENCE OF MIND. 273
On this point I may affirm that agreeable deception, nay, that which may
be termed a pious fraud, may be conscientiously and most beneficially adopted
in many cases of hysteria. The supposed morbid effects of an easterly wind
have been really averted from the hypochondriac by nailing the vane to the
westerly point. And patients who have imagined that they carried within
them the most monstrous entozoa, have been cured by an emetic, some-
thing resembling the parasitic monster having been, previously to its effect,
secretly placed in the basin.
The miracles of Ilohenlohe Avere precisely on this principle. The extra-
ordinary case recorded by Dr Baddely of Chelmsford ceases to be a mystery,
when we illustrate and explain it by the power of implicit confidence, conse-
crated as it were by intense devotion.
About three years ago, I myself proved the powerful prophylaxis of mental
concentration on another point, during a most awful and perilous night voyage
from Boulogne. There were ten gentlemen in the saloon, of whom eight
were prostrate; and I should certainly have joined the interesting group, had
I not fixed my thoughts intensely on the pictorial and sculptured treasures
of the Louvre and Versailles.
I visited, some years ago, a lady in the west of Sussex, in whom intense
hyperesthesia of the skin was the torment of her life during the latter stages
of pregnancy. Even while I was watching her, I observed that, while her
attention was interestingly diverted from herself, she left off scratching. It is
clear, therefore, that one prominent principle in these cases is mental coun-
teraction. Once arrest the attention on any other subject than self, and we
shall often see its remedial influence on that malady, which, as we have all
proved, will constantly resist the laboratory and the materia medica. But
the illusion may be so severe, as to amount to confirmed madness on one point,
and this automania may lead to fatality. One of my medical friends had for
some time laboured under the illusion that syphilitic caries of the nasal and
palatine bones was rapidly progressing, and would destroy him. It was not
difficult to reason him, at times, out of this phantasy; but he would, sooner
or later, relapse. In the lucid intervals, he visited and prescribed with
judgment and discretion; yet immediately after a day spent in professional
duties, the wrong notion of self came across him ; and in a moment he half
divided very scientifically the brachial artery, and bled to death?yveodi areavrov
would have" saved him from the act of suicide.
This morbid introspection, productive as it is of disorder, it is our duty to
divert or set aside, as much as it is to watch and warn the brain and mammon
slaves of their infatuation. Yet we go on pilling and draughting; at best,
merely removing consequences, forgetful of the giant effects of the sympa-
thies, and on the failure of our therapeutic efforts, wonder that the brain,
heart, and lungs, should still become disordered or disorganized.
Intense thought and calculation had induced in Mr. M., a man of robust
health, a throbbing and intermission of the pulse. Keeping the mind in
fallow, or diversion, twice restored the heart's integrity. Immense specula-
tions, and the crisis or panic concentrated his thought on his ledgers, and he
entirely forgot himself and his functions. Mitral disease, hypertrophy, and
universal effusion was the end of this; and from his right pleural cavity I
drew off at once five pints of fluid. And all this might have been averted,
had thought been diffused or diverted; or he had been dissuaded from this
mismanagement of self.
In deep study, this concentration of thought is a constant source of self-
forgetfulness. The heart being an involuntary muscle, will still act as well
as congestion will allow it. But congested lung, when instinct fails in its
duty, must be relieved by voluntary effort. We must not forget to breathe.
The consequent collapse of the air-cells will not only increase congestion,
but especially favour the development of tubercle. It is often by the due
274 ON MORAL INSANITY.
expansion of cells that the granule or germ in the pulmonary parenchyma
is subdued or kept down. So that volition, or direction of mind to the pul-
monary apparatus, so as to ensure full and deep breathing, may be not only
remedial, but prophylactic of consumption itself. Indeed, we may believe
that mysterious dissolution may be sometimes referred to this stealthy cause.
The cases of Bateman and Hunter might have formed fatal illustrations, had
not the one been almost incessantly roused from slumber, and the other set
himself to deep and voluntary inflation of his lungs. On this principle, sleep
is sometimes perilous in disorders of the pulmonary system, as it withdraws
volition. Probably this may have been the immediate causa mortis in old
asthmatic persons, who having long endured a sort of chronic atelectasis, have
been discovered dead in their beds.
I have studied to limit, as much as possible, this crude paper, avoiding any
direct allusion to the pathology of sympathetic and reflex actions, confining
my remarks chiefly to the points of prevention and remedy by psychical
influence. But this, of course, only through the medium of matter; for the
metaphysical treatment of disorder would be an absurd solecism. The basis
of my remarks is of course the proposition that a mere thought instantly
induces a physical change, probably even in the condition of the blood, and that
by the directing or averting such thought to or from disordered structure or
function, we may constantly avail ourselves of a valuable auxiliary in the
practice of our intricate science.
