On the Epidemic Mental Diseases of Children
=============================================

(Original (JDommuntcattons,

(Translatedfrom the German by G. H. Cooke, Esq.)

We may be allowed, in limine, to reply to any objections which may be made
against the application of the word epidemic to diseases which are pnrely and
primarily mental.

We are too frequently compelled to nse words borrowed from the physical
world for the description of mental phenomena; to shrink from the employment
of a new metaphor, merely because it does not express an exact resemblance.
It is well, however, that in each case we should remind ourselves that we are
only using a metaphor, and that we should endeavour to ascertain and remember
what are the chief points of contrast.

By neglect of this precaution, we may doubtless be misled by the words we
use; an error than which none is more common, but which is not conliued to
the discussion of mental phenomena.

In the case before us, it is probable that the chief ground of hesitation to
employ this epithet of pathological nomenclature lies in the fact, that in most
cases of mental disease some consent of the will is necessary to their production.
The same objection, if it be admitted, would prohibit the employment of the
words " disease," and the like, in reference to a large number of mental
phenomena, which we regard as justly entitled to those epithets, and for which
we should be at a loss to discover any other; for most of them might probably
have been prevented by a strong exercise of the will.

But we cannot, as students of the mind in its pathological aspect, concede to
it that freedom of the will which those who regard it from another point of
view may claim for it. Our constant experience shows us, on the contrary,
that it is in bondage to all external circumstances.

Of these external influences, the most powerful is, as might be anticipated,
that of other wills, more powerful, either by position, or number, or in their
own energy. This susceptibility, which we may call the impulse to imitate, is
not at first an impediment to the will. In the infant, on the contrary, it is the
first stimulus to voluntary movement. The first actions to which that name
can be given are imitative of the motions and articulations of those about it.
" In the further development of the child, nature makes no sudden strides.
There is no abrupt line of demarcation between the earliest instinctive uncon-
scious movements and the dawn of ideas, when the impressions made through
the senses act on the sensorium.

" These ideas are necessarily at first obscure and undefined. Eor the
reception of sensuous impressions there is required a preparation of the mind,
which is not yet present, and is only slowly developed. This includes attention,
comparison, and judgment.

" And there is no other inlet for ideas than through the nerves of sense and
sensation. Spontaneous ideas are impossible to man under his existing
organization.

" It is well known that children only learn to see and hear after a considerable
time, though the organs of sight and hearing are from the first prepared to
receive their appropriate impressions.

"There can be no question that the mental life of the child at this period is
far inferior to the dreaming state of the adult: for though the suspended con-
sciousness of the sleeper is scarcely stirred by the thread of ideas which flits
across the mind, and is almost incapable of attention to them, yet these ideas
may be perfectly clear in themselves, and even orderly; while in the child, when
awake, they are only dim figures, without order and connexion.

" The faculty of speech is, as we know, acquired by imitation of the sounds
heard.* The first modulated cries of the infant are not speech, but sounds
without consciousness and significance; it learns to imitate the sounds pre-
sented to it, to show that it has received the impression they give. Gradually
it associates ideas with the words, to which it then gives significance. It is
not till a later period that there wakes up the higher faculty of recalling past
ideas and the power of using words as the organ of thought."

It is still long before the child can attain that mental independence which is
regarded as the characteristic of man; the most can hardly be said to attain
it at all, but continue through life dependent 011 circumstances.

We constantly observe, in the amusements of children, that they arc most
absorbed in those which mimic the serious occupations of those around them?
those of the school, the household, the family, the shop, and the church.
Especially in times of popular excitement, we find the general topic repeated
with perhaps greater earnestness, and the most engrossing plays of the children
are the military attack or the parliamentary debate.

In all this we see nothing but what is natural; we are aware that it needs
guidance and restraint, but this is easily applied?the need of rest and food,
and the quiet discipline of home, separates the most ardent playmates, and
subdues the most vivid enthusiasm.

That the faculty should be morbid in its manifestations, it is necessary that
the general feeling of society should be undulv, or, at least, unusually excited,
and that either the domestic tie be feeble, or the position of children in society
misunderstood.

How widely spread, and how morbid an excitement may seize the youthful
population under favouring influences is remarkably evinccd in the children's ,
crusade of the thirteenth century.

" At this period, the Iloly Land had long been restored to the sway of the
Saracens. Vexation for the loss, and an earnest desire for the recovery of
this dearest possession of Christendom had spread with renewed earnestness
among all the nations of the west. But the emissaries of Rome found no sym-
pathy among the men, and not an arm was raised. They would not give their
property and lives a useless sacrifice in the repeated effort at an achievement
111 which the skill and bravery of the past century had failed.

In those cases in which the faculty of hearing is absent, speech is impossible till
the inind is sufficiently exercised to imitate the motions of the mouth as observed by
the eye.

"But the children's minds were kindled with brilliant dreams of the Holy
Land, and of miraculous victories over the infidels, and it was impossible that
some outburst of feeling could be long delayed.
" The first impulse was given by Etienne, a shepherd-boy of Cloies, near
Vendome, who must have possessed great address and talents. He gave him-
self out for an ambassador of Christ, who, he said, had appeared to him in a
foreign garb, had received food at his hand, and given him a letter to the king.
His sheep were said to have knelt down before him, to worship him, a miracle
which perhaps was hardly needed to encircle him with the halo of sanctity.
The shepherd-boys of the neighbourhood collected about him, and soon more
than 30,000 persons streamed together to accept his revelations, and be
transported by his preaching. He wrought miracles in St. Denys, the reports
of which circulated with incredible rapidity through Erance. All rendered
him homage, as the saint of the day and the messenger of God.

" The king, Philippe Auguste, alarmed at the excitement of so formidable a
multitude, forbad the assemblies, with the sanction of the university of Paris.
He might as well have forbidden an earthquake. Every day there started up
new eight or ten-year old prophets, who preached, worked miracles, collected
troops of young enthusiasts, and conducted them to the holy Etienne.

" To the inquiries put to these young pilgrims (for they were mostly clad in
pilgrim's weeds) whither they were going, they replied, as with one voice : ' To
God.' They went in orderly processions, headed with oriflammes; many carried
wax candles, crosses, and censers, and they sang hymns without intermission,
with most intense devotion, and to new melodies. In these hymns they often
repeated the words ' Lord, raise up Christendom, and give us again the true
cross.' It is to be regretted that the witnesses of a movement which thus
ingulfed the whole of the youthful population, have not recorded either these
hymns or the music to which they were sung. Even the few words which have
been preserved have not come down to us in the vernacular dialect.

"It cannot be doubted that thus many of the fairest flowers of national
poetry have been lost, however overwrought and morbid the excitement which
produced them.*

"Many of the parents partook of the delusion, and furnished their children
with arms and armour, or clad them in pilgrim's garb, and gave them a staff
and wallet for their long journey. Some, who were kept back by force, wept
day and night, and wasted away with fretting, or fell ill with nervous disorders,
till they were allowed to go. Others made light of bolts and bars, and found
means to elude the utmost vigilance of their attendants, that they might join the
representatives of the holy Etienne, and at last behold that great crusade-preacher
himself. All distinction of ranks was confounded: the children of counts and
barons fled equally with those of burgesses and the lowest peasants. The
richer parents, however, sent guides to accompany their children, many of whom
it is probable were thus quietly rescued.

" Within a month from the commencement of the commotion, there was
assembled at Yendctme an immense host of boys armed and unarmed, a few of
them on horse, and among them not a few girls in male attire. The total
number is reckoned at 30,000.

" They all acknowledged the beloved Etienne as their captain and guide to
the Holy Land, which they purposed to rescue from the Saracens. They put
him in a splendid chariot; the noblest of the youths, in splendid equestrian
accoutrements, formed his body guard, which indeed he needed, to restrain
the ardour of his followers, who blessed themselves if they could but get a
* Three or four years ago one of the Crusaders' hymns, with its melody, was dis-
covered in Westphalia. It is characterized as far superior to any other music of that
age which has descended to our times. It will be found in one of the numbers of
Evangelical Christendom for 185Q.

thread from his robe, when their devotion and enthusiasm had been inflamed
by his preaching. On some of these occasions, a few were crushed to death in
the violence of the press.

"In July, the extraordinary procession set out for Marseilles. It was hot
and dry, but none of the difficulties of the pilgrimage, neither the drought on
the hot and arid plains of Provence, nor the scarcity to which the poor must
have been exposed atter the first few days of the journey, could quench the
ardour of their devotion and zeal. ' To Jerusalem !' was their cry, when they
were asked of the astonished beholders whither they were going; and none
doubted Etienne's promise that the sea should divide before them, and they
should go to the holy land dry shod. Disappointed of this expectation, on
their arrival at Marseilles they thankfully accepted the offer of two merchants
of the city to convey them to Palestine without charge. They were still suffi-
ciently numerous to fill seven large ships. Shortly after they set sail, two of
the ships were wrecked in the bay, and not a soul saved. The remaining five
were taken to Bugia and Alexandria, and all the children sold to the Saracens.
It is satisfactory to know that the two merchants did not escape retributive
justice. They were hanged in Sicily for another offence.

" At the same time a similar excitement sprang up in Germany, and repeated
almost to the letter the incidents of the French boy crusade?the number of
those drawn into it being probably somewhat larger. They were under two or
more leaders, and went in two bodies toward the coast. It is probable that at
least the half must have perished by the way, for the passes of the Alps were
at that time very difficult, especially for such ill provided travellers; while the
greater number of adults and women that attached themselves to these expe-
ditions must have made the moral effects more disastrous.

One of the detachments reached Genoa in August; the other entered Italy
by way of Lombardy. Their fate was various. A large number met the same
fate as the children of Etienne's army, being kidnapped in the Italian sea-port
towns, and sold into slavery; some entered into service in Italy ; some fell
victims to seduction or violence, and abandoned themselves to infamy; some
of noble birth established themselves in patrician families in Genoa. A very
few only returned home."

Hecker relates, on the testimony of a contemporary chronicler, a monk of
Pirna, that twenty-five years later a similar movement seized the youthful
population of Erfurt. Above a thousand of these assembled on a particular
day, unknown to their parents, left the town together, and went dancing and
leaping to Armstadt. They were fetched back the next day, but none of them
could say who had enticed them, or wherefore they had gone. This appears to
have been more connected with bodily indisposition than the boy crusades.
Many of the children continued ill long afterwards with chorea and epilepsy.
Hecker conjectures (I do not know on what ground) that the proximate cause
of this event was the religious solemnities connected with the canonization of
a landgravine of Thuringia. From its proximity in time to the former event,
he very reasonably supposes an exciteable state of the " child world " at this
epoch.

More than 200 years afterwards, in the year 1458, a time when the St.
1^,us dance was very prevalent, more than i00 children of Hale, in Suabia,
set out, against the will of their parents, on a pilgrimage to Mont St. Michel,
in A ormandy. As all attempts to restrain them were fruitless, or hazardous,
the corporation provided them a guide, and an ass to carry their baggage.
Iney made the journey, offered their devotions to the archangel Michael, and
returned.

tl 4"^hese mental epidemics (if so we may call them) had this in common,
that they produced an impulse to bodily activity?an impulse which, especially
iii childhood, may be regarded as salutary and critical. I do not suppose (in
detect of information on the subject) that any permanent effects were produced
on those wlio survived the hardships of the journey. It is recorded that, on
the contrary, those who were kept back suffered much with chorea and con-
vulsions, as well as with the anguish of disappointment, and that some died in
consequence.

There is another class in which we suspect the consequences may have been
more lasting; more, we mean, which were connected with hallucinations, and
which consisted in supposed commerce with the invisible world.

The belief of witchcraft prevailed throughout Europe from the time of the
Reformation, or earlier, down to within a century of the present time. As I
am now only concerned with so much of its history as relates to its influence
on children, I have not here to decide how much was imposture or malignity,
but set down all, with a merely fractional deduction, to the score of delusion.
It will be remembered that, in this uuhappy superstition, the children were
regarded as the chief victims, a delusion which, as we may anticipate, they
almost universally confirmed.

"Nearly all the children were seized with the complaint. If their mothers
were burned as witches, they themselves conversed with the devil, whom they
saw hovering before them. They cried after their mothers, and all received
answers from them. In sleep they felt themselves carried away by women in
the form of cats, and when carried before the courts, they mentioned the
names of the women who had thus carried them. This evidence, in which
multitudes of children were unanimous, sufficed for the condemnation of those
women to the stake. The children were carried into the churches, and were
studiously kept awake. When overpowered by sleep, their dreams were
repeated, and they described all the doing of the witches, the appearance of
the devil, the food he set before them, the dances they had witnessed, the con-
versations and songs they had heard. When these witches were burnt, the
evil was by no means stayed; the children soon found themselves similarly
treated by other women. They all agreed in the affirmation that bolts and
licks were of no avail to detain the witches from the observance of their
S ibbath, and that they had themselves been cruelly scourged by witches, who
were at the very time in prison. This was regarded by the judges as an addi-
tional motive to hasten the execution of the sentence, and even a girl of sixteen
years was burnt on her confession of having carried three children to the
witches' Sabbath.*

The convulsive disorders occasionally prevalent in schools and nunneries are
too familiar to us, historically, to require that I should allude to the case
treated by Boerhaave in the orphan asylum at Haarlem, or similar cases
recorded in the treatises on hysterical affections.

Prom extensive inquiries which I have made among many of the great
educational institutions in Great Britain, I cannot find any modern instances
of these affections.

I do not know of any instance in which any demonstrations of juvenile
ardour have taken place in defence of Mahometanism, nor can I find any
records of a similar nature during the shorter history of Mormonism. To say
nothing of the contrast of both these systems with the Christian system in
their influence on the uncorrupted sentiments of youth, it is easy to perceive
that neither the personal history of the Arabian prophet, nor that of his vulgar
imitator, Joseph Smith, presents any thing adapted to win the affections and
excite the enthusiasm of children, such as the history of our Lord presents.
* Though it does not strictly belong to my subject, I allude here to the prevalence of
particular forms of mental affection at particular eras?chiefly to suggest to those
interested in the inquiry a source of much interesting information. There is a depart-
ment of the State-paper Office for a particular class of correspondence, which had long
perplexed those who were engaged in deciphering the secret correspondence of the
Stuart and revolutionary era. It was at last found that they were the ietters of lunatics.

ON THE EPIDEMIC MENTAL DISEASES OF CHILDREN. 123
Tlie same remark is applicable to ancient paganism, for the youthful pro-
cessions in honour of some of its divinities were due to quite another sentiment;
nor do any of our modern missionaries record anything similar in defence of
their fading superstitions.

In some of the excitements of religious revivals at the close of the last
century, the children took much part, and were evidently morbidly affected. I
have not been able, unfortunately; to procure the exact information on this
subject.*

It will be remembered, that a few years ago children were much pressed into
the advocacy of the cause of total abstinence, much I believe to the moral
injury of some, and with fatal results to others.

Beyond this, I do not know any modern events at all resembling those
narrated at the beginning of this paper.

If we are correct in attributing these phenomena to instincts of the youthful
mind, we are compelled to inquire how it is that at a period so similar to the
periods of the Crusades and the Reformation in the general religious and
social excitement they have failed to recur.

I fear we shall hardly be justified in attributing it wholly to the more
advanced civilization of our times, as offering to our youth patterns which they
may safely imitate. Probably the true explanation is to be found in the more
general kuowledge of the nature of these excitements, and in the better under-
standing of the position of children in society. It is not improbable, that it is
partly due to the increased longevity of modern times and the long peace of
Europe, the numerical ratio of the youthful population to that of the adult and
aged being thereby reduced, and their influence in society being proportionally
diminished.

In some of the republics of central America, the low average of life through
malaria and civil war has proved a fertile cause of incessant revolutions ; their
statesmen and magistrates beiug called to office almost in youth. Insanity and
idiocy are also fearfully prevalent.

Creditable as this result may be to modern intelligence, and advantageous as
it is to public decorum, I fear we have thus too entirely closed a safety valve,
some action of which is advantageous to bodily welfare, and that the general
health of the educated classes has suffered in consequence. 

I do not refer to the supposed or actual increase ol insanity at this period and
in this country, which I think is not fully proved; nor to those severe affections
of other parts of the nervous system, the prevalence of which in this country
has compelled our physiologists on the researches which have given fame to
this half century; but to what may almost be called the epidemic constitution
of the educated classes of this country, and which constitutes the substratum
* Extract from a-Letter by G. Lewis, Esq. "Wrexham, 7th April, 1851.?The
principal fact I alluded to in connexion with the Welsh Revival Meetings, which I had
observed on several occasions, was, that the excitement, after it had once commenced,
could be kept up, and even renewed with considerable vigour when it had almost ceased,
by mechanical means. Figure to yourself groups of young people from 12 to 20 years
of age laying hold of each other by the hands, jumping and crying out for a considerable
space of time, till their physical powers were nearly exhausted. Then some wicked wag,
going behind them, pricking them in the elbows with pins or needles, which would, as a
matter of course, make the one so pricked spring up, and his or her example would give
fresh impetus to the whole circle; and it would be astonishing the length of time the
jumping (of all) would go on again when apparently almost exhausted, when the impulse
was once communicated by the example of one or two pricked. It was evidently the
ellect of example, or contagion, if you will; for the poor creatures were evidently at
that time quite beyond the control of mental influences."

f It appears that in the " convulsive epidemic" in Cornwall, in 1814, the young were
not predominantly affected.?See Mr. Cornish's account of it, Med. and Phys. Journal,
vols. 31 and 32. of those diseases, while it modifies the nature and in consequence the treat-
ment of most others. I refer to the nervous asthenia so prevalent in both
sexes, but chiefly in the female, during a few years, commencing from the
establishment of puberty. In the majority of cases it passes away with the
full development of the body, and may never during its continuance have
amounted to disease?amounting only in its collective symptoms to what we
habitually call delicacy of constitution, and which it is quite needless to
describe.

It is impossible to collect statistics of what does not constitute au actual
disease. I am compelled to rely on the statements of intelligent women, who
almost unanimously testify in reply to my frequent inquiries, that this delicacy
which they see in their daughters and granddaughters was almost unknown in
their earlier days. This is confirmed by the testimony of the medical pro-
fession, that disease in general is more nervous aud more asthenic than it was
comparatively a short period ago. Probably the increased curability of diseases
by nervous influence alone tends to further confirmation of the opinion.
It appears to me, that it is impossible to observe the symptoms of this con-
dition, and the manner of its gradual abatement, without feeling that' it is a
result of exhaustion only to be relieved by a protracted, but not passive rest.
It is, if I may use such a figure, a temporary old age, not very dissimilar to
the climacteric disease of old age.

The present topic is one that chiefly concerns those who in any way have
the care of the young?the clergy, preceptors, and parents. I am fully aware of
the difficulty of the task at once to educate the child up to the point that shall
qualify it to meet the excitement of the world, and to take care that the
exercise thus given to the mind shall not restrain or impair the development
of the body; and I am far from thinking that the difficulty is not on the whole
judiciously met. I fear, however, that there is an undue tendency to call the
young to aid of our religious institutions.

Par be it from me to discourage youthful decision and activity in religious
matters, but to urge the necessity of care, in this more than in any other
subject, that the child be not urged to do that wuich is properly the work of
the man. If he does it in his childhood, there is a risk that he will not do it
iu manhood.*

Having hinted at what in some, not, I think, very many cases, is an error in
the education of youth, I will mention, in conclusion, what seems to me the
great desideratum of English society in cities. I mean scope and encourage-
ment to active relaxation. It is with very little hope that they can be supplied
that I allude to their needfulness. I fear that modern civilization has not as
yet either the means or the wish to allow its younger servants that bodily
exercise which might mitigate the strain which it imposes cn their minds.
The proper mental and bodily relaxants are music and the dance. It is a
subject of much congratulation that the former is now recognised as almost
one of the necessaries of life. It is to be hoped that a better understanding
of the value of the latter may ere long correct that mistaken morality which
has driven it to late hours and heated drawing-rooms. No amusement is
either healthy or moral which cannot be taken within the domestic circle,
and at the hour when it is needed.

* Roddick, in his pamphlet on "Epidemic Democracy," blames 'the practice of
teaching living languages to young children, believing that thus a premature expansion
is given to their ideas and habits of thinking.
k
