Lunacy and Lunatic Asylums of Ireland
======================================

528
"Art. JV.-
-.*
We have repeatedly had our attention called to the deplorable state of
lunacy in Ireland. Perhaps no land so highly favoured by Nature was
ever so preyed upon by disastrous causes from without, exciting an
intelligent and active minded-people to dissatisfaction, agitation, insur-
rection, self-expatriation,?and shall we not add insanity ? Amidst
the fierce moral tempest which has here raged with fluctuating inten-
sity, driving a naturally excitable race to the opposite extremes of
prostrate mendicancy and wild enthusiasm, we might well expect to
find crime and insanity going hand in hand from the woi'khouse to the
gaol, and from the overcrowded gaol to such lunatic asylums as might
"be open for their reception. "Alas! poor country, almost afraid to
know itself!" faction-torn, fever-stricken, emigration-abandoned?we
may truly image to ourselves the poor Irish peasantry in a state of
unthinking and frantic desperation, resembling the terror-stricken
victims on the precipitous and perilous rocks in Martin's picture of the
Deluge?men, women, and children together mingled?throwing their
arms wildly about them, not knowing whether in resistance or despair.
The healthy springs of all human action paralyzed and radically con-
taminated, what else could be anticipated, but that disease and misery
would do their worst ? Yet how inadequate has ever been the provi-
sion made for this destitute multitude, upon whom humanity herself
seems to have turned her back, leaving them no place of refuge, not
even asylums, using that word in its proper sense, for the reception
of the insane. The Report which we have just received, the sixth
upon the District Criminal and Private Lunatic Asylums of Ireland,
would, however, appear to indicate that government has in some degree
thrown off its lethargy, and is bestirring itself; but the evidence before
us is still, discouraging, inasmuch as it holds out no prospect of anv
measure sufficiently comprehensive being adopted for the relief of a
large class of sufferers, who have the strongest claims upon our sym-
pathies. We do not wish to surcharge or over colour, in the least
degree, the misery to which we have so often referred,f and would
* The Sixth General Report on the District Criminal and Private Lunatic Asylums
in Ireland. With Appendices. Presented to both Houses of Parliament, by Com-
mand of Her Majesty. Dublin. Printed by Alexander Thorn, 87, Abbey Street, for
Iler Majesty's Stationery Office. 1853.
f Sec the Psychological Journal, vol. ii., pp. 390, 391.
willingly avail ourselves of any authentic evidence which presented signs
of progressive amelioration.

In taking up any report upon the state of lunacy in Ireland, the first
question which suggests itself is, whether adequate accommodation
exists for the reception of its insane poor ? And for many years
past we have been bound to answer this interrogatory with an em-
phatic negative. We have first to consider the extent of insanity in
Ireland; how far the disease prevails ; the numerical proportion of
the population which may be so afflicted?and here, we regret to say,
upon the very threshold of the inquiry, the inspectors leave us in the
dark, and make a very lame apology for not supplying us with this
very important statistical information. They set out with stating that
as in their previous reports, they have entered into minute statistical
details ; they purpose on the present occasion, " whilst affording a
general outline of the state of this department of the public service, con-
fining themselves more particularly to the alterations and improvements
which have been effected in it within the last two years." They there-
fore abstain from giving us the usual returns, showing the number of
lunatics confined in private asylums, in poor-houses, and gaols, and take
no notice of the wandering idiots, imbeciles, and lunatics, the number
of which was, in 1846, returned as 6217; in 1819, as 6000; and, in
1851, as amounting to as many as 8985. Again, in the year 1846,
there were 1921 lunatics confined in the poor-houses ; in 1849, there
were 1940; and, in 1850, the number was increased 2393. The present
Report gives no statistical return whatever of either of these classes;
and we should like, therefore, to know how, without this information,
we can form any opinion of the adequacy of the provision, which is
described in the Report before us, to accommodate the pauper lunatics
of Ireland ? This much appears obvious, that, in the year 1846, there
were 8138 lunatics; in the year 1849, there were 7940; and in 1850,
there were 11,378 returned as domiciled in poor-houses and wandering
about the country. We therefore cannot understand liow it happens
that the inspectors, in the present Report, express themselves not only
in terms of self-complacency, but in a tone bordering upon exultation
upon having/ozn- new asylums (Cork, Kilkenny, Dublin, and Killarney),
open, and three (Mullingar, Armagh, and Sligo,) nearly ready for the
reception of patients, which, together^ with all the other asylums in the
county, will not afford accommodation even for 5000 patients.
" The full accommodation" (we quote the words of the Report) " be-
tween existing public institutions and those in progress for the destitute
insane of Ireland, may, within another twelve months be set down as
adequate for 4500 patients. Taking the statistical ratio of lunacy in
the general population, this amount of accommodation is by no means
too great." -

" Too great," indeed! Why we have just seen that, in 1850, there were
as many as 11,378 lunatics eligible for admission; and the inspectors
themselves avow that they believe insanity to be on the increase. We
repeat, therefore, that the tone they assume appears to us unintelligible.
" Experience," they observe (we again quote the report), " fully jus-
tifies us in stating, that while we have as accurately as possible appor-
tioned the supply to the want (!) it is far more beneficial for the commu-
nity at large to have an excess of accommodation than the reverse, as
the statistics of insanity furnish incontestable proofs that mental de-
rangement is, unfortunately, on the increase, and that the only certain
and legitimate means of arresting its progress is to bo prepared to meet
it; as proof of which, allusion need but be made to the recognized fact
that the curability of the disease is mainly dependent on the facilities
of an early treatment."

With this reasoning we ar<5 perfectly satisfied ; the fact referred to is
indisputable; but where is the supply to be found which will be " appor-
tioned'''' to the wants of the 11,378 lunatics, whose numbers must, upon
the evidence of the inspectors themselves, during the succeeding three
years, have considerably augmented ? We have not a shadow of
evidence in the report before us that any supply at all adequate to the
accommodation of the lunatic poor of Ireland has been provided; but
the contrary appears too palpable upon the surface of the Report, for a
provision for only 4500 will not meet even half of the declared exigency.
This will appear more manifest from the following very imperfect table,
which we have drawn up from the reports before us, showing what was
lately acknowledged to be the extent of lunacy in Ireland.
Table showing the Extent of Lunacy in Ireland.
184G
1849
1851
1852
1850
In District Asylums . .
In Local Asylums . . .
In Gaols
In Poor-liouses ....
Wandering nnd Unprovided
In private Asylums . .
Under the care oftlie Court )
of Chancery, but not in |
Asylums J
Criminal
Total . . .
2555
5G2
200
1921
0217
251
7G
11,872
2003
305
338
1910
0000
432
2913
("Included
?< in Dis- >-
(.trict A. )
280
2393
450
2722
No return
No return
No return
No return
No return
2870
No return
No return
No return
No return
423
11,078
91
15,118

Incomplete as this table necessarily is, it affords conclusive evidence
that the extent of lunacy in Ireland far surpasses the contemplation of
the inspectors, or at least the provision which they seem to conceive
adequate to adjust the balance between the demand for the accommo-
dation of pauper lunatics and the supply provided for them. We
greatly fear?indeed it is evident?that the scale must greatly prepon-
derate on the side of the demand; and the philosophy of being " pre-
pared to meet" and "arrest" the progress of the disease "melts into
air?thin air"?the very attenuated air of an Irish atmosphere!
But to proceed. Our attention is next called, in the present Report,
to a curious fact, nevertheless one which we might have anticipated; it
is simply this, that the sane and the insane in Ireland have a great
horror of Irish lunatic asylums; and hence, when one of these noble
edifices, upon which the inspectors congratulate themselves, is finally
erected and thrown open, it fills very slowly. Little more than a cen-
tury ago, Swift, from the context of his will, appears to have enter-
tained some doubt whether fifty " madmen" could be found in all
Ireland; and we are informed that years elapsed before some of the new
district asylums were filled. For example, the Maryboro', built for 104
patients, in a district containing above 500,000 inhabitants, did not
receive its full complement for three years; but what then followed ?
In the fifth it " became crowded beyond its original intent, whilst many
cases were denied admission." Here we come at once to the root of an
evil, which we have no doubt prevails to a prodigious extent in Ireland;
?nay, we are informed that "similar observations might be made
with reference to other institutions, which in time became obviously too
restricted for the pressure on them; while the only mode of meeting
the emergency was by having recourse to temporary additions, and the
conversion of day-rooms and workshops into dormitories; also by taking
of fresh land to afford out-door employment to the patients, who in
some instances nearly doubled their primary numbersa state of things
which, it is added, seriously interfered with a regular system of classifi-
cation, and greatly augmented the number of the insane confined in
gaols and workhouses. Can we be surprised at this ? "We have first
an inadequate amount of accommodation, which, notwithstanding the
erection of additional asylums, is, Ave maintain, upon the evidence
before us, still the case; and, secondly, it does not appear that the
parish authorities make any effort to bring the wandering idiots, im-
beciles, and lunatics, from then' forest haunts, where, in " looped and
windowed raggedness," they are doubtless exposed, and perhaps inured,
to all inclemencies of weather. In England, where every effort is
made to suppress vagrancy, it is compulsory upon the part of the
parish authorities,?overseers, constables, and relieving officers,?to
apprehend all wandering lunatics, with the view of their being placed
under proper care and control; but this is obviously not the case in
Ireland, where, as is manifest from the table before us, large numbers
are permitted to roam at large. Nor do the lunacy inspectors them-
selves appear even to calculate upon making adequate provision for
them. Assuredly this is to be lamented. Although the asylums to
which they refer fdled slowly, it is admitted that they became gradually
so overcrowded that it was found necessary to relieve them by finding
temporary accommodation for the insane in places not adapted to the
purpose; hence the circumstance of these asylums having filled tardily
should afford no argument for the future provision being narrowed.
The very contrary is the inference which ought to be deduced. To re-
lieve gaols and workhouses, and to provide for the lunatic poor wander-
ing at large, a more liberal and comprehensive measure than that which
is described in this Report must be adopted. We are, however, to be
thankful, Ave suppose, for the boon which has already been granted ; and
it certainly is a satisfaction to know that the new asylums which have
been erected, and which are in progress, will in some measure increase
the accommodation. It is well observed in the report that " the benefits
derived from these establishments, not only in a curative point of view,
but in their social and moral tendency, largely counterbalance the public
expenditure which they entail." The inspectors furthermore add?and
the observation seems to fasten upon them the necessity of adopting a
more enlarged policy?that if ample provision for the treatment of in-
sanity had in the first instance been made, " it would have had the
effect of essentially obviating the propagation of a disease so prone to
diffusion, and would not only have prevented an increased subsequent
cost, but many unfortunate occurrences might have been-guarded
against." This acknowledgment pleads conclusively in favour of the
views we have adopted; but the expenditure, in great as well as in
little matters, is always the sore point, and our philanthropy we
fear would press heavily upon the Irish exchequer. From the tabular
synopsis which is here given, we find that the aggregate cost of the
eight new district asylums amounted to 209,403/. 6s. 2\il., and
the return to the Treasury of the sums assessed upon the several
counties to meet this expenditure is given in detail; but into these
financial and fiscal arrangements we forbear entering. The interest
attached to them is purely local; but the protection provided for the
lunatic, who is in reality to be regarded as a " State care," concerns
humanity at large. It is an old axiom in English law that the reigning
sovereign, in the capacity of parens patricc, should, in return for the
allegiance of the subject, take care of the person and property of those
who are from insanity incapable of governing and defending themselves}
hence the Lord Chancellor, as keeper of the great seal, is delegated by
royal warrant to preside as the representative of the crown over this
department of the public service; and in England it has been wisely
provided by different and successive acts of parliament, that every
county shall make adequate provision for its own pauper lunatics.
The progress of legislation in Ireland, since the Union, has unhappily
been retarded by the political events which have notoriously darkened
its horizon ; but a brighter day has now dawned, and her public lunatic
asylums will, we trust, be put upon the same footing as those upon this
side of the Channel. It was in the reign of George IY. that district
asylums for the reception of pauper lunatics began to be erected; and,
without entering into their history, which will be found in a previous
number of this Journal,* we may briefly state that there are now thir-
teen of these district asylums, and the total number of the insane
remaining in them collectively, on the 31st March, 1853, amounted to
2870. "Fully one half of these patients (we are informed by the
Report) may be considered as incurable, and hence a question arises
whether a large proportion of them might not be removed to union
workhouses and other receptacles, where they might be supported at a
diminished expense." This, we are of opinion, Avould not be a step in
the right direction. The insane ought not, for the sake of the sane, to
be transferred into such establishments?incurable, harmless, and tran-
quil as they may appear, they would require separate wards, and sepa-
rate treatment. The inspectors truly add, that " the larger number of
lunatics, the chronic inmates of asylums, although quiet and amenable
under that supervision which asylums are peculiarly calculated to afford,
would assume a very different character, and become dangerous if less
systematically attended to." Experience sufficiently proves this to bo
the fact. The tranquil behaviour of a lunatic in an asylum is no
criterion of what his conduct may be when released from a supervision
of which he is habitually conscious, and which silently imposes upon
him the necessity of self-restraint. A lunatic asylum, if it is to be con-
ducted properly, must be an establishment per se; and the notion of
conjoining it either with a gaol or a workhouse ought never for a
moment to be entertained. Innumerable arguments?and those of the
most cogent description?might be urged against such a proposition.
It is unnecessary, however, at present to enter upon this discussion, as
the inspectors state that they do not feel in a position at present to
make any definite recommendation, and propose, therefore, instituting
further inquiries on the subject. The result, we anticipate, will be
fatal to a project which no pecuniary theory of economy can justify ;?
the wing of an asylum stretching out from the body of a gaol, or
* Vol. v., p. 526.

abutting from the side of an Elizabethan workhouse (the fashionable
architecture at present of pauper buildings), would certainly have an
anomalous aspect!

It is gratifying to observe that the sanitary state of the district
asylums in Ireland has during the past year been favourable ; and wo
are glad to recognise a tone of liberality in the Report respecting the
dietary and domestic arrangements, the expediency of which experience
has amply confirmed. We have much satisfaction in transcribing the
following very judicious remarks:?

" As disease of the mind is so frequently found to be associated with
physical debility, and not unfrequently arising therefrom, the impor-
tance of a well-regulated and generous diet needs no comment. We
are happy to state that ameliorations in this respect are being effected.
At the Richmond or Metropolitan Asylum, on a report from the phy-
sicians, animal food has been allowed either in a solid form with vege-
tables, or made into a nutritious soup, six times a week; whilst in
other establishments, if not as liberally supplied, improvements in the
general dietary have been made. The various boards of governors?
though perhaps in some instances not to the extent we could wish?
are still anxious to ameliorate, in regard to domestic comforts, the con-
dition of the insane poor, and to act consistently with the public trust
committed to them in a liberal manner towards the various officers and
servants belonging to their respective asylums : hence, within the last
two years in many instances, when we consider the scale of salaries and
wages to be disproportionate to the duties entailed on the recipients, an
increase of pay has been willingly accorded."

This really is only just; " the labourer is worthy of his hire." There
is no position in life, no description of servitude, attended with so many
anxieties and responsibilities as devolve upon officers of all grades who
are resident in lunatic asylums; and, speaking generally, we have no
hesitation in saying they are very much underpaid. The inspectors have
favoured us in their appendix with the following table, which, com-
pared with the one we have already given showing the amount of
salaries given to the officers belonging to the county asylums of Eng-
land, will be interesting. Being official, it is more complete than the
one Ave were at the pains of drawing up, inasmuch as it presents us
with the names of the respective office-bearers;?
Return, showing the JSrames and Salaries of the principal Officers of District Lunatic Asylums
in Ireland, 31s? March, 1853.

VISITING PHYSICIAN'S.
RESIDENT PHYSICIAN
AND MANAGERS.
PROTESTANT CHAPLAINS.
ROMAN CATHOLIC.
APOTHECARIES.
CLERKS AND STORE-
KEEPERS.
Armagh .
Ballinasloe
Belfast
Carlow
?
Thos. Cumming, m.d. 100
Fred. Thornton, m.d. . 125
Ily. M'Cormac, m.d. . 100
Thos. O'Meara, m.d. . 100
Clonmel . . j Wm, Jas. Shiell, m.d. 100
Cork . . . S. Hobart, m.d. . . 100
Killarney . . W. W. Murphy, m.d. 100
Kilkenny . . 1 L. E. Kinchela, m.d. . 100
D. O'Callaghan, m.d. . 150
Limerick
Londonderry
Maryborough
Richmond .-
Waterford .
Omagh . .
Sligo . . .
Mullingar
F. Eogan, m.d . . . 100
John Jacob, M.D. . . 100
J. Mollan, m.d. <?168 9 4
B. Tuohill, m.d. 168 9 4
J. Banks, m.d., phy-
sician extraordinary,
acting without salary
John Hughes, Surg. . 100
W. ConoOy, m.d. . . 100
Hy. Thompson, m.d. . 100
Wm. Little, m.d. . . 100
Jos. Ferguson, m.d. . 100
?
Thomas Jackson , 200
John M'Kiernan. 200
E. Stewart, m.d. . 275
M. E. White, m.d. 260
James Flynn, m.d. 260
Thos. Power, m.d. 430
M. S. Lawlor, m.d. 260
Jos. Laylor, m.d. 260
E. Fitzgerald, m.d. 260
D. Cluff ... 200
T. C. Burton, m.d. 250
j" Samuel Wrigley 250
John Dobbs . . 200
J. F. West, m.d. . 260
J. M'Munn, m.d. 260
II. Berkeley, m.d. 260
?
Matil. Jackson 50
M. A. Callan . 60
M. F. Stewart 75
L. Parsons. .100
Ellen Crofton. 73
M. Merrick . CO
M. Smith, as-
sistant m. . 50
M. A. Falvey . 75
Joanna Eyan . 75
M. A. Sleeman 70
E. Cluff. . . 50
E. Abbott . . 85
C. Wrigley . 80
K. Eonayne . 70
H. Hudson . 75
Margt. Benson 75
Deborah Long 75
Not yet appointed . ?
Eev. J. C. Walker . 10
(Kev. John Carroll . 50
< Eev. Wm. M'Cul-
(. lagh, Pres. . . 50
Eev. Fred. F. Trench 25
Eev. W. Palliser . . 30
Eev. C. W. Clifford 50
Eev. G. S. Green. . 25
Eev. J. Graves . . 30
Eev. B. Jacob ... 50
("Eev. W. Wilson . 25
?J Eev. Dr Denham,
(. Pres 25
Eev. T. Harpur . . 25
Eev. A. Leper . . 50
Eev. E. Bell . . .25
!Eev. Eichard M.
Smith .... 30
Eev. Jos. Mitchell,
Pres 30
Eev. Edward Day . 30
Not yet appointed . ?
Not yet appointed.?
Eev. L. Dillon . 40
Eev. Patrick \
j Fagan . . 50 j
( Eev. D. M'Car- ")
I thy . . . 25 j
Eev. P. O'Neill . 35
/Eev.M.O'Sul- \
<. livan . . . 50 j
Eev. D. Cotter . 50
Eev. N. Kealy . 35
Eev. L. Bunton. 50
Eev.H.Nugent 25
("Eev. N. 0'Con- ")
(. nor . . . 25 j
Eev. J. Falkner. 50
Eev. P. Wall . 25
?Eev. D. O'Do-
f gherty . . 30 J
Not yet appointed.
Not yet appointed.
?
Vacant.... ?
J. E. Poyntz. . 30
J. S. Mulholland 50
H. Montgomery 25
E. Grattan . , 30
W. J. Jones . . 25
E. Linnegar . . 30
J. Fitzsimons . 35
J. C. Bouchier . 30
C. Morton , . 30
T. Pilsworth . . 30
P. Beatty ?27 13 8
J. Mackesy . . 30
Francis Traynor 35
John Lougheed. 35
in ljougt
Wm. Midaleton. 35
? s. d
Samuel Parks ,30 0 0
J. E. Maher ,55 0 0
Eobert Lamont 50 0 0
Timothy Brenan 40 0 0
G. O'Neill . . 55 0 0
W. Eennick,
storekeeper 54 12 0
W. Connell,
clerk . . .25 0 0
J. Wallace . .50 0 0
W. O. Flahertie. 50 0 0
J. Bodkin . . 60 0 0
E. Hamerton .30 0 0
J. Vanston . . 40 0 0
/"Clerk and store-
J keeper, vac, 50 0 0
j Accountant,
(. vacant . . 55 7 8
T. Keary. . .50 0 0
John Carson .50 0 0
William Savage 50 0 0
Benj. Barter .50 0 0

By this Return it will be seen that to each of these asylums a visiting
or consulting physician is attached, with a fixed, although nominal,
salary, inasmuch as the amount of each salary is not commensurate
with the status of the physicians, who doubtless regard the appointment
in an honorary light; and we are further happy to observe that the
inspectors enforce the propriety arid expediency of these appointments
by the following very judicious remarks. " Connected with every
asylum"?we here again quote the Report?" is a consulting or visiting
physician, whose services, in addition to those of a medical super-
intendent, may, by many, be deemed uncalled for; but affections of the
mind are so complicated, and the consequences arising from them often
so dangerous and unforeseen, that, though attended with expense, it is a
judicious outlay?for if on any subject there obtains a greater variety of
opinion, it is that on the existence of lunacy in certain parties; conclu-
sions the most adverse being frequently arrived at on the same case by
educated and experienced practitioners, a circumstance almost unknown
in regard to corporeal disease." ? We may udd that this difficulty, this
difference of opinion, is not limited to the medico-legal question of the
existence or non-existence of insanity, but that it constantly arises in
the treatment?medically and morally?of the disease in all its different
stages?during the stage of convalescence not less than during that of
incubation. We have, however, already, in the preceding pages, so fully
argued this question, that we shall not here re-open the discussion;
suffice it to say, that we are much gratified in finding our views so ably
advocated, and practically adopted by the inspectors of lunacy in
Ireland.

While on the subject of officers and attendants, the Report suggests
that a superannuation fund should be annexed to these institutions;
the inspectors- state that they take the opportunity of expressing their
conviction that " it is necessary for the well working of these great
national establishments that a retiring allowance should be secured to
those who have long and efficiently discharged their duties to the public
and to those entrusted to their care within the precincts of an asylum?
a place of all others which unfits a person advanced in years for after
employment. ? At present there is 110 ? superannuation fund whatever,
and tlrus we ai-e occasionally obliged to retain the ineffective services of
individuals who, having no means of support, to fall back upon, it would
be an injustice to supersede." The cogency of this reasoning cannot,
wo apprehend, be challenged. We cordially approve of the suggestion;
and we believe that in the large asylums in Paris the principle is
adopted, and is found to work well. We are, indeed, at a loss as to what
system should be adopted in order to" secure the services of steady,
humane, and intelligent attendants; it is, however, probable, that were
some sucli prospective benefit and provision held out, it would encourage
persons to remain attached for years to such asylums, instead of which
the attendants and domestics arc now constantly changing their places,
which, apart from putting the proprietors to inconvenience, is a great
disadvantage to the patients. A frequent change of nurses and
attendants in asylums is a prodigious evil; the difficulty of finding
eligible persons to hold these situations is universally acknowledged.
A few years ago our own commissioners proposed annexing a Bureau for
such applicants to their office in New-street, Spring-gardens, and
addressed circulars to proprietors and superintendents of licensed houses
requiring a return of the names and characters of discharged attendants;
and a registry office, having a similar object in view, unconnected with
the commissioners, has been opened in London, but the attempts to
organize an improved system for ensuring the engagement of a better
class of persons to fill these situations, have, we fear, hitherto been
attended with little success. The root of the evil lies, we apprehend,
to a considerable extent, in the fact that salaries and wages are, speaking
generally, too small, and that there is no superannuation fund for those
persons to look forward to, who may, in the faithful discharge of their
duties, have grown grey in the public service. The suggestion, there-
fore, of the Inspectors of Lunacy for Ireland, merits serious consideration.
Indeed, our impression is, that the difficulty referred to will be found
an increasing one, now that the shores of Australia have thrown open
golden prospects to the industrious among the working classes. And
the fever of emigration is daily thinning our population. We would
not willingly hazard a gloomy prophecy, but every day's experience
will, we fear, prove the very great difficulty of finding persons willing,
upon any terms, to become nurses, attendants, or servants in lunatic
asylums.

The Report before us next re-opens the quceslio vexata, which was
some years ago discussed and disposed of, respecting the admission of
paying patients into the district asylums of Ireland. Here we are
again at issue with the inspectors. They propose that pauper lunatic
asylums should be open for the reception of private patients belonging
to the middle classes of society?persons in trade, agriculturists, and an
extensive class of the community who, on the one hand, cannot be
placed in the category of paupers, and 011 the other, are devoid of
sufficient means to meet the terms of well regulated licensed houses.
We have elsewhere argued this subject; and can only repeat that the
better classes of society not only object, very naturally, to being
domiciled under the roof of paupers?but that the organization required
lor the management of a pauper lunatic asylum is, in all respects, so
different, as to dietary, domestic arrangements, and general discipline,
from that which we require in private asylums, that the two cannot
well he combined. The evidence which was adduced upon the Com-
mittee of Inquiry presided over by Lord Monteagle, when the whole
question of provision for lunatics in Ireland was entered into, was, we
remember, clearly to the same effect. We cheerfully admit that every
accommodation should be provided for the insane belonging to what
are called the " middle classes of society"?but, at all events, upon this
side of the Channel, there is no want of such establishments, for there
are many licensed houses which receive patients at 12s., 15s., and 20s.
per week; and we apprehend that persons in reduced circumstances
who cannot afford to pay 12s. a week for lodging and maintenance
come literally within the category of paupers. " On one point," says
the Report, " we can pronounce with certainty, that in public establish-
ments, the class in question would be more comfortably located than in
private houses, inasmuch as in the former the stipend being small
would go simply to the support of the lunatic without any derivable
profit to a third party; moreover, large institutions could necessarily
afford a greater amount of comfort and at much cheaper rate." Here
the reasoning of the inspectors is utterly at fault; they are in error
upon the fact to which they refer: it may be true that half a dozen
patients at 12s. a-week would afford no profit to the asylum proprietor,
but numbers may be made to pay even at this low figure. Indeed, we
have no doubt that all the asylums in the metropolitan, and also in
provincial districts, licensed for the reception of pauper as well as
private patients, have derived considerable profit by conducting these
establishments upon liberal principles. Be it also observed that the
inspectors assign no reason whatever for the gratuitous assertion that
patients would be afforded a greater amount of comfort in large
institutions than in small asylums?but, on the contrary, they report
officially their approbation of the manner in which these private
asylums, conducted upon a small scale, are managed. " It is gratifying
to us" (they state) " to be enabled to express ourselves favourably as
to the humane and judicious manner in which these asylums are for
the most part conducted." But this is not all. If the management of
them be in the least defective, the inspectors who have the supervision
of such establishments are themselves to blame. It is upon them the
charge must recoil, for they are responsible that all asylums, large or
small, under their jurisdiction shall be conducted upon proper, humane,
and liberal principles. The total number of private patients confined in
lunatic asylums in Ireland in 1853, amounted only to 423, of whom 245
were males, and 178 females. It is remarkable that in Ireland the pro-
portion of male to female patients is greater in private than in public
asylums, which the inspectors attribute to the circumstance that, in the
more affluent grades of society, men having greater opportunities and
being under less personal control than females, indulge more frequently
in a course of life which leads to the development of insanity. With
respect to the social condition of the inmates in private institutions, we
find that in Ireland, as elsewhere, the numbers of the unmarried insane
exceed the numbers of the married insane, the numbers being 258
unmarried, and 85 married.

Males. Females. Total.
Single . . 199 139 338
Married . 46 39 85
245 178 423

The most interesting portion of the present Report refers to the chap-
laincy question?raised by the circumstance of the governors of the Bel-
fast Asylum being adverse to the introduction of regular chaplains, and
to the performance of public worship in that asylum; and having conse-
quently refused admittance to three clergymen, a Protestant, Presbyterian,
and Roman-catholic, appointed by government. The Belfast governors,
in their memorial on the subject to the Lord-Lieutenant, state that they
are in this dilemma?they have in the Asylum inmates belonging to
seven different persuasions, and they require to know how one chaplain
and one place of worship can satisfy the conscience of them all. The
governors thus reason?" In an asylum" (we quote the memorial)
" where there is but one chaplain, and one persuasion, the judicious
clergyman may be permitted to visit without restriction; he may eon-
verse with them in their ward rooms, and have free intercourse with
them collectively. How different would the case be here. There are
in this house seven religious persuasions, three of them of considerable
number. Are the different persuasions to be separated into different
ward rooms on the visit of each chaplain? Are the chaplains to have
free range of the house and grounds?" The difficulty is a curious one.
Is one chapel to be dedicated to seven different religious persuasions ? or
is each sect to have a chapel of its own? How is one clergyman of the
Established Church to perform service for the Catholic, the Presbyterian,
the Trinitarian, the Unitarian, the Methodist, the Independent, and the
Moravian? "The very fact," say the governors, "of three or four
different kinds of religious services being performed each Sunday by
three or four different clergymen under one roof, would, in a common
sense view of the matter, be calculated to cause no small excitement
even amongst the sane, to say nothing of that community being
composed of insane individuals." What, then, is to be done? The
inspectors answer, that it is not necessary to grant to every persuasion
numerically in any institution a special clergyman, they therefore pro-
pose that a chapel in common shall he erected, where the chaplains may
attend at different hours; and with respect to having a free passage
through the house, they very truly remark, that " a judicious and
sensible chaplain will, it is to he presumed, act with such good taste,
discretion, religious quietude, and gentlemanly hearing, that his visits
will, as at the asylums of Northampton, Surrey, Han well, London-
derry, Cork, &c., he always welcome;" but that "he will, of course,
consult with the physicians as to the ministration of his office in detail."
We remember a few years ago visiting, at Heidelberg, a church divided
in the centre by a partition-wall, and were informed that on the one
side the Lutherans performed divine worship, on the other side the
Moravians; and certainly it struck us, prima facie, an anomaly that two
separate altars for two separate religions should be raised under the
same roof; but we are to consider that upon the great?the funda-
mental principles of the Christian religion, most sectarians are agreed,
and their grounds of dissent do not remove any of them beyond the
pale of Christianity, wherefore it is not as if we should propose to raise
a Christian altar within the precincts of a Mohammedan mosque. We
certainly see no objection to a chapel in common being attached to any
institution where the inmates, though dissenting from each other in
some opinions, are nevertheless agreed upon the great principles of the
Christian faith. In lunatic asylums much discretion is certainly
required in the administration of religious instruction and spiritual
consolation; the patient's mental capacity to receive and understand
what is said to him, and the effect which certain allusions may have
upon excitable dispositions, must be well considered. The chaplain,
however, if an intelligent man, assisted by the advice of the physician,
will, in the exercise of his vocation, soon acquire sufficient tact and
knowledge to direct and guide his ministrations. The late Dr Mil-
lingen used to relate the story of a patient at Hanwell who always
attended divine worship in the chapel of that asylum, and appeared
very devotional. One Sunday, after he had paid great attention to the
sermon, in which he seemed much interested, he was asked what he
thought of it. " Oh," answered the man, " it was an excellent sermon,
and all made so clear." " Well," rejoined the other, " but what was
made clear? What was it all about?" " Why, you know you under-
stood it, replied the lunatic; " it was all about the Emperor of Russia
and the King of Prussia, to be sure!" We are not to conclude
that because a congregation of lunatics are well conducted and
attentive to the service, that they are therefore impressed with religious
feelings and reflections. Many a silent and apparently devout listener
is doubtless pondering upon his own delusions; but then, it may be
argued, that if this happen with the insane, so does it often enough
happen with those who are reputed sane, whose thoughts in church,
particularly under the monotony of a stupid sermon, often wander far
away from the devotional scene around them. But this is no argument
against the performance of divine service in our churches and chapels
on the Sabbath-day, neither ought it to be urged against the pro-
priety of the insane being required to attend Sunday worship in the
chapels annexed to public lunatic asylums. The effect of such service
may, in some cases, be negative; but in others it undoubtedly is
attended with positive good, having a soothing influence and curative
tendency, by exciting the mind to healthy reflections. The inspectors
have, on this subject, well remarked, that a great majority of the
inmates of asylums are chronic cases?perfectly collected and rational
except upon the immediate subject of their delusion. It therefore
appears to them " a moral contradiction to encourage parties in the
perusal of books of literature and amusement?botany, history, che-
mistry, Chamberss Journal, &c.?if they are to be denied, as incom-
petent to benefit thereby, the visitation of regular chaplains, and the
privilege of attending divine worship in places set apart altogether
for sacred purposes."

We cannot conclude this notice without referring to the success
which has attended the establishment of the Central Asylum for the
reception of what are termed "criminal lunatics," at Dundrum, in the
vicinity of Dublin,* which has now for nearly three years been in full
operation. Since the publication of their last Report, the inspectors
inform us that material improvements have been effected in the general
character and appearance of the institution. The land which, on the
occupation of the premises not quite three years since, was in a poor
and comparatively neglected condition, is now tastefully and judiciously
arranged, and looks as if pertaining to a private residence. The por-
tions immediately around the building are laid out in exercise and
pleasure grounds; the garden affords an ample supply of vegetables for
domestic use, and about ten acres are under oats and potatoes, the
manual labour having been altogether performed by the patients.
Besides the out-door labourers, there are some good tradesmen and
mechanics among these " criminal lunatics" usefully engaged, and
perhaps the best and most ingenious of them are those, we are told,
who are occasionally the widest in their delusions and the most dan-
gerous. In the female department, both the insane and the con-
valescent, with few exceptions, industriously occupy themselves under
the superintendence of the matron, and perform the common household
* Vol. v., p. 526, loc. tit., where a full account of the early history of this asylum
will be found.
P P 2

duties of washing, spinning, knitting, mending clothes, &c. The
healthy condition of the institution appears to have been unvaried; no
epidemic or fatal disease is reported to have prevailed, and no accident
from suicide or any incidental cause has taken place. It is observed
that strangers, unless with permission from the proper authorities, are
prohibited from inspecting the institution, which is obviously a very
proper regulation, as many of the inmates, who may be in a con-
valescent state, naturally revolt at the idea of being made objects of
public curiosity. Although the building is not protected by outer
barriers, similar to those of many district asylums, and although the
inmates have the liberty of exercising and employing themselves in the
surrounding ground, which consists of twenty acres, no untoward occur-
rence has arisen, and no escape been effected, which is to be attributed
to the vigilance and assiduous attention of the officers and attendants.
"From the character and construction of the Central Asylum," the
inspectors report, " the cost of the staff is considerably greater than
in ordinary lunatic establishments. In the total absence of mechanical
restraint or coercion of any kind, a full number of attendants is indis-
pensable for the safe custody of the particular classes confined there."
The total number at present in detention amounts to 109, of whom 69
are males, and 40 females; the following return exhibits the offences
they committed, and their mental condition.
General State of the Inmates in the Central Asylum,
on 31s? March, 1853.
Offences. M.
F.
Total.
Mental Condition.
M.
F.
Total.
Homicide \ 32
Violent Assault . . . . j 21
Burglary, Arson, Felony . ! 16
Recovered
Improved.
Insane . .
Total .
69
Total .
40

By this return it will be observed, that of these 109 criminal lunatics,
the offences of whom varied in degree from the perpetration of a mis-
demeanor of petty larceny to the commission of homicide or attempt
to murder, 17 are reported to have improved, and 13 recovered; and a
grave question here arises, how are these recovered persons to be dis-
posed of P There are two points for consideration:?First. The inspectors
state that at the present annual rate of admission, in the course of a few
years, the Dundrum Asylum will be found too limited for the demand,
unless it be relieved by full discharges, or the removal of patients who
may become fatuous and decrepit to their respective district hospitals.
Secondly. Under what circumstances ought a recovered patient to be
liberated ? It is evident that unless the Central Asylum be relieved by
discharges or removals, the number of sane inmates who have recovered
must accumulate, which cannot be otherwise than a great evil. The inspec-
tors therefore state, that on mature consideration of the subject, they are
disposed to think that " were it merely to serve by way of example and
encouragement to good conduct, it would be advisable to occasionally
liberate recovered patients,but not without a minute examination into the
antecedents of each case, and with a scrupulous regard to the feelings
and just prejudices of the public at large." Upon many other grounds
this proposition of the inspectors may be defended, but we at present
must abstain from entering upon this subject; and in closing the
Report before us, we can only repeat, that although much has been
done to provide additional accommodation for, and ameliorate the state
of, the insane poor of Ireland, for which a large debt of gratitude is due
by the country to the inspectors, Messrs. White and Nugent, much
still remains to be effected, which we have no doubt their zeal and per-
severance will eventually accomplish. All public benefactors have
great difficulties to surmount; and those which the inspectors of lunacy
m Ireland still have to contend with, are of no ordinary description.
May success, however, attend their continued philanthropic exertions!
