Table-Turning and Spirit-Rapping
==================================

^ 563
w'
THE PEOXIMATE CAUSE OF INSANITY.
In the thirteenth and fourteenth numbers of The Psychological Journal
we entered very fully into the consideration of a " new theory of
insanity," propounded by Dr. Henry Monro ; but while we admired the
philosophical spirit in which it was conceived and enunciated, and were
especially delighted with the graceful style of the writer, we were com-
pelled to dissent from his conclusions, and even to withhold from him
the praise of originality for the theory itself. In his views of treatment
?in his incidental reflections upon various mental states, and in most
of his moral speculations, we cordially concurred, and felt on closing
his elegant essay that we had been in pleasant communion with an
honest truth-seeker, who fully believed in the originality of his doctrine,
and was influenced by pure motives in publishing them to the world.
The object of the work* before us, is still further to elucidate and
substantiate the same theory, and to claim for the author of the volume,
the merit of having been the first to bring before the world the views
propounded in Dr. Henry Monro's book. We confess that we are not
aware that the theory was distinctly announced by the present author
in his former publications?although enough was stated to establish
inferentially a corresponding idea in the mind of the writer, but in a
manner, as in no way to detract from the claims, such as they are, of
the preceding theorist. We have heretofore shown that the asthenic
character of some forms of insanity had been fully recognised by Hill,
Crichton, and others, and that Dr. Henry Monro differed from these
authors (as indeed does Dr. Davey) only by limiting the disease to one
especial cause, such as deficiency of nervous tone, and in doing so, has,
we conceive, rendered " the theory and opinion unsound, because not
in harmony with all the facts of the case."
There is no difference between the theory of Monro and Davey, and
we have therefore nothing to add to, or subtract from, our former
observations, respecting its merits or truth.
In justice, however, to our own position, we wish to make a few
remarks on an incidental statement in Dr. Davey's essay. The statement
is as follows:?" Throughout the country, psychological journals exist
and enjoy a very respectable position, but are nevertheless without the
first principles of a sound and inductive psychology. The name of Gall
can hardly be found on their closely-printed pages," page 25. The
same statement, or rather opinion, of what only is " sound psychology"
* On the Nature and Proximate Cause of Insanitv. By Dr. Davey. Churchill,
London.
564 THE PROXIMATE CAUSE OF INSANITY.
is expressed in equally strong language in Dr. Davey's former work
" On Mental Pathology:"?" No person, unless he be a phrenologist, that
is, unless he is well acquainted with the functions of the brain in a
state of health (! !) can possibly be a good judge of the indications of
an unsound mind," page 91. Dr. Davey writes in the plural number
respecting the " psychological journals" of this country, but in our own
behalf, we protest against the truth of his statements. The " name of
Gall" is as familiar as a "household word" to the readers of this
journal, and we have endeavoured to put forth whatever is valuable
in his theory, while his anatomical researches have ever received our
Avarmest praise. We are not fanatical followers of any name, however
great, and claim it as our right, and imperative duty, to submit all
theories to a rigid and scrutinizing analysis, and compare them most
carefully with well-observed and established facts. If the conventional
meaning of the term " phrenology" be departed from, and the word be
made to embrace the large signification modestly assigned to it by Dr.
Davey, and which, we confess, its derivation ((pprjv-Xoyos) would
imply, then have we no cause to complain of his argument; but if the
term embrace only the theory of Grail (craniology), then, the sentence
which we have quoted, short as it is, embraces two arguments wholly
unconnected with each other. It intimates that " phrenology" and
" the functions of the brain" are convertible terms?a dogmatism
against which we protest, as we do to the corollary, that no person can
possibly be " a good judge of the indications of an unsound mind unless
he be well acquainted with the functions of the brain in a state of
health." The functions of the brain are at this moment unknown.
The functions of some parts of the structure are alone understood. A
great portion of this important organ has still its function, or functions,
to be discovered. Does the present state of cerebral "pathology"
support the belief that phrenology reveals the functions of the entire
brain ? The exterior of the brain is mapped out, by Combe, into sixty -
six organs?but what of the huge masses of "grey matter" in the
interior, at the base, and in the inner lateral portions of the cerebral
hemispheres ?
But apart from this anatomical defect, has any anatomist of repute
published a case in which the autopsy revealed cerebral lesion limited
to one of the above topographical regions, and this region according
with the impaired or diseased mental manifestations during life ? For
example, has a defect in the organ of comparison (the mental attribute
which, according to Dr. Conolly, exerts so great an influence in the
production or control of insanity) been discovered by the scalpel in a
sufficient number of cases, to set aside the possibility of coincidence ?
Mr. Lawrance, whose mental bias, early studies, and published writings,
THE PROXIMATE CAUSE OF INSANITY. 565
lead him to adopt the opinions of the Sensational School of Philosophy,
has published no such case, although the brains of all the lunatics who
die at Bethlem Hospital are examined by him. The results of several
hundred examinations have been published, but, in these researches,
we look in vain for any circumscribed or phrenological lesion, or for
any details which will uphold the hypothesis so boldly asserted in the
above paragraphs. If we extend our investigations still further, and
examine the numerous facts recorded by Esquirol, we not only find no
support, but meet with a positive denial of all coincidence between
the morbid lesions of the cerebrum and the theory of phrenology. At
Ivry, Esquirol had a very large collection of skulls, and casts from
the heads of lunatics, and he positively assured the late Dr. Prichard,
that during his long career of observation at the Salpetriere, and at-
Charenton, he had not met anything which supported the above hypo-
thesis ; and that, in short, his whole experience was " entirely adverse
to the doctrines of the phrenologists." " This observation," says
Dr. Prichard, " was made in the presence of Monsieur Mativi6, and
received his assent and confirmation." The experience of Foville, the
late able and observant superintendent of the asylum of St. Yon,
accords with the above; and the opinions of the resident medical
officers at Hanwell, in 1850, were to the same effect. With a strange
inconsistency, the author states, in his "Mental Pathology," that
Dr. Prichard was the first to detect and to describe the form of
disease called moral insanity; and yet, "no person, unless he be a
phrenologist, can possibly be a good judge of the indications of unsound
mind." The illustrious dead are thus libelled as blunderers. Esquirol,
Haslam, Burrows, Pinel, and Prichard, repudiated or disbelieved in
the hypothesis, and no one until now has had the boldness to declare
that they could not 11 possibly'''' [be good judges of the indications of
unsound mind. Jacobi, the talented and experienced physician of the
Seigburg Asylum, belongs to the same list of noble dissentients, and
we may, therefore, as journalists, be well satisfied to be rebuked with
them, as being destitute of " the first principles of a sound psychology."
We do not, however, deny that the phrenological theory is ingenious,
and with certain modifications, deserves the attention of psychologists;
but we hold that Dr. Davey has outstepped the limits of strict induc-
tion, and entered the arena of sheer dogmatism, by upbraiding us, as
destitute " of the first principles of a sound psychology," solely because
we cannot follow him in his enthusiastic admiration of the writings and
labours of Dr. Gall.
But to return briefly to Dr. Davey's theory of insanity, we may
observe that " morbid sensibility," or irritation, are convenient phrases
to use, and most difficult conditions to refute?inasmuch as when in
566 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
existence they admit of no appeal to the senses, no demonstration, and
are regarded by their advocates, as the antecedents of whatever physical
or pathological changes may he detected in the cerebral or other struc-
tures after death. As we stated in reviewing the elegant essay of
Dr. Monro upon the same subject?a low tone of vitality and " irri-
tation" or morbid "sensibility" consequent upon this, may, as a
truism, be accepted as the condition of all disease, but it remains to be
proved, that it is especially the "fons et origo maW in all eases of
mental derangement. The ardent mind of Dr. Davey has impulsively
embraced this theory, because at Hanwell and elsewhere he saw many
patients who recovered rapidly from their respective maladies by a
judicious course of tonic treatment; but a careful perusal of the cases
recited from his practice at Hanwell, Colombo, and Colney Hatch, will
prove to the unbiassed mind that the irritation, or " morbid sensi-
bility" referred to, was in some cases dependent upon derangement of
the digestive organs, and the others, upon an impoverished condition of
the blood. It gives us much pleasure, however, to state, that the
method of treatment inculcated in this little essay is most judicious,
and that the general statements which pervade the work are such as do
honour to the head and heart of the writer.
