Habit? Physiologically Considered
==================================

Original Communications,

A LECTURE DELIVERED MAY 9til, 1S53, AT TIIE BRISTOL LITERARY AND
PHILOSOPHICAL INSTITUTION, BY JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS, 3I.D., CON-
SULTING PHYSICIAN TO THE BRISTOL GENERAL HOSPITAL, ETC., ETC.
I propose on tliis occasion to invite your attention to a class of phe-
nomena, generally designated by tlie word Habit. This word, as you
are aware, is one of various meanings; and yet through them all you
will find a thread of connexion. It denotes that which has been
observed so often in a living organism, that it is regarded as having
something of permanency or constancy in a being which is evermore
liable to change. It. sometimes implies a cause; as when we notice that
a friend has become stout or thin, and our suspicion is put down by the
remark?" Nay, but he is of a full or spare habit,"?which means, that
there is something in his original constitution, whether derived from
inheritance or noted in an early period of his history, which is considered
to be the cause of what has become the ordinary condition of this per-
son's frame as to plumpness or leanness. Or it simply expresses a
mode of action, the final or ultimate explanation of which is simply that
it has occurred so often as to be always looked for. A stamp of per-
manence has been given to what at first might have been regarded as
casual and temporary?that is, begotten of the circumstances under
which it first originated, and to be expected to recur only under like
conditions. This reference to habit as something ultimate or final,
springs from the tendency in the human mind to acquiesce in the cus-
tomary. From the unreasoning peasant, who quietly tells some
traveller, startled by what he conceives to be a foolish or even outrageous
mode of action, that it is the custom,?to the philosopher, who, unable
to discover any more remote antecedent to the chain of sequences under
his survey, says, that such is the natural order of events, the mental
tendency is the same. A thing familiar is customary, and what is cus-
tomary is acquiesced in. Nay, there is a tendency to imitate it
passively. And what was an individual trick or habit, becomes a
fashion or social convention.
Habit is sometimes used in a more vague signification, as when we
HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 881
speak of the habits of animals or their customary actions, and when it
would be more correct to say, instinctive actions. But in this case, the
habits are referred to as the effects of the instincts. And if the phrase
" Instincts and Habits" of animals be used, it is intended to distinguish
that mysterious principle called instinct, from the action which it
prompts. Not, however, that habit in its strict sense may not be pre-
dicated of the lower animals; for as they are the subjects of volition
and reasoning processes to a certain extent, so also they may be sub-
ject to habit.
It is not uncommon also, to speak of the habits of nations or races,
meaning thereby, such modes of life and action as are usual to them.
Perhaps in all the senses of the word, Ave shall find a connexion Avith
its etymology, and that it bears reference to something Avliich has been
held {habitus), retained after being acquired; something added to the
individual, and henceforth always associated Avitli him. Again; dress is a
habit, and coutume passes into costume. But Ave have to treat of habit
in a more restricted sense, or as I have expressed it in the title to this
lecture?Habit physiologically considered." As physiology is the
science which treats of A'ital actions, so we haA'e to investigate habit Avith
reference to these, or at least to some of them. We shall consider it in
reference to those which constitute the life of relations in man?those
functions which place him in relation Avitli the outAvard Avorld?sensa-
tion, motion, and thought. But Avliile each of these heads Avill have
some discussion, the greater part of our survey will be devoted to habit
in relation to motion.
Some of the most curious examples of actions resulting from habit
are to be found among those Avhich Ave generally associate in our minds
with the prosecution of some purpose, the relief of some feeling, the ex-
pression of some emotion, and yet in these cases there is no such final
cause discernible. " Why does Mr. Thunderton speak so loudly and
angrily? does the occasion call for it?" "Oh, that's his Avay?it is a
habit he has got." " What does Mr. Scrutator find so very remarkable
in us? Do you see Iioav he fixes his eyes upon us?" "Oh! that's
nothing?he always does so?it is his habit." " Don't you pity that
poor gentleman? he is obliged to cough between every clause of his
sentences." " Oh, no, he is quite Avell. We call it his interjectional or
ejaculatory cough; and ATery expressive it is, like that of one of the
fictitional characters of the day; it is a habit he has fallen into." " That
person must surely b'e \'ery umvell?very giddy.?See Iioav he SAvays
about in his Avalk?he Avill surely fall." " Oh ! no,?he always Avalks
in that way?lie got the habit early in life." "What is that gentle-
man in search of? Do you see Iioav he examines everything on
the table and mantle piece? What is he looking for?" "That
shows you don't know him! We never notice it. He has had
that habit as long as Ave have knoAvn him, many years ago." These
cases might be multiplied indefinitely. In each you observe that an
action Avhich appears to a stranger to be generated by a particular
occasion or circumstance, is by one familiar with the subject of it ex-
plained, and seemingly quite to his satisfaction, as being an habitual eccen-
tricity. That action, or manner, or mode of expression Avhich strikes
IsO. XXIII,
382 HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
us as odd and exceptional, lias in the observation of others occurred so
frequently as to be considered necessary to the individual, the result of
liis acquired bodily or mental constitution. It is, in common phrase,
" second nature,"?habit.
We are not, however, about to spend much time upon these abnormal
instances. For in the category of Habit must be placed a great number
of our most ordinary and familiar actions. Such are those actions
which have become secondarily instinctive, or automatic;?those
wonderful acquirements which we call standing, walking, running,
grasping and handling, speech and talking, and those less universal but
still not uncommon accomplishments of swimming, climbing, dancing?
all the manual arts or handicrafts, and the fine or cestlietical arts;?all
these belong to habit, as a principle of action, no less than do those
actions which we call mechanical, and those aberrant movements which
are designated nervous tricks and fidgets.
Habit in Relation to Motion.
The function of muscles is, as you are aware, to move some part or
the whole of the body, or to impress some motion on surrounding
objects. A muscle is a bundle of fibres, which, in shortening them-
selves, bring their two ends nearer to each other. For various reasons,
which Ave have not time to consider, several muscles act together in
effecting particular movements. It is obvious, therefore, that they must
act harmoniously, and to effect this they are under the governance of a
central impulse. The muscular fibres are called into action by motor
nerves, and the impulses in these several motor nerves are associated
or derive a unity of origin from a nervous centre, as it is called, a part
which receives an impression or imparts an impidse. Within the com-
pass of the spinal cord and the brain, an immense number of these
centres or ganglia are congregated, and so closely packed together as to
seem to be one substance.
Some movements in the body are unaccompanied by sensation, and
not instigated by the will;?these are often called the involuntary, and
sometimes, instinctive movements. All the mechanism consists in the
transmission of an impression by an afferent nerve to the ganglion
which originates an impulse in the motor nerve. These movements
may occur in an animal deprived of consciousness, or the susceptibility
of feeling, as well as in one possessed of it. Thus, suppose the spine
of a frog has been cut across the middle, if you pinch the extremity of
one of the hinder limbs, the whole limb will be retracted. We are
constantly the subjects of many such actions ; one of the most striking-
examples is the series of muscular actions employed in breathing?a
wonderful congeries of muscles which open the aperture of the wind-
pipe, expand the chest, and so admit the fresh air, and afterwards expel
the air which has yielded its oxygen to the wants of the blood; all
these are put into action by afferent nerves, which convey an impression
to the central respiratory ganglion, which sets in motion the requisite
muscles. These movements are often accompanied by sensation, and
may be altered, to a certain extent, by the will; but .they are quite
.capable of going on, and in the healthy state they always do go on,
HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 383
without the one or the other, as we know at the present moment-
Were other proof needed, it would be enough to observe the breathing
in a person profoundly asleep or rendered insensible by disease, or in an
animal deprived of those parts of the nervous system which minister to
sensation and volition. This class of automatic movements has been
called of late years reflex, or excito-motor.
There is another set of movements which are prompted by sensation,
and are yet independent of the will. They are designated by some
physiologists as consensual. Dr. Carpenter uses the term sensori-
motor. I shall employ the term sensational; and, further, I think it
desirable to discriminate these movements into two subdivisions?the
subjectively sensational, and the objectively sensational. Now what do
we mean by subjective sensations as distinguished from objective? An
objective sensation is one that gives us information of something in the
outward world, something that does not involve our consciousness or
remind us of our own individual existence. I see a green meadow, or
hear the song of a bird, or smell the fragrance of a flower, without my
mind being cognizant of anything but the objects which have excited
the sensations of vision, hearing, and smell. These, then, are objective
sensations. The subjective are those in which the consciousness is in-
volved, the ego, the individual self, partially or exclusively. I touch a cold
marble: while I recognise the marble as the cause of my feeling, and
attribute to it a certain quality which gives me the feeling, my con-
sciousness, or an affection of me, myself, as the subject of the
outward operation, forms a part of the sensation. But this is a
mixed example, and might be called an objective-subjective sensation.
Take another example:?I feel ill. I do not know what is the matter
with me,?I have no pain. I am surrounded by pleasant objects, and
within reach of everything likely to make me happy; but I feel ill.
This is an intensely subjective sensation. Take one more example:?
I have a headache, i. e., I feel pain and I refer the pain to my head.
This is a mixed sensation;?it is subjective so far as the feeling of pain
implicates the ego; it is objective with reference to the seat of the pain;
that is, the part of the outer world constituted by the body. It may
seem strange to talk of a person's own body as being external to his
conscious identity. But if you consider the matter fully, you will find
that the knowledge of our bodily organs is an acquirement, and not a
part of the feeling of personal consciousness. A young child suffering
pain in some part of the body, is often quite incapable of saying where
the pain is seated. In disturbed states of mind, the separateness of
subject and object is very well shown with reference to these bodily
feelings. I have known a person in delirium say to a bystander, " You
have a dreadful headache, sir." lie was the sufferer, but his morbid
intellect linked the pain with the image of the person before him,
instead of with his own body.
. These sensations may then, I have said, Avhetlier subjective or ob-
jective, have motions immediately related to them ; responding to
them, as directly as those which are instigated by the will?often coin-
cident with, and controllable by the will?but still having a causation
of their own.
E E 2
384 HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
As an example of subjectively sensational motions I may adduce
the act of coughing. A tickling sensation is felt in the wind-pipe ; a
series of muscular actions ensue, vehemently forcing the air out of the
chest, and often not to he restrained or prevented by the will. Winking
the eyes is another example. The movements which preserve the
equilibrium of the body are mainly prompted and guided by subjective
sensations, with but little and often no assistance from voluntary
efforts. This governing feeling of equilibrium is directly related with
pressure on the nerves of the feet, or whatever parts are supporting the
rest of the body. If that compression be removed, giddiness, or a
feeling of loss of balance is the result; and in an instant such muscles
are thrown into action as tend to restore the equilibrium.
Of the objectively sensational movements, no instances are more
striking than those which are associated with vision. Close one eye of
an infant, and mark the movement of the eyeball as you shift the light
before it?then let both be exposed, and see the admirable concert of
action between them?and when you are acquainted with the muscles
and their nerves that effect these movements, how nicely they are
adjusted and balanced against each other, and with what delicacy they
mutually respond, your admiration is great indeed. Though these
actions are thus immediately related with vision, they may be, and
very frequently are, the servants of our will, as when they fulfil our
wish of looking in particular directions, or at different objects. But,
in these cases, motion does not enter into our consciousness. The
object of our desire is the sight of something. We will the seeing of
it?that is, we look at it, inspect, examine it, &c., but we are uncon-
scious that, in order to this, certain movements of the visual organ
must take place. Here then is a palpable distinction between this class
of movements and the voluntary : for in the latter, whether we know
anything or not of the muscular instrumentality, Ave are conscious that
our wish is to be executed by a movement either of the whole, or of a
part of our frame.
It is in this group of sensational motions that our actions are most
closely analogous to those which subserve the instincts of animals.
They are as blind, that is, as dependent on motives involving no fore-
sight, no prearrangement of our own. They are as perfect?for Ave
neither learn them nor teach them?they are the Avorks of an art
unteachable, untaught?and they Avere as complete in our first parent,
Avlien his eyes feasted on the natural glories of Eden, as in his latest
descendant, inspecting the Avonders of art in the Crystal Palace.
Another class of movements are those Avhich give outward expression
to the emotions. These also occur Avithout any intention or volition,
whether they consist in the play of the features, or in the gestures of
the limbs; joy, soitoav, anger, complacency, fear, courage, confidence,
distrust, speak in the quick turns and ever-shifting hues of the eyes, in
the A'arying surface ot the cheek, in the expansile nostril, the flexile
lip, and the smooth or knitted broAV. To this head also belong those
vocal movements Avhicli giAre utterance to particular feelings, and are
common to all ages of the human being, and to all animals possessed of
vocal organs. The scream of pain, the shriek of terror, the sigh of
HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 3S5
grief, the yell of resentment, tlie shout of joy, are the instantaneous
productions of these passions. The emotions which approach nearer
to intellectual conditions are also related with actions altogether invo-
luntary. Such are the perceptions of the beautiful, the sublime, the
wonderful, and the ludicrous.
These emotional movements are interesting in a point which has not
received much attention. The feelings prompt the movements ; but it
is no less true that the movements excite the feelings. And this, I
think, is the key to some of those curious phenomena, often thrown
into the vague category of sympathy. A sudden panic in a multitude,
a burst of enthusiasm, will spread like lightning. The individuals look
round and see countenances and gestures expressive of a particular
emotion, of which, in the very process, they themselves become the sub-
jects. But you may say this is nothing but the instinctive reading
of nature's language of gestures and featural expression. The best
instance is in those anomalous states of the nervous system, observed in
persons subjected to mesmeric processes. Here the individual partially
asleep, and with his will in abeyance, is at the mercy of any association
suggested from without : close his fists and put his arms in a menacing
attitude, and the emotions related with such movements are excited.*
Passive imitation comprehends movements very analogous. Yawning is
the expression of weariness. The sight of yawning engenders the
related feeling, and our own muscles answer to it.
Our next class of movements would be those which are directly
prompted (still without volition) by ideas; meaning by this term,
remembered sensations and thoughts, as distinguished from those
objects of consciousness which are immediately brought from the outer
world. But as the best illustrations are derived from the group of
allied movements which we shall have to consider as pertaining more
particularly to the topics of this lecture?that_ is, the secondarily
ideagenous?I shall not now adduce them. (T must content myself
with remarking, that in various kinds of passive imitation we have
specimens both of sensational and of ideagenous movements. You
know how readily some persons contract a particular tone of voice from
association with others. Now as the individuals often wish to avoid the
infection, and yet do not escape it, the imitation is clearly passive and
mechanical?the vocal movements which give the particular tone
respond instinctively to the sound which has been so often im-
pressed on the ear. But take a case of unintentional mimicry: you must
have observed that when any one is relating an anecdote respecting the
sayings or doings of an individual who has marked personal pecu-
liarities, the narrator's face, tones of voice, and gestures, will represent
the individual, though the operator has no intention of so taking him off
(as the phrase goes). The idea of the individual is so vividly before him,
* The explanation of some of those strange mesmeric phenomena is admirably set
forth in Dr. Carpenter's " Human Physiology." The chapter on the Physiology of the
J>e\v System in the last edition, abounds in views highly original, and stated and illus-
trated with wonderful perspicuity and affluence. The members of this Institution
should be proud of this production of one to whose voice these walls have so often
echoed.
38G HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
that he cannot help this imitation; and consequently liis vocal muscles,
i those of featural expression, and those which govern the gestures, the
! gait, carriage, and demeanour?all obey the mental impression, without
the intervention of any volitional action.
Let us now inquire into the distinction between automatic and voli-
tional action. We have seen that in the several groups comprehended
under the former, motion succeeds to impressions, without sensation or
with sensation, to emotions, and to ideas ; but that thei*e is no indication
in any of these instances of the self, the conscious ego, being the
originator of the movements. The common statement is, that we will
the action of certain muscles or groups of muscles, in order to execute
our purposes. But this is an incorrect statement; for it is obvious
that in childhood, and indeed at all ages, unless Ave have learned
anatomy, we know nothing about the mechanism whereby we move our
limbs. Nay, after Ave have acquired such knoAvledge, Ave cannot make
use of it in the manner supposed. I cannot, by an effort of my Avill,
cause the contraction of that muscle Avhich is the chief agent in bending
the elboAV?yet that muscle may, in morbid spasm, be throAvn into
single and separate action. But, will the bending of the arm, and it is
done. In many of Avhat Ave call voluntary movements, Ave do not
even will the action of particular limbs. Thus, in learning to AAralk,
the infant has no notion of limbs, of planting the foot on the ground,
keeping one leg stiff, rotating the body on the hip-joint, &c. It only
wishes to move to some place or person in vieAv. The motions ensue
ujion the desire, guided by the subjective sensations of equilibrium, and
by the objective sensations of vision.
The more we consider the subject, the more plain will it appear that
the exercise of volition consists in maintaining an association between
certain ideas, sensations, and motions ; the individual self being con-
scious of its relation as the cause of those actions, and of its power to
increase, or lessen, or interrupt, or arrest them. If Ave Avish to analyse
the process in any given case, Ave must be careful, for reasons Avhich
will soon appear, to select one that is not an habitual or mechanical
action. In learning to play upon a musical instrument, there are many
movements to be acquired Avhich are quite new, and Avould, perhaps,
never be required at any other conjuncture in our lives. Or to take a
less uncommon case. You have to lift the third finger alone, Avhile the
others are kept flat on the keys of the piano. The master tells you to
practise it,?and Avhat do you do in practising it1? You keep your mind
on the end in A-iew,?the raising this finger so reluctant to act alone,
vehemently desiring to be successful, and sooner or later, if you are free
from any physical defect, your ambition is realized. This little achieve-
ment seems a simple affair, but it is really rather a complex one. It is
not the mere lifting of the finger, it is keeping the other two doAvn; for
tlie^ finger in question is raised by a muscle Avitli tripartite tendon, of
which two divisions go to the second and third fingers, and therefore the
tendency is for all three to move together Avhen the muscle is set in
actiou. To prevent this, the muscles that place the first tAvo fingers are
put into action so as to antagonize the extensor and keep them down,
while the action of that extensor is allowed to tell on the third only.
HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 887
But of all this tlie successful young lady is unconscious. She has only,
hy diligent application of her mind, kept the objcct steadily in view,
and a wonderful association of muscles lias done her bidding, she is un-
conscious how; she knows no more of the process than if she had called
to her aid some of the fairies or genii of her nursery fables.
The process in volitional movement is well illustrated by what takes
place in imitating an instinctive action?as in acting or forcing a cough.
We conceive the idea of the act of coughing with the will of producing
the act and this follows with more or less success according to the
vividness of the conception, and the readiness with which in the indi-
vidual ideagenous motions follow the idea. In one who has histrionic
genius, there is, besides the higher mental faculties, a quickness of
response in the muscles to the ideas in the mind, as well as to tlie emotions.
But perhaps this subject may be further elucidated by considering
what takes place in volitional efforts of thought. Much of our thinking
is done mechanically?automatically?one thought suggesting another
hy the laws of casual association. But what is implied in such phrases as
mental effort, application, undivided attention, painful abstraction of
thought? There is a close analogy between this process and muscular
exertion. They are analogous in the circumstance that they for the time
engross our consciousness, that we feel a strain, an exertion, which, but
for some ulterior object, we should be inclined to relax, and that, after
it is over, we may be conscious of fatigue or exhaustion.
If you watch a child who, under the stimulus of emulation, or the
fear of punishment, has been laboriously conning a task but just within
the reach of its faculties, you may mark in the countenance, the skin,
the pulse, the whole demeanour, effects like those produced by excess of
bodily exercise. In both cases there has been an undue consumption
of force. Wherein consists this mental labour ? It is the forcible
bringing together and keeping together ideas or signs of ideas, which
have no natural tendency to cohere, or are not helped to cohere, by any
other process than volitional effort. Take the instance of a child's
committing to memory a rule of grammar, the meaning of which is
altogether dark to him. I remember one, who before he was five
years old, sat down to learn off the Latin Accidence (prompted by am-
bition?an elder sister having just been initiated into its mysteries),
and he worked away at that luminous sentence?" A noun is the name
of whatsoever thing or being we see or discourse of." Plain as this
seems to us, it was to him only a series of words which had to be im-
pressed on his mind, and remembered in the order in which they
followed each other. And how did he achieve this wonderful acquire-
ment? He read them over and over again?sometimes in silence?and
then those cabalistic verbal signs were associated as visual remem-
brances. He read them aloud, and certain tones were associated with
them,?reproductive of each other. The words contracted relationship,
not only with the part of the page on which they stood, but with the
part of the room where he sat, with the furniture near him, and with
the emotions of which he was the subject, as hope and fear fluctuated in
his anxious ambitious bosom.
At last the lesson was learned j that is, the words would come back
388 HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
into tlie mind in the series in which they had been seen in the book.
They were no longer held together by mere sight and volitional atten-
tion, but the occurrence of the first brought the second, and the second
the third, because they had now very often co-existed, or proximally
succeeded each other; and they had come to be associated with the
images of other visual things, the recurrence of which was easy, by
virtue of the liveliness of the original impressions.
To attend, or perform the mental act of attention, is to keep before
the consciousness, by an effort of the will, particular impressions or
trains of thought, or muscular actions. As to sensation, impressions
excite the consciousness, and become sensations when the consciousness
is not too closely associated with some other impressions or thoughts,
or when they are new or very vivid. It seems to be a law, that con-
sciousness does not link itself with any impression frequently repeated,
unless it be accompanied by a feeling of pleasure or pain, or associated
with some strong emotion, or with a train of thought associated with
such emotion, (in common language, some interesting subject). The
first time }tou sit down in a room close to a railway, and hear the roar-
ing of a train, you think that it will arrest your attention every time it
occurs, but when the novelty has ceased, you cease to hear it. It is not
associated with any emotion or interesting series of thought; it is the
passing of a train and nothing more. Or suppose you are at a dinner
party. There is an incessant clatter of knives and forks and changing
dishes, tramp of servants, and hubbub of voices, and yet you hear
nothing but the words of your friend beside you, who is engaging you
in some interesting dialogue. The consciousness at that time coheres
to your friend's speech, fastened by the attractive force of present emo-
tions, and is not to be torn from it by mere sensory impressions, unless
these come reinforced by the divellent affinities of stronger emotions,
or unless a voice pitched in a higher key than the confused Babel
around you compels attention by its novelty. But the laborious action
of the will in attention consists in enforcing a coherence between the
consciousness and certain objects which are not bound to it by emo-
tional interest.
But if there be labour or difficulty in this volitional effort, there is
still more in that which has for its object the conjunction of past sen-
sations or ideas, to the exclusion of the objects of sense. Suppose a
young person shut up in a room and set to write down his notion of
the character of Alexander of Macedon, and suppose, if it be possible,
that the youth has never taken any interest in that magnificent hero?
to measure the efforts he has to make you must consider what objects
would be most likely to present themselves to his consciousness were he
not to endeavour to control his thoughts. The things in the room,
furniture, prints, ?fec., or should there be nothing of interest within,
then the view from the window;?escaped from these temptations he has
to resist the attractions of memory, some sport, or entertainment, or
curious book, or some prospective pleasure. He has to keep before his
consciousness the image of Alexander, and all the cluster of actions and
sayings associated with that idea through books, lectures, &c. No dif-
ficult task; but he has to arrange and parcel these recollections in con-
HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 389
nexion with certain qualities of Alexander's mind, and clotlie tliem in
appropriate language. These connexions are not so spontaneous as
the others, and require more volitional effort.
The effort in recollection consists in detaining before the conscious-
ness some idea about which the wished for ideas will cluster by associa-
tion. "We cannot will their reproduction immediately, for, were they
objects of volition, they would already be in the presence of the mind, and
therefore need no summons. Do I wish to remember the name of some
person whose image is in my mind's eye 1 I keep it there?my
thoughts about him take the forms of place and time?each of these
bringing a large cluster of associations?to some one or more of which
the name so adheres that it at last is presented to my consciousness.
There is a great difference in the facility with which ideas are pre-
sented to the consciousness and that by which they are detained.
Conjunction between ideas and the consciousness, is greatly assisted by
the emotions. An illustration will bring this before you immediately.
The first time you gathered a violet you were in company with a friend.
Long years afterwards you come into a room perfumed with violets
which you do not see. The fragrance recalls the flower, its size, colour,
form, etc. Those perceptions coexisted in the first instance. The pre-*
sence of one has recalled the rest by the mere law of coexistence. The
same law brings before your mind at the same time the friend who was
with you; but he is associated with so many emotions that his image
remains long after the violets and their perfume have faded from your
sense and memory. Nay, you are so occupied with those remembrances
that you may fall into a fit of abstraction, that is, be unconscious of
anything but the ideas and sentiments which have thus been summoned
to your consciousness. Thus you see the ideas and remembrances asso-
ciated with emotions are not only before the consciousness, but are
detained there; while those remembered sensations which had no other
connexion than that of coexistence and succession, passed away as soon
as they appeared.
These remarks on attention will enable us to return to volitional mo-
tion. The will compels a conjunction between the idea of the move-
ment to be executed and our consciousness. To the idea of the move-
ment, conjoined with the wish to execute it, the nervo-muscular appa-
ratus responds sooner or later, if it be within the compass of our
organization. The action is much aided by the senses, and, in some
cases, particularly by the muscular-sense. Indeed there is no volun-
tary action of which sensation does not form a link in the series of
events. This is well seen in the act of prehension. In grasping a ball
for the first time, my fingers obey my wish to close upon it. The
degree of force with which they will close depends 011 the sensation
which the ball gives to the nerves of touch, and the feeling of resistance
afforded by the muscular sense,?that is, the nerves of sensation in the
muscles. To hold the ball in my hand, I must either keep my atten-
tion fixed 011 the action, or the nerves of sensation must maintain the
muscular action. If these nerves be paralysed, the action must be
guided by the attention and by sight. The following case, related by
Sir Charles Bell, is a good example:
390 HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
" A mother, while nursing her infant, was seized with a paralysis,
attended with the loss of muscular power on one side of her body, and
the loss of sensibility on the other. The surprising and, indeed, the
alarming circumstance here was, that she could hold her child to her
bosom with the arm which retained muscular power, only so long as
she looked at the infant. If surrounding objects withdrew her attention
from the state of her arm, the flexor muscles gradually relaxed, and the
child was in danger of falling."?Bell on the Iland, p. 244.
T- These consensual changes have something secondarily automatic or k
reflex in their character, for although when I fix my attention on the
action, I am conscious of a sensation; yet when I am occupied with >
other subjects, as in talking, I have not the sensations, and yet the
nerves of sensation are acting in concert with the nerves of motion,
and maintaining the action. The sensational has been converted into
a reflex action.
Next Ave may notice the connexion between volitional action and
sensation in the process of speaking or singing. We need not go back
to babyhood, though the study of it is most interesting; but we will tax
our mature consciousness for the supply of information on this subject.
I am learning a new language. I wish to acquire the pronunciation of a
new sound?say a German guttural. It is a volitional effort. I hear
the sound?I fix my consciousness upon it; my vocal muscles, after a
few trials, produce it. After a time no effort of volition is needful. *
Certain letters associated with the first hearing of the sound suggest the
idea of the sound, and this the muscular action. The action of the
muscles of the voice clearly, then, belongs to the sensational group.
Strictly volitional movements are those which are objects of mental
attention, combined with the wish to execute them, and which are not
performed but under such circumstances. They are thus distinguished
from actions which, though coinciding with, and controllable by our
will, are originated and maintained by processes independent of this
mental principle.
We have now to inquire how these volitional movements, after a
time, pass into the category of instinctive or automatic actions. In
fact Ave are entering the domain of Habit?a field Avhich, though appro-
priated especially to this discourse, Ave have had to approach by a
circuitous and, I fear, tedious avenue.
Habitual motions are those which have been transmuted from
volitional to instinctive,?Avliich liaAre become secondarily automatic,?
which from having been compounded of will, idea, and sensation, have
become merely sensational, and perhaps, even in some cases, purely
reflex. The ego?the consciousness, Avhich A\Tas the first mover, has
been able to leave the transaction to its subordinate agents, Avhile it is
occupied with other actions, or with sensations and thoughts requiring
its undivided attention. Of these many have been established in early
life. In standing and walking we have examples of complicated series
of muscular actions guided by the sensation of equilibrium, and be-
coming ultimately all but reflex, though originally prompted by the
?will. That the will is originally concerned Ave see, not only by our
observation of children learning- to stand or Avalk, but also in adults in
HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. <S91
whom tlie apparatus lias been weakened by illness or old age, and in
whom tlie mechanism is no longer so self-acting as not to require that
mental attention to the several stages of the process, in which volitional
action consists.
Speech is another of the habitual or secondarily automatic actions.
In this process there is the perception of sound as connected with some
object of sight (as in the naming of a thing) and the wish to imitate
the sound. The action of the vocal muscles is preceded by sensation,
idea, and volition. But after the habit of speaking has been acquired,
it becomes purely sensational or ideagenous without intervening volition,
and is allied to the instincts.
I here take the liberty of quoting from a paper which I pxiblished
many years ago:?
" The articulation of every word was once, perhaps, the result of
effort, a voluntary exertion of the vocal organ to imitate a sound pro-
duced by another. But now it is enough for the word to occur to the
mind, and the pronunciation follows, without any intermediate volition,
merely because the idea and the action have been accustomed to the
relation of antecedence and consequence.
" Again: I may use some word which I not only did not intend, but
which I would much rather have avoided, as it may be personally
offensive to the individual with whom I am conversing. This word, in
all probability, will be found to be similar in sound to that which was
present in my mind, but which was not expressed by my voice. The
word was the product of a certain aggregation or series of vocal move-
ments, which followed some initial movement common to it, and to
that other series which properly belonged to the idea in the mind.
This we conceive to be the meaning of what is commonly called a
lapsus Ungues, and is very different from a malapoprism: the latter is
a mistake of the mindthe former is a mistake of the muscles. A
similar error not unfrequently occurs in writing. A perfect master of
orthography may commit a mistake of this kind; he may write, for
instance, the adverb there, though the pronoun was in his mind, merely
from an irregularity of muscular succession. The tracing of a word on
paper is the result of a particular set of muscular movements; but
words of very different meanings may have very similar sets, and even
initially identical, as in the instance just mentioned; and hence the
mistake arises. We have heard persons say that a bad pen would make
them mis-spell; in such a case, the impediment offered by the pen
causes an irregularity in the succession of the movements. But it may
be asked, how is it that we sometimes utter or write a word no less
dissimilar in sound and in symbolical characters, than foreign to the
subject discoursed of1? The causation in this case is different; the error
exists in the mind, and arises from our being occupied with more than
one series of ideas; in which case an accidental exchange takes place
between the series communicated and that which is retained. To a
person engaged in writing when others are talking around him, the
accident is very likely to happen. Some word makes a particular im-
pression on his mind and diverts him a moment from his previous train
302 HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
of thought; but his muscles continue to act, and follow the impulse of
the word in question, as of any other that passes through his mind, and
germane to the matter in hand.
"From what has been said, then, it is deducible that there are
motions immediately consequent on ideas, in the same manner as others
consequent on sensations and emotions; but we have not arranged the
former in a separate class, because we are not aware of any evidence
that ideas assume the relation of proximate causes to motions, except
under the operation of the general law or principle which we have been
engaged in illustrating, while sensations and emotions, on the contrary,
manifestly produce their appropriate actions, without any reference
whatever either to previous association or succession."?Relations of
Mind and Muscle. TVest of England Journal, 183o.
Such actions as standing, walking, speaking and handling, are the
most primitive arts of life, belonging to man as a species, and con-
templated as essential parts of his active existence, without which,
indeed, he would be wanting in the outward characteristics of humanity.
They correspond to actions which in the lower animals are all but
coeval Avith birth, or which only require the complete development of
the organism rather than any process of education. The young kid
walks 011 the day of its birth. The bird does not fly when just out of
its shell, because its wings are imperfect.
In these primitive arts, then, belonging to the whole race, there is a
more ready and rapid conversion of volition into habit or instinct than
in others, which I now proceed to notice. These are the arts acquired
by long education and practice, and which belong either to individual
man originating them, or to individual man affected by his fellows.
They are the manual, the domestic, the social, and the fine arts. In
all these arts the limbs have to respond to and work out an idea; and
the connexion must be frequently established and repeated by volitional
efforts before the art becomes a habit. And yet we shall see here, again,
the power of habit, and how, when it is more early acquired, it becomes
allied to an instinct or an inspiration.
It is in these arts, indeed, that we may discover some of the most
marked examples of habit,?recurring to that character of the principle
which Ave gave at the onset of this discourse, as the conversion of the
casual or temporary into the fixed or permanent. For as the muscular
.actions have been engendered to meet circumstances Avhicli are not
necessary to the life and endoAvments of the species; in other AArords, to
subserve Avants and answer to ideas Avhicli have arisen under particular
-circumstances or in particular minds, so the conversion of them into
actions that may occur Avithout the maintenance of volitional supervision,
illustrates very strongly the dominion of habit.
Such combinations of muscular actions as are effected in the sleight-
of-hand tricks of a juggler, or in the scarcely less surprising dexterities
of an accomplished player 011 the violin, may never before have tran-
spired, and may never again transpire in any son of Adam, and yet in
that individual they may have been so frequently produced, (i. e., the will
may have so often effected a junction between the idea, the sensations,
and the motions) that the succession is maintained Avithout any mental
/
r
/
habit?physiologically considered. 393
attention. The player may talk to you while his hand is bringing out
the music; one note suggests the next which has so often proximally
succeeded to it, and with it comes the nervo-muscular action according
to the principle of association which we have before adverted to. But
in cases of this kind we may sometimes in our analysis fail to discover
any link formed of an idea or a remembered sensation. Thus, one may
begin to Avhistle without the faintest notion of what tune the muscles
of the mouth and cheek will modulate. The muscular actions aggregate
themselves into combinations and series unprompted by an idea, un-
guided by the will, nay, unsuggested by a sensation (for the motion
precedes the note evolved), and arranged solely by the law of previous
coexistence and proximal succession, repeated an adequate number of
times. They are mechanical, automatic, reflex. ^ Originally, perhaps,
the order of events had been remembered;?musical sounds associated
with certain words. The recurrence of the words brought the sounds,,
to which the vocal movement responded. But now the first movement
sends an impression to the reflex centres, and these maintain the series
independently of the sensational, ideagenous, and volitional centres. It is
like the running off of a musical machine, except that the series may be
deranged at any moment by an idea or emotion or sensation. There-
fore it is most likely to be safe from interruption when the mind is in
that blank condition to which the most sentient, sentimental, and
intellectual are sometimes subject. Therefore there is a physiological
meaning in the old line:?
" He-whistled as lie went for want of thought."
The habitual or secondarily automatic actions bear resemblance to
the primarily automatic in the circumstance that when once established
they are liable to derangement rather than assisted by mental attention.
Fix your mind on the process of breathing, and it becomes laborious
or irregular,?think of the act of swallowing while you are perform-
ing it, as in taking a pill, and the action becomes spasmodic, con-
vulsive, abortive. In like manner if you attend to your walking as you
pass from one side of a drawing-room to another, it is ten to one but
that your gait and carriage will be a series of jerking, swaying, rolling
motions, in short, awkward, constrained, ungraceful. Something in
such cases must be set down to emotional causes, such as the disturbing
influence of anxiety. But from what we remarked before, you may
be prepared to admit that the act of volitional attention is closely allied
to emotional processes. And it will be found that in certain of the
secondarily automatic mental operations, this disturbing influence is still
more easily traceable.
The readiness with which these habitual movements are established I
have already mentioned incidentally, is closely allied to natural aptitude
or talent. It is far beyond dispute, that however great may be the power
of education and practice, yet that men differ immensely from each
other in original capability for particular arts. Men are born artisans
and artists, ^ as well as poets; for the former, whatever may be the
mental requirements, there must, at all events, be an aptness of hand,
a quickness of response in the muscles to the ideas in the mind a
394 HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
readiness for the establishment of those series, and aggregations of
complex co-ordinate movements, which, for their first institution re-
quire the repetition of volitional efforts, hut which in one man require
almost an indefinite number of repetitions, while in another a very few
will suffice to convert them into habits. This, however, (natural dex-
terity) is but the bare mechanical substratum of skill in art. Yet
without it a man cannot excel, though his mental capability for the
higher processes in the art be of transcendent excellence. He may have
the most nimble apprehension, a memory the most retentive and acces-
sible, the most refined and delicate sense of the beautiful, a power of
rapidly combining and abstracting those qualities in natural objects,
which, when reproduced, will faithfully and vividly represent the origi-
nals,?an instinctive knowledge of that subtle symbolism whereby
objects are made to evoke in other minds those sentiments which were
inspired in the artist as he looked on nature, and with all this, a noble
desire to make the astlietical gratification minister to its natural hand-
maids, Virtue and Religion ? he may have all these, and many more
qualities, necessary for the accomplished artist, and yet they may only
serve him for the appreciation of the achievements of others,?not be-
cause he wants " the vision and the faculty divine," but because the
hand is not a defty servant of his thought. But when, indeed, the
hand and the eye and the mind do come together, each with the highest
qualities, compass, quickness, and co-ordination, then we have a Phidias,
a Michael Angelo, a Raffaelle. Many like instances might be adduced;
but I hasten to remark, in connexion with this department of our sub-
ject, what indeed is well known to every one, that for the formation of
many of those habitual co-ordinate actions, nothing is needed but fre-
quency of repetition. They argue no special fitness of organization
(though, indeed, even in them a natural cleverness may be discernible),
and merely instance the power of repetition. Such are the mechanical
processes of every-day life,?the act of writing, the operations of the
toilet, the dinner table, Arc.
? But here the question naturally occurs, why should mere repetition
dispense with volitional exertion? To answer this fully, would require
a long and abstruse discussion. I must content myself with a summary
statement of what seems to me to be the explanation of the fact. The
more the action of an organ is augmented the stronger it becomes, and
its nutrition increases. This is clearly seen in the development of mus-
cles called frequently into play. I would apply this fact by analogy to
the nervous centres. The different nervous centres in the encephalon
communicate with each other by commissural fibres. In volitional
movements, the action of the commissures between the sensational or
ideagenous centres and their related motor centres is excited in the
first instance by the will. But the repetition of more or fewer of these
incitements appears to suffice for the growth and development of the
commissure to a degree of strength and activity adequate to the per-
formance of its functions independently of the will. Thus the volitional
action is converted into a habit.
The anormal habits are curious, and perhaps less easy of analysis.
They are those actions which subserve no apparent purpose, either as
V
I
HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 395
to the functions of the whole system, or to the will, or the emotions, or
the ideas of the individual. What earthly end is answered by biting
the nails, twitching the hair, twirling the thumbs, rubbing the hands,
kicking the heels, and various other singular and all but unaccountable
human actions, which are designated in the vernacular as tricks or
fidgets ? Why should a person under strong emotion, exhibit such
peculiarities of deportment as are attributed to Sir Jacob Kilmansegg on
the morning of his daughter's christening ?
" And Sir Jacob, the father, strutted and bowed,
And smiled to himself and laughed aloud,
To think of his heiress and daughter?
And then in his pockets he made a grope,
And then in the fulness of joy and hope,
Secm'd washing his hands with invisible soap
In imperceptible water."
Why was it that when a certain great statesman in the House of Com-
mons was about to make a signal rhetorical effort, his friends were
advertized of it by his mechanically rattling his watch-chain and seals
for full lialf-an-hour before he rose? Why do little boys, in saying their
lessons, go through sundry mysterious operations of buttoning and un-
buttoning their jackets; and why do gentlemen, earnest in argumenta-
tion, wildly lay hands on the little implements of a neighbouring lady's
work-table, and turn them to strange uses on the adjoining furniture?
There must be a law for facts so common, and all but universal.
I believe that they are referable to two principles?one of them is
the provision made in the nervous system for the concurrence of mus-
cular action with deep thought and strong emotion. Consider how
nearly all the emotions have their natural alliance (in the form of ex-
pression) with certain muscular actions in the features and the limbs, and
how very important these are in the mutual communication of men in
early states of society. Consider also, how often some form of muscular
action goes with thought; and again, how common it is to accompany
speech with gesticulation; and how in the more important acts of life,
thought and motion are going on together. In literary composition,
the action of writing is a natural accompaniment. If a man dictates,
it is ten to one but he will walk about the room while doing so, be-
cause it is natural for some muscular action to accompany profound
thought.
_ But you may say that these considerations do not help us out of the
difficulty. For speech and gesticulation being the accompaniments of
thought and emotion, why should we add such unmeaning muscular
actions as those which have been adverted to? We come then to the
other principle, which is, that the motor centres are apt to elaborate
more force than is required, and which must be disposed of in some
way. Now^ that there is such a thing as nerve-force cannot be
doubted. W e talk of force of attraction, of chemical force, of motive
force, of electric force; and though none of these forces can be pro-
duced as entities, and may be only summary expressions of certain
chains of phenomena considered in their causative order, there is as
much reason lor using the term nerve-force as any of the others. It
89G HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
is that principle or power which, generated in nervous tissue by
virtue of the changes which this substance undergoes in its ultimate
muscular nutrition, (in the higher animals, under the operation of blood-
changes,) stands in the relation of proximate cause to motion, sensation,
and the material ministrations of thought. The common sense or con-
sciousness of mankind, attains to a very near recognition of this power,
when it assigns the buoyant movements of childhood to an excess of
vitality, and when a man says that he feels such a surplus of irritability
or irritation in his system, that he takes active exercise to get rid of it.
"We have seen how the nervous centres are brought into action simul-
taneously and co-ordinately. Now if there be great excitement in one,
(excitement means exalted vital action,) there will, to a certain extent,
be the same in others, more especially in those related. If the emo-
tional centres are strongly excited, there will be a large elaboration of
force in the motor centres, some of which force may be discharged in
the appropriate featural expressions and gestures; but to expend the
whole of it, strange movements and antics will very probably be
performed. To let these have free play is a great relief to many
persons, while to restrain them requires great self-command and
discipline.
In sleep, although the centres of sensation are quiescent, there is
often too much activity in the motional centres, and then the nerve-
force goes off in a variety of irregular muscular actions, such as kicking,
stretching, change of position, tossing oft'the bed-clothes, &c.
In sensation, in motion, and in thought, nerve-force is generated
and consumed. The fatigue, nay the absolute bodily exhaustion, induced
by excess in any of these functions is a proof of it. In persons of the
nervous temperament, there is at all times an amount of nervous energy
produced beyond what is absolutely required for the performance of
the normal functions of the brain. Hence it is in these persons that Ave
see the most striking instances of the tricks which we are now consider-
ing. Very remarkable is the tendency in some children. They wink their
eyes, make strange contortions in their limbs, change their posture, shift
the weight of the body from one foot to the other incessantly when
answering the slightest question, and all from the excess of motor
nerve-force generated concurrently with the little mental excitement.
These movements sometimes occur in particular sets of muscles in pre-
ference to others, and then they are called habits.
But I cannot leave this part of the subject without remarking that
there is good reason for the caution which has often been given, not to
interfere too much with these nervous habits; for they are sometimes
salutary outlets for morbid irritation. I know a young lady who, when
her mind was unusually interested, had a habit of rubbing her fore-
head, and if this were prevented, either by moral or mechanical means,
it seldom failed to induce threatenings of serious disorder in the brain.
There are certain kinds of convulsive seizures which may be con-
sidered as discharges of nerve-force, like those of electric jars, highly
charged. Pardon me for giving you one more practical instance :
There are some persons whose brains, when highly excited, say, by
a public entertainment, or an interesting conversation or argument,
HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 397
-or even by having fallen into some engrossing train of thought, can-
not pass readily into the normal condition. The elaboration of nerve-
force continues. If they retire to rest they cannot sleep ; they go on
thinking, and feeling, and tossing about, or vividly dreaming, when
they ought to be " mere clods of the valley." Now the best thing
to prevent this, is to take active muscular exercise before retiring,
whereby the superabundant force is used up.
Habit, as to Sensation.
On first considering the effects of habit in connexion with sensation,
it would seem to be the reverse of what occurs in connexion with
motion. Habit, instead of increasing, seems to lessen sensation. We
speak of becoming too habituated to things to feel them. The contact
of clothes with our skin is habitually disregarded, though, had the inves-
titure been a new ceremony, we should not be able to forget them for
an instant during the day. We sit in a room reading or talking, while a
time-piece, to the sound of which we are accustomed, strikes the hours
and the quarters, without hearing it. The inhabitants of miserable
tenements in the worst parts of our towns, (where sanitary matters
are neglected to a degree that is a disgrace to civilization, and a dis-
honour to Christianity,) live unconscious of odours, which strike
those who have not been inured to this wretchedness with disgust
and terror. The " common light of day" gives us no subjective
sensation, no feeling in our eyes, unless we have been unusually ex-
cluded from it for a long time, and then it may be blinding.
After considering such facts as these, we remember on the other
hand, that education is known to quicken the senses, that the North
American Indian is said by habit to see and hear sights and sounds
which escape his more civilized brethren; and that the purchaser of
tea can try forty or fifty sample-cups in succession, and make his selec-
tion of the best flavours with unerring accuracy ; and that wine-tasters
can, by practice, attain to the delicacy of discrimination which charac-
terized those notable rivals vouched for by Sancho Panza, of whom,
as you remember, one declared that the wine tasted of iron, and the
other of leather, and each of whom was found to be correct when
the cask had been drained to the bottom: for there lay an old cellar-
key, with a thong attached to it.
These two sets of facts seem at first sight to contradict each other,
but they do not really do so. We have seen that habit in reference to
motion strengthens and gives independent power to a connexion esta-
blished in the first instance by volition. It will be found to be th? same
iu sensation.
What is the process in sensation? An impression is made on a
sentient nerve, and conveyed by it to the sensory ganglia, where it
becomes connected with the Ego, and is then, and not till then, a
sensation.
"W e have already been speaking of attention, and shown that im-
pressions are presented to the consciousness by virtue of their novelty
or vividness, and are detained or dismissed according as they are asso-
ciated or not with emotions, or compulsorily associated by the will. It
NO. XXIII. F F
398 HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
appears to be a law that a repeated impression ceases to become a sen-
sation when its novelty ceases. A different degree of vividness is in
fact a new impression, and therefore comes under the law. The final
cause of this arrangement is obvious. Were we at the mercy of all the
impressions which are perpetually made upon us, were they all converted
into sensations, connected thought would be impossible. But the im-
pression may have nothing of novelty, and yet its recurrence will always
be followed by sensation, because it has been associated with an emo-
tion. This effect of association is strikingly exemplified in sleep.
Impressions of the most violent kind may be made, and yet the sleeper
will not feel them if he has been accustomed to them, and not had
them connected in his mind with some subject of interest. It is told
by Dr. Carpenter, of a great naval officer, that he could sleep through
the loudest noises on ship-board, but if any one whispered in his ear
the word signal, he Avas awake in an instant. So I know the case of a
lady who sleeps profoundly during ordinary noises, but if her relative
who is near her, makes in breathing a sound which she has often known
to be the precursor of an attack of illness, she wakes immediately. So
also with the tick of an alarum.
In the sharpening of the senses by education and training, we again
see the influence of the emotions, or of ideas associated with emotions.
We look and listen, that is, we attend to sights and sounds, because
there is an expectation of good to be received, or a fear of evil to be
averted. Again we are said to acquire the habit of attending to certain
classes of sensations. Here the emotional interest is more remote.
The objects of sensation may be uninteresting, but we exert our voli-
tion to compel a coherence between the impressions and the conscious-
ness ; and the conviction having been often repeated, and so once
established, becomes permanent; the volitional becomes automatic.
Habit supplants the will; and thus we have another illustration that
the influence of this principle is exerted by virtue of association.
Habit would thus seem the offspring and afterwards the successor
and representative of volition. But what is meant by a habit of
inattention, a listless habit? Thus a person may fall into the habit of
sitting at church and not listening to the service or the sermon. The
use of the word in this manner is a metonymy. It is not the habit
of not attending, but the habit of attending to your own thoughts in
preference to those of tlie clergyman.
Everywhere in this subject we fall back on the principle of associa-
tion. Everything in this world is interesting, or important, or influen-
tial, according as it is related with other things.
The repetition of volitional impidses gives increased strength to the
related centres of motion, because these centres become active. The
repetition of impressions which are not taken up by the emotions or the
will, and do not pass into sensations, will come to nothing. It is not
that habit deadens the sensibility to the repeated impressions, but that
the impressions ceasing to be linked with the emotions and the will,
having in fact no associations Avith any thing else in the mental life,
die away; or, indeed, never arrive at any thing but an abortive
existence.
I
HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 399
Habit as to Thouht.
In the remarks preliminary to our consideration of volitional
motion, I spoke of some of tliose mental processes which are en-
forced by the will in efforts of memory. There are others to which
I can but very briefly advert, with a view to the prosecution of our
immediate subject. Such is the compulsory contemplation of pheno-
mena in a certain order or arrangement, when we reason, whether
inductively or deductively, or when we arrange, according to a certain
shape or plan those clusters of ideas and emotions which belong to
fancy and imagination.
Congeries of ideas, or trains of thought, originally associated or
marshalled by volition, may, like the volitional movements, become
automatic. The memory of compositions, or of narratives, or of argu-
ments, once attained by efforts of the will, becomes automatic. Re-
collection passes into remembrance, Nay, like the analogous move-
ments, it is apt to be deranged by mental attention. How often does
a person find that the more he tries to remember something, the more
he is baffled. He gives it up, talks of something else, and that which
had been sought for in vain, comes unbidden. The automatic process
of association went on better when the consciousness was not fixed
upon it.
Arithmetical calculations illustrate this principle. That 2 and 3 make
5, is at first committed to the memory by means of the will,?after a few
repetitions of these three figures, the combination of the two first Avill
bring the third mechanically, that is, 3 will add itself to 2, and bring
5 in its train, and so on with a long column of figures. Mr. Dugald
Stewart adduces the case of an expert accountant running his eyes up
a column of figures and arriving at the sum total, unconscious of the
intermediate mental acts, as an instance of a succession of efforts of
attention, so rapid as to have been forgotten. But there seems to me
no need of presuming that of which there is no proof. The numbers
seen have so often been linked with their equivalents in the memory,
that the latter recur passively and mechanically. Thus in consequence
of long use and practice 2 and 3 cannot but sug-
gest the idea 5, and 5 meeting 7 brings 12, and
12 meeting G brings 18, and with 18 added to
9, 27 links itself, and so on.
Thus the visual and the mental trains of figures
interchange without any effort.
These associations have so often been compelled,
that they now recur by necessity. It is just as
with the player on an instrument; the impulses ?
in the centre of motion so often associated with 39
the notes of music on the paper come without ?
attention, though at one time their co-ordination was only effected by
dint of the most laborious attention.
In reasoning, a like automatic process is traceable. The ergo fastens
itself without effort to the premisses. The conclusion is self-evolved
from the major premiss.
f f 2
400 HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
And the self-evolution of thought may be traced much further.?
Ideas grow out of ideas, without our consciousness of the various
stages of their mysterious genesis. The new production suddenly
blossoms forth to the astonishment of its possessor, who finds himself
all but unawares the maker of a grand discovery. Or to vary the
illustration, take the case of a writer of works of imagination. His
mind has been stored with a vast assemblage of images, scenes, senti-
ments, and characters. In some auspicious moment, and sometimes
unexpectedly, the scheme of a poem or fable unfolds itself before his
mental eye; it is as if his mind up to that time had held all the
scenes, incidents, characters and similies in a state of solution, and then
by a happy conjunction of outward and inward agencies, the several
elements of thought attach themselves to each other by their several
elective affinities, and crystallize into their appropriate shapes and
colours of beauty and grandeur.*
The secondarily automatic processes of thought, induced by habit,
closely resemble those which are instinctive. To the latter class belong
the intuitive belief. To believe the information of our senses, as that
the sun moves, is an instinct. Such also, is the expectation of like conse-
quents from like antecedents, or cause and effect. Such, also, is the con-
fident belief in the existence of outward things?the separation of the
ego and non-ego. Such, also, the reference of the existence of things
and of ourselves to an unseen Power. These, like other instincts, are
variously susceptible of modification from subsequent experience. But
in all these cases, the ideas have not been brought together by volitional
efforts; they have an innate tendency to cohere. Indeed, they can
hardly occur separately. The existence of the one necessarily involves
that of the other. They, in fact, grow together. But the ideas which
have only been casually clustered, or knit together by the workmanship
of volition, may ultimately cohere as strongly. The force of habit will
thus equal that of instinct; a faulty train of reasoning may acquire the
strength of an original instinctive perception; an oft-told lie becomes
a truth, and a superstition may be as hard to break asunder as the
simplest and most primitive religion. Education thus vies with intu-
ition?and habit becomes second nature.
These habits of thought, like habits of action, when once acquired
are not easily discontinued. They are like grooves in which the mind
lias been accustomed to slide ; if well contrived and fitted, and in a
right direction, they are of incalculable value. If not, they are
injurious, they prevent the mind from moving in better ordered and
more truthward tracks. In the progress of life it becomes more and
more difficult to alter our habits. The grooves have worn deeper and
deeper, and the volition is less and less willing to trace or carve new
ones. It is ridiculous, I should better say, it is mortifying to human
nature to watch the awkward and futile efforts of a mind to throw off'
* The whole subject of the automatic action of the brain in intellectual processes is
treated with great ability and originality in Dr. Carpenter's Chapter on the Cerebrum
and its Functions ("Principles of Human Physiology," fourth Edition). The reflex
action of the brain with reference to motion had previously been expounded in a highly
ingenious paper by Dr. Laycock, read before the British Association, September, 1844.
HABIT PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED. 40J
its long formed habits. Take it out of these prepossessions, and pre-
judices, and bigotries, and liow uneasy and jolting are its movements !
for such habits are ruts rather than grooves, which though they allow
no rapid motion of the heavy carriage that follows them, yet cannot be
escaped. In attempting to quarter the road the movements are made
without confidence, and the wheels are perpetually threatening to slip
into the old tracks with a crash that endangers the safety of the whole
vehicle.
It would be interesting, but time will not allow us, to pass on to an
investigation of habit in reference to the emotions and moral senti-
ments. But the same law will be found to hold good in that depart-
ment as in those which we have so imperfectly treated.
I must conclude with a few words on the final cause of habit.?
As to habits of action, it is obvious that the great use they serve
is the economy of time. What would man have accomplished by the
end of his life had it been needful for him to attend to his movements
in standing, walking, and using his hands and fingers 1 What pro-
gress would thought make, were speakers to be thinking of the sounds
they utter, and to be consciously directing and adjusting their vocal
apparatus 1 and where would be the literature of the world, were the
mind compelled to pass from its sublime contemplations to the
muscular actions which guide the movements of the pen 1 But the
more we consider the subject, whether as to the development of those
actions which characterize the species, or as to those acquired accom-
plishments and dexterities which range from the humblest handi-
crafts to the loftiest triumphs of the imaginative arts, the more we
shall be struck by the gradually increasing subordination and subjuga-
tion of the mechanical processes to the more exalted faculties of the
mind.
This view would at first, perhaps, make us inquire whether, as these
volitional movements which we have been considering ultimately become
automatic, it would not have enlarged the capacities of man, had they
begun as instincts, just as some of them really are found in the lower
animals, instead of going through so long a process of evolution and
education] A foolish question, as every question must be, which pro-
poses an arrangement of events different from what is obviously a part
of the plan of God's universe. Take away the struggling striving will
even from these corporeal actions; remove effort, resolution, the con-
scious initiation of action, perseverance, training, and education,
and what is human life reduced to? Gigantic as man's powers
become, he was not intended to spring from the earth in their full equip-
ment. Survey him in his infancy, childhood, youth, adolescence, and
manhood, and while you become convinced that his gradual acquirements
bring him a multitude of enjoyments, as well as difficulties and disasters,
you cannot but see that what is evolving in him bears a strict correlation to
the powers, emotions, sentiments, and virtuous actions of those, who
having arrived at the maturity of their powers, are to help him, to whom
he is bound, as they to him, by ties which make the affinities of the
human family infinitely transcend the transitory parental instincts and
gregarious associations of the lower animals j for they live and grow up
402 HABIT?PHYSIOLOGICALLY CONSIDERED.
almost as they were born, devoid of progress, not one whit wiser or
more skilful than the first pair that issued from Noah's ark, living for
themselves only, or only under a blind impulse providing for another suc-
cession. But man having consciously and with pain and labour and peril,
acquired his endowments, lives them over again by teaching them to his
offspring; and apart from that happier existence to which he knows that
he is destined in other worlds, feels that here too he has a kind of im-
mortality; that as he has inherited knowledge, and virtue, and power,
he too has to transmit them; that his life and its achievements have a
mortal metempsychosis, a translation into the enlarging attributes and,
brightening destinies of his children, and of unborn generations, and in
the production of works which, like Milton, he knows that posterity will
not willingly let die, and in the elaboration of systems which, like
Bacon, he bequeaths with his fame to the next ages; in this realizing
anticipation of a posthumous renown, he survives his own death, passing
by his living consciousness far beyond the narrow bounds affixed to his
mere corporeal duration.
But while habit, as we have seen, is so useful in abridging labour,
in economizing time, in preserving order, and method, and coherence in
our thoughts, and in making the practice of virtue and religion easier to
us, still it imposes upon us no inevitable compulsion. It is not the
blind necessity of an instinct. It is our own fault if we are enslaved
instead of being merely assisted by habit. Human agency ought to be
able to assert its freedom in this as in every other department of
thought and action. The habit should be like a steed, so well broken,
that though the will may have thrown the reins on its neck, while otherwise
occupied, it can in a moment gather them up, and come to a sudden
halt.
Habit, we have seen at once, is the product and the sign of previous
volition. And though in certain muscular actions belonging to the
species, it closely resembles instinct, yet as to the thoughts and actions
of individual men it is widely different. For as the will of every man
has its own peculiar form and colour, making an important part of his
individuality, so his habits will have their own character and freedom
of growth. Those Avho are attached to him will regard with partiality
the very habits which have grown out of his peculiarities. The singu-
larities of his gestures, the eccentricities of his gait, carriage, and
demeanour, the oddity of his featural expression, the tone of his voice,
his ways and his whims, his fancies and his philosophies, his predilec-
tions and prejudices, the whole complexion of his life, and the whole
colour of his conduct?his goings out and his comings in, his risings
up and his lyings down,?all are valued, because they give us more
vividly the express image of him who is endeared to us for his own
individual sake.
But while there is the utmost latitude for the formation and the
relinquishment of habit according to the will and humour of the indi-
vidual, the habit which has grown out of a strong character will inevi-
tably impress itself on others. A strong character does not depend on the
intellect, but on the original strength of the will, and on the habits which
it has originated. It is one whose actions have sprung out of its own
OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 403
individual will. The very limitation of the intellectual vision may-
strengthen the volition by the repetition of its objects and by the itera-
tion of its correlative actions. This self-possessed, self-contained, self-
originating power, is sure to affect others. It is a new centre of motion
to those who are ever ready to derive their impulses from without,
rather than from their own life.
Thus we see the two elements in social life antagonizing each other,
and yet bringing out the most important results;?the potential free-
dom of every individual?and yet the unfelt compulsion of a passive
imitation. And were any argument needful beyond what has been so often
urged by moralists and divines as to the formation of habits which may
become so powerful either for good or evil, in the individual character,
it is to be found in the consideration that in our influence on others,
we are responsible not only for what we directly do or directly teach,
hut also for that insensible operation of our characters which, in pro-
portion as they are strengthened by habit, are in that same proportion
sustained in their capability of impressing and moulding to their like-
ness, the wills, the affections, the thoughts, and the actions of our
fellow men.
