State of Lunacy in England
===========================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
OCTOBER 1, 1853.
Aet. I.-
.*
The Seventh Annual Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy has just
been issued to the public. Before proceeding to analyse its contents,
we feel it our duty to refer briefly to a grievance connected with its
publication to which our attention has been specially called. We allude
to the unreasonable delay which uniformly takes place in the publication
of these annual reports, which seem to lag habitually something like a
year and a half behind the time to which they relate. It is clear, that
all public, official, or parliamentary reports should be brought down as
close as practicable to the period of publication ; they should not be a
record of bygone, but of existing facts, otherwise they possess only
a retrospective and not a present interest. The Seventh Annual Report
of the commissioners in Lunacy is open to this objection. It extends
from June 30th, 1851, to June 30th, 1852, and has not been published
until the August of 1853 ! By the 88th section of the Act 8 and 9
Yict. cap. 100, it is enacted that the commissioners shall, at the expi-
ration of every six calendar months, report to the Lord Chancellor the
number of visits which they have made, the number of patients whom
they may have seen, and the number of miles they have travelled during
such months ; which mileage would appear curious were it not intended
as a criterion of the expenses thereby incurred. Furthermore, they are
required in the month of June in every year to make a report to the
* Seventh Annual Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy to the Lord Chance or.
30tli June, 1852. Pursuant to the Act 8 and 9 Vict., s. 88. (Ordered by the House
of Commons to be printed, 5th April, 1853.)
NO. XXIY. K K
460 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
Lord Chancellor of the state and condition of the several houses, hos-
pitals, asylums, and other places visited by them?the care taken of
patients generally, and such other particulars as may appear to them
deserving of notice. All this is unquestionably highly proper and im-
portant ; but unhappily the same section of the Act provides that this
report shall be laid before parliament within twenty-one days next after
the commencement of every session; which probably may account in a
great measure for the delay complained of in its publication. Un-
doubtedly it is a grievance. Here we have, in the August of 1853, the
last annual report of the commissioners, which only brings down the
admissions of the insane into asylums and licensed houses to the 1st
January, 1852. Here we have a tabular view of the number of patients,
private and pauper, found lunatic by inquisition, and criminal, confined
in these metropolitan and provincial establishments; and yet these
tables leave us so much in arrear that they are for our present informa-
tion perfectly useless. The appointments, too, of superintendents and
medical officers in these institutions, have, during the interval of pub-
lication, undergone material changes ; yet this report, which was ordered
by the House of Commons to be printed on the 5th April, 1853,
retains the names of Mr. Eccleston, as superintendent of Kainhill, Dr.
Conolly, visiting physician at Hanwell, and Dr. Bushnan's appears as if
just gazetted for the " appointment" of medical superintendent at Wyke
House. It is true that eighteen months or two years ago, such
appointments were held; but these, and many others specified in the
report before us, have for some time ceased to exist. But this is not
all. The comments and censures which the commissioners may have
thought proper to pass upon the condition and management of certain
asylums nearly two years ago, are now for the first time published to
the world, although sufficient time has elapsed for the removal of the
causes which suggested their animadversions. It is only fair, therefore,
to presume that many of the suggestions in the report before us, which
were made by the commissioners so far back, have, before its publica-
tion, in most instances, been attended to ; but, however promptly or
efficiently the superintendents in charge of such asylums may have
responded to the wishes of the commissioners, they must still remain
under the public ban and odium of their displeasure, until another
eighteen months has elapsed, and the eighth annual report issues from
the parliamentary bill office. This report may possibly then announce
that the recommendations here notified have been adopted. Assuredly
this requires amendment. Again, in illustration of the inconvenience
which must arise from the delay complained of, it is clear that the next
report will embrace from the June of 1852 to the June of 1853, and
not appear until about the same period?viz., the autumn of 1854, yet
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 461
during that period the new Lunacy Bills will have come into operation,
which will not therefore be officially reported upon until the tenth
report, embracing the period from 185B to 1854, makes its appearance.
This, in the course of nature, will not happen until the autumn of 1855!
This certainly is publishing "annual reports," as they are termed, with
a heavy drag upon them. We observe that, by the 33rd section of the
New Lunatics' Care and Treatment Bill, it is provided, in reference to
the 88th section of the Act above cited, that these reports of the com-
missioners to the Lord Chancellor shall hereafter be " made on or before
the month of March in every year, and shall be made up to the end of
the preceding yearbut Ave do not perceive how this will facilitate or
expedite their publication. We must, therefore, bear in mind that the
Seventh Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy does not bring down
the general statistics of insanity beyond the 1st of January, 1852 ; and
the observations which they contain respecting the condition and
management of certain asylums, must be received as applicable to them
some eighteen months ago, and not as affording us any indication or
criterion of their present state. It is only fair that this should be tho-
roughly understood; the grievance we recognise, but we do not see how
it is to be remedied so long as these reports, prior to publication, are to
be laid on the dormitory-table of the House of Commons, where mea-
sures not stimulated into active progression by the excitement of popu-
lar interests generally remain in a state of passive slumber during the
greater part of the session.
We now proceed to analyse the report before us, viewing it in con-
nexion with the report which was published by the commissioners five
years ago?a comparison which will greatly enhance its interest. In
the year 1847, referring our date always to the first of January, there
were in the metropolitan district, which comprehends an area of some 15
miles round London, 45 houses licensed as private asylums, 9 of which
were open for the reception of paupers. In the year 1852, the number
of these licensed houses was 41, and only 5 appear to have been licensed
for the reception of paupers. During the five years, therefore, the
number of private lunatic asylums in the metropolitan' districts has
been reduced by 4 ; and, a circumstance we should not have anticipated,
the number of lunatics confined in them has diminished by 141; the
numbers male and female having in 1847 amounted to 2767, and in
18o2, to 2326. We must not, however, infer that insanity has, during
this quintennial period, been on the decrease, for, unhappily, when we
look to the returns of the county asylums, hospitals, provincial licensed
houses, and other places for the reception of lunatics, including Beth-
lehem, Haslar Hospital, and Thornclifie Military Hospital, we ^nd that
between the year 1847 and 1852, there has been an increase of as many
k K 2
102 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
as 3580 lunatics ; in 1847, tliere were returned 13,832 ; but in 1852,
we find the number increased to 17,412. The number of persons
found lunatic by inquisition does not present any corresponding increase,
but appears?-which is remarkable?to have remained almost stationary.
Thus, in 1847, there were 235 persons found lunatic by inquisition,
and in 1852 only 1 more, making 236. The tabular returns of
criminal lunacy in the two reports exhibit an increase of 99 ; the
numbers being in 1847, criminal lunatics, 337, and in 1852 increased
to 436. The two summary tables, the one for 1847 and the other for
1852, may suggest other points for consideration; and we therefore
here subjoin them.*
On the 1st of January, 1847, there were in England 20 county
asylums; in Wales 1; and the number of lunatics therein confined
amounted to 5486. At the commencement of the January of 1852, we
find 25 county asylums open in England, 2 in Wales, and 4 borough
asylums, giving an increased accommodation for 4731 lunatics, the total
numbers confined being 10,217. It has long been the desire of the
commissioners to insist upon every county providing one or more
asylums for its own lunatic paupers. Hence, architects have been busy,
and new county asylums are being erected in all directions.
In Lancashire, three county asylums?Lancaster, Rainhill, and Prest-
wich?are now open, which will, for many years, afford ample provision
for the insane poor of this extensive and populous county. In Middlesex
the additional asylum at Colney Hatch will also greatly relieve the
county of its pauper lunatics; but from the rapidity with which it has
filled, we apprehend that Hanwell and Colney Hatch will eventually be
found inadequate for the reception of all the patients which will require
admission. Under these circumstances the commissioners acted wisely
in calling upon the Secretary of State?then Sir George Grey?to re-
quire the Court of Aldermen to provide an asylum for the pauper
lunatics chargeable to the several parishes within the jurisdiction of the
City of London. Under the new Lunatic Asylums Bill the justices of
every county and borough not having a lunatic asylum are required to
provide one; and we believe that ere long no private asylum will hold
a licence for the reception of pauper lunatics. Our own opinion is, they
are better separate. The system of organization required for the proper
management of a pauper lunatic asylum differs in a great variety of
details, from that which will be found the most eligible for the manage-
ment of a private lunatic asylum ; and although a feeling seems to exist
with some persons that private asylums should be abolished, and accom-
modation provided in county asylums for the better class of patients,
yet we have reason to know from the inquiries we have made, that the
officers in charge of county asylums entertain a very strong conviction
* See next page.
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 468
Summary Table for the 1st January, 1847.
County Asylums
Hospitals ....
Metropolitan Houses
Provincial Houses .
Bethlehem Hospital
Haslar Hospital (Naval) . . .
Xhornclifl'e Hospital (Military)
Totals . .
Private.
M.
131
319
548
790
1788
112
13D
73
2112
108
408
555
740
1786
138
Total.
239
727
1103
1530
3574
250
139
77
4005
Pauper.
M.
2431
191
680
1127
4429
101
4533
2816
193
984
1205
5223
36
Total.
5247
384
1664
2332
9652
140
9767
Grand
Total.
5486
1111
2767
3862
13,226
390
139
77
13,832
Found Lunatic by
Inquisition.
M.
F.
Total.
10
18
89
119
Criminal.
M.
167
90
257
Total.
30 117
1 5
15 40
13 01
59 226
21 111
337
Summary Table for the January, 1852.
County Asylums
Hospitals
Metropolitan licensed Houses.
Provincial licensed Houses . .
Bethlehem Hospital
Royal Naval Hospital, Haslar, Hants . . .
Military Lunatic Hospital, Great Yarmouth.
Totals
Private.
M.
131
494
568
727
1920
193
129
89
F. Total.
120
494
570
721
1905
190
1138
1418
3825
383
129
93
2331 2099 4430 5916 7060
Pauper.
Total
Males.
M.
4520
152
?487
757
5916
5446
145
701
774
7066
Total.
9966
297
1188
1531
12,982
12,982
Total.
Fe-
males
1651
616
1055
1484
7836
193
129
89
Total.
Luna-
tics.
5566
639
1271
1495
8971
190
8247 9165
10,21
1285
2326
2979
16,807
3S3
129
93
17,112
Found
Lunatic by
Inquisition.
Criminal.
M. F. Total. M. F. Total,
154
156 80
9
16
96
113
234
2
236 1357 79
38
175
41
108
332
101
Chargeable to
Counties or
Boroughs.
M. F. Total.
375 -137
5 1
15 24
85 59 141
474 152 986
436 171 152
464 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
that such a system would not work well, independent of which, persons
of education and status in society will never consent to their relatives
being domiciled under the roof of paupers, for however complete the
separation may he as far as the architectural plan of the building is
concerned, so long as the establishment is the same, the objection will
prevail. The noble Earl who is the Chairman of the Board of the Com-
missioners in Lunacy, has, we regret to observe, pronounced in the House
of Lords a very strong opinion upon this subject; and supposing that
the Legislature in its wisdom did devise some such plan, the danger we
apprehend would be that the old cottage system, which the philanthropic
exertions of the noble Earl did so much to annihilate, will again be re-
stored, inasmuch as persons who recoil at the idea of their relations being
placed in a public asylum would prefer locating them elsewhere, and
we have only to glance over the columns of the Times newspaper to see
the number of "genteel private families," and "experienced physicians,"
advertising to take charge of lunatics, and the many cottages omees
which are open for their reception. In legislation this would be a re-
trograde step which, however, cannot be easily accomplished; indeed,
we have no hesitation in pronouncing it wholly impracticable, for not
living in a despotic country, the relations of the insane will very natu-
rally insist on their feelings being consulted in providing for such
afflicted persons. Whatever prejudices may be entertained against
private asylums, their existence we believe to be absolutely necessary;
and all the Legislature can do is to secure for them such an efficient
system of visitation and supervision as shall ensure their being con-
ducted on the best and the most humane principles. The argument
urged against them, that the proprietors have a pecuniary interest in
these establishments, admits of the very contrary application; the
abuses which are found to exist at certain times in great public insti-
tutions may ahnost invariably be traced to the fact of an irresponsible
management; and if the persons guilty of negligence, and a thousand
irregularities, had only a bona fide interest in such concerns, they would
not, for their own sakes, allow the shadow of a reproach to fall upon
them. The best guarantee that the public can have that an establish-
ment shall be well conducted may be looked for in the fact that the
proprietors have a pecuniary interest in them ; for it is universally ac-
knowledged that the path of rectitude leads to fortune, and that of
roguery to inevitable ruin. The very converse of the proposition, there-
fore, enunciated against them, holds good. Where a man has an inte-
rest in an establishment?where his responsibility is declared?he is far
more likely to exert himself conscientiously and to the best of his
ability, than when he has only a stipendiary interest in an establishment
and shares a divided responsibility. The Commissioners in Lunacy do
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 465
not, it is to be hoped, entertain the opinion of the noble Earl at the
head of their Board, otherwise painful, indeed, must be the discharge
of their duties in supervising a system which they at the same time
desire abolished. This, however, we do not believe. To return,
however, to the Report before us. Having notified the changes which
have taken place in the metropolitan and provincial licensed houses?
the new county asylums which have been opened, and those which are
far advanced towards completion, and which will have the effect of
closing numerous asylums for the reception of pauper lunatics?the
commissioners state that applications are occasionally made to them, on
the part of committees of visitors engaged in organizing lunatic asylums,
for their advice respecting the organization of the staff of officers ; and
they, therefore, some time ago, circulated a paper of suggestions, of
which the following is a copy.
Commissioners' Suggestions for the Staff of a County Lunatic
Asylum.
Resident Medical Superintendent.
This officer should be duly qualified both as a surgeon and apothecary
(whether possessing a degree or not).
He should have paramount authority in the asylum, and be precluded
from private practice, and should devote his whole time and energies to
the duties of his office.
He should be a person of high character and experience, and be
liberally remunerated.
With regard to salary, the commissioners find that in the various
county asylums the salaries vary from one hundred and fifty to five
hundred pounds per annum, to which is to be added, where (as is com-
monly the case, and is always most desirable) he resides on the premises,
furnished apartments, with coals, candles, and generally also board, or
an equivalent in money for the same.
The commissioners consider it the preferable arrangement that there
should not be any visiting physician or other medical visitor with a
salary,but that in lieu thereof the resident medical superintendent should
have the power to call in medical or surgical advice,*on extraordinary
occasions, at the expense oi the asylum. If there are honorary physi-
cians or surgeons attached to the institution, their services would be
gratuitous, unless when they were so specially called in.
In the event of the asylum becoming full, or nearly full, it may be
advisable to appoint an assistant medical officer, with board and lodging,
at a moderate salary, say Irom fifty to eighty pounds per annum. Such
an arrangement has been adopted in many of the large asylums, e. y.,
Lancaster, Kent, Stafford, &c.
466 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
*
Resident Clerk and Steward.
The commissioners are disposed to think that these offices may be
conveniently joined, and that, at least until the number of patients be
considerable, this officer may (in addition to his ordinary duties) examine,
from time to time, or daily, the condition of the bedding and clothing,
and generally overlook the male side of the establishment. He should
have suitable board and lodging in the asylum. The salary of this
officer varies in different asylums from fifty to one hundred pounds,
according to the position assigned to the person holding the office, and
the amount of duty imposed upon him.
Matron and Housekeeper.
She should be a single woman (or widow) of the middle class of life,
of active business habits, and capable of personally directing all the
details of a large household, such as the kitchen, laundry, cutting out
and making up dresses, clothing, &c., and directing the female patients
in their needle work, &c., in addition to the superintendence of the female
wards, nurses, and female servants.
A person brought up with the habits of a lady appears to be in general
not desirable.
Her office would in a great degree combine the duties of a house-
keeper and those of head nurse, and her salary should be not less than
double the amount of wages of any other nurse, together with apart-
ments and board. In the generality of existing asylums it varies from
forty to one hundred pounds a year.
Chaplain.
The salary of this gentleman, who will, it is presumed, be a non-
resident officer, may be generally described as equivalent to that of a
curacy. In the different asylums it usually varies between fifty and one
hundred pounds a year. In two or three asylums, however, it exceeds
this amount. In the Middlesex Asylum at Hanwell, where there are
nearly one thousand patients, it is two hundred pounds ; and in that of
Lancaster, where the patients are nearly eight hundred, it is three hun-
dred pounds a year.
The particular amount ought, in some degree, to be regulated by a
consideration of the quantum of labour imposed, and the amount of
time required for the due performance of the duties.
The practice has hitherto, we believe, been that the chaplain should
not reside in the asylum, and a contrary practice would seem in general
to be open to grave objections;
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 467
Treasurer.
Some local banker would, doubtless, perform the office of Treasurer
without salary.
Clerk to the Visitors.
A fixed payment for each official visit to the asylum with the Visit-
ing Justices, or a yearly salary, not exceeding in either case a limited
and very moderate sum, appears to the commissioners to be the best
mode of remunerating the labour incident to this office. Possibly, how-
ever, with a view both to convenience and economy, a satisfactory
arrangement might be made for having the duties performed by the
clerk of the asylum.
Male and Female Attendants.
In addition to the qualities obviously requisite in servants of this
class (such as good temper, patience, sobriety, honesty, activity, and
general intelligence), it is desirable that each attendant should be able
to read and write, and should be qualified to train and direct the patients
in their various in-door and out-door occupations.
The commissioners think that the wages of the attendants should be
liberal, and should be subject to periodical increase in cases of length of
service and good conduct.
Before making any comment upon these suggestions, we shall lay
before our readers the subjoined Table, which we have been at the
pains to construct from the Report before us. It exhibits the amount
of salaries which the officers referred to now enjoy at the different
county asylums specified. The asterisk signifies non-resident. The
first column states the number of patients in the asylum on the
1st January, 1853, with the view of giving some idea of the amount of
duty required.
TABLE OP SALARIES GIVEN TO THE SUPERIOR OFFICERS IN COUNTY LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
Number
of
Patients.
The Medical Staff.
Superin-
tendent.
Chaplain.
Matron.
Assistant
Matron.
House-
keeper.
Clerk to { Clerk and
Visitors. Steward.
Steward.
Bedford
Cheshire
Cornwall Asylum
Denbigh or North
Wales Asylum
Derbyshire Asylum .
Devon Asylum
Dorset Asylum
Gloucester Asylum
Kent Asylum
267
225
231
77
158
311
498
. . Resident Medical Officer, ?100, board
. . riiysician and General Superintend-
ent, ?300 *
Assistant Medical Officer, ?100, board,
&c.
. . Medical Superintendent, ?315 . .
Visiting Physician, ?100*
. . Medical Superintendent, ?150 . .
. . Medical Superintendent,?400, board,
residence, washing, fuel, and light.
. . Medical Superintendent, ?500, resi-
dence and washing.
Medical Assistant, ?100, board, resi-
dence, and washing.
. . Medical Superintendent,?200, board,
and residence.
. . Physician and Superintendent, ?300,
suite of apartments, fuel, and lighting.
Medical Assistant, ?50, board and
washing.
. . Visiting Physician, ?100* ....
Resident Medical Superintendent, ?100,
mats and matting, coals, candles, oil,
soap, milk, garden produce, washing for
self and family.
?150*
?200
?S0*
?70*
?50*
?50*
?60*
?150*
?50*
?60*
?150*
?30, board
. . ?40,
board, &c.
. . Not de-
termined.
?50
. . Included
in Superin-
tendent's
salary and
allowances.
?18, board
. . ?100,
wife of Phy-
sician.
. . . ?50,
apartments
furnished,
with board,
washing,
and attend-
ance.
?100*
?80*
?40*
. . ?25,
board and
washing.
. . ?40,
board, re-
sidence.
?60*
. . and
cook,?30,
board, re-
sidence.
?100
. . ?140,
residence,
fuel, light.
?105
. . ?30,*
clerk only.
?140*
. . ?170, re-
sidence,coals,
candles, oil,
soap, milk,
produce of
garden for
self and fa-
mily, and of
farm for
keep of pony.
?50
Lancaster Asylum
Rainhill Asylum, near
Liverpool.
Lancashire?
Prestwich Asylum,
near Manchester, (a)
Leicestershire and
Rutland Asylum.
Lincolnshire Asylum
Middlesex?
Colney Hatch, (b)
Hanwell Asylum, (c)
679
296
302
238
Not yet
open.
1005
9G1
. . Physician, ?150*
House Surgeon, ?120, board and lodging.
. . Medical Superintendent,?350, house,
coals, gas, soap, candles, milk, vegetables.
House Surgeon, ?50, board and lodging.
. . Resident Medical Officer and Super-
intendent, ?350, unfurnished house,
coals, gas.
House Surgeon, ?60, furnished apart-
ments and board.
. . Medical Superintendent,?300, board,
lodging, washing, all necessaries, except
?wine.
. . Resident Medical Superintendent,
?500.
. . Medical Officer (male side), ?200,
house, coals, candles, milk, vegetables,
and ?150 a-year in lieu of board.
Medical Officer (female side), ditto.
Dispenser, ?50, board, lodging, and
washing.
house fur-
nished (ex-
cept plate,
glass, and
china), fruit
&vegetables.
?100, ?300* . . ?75,
. . (il) Resident Medical Officer, ?200,
board, lodging, and washing.
Ditto (female side), ?200, board, lodg-
ing, and washing.
Dispenser, ?70, ditto.
(a) The Treasurer and Clerk to this Asylum receives a salary of ?120 per annum.
(4) The Assistant in Stores to this Asylum receives a salary of ?25, with board, lodging, and washing.
(c) The Schoolmaster in this Asylum receives a salary of ?90.
(rf) The Office of Visiting Physician, whose salary was ?315 per annum, has been abolished.
. . ?200,
house, and
garden.
. . ?200,*
unfurnished
house, coals,
gas.
?10*
. .?200,*
an unfur-
nished
house.
?250*
board and
lodging.
. .?75,
board and
lodging,
. .?50, fur-
nished apart
merits and
board.
. . ?52 12s.
board, lodg-
iug, washing.
. . ?150,
furnished
house, coals,
candles,
milk, vege-
tables, and
?80 a-year
instead of
board.
. . ?200,
board, lodg-
ing^ wash-
ing.
. . ?22,
board and
lodging.
. . ?25,
board and
lodging.
. . ?30,
board, lodg-
ing^ wash-
ing,
. . ?60,
board, lodg-
ing^ wash-
ing.
. . ?25,
board,
lodging,
& wash-
ing.
. . ?30,
lodging,
8c wash-
ing.
?10*
?100*
?100*
. . ?75,
board and
lodging.
. . Clerk &
legal adviser,
?30.
. . Clerk,
?200; As-
sistantClerk,
?70; ditto,
?25; board,
lodging, &
washing.
. .?80*
unfur-
nished
house.
. .?70
apart-
ments
and
board.
.. Stew-
ard's
Clerk,
?70.
Table of Salaries?continued.
Number
of
Patients.
The Medical Staff.
Superin-
tendent.
Chaplain.
Matron.
Assistant
Matron.
House-
keeper.
Clerk to
Visitors.
Clerk and
Steward.
Steward.
Moumoutli, Hereford,
Brecon, Radnor,
joint Counties Asy-
lum, Abergavenny.
Norfolk Asylum . .
Nottingham Asylum
Oxfordshire & Berks
Asylum.
Salop and Montgo-
mery Asylum.
Somerset Asylum .
Stafford Asylum
Suffolk Asylum
275
236
347
216
349
241
. . Physician and Superintendent,?250,
with board and apartments.
. . Visiting Surgeou, ?84*
Resident Surgeon, ?100, board and
lodging.
. . Physician, ?100*
Medical Superintendent. ?200.
. . Medical Superintendent, ?250, fur.
nislied apartments, board, &c.
Clinical Clerk, ?70, ditto.
. . ?150,
board and
lodging.
?100*
?80*
?70*
. . Medical Superintendent, ?300, self
and wife maintenance.
. . Medical Superintendent, ?500, house
furnished, washing, coals, candles, vege-
tables.
Surgeon, ?70, with furnished apart-
ments, washing, firing.
. . Visiting Physician,* ?200,* fees in
addition upon all private patients.
Medical Officer, ?400, board & lodging.
Superintendent and Matron, ?450
. ?140,
unfurnished
house.
?40*
?126
?80*
Clerk,
?25.
Organist,
?10.
?60*
. . ?40,
board, apart-
ments.
. . ?50,
board and
lodging,
?80
. . ?16,
board and
lodging.
See Su-
perintendent.
. . ?45,
apartments,
and room
and a ser-
vant.
. . ?100,
board and
lodging.
. . See Su-
perintendent.
. . ?30,
furnished
apartments,
board.
. . ?30,
board &
lodging.
. . ?80,
board and
apartments.
?70
. . ?70,
furnished
apartments,
board.
. . Steward,
?42;* Clerk,
?50*
. . Clerk &
Steward, &
Clerk to the
Visitors?70;
apartments,
washing,
firing.
?43.
Surrey Asylum .
Warwick Asylum
Wilts Asylum. .
Worcester Asylum
Yorkshire?
North-East Riding
Asylum
West-Hiding Asylum
Birmingham Borough
Asylum.
Bristol Asylum . .
Haverfordwest
Asylum.
Hull Borough Asylum
853
Not yet
open.
Not yet
open.
271
Gil
263
73
79
. . Visiting Physician, ?210 . . . .
Two Resident Medical Officers, ?350
each??700 ; furnished apartments and
coals.
. . Resident Medical Superintendent,
?300, furnished apartments, fire, light,
and washing.
. . Medical Superintendent, ?100, and
?100 in lieu of board; attendance,
washing, vegetables from the garden.
. . Medical Superintendent, ?350, fur-
nished house, coals, washing for family.
. . Medical Superintendent, ?320, and
?100 with farm and garden produce, in
lieu of rations.
. . Two Visiting Physicians at ?105
each??210*
Medical Superintendent and Treasurer,
?400, with board and lodging.
Apothecary, ?70, board and lodging.
. . Medical Superintendent, ?350, house,
firing, and gas.
. . Visiting Physician, ?75.*
House Surgeon, ?50.
Medical Officer, ?20
. . Superin-
tendent and
Clerk, ?50.
. . Medical Officer, ?230, house, fuel,
and vegetables.
?100?
?60*
?100*
?80*
?250*
?100*
?60*
?50
. . ?120,
furnished
apartments
and board.
?60
. . ?50, fur-
nished apart-
ments,board
& washing.
. . ?60,
board, lodg-
ing, washing.
. . ?60, fur-
nished apart
ment, and
board.
. . ?150,
board and
lodging.
. . ?60,
board, lodg-
ing, washing
. . ?25,
board and
lodging.
. . ?28 12s,
maintenance,
fire & candle.
. . ?25,
board and
lodging.
. . ?30,
with board
& lodging.
. . ?30,
with board
& lodging,
. . None
fixed.
?50
?5
?21*
. . ?330,
furnished
apartments
and coals
. . ?100,
furnished
house, fire,
light, and
washing.
. . ?70, fur-
nished apart-
ments, light,
& washing.
. . ?l00,fur-
nishedliouse,
gas, coals, &
vegetables.
. . ?100,
withr-tijrvu
. . Clerk,
?65, board
and lodging.
. . ?125,
board, lodg-
ing, washing.
?40
472 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
?
We have always considered that the organization of the medical staff
connected with our principal lunatic asylums is very defective, particu-
larly when compared with the great continental asylums, the Salpetriere,
the Charenton, and the Bicetre. Upon referring to the table before us,
it will be seen that the Kent Asylums, containing 498 patients ; the
Nottingham Asylum, 236; the Stafford Asylum, 349; the Surrey,
853; and the Bristol, 73 only, has each an appointed visiting physician;
and that the Norfolk Asylum, having 275 patients, has a visiting sur- *
geon; and the Yorkshire West Riding Asylum, with 611 patients, has
two visiting physicians ; and yet our two metropolitan asylums?Han-
well, with its 961, and Colney Hatch, with 1005 patients in it?have
neither of them a consulting physician officially connected with them.
The commissioners state that they consider it a preferable arrangement
that there should not be any visiting physician, or other medical visitor,
with a salary, but that in lieu thereof the resident medical officer should
have the power to call in additional medical or surgical advice on extra-
ordinary occasions, at the expense of the asylum. They, however, con- *
cede that honorary physicians may be attached to such institutions?
but in that case, unless specially called in, their services should be
gratuitous. This is a question which we conceive ought not to be dealt *
with upon mere financial principles; if it be desirable that visiting
physicians should be attached to the medical staff of our county asylums,
the expediency of such appointments should be recognised. Unfortu-
nately, as Sir George Ballingall has so well shown in his little brochure
upon the construction and arrangement of Medical Hospitals, so large
a sum of money is expended for the most part in unnecessary architec-
tural display, that the resources of such institutions are often found to
be crippled when it becomes necessary to draw upon them for the neces-
sary purposes of the charity. We observe by the Table before us that
some of the county asylums, erected in the style of palaces, at an enor-
mous expenditure, have so impoverished their exchequer, that, while
vestry committees are complaining, and rate-payers groaning, they can
only afford to pay the resident medical officer?the most important 1
functionary of the institution?a pittance of 200/. a year. We do not,
therefore, we repeat, deal with it as a question of finance ; all we con-
tend for is, that our metropolitan and county lunatic asylums should
be put on the same footing, and that their medical staff ought to be or-
ganized on the same principles as we find at other public hospitals. If
Guy's or St. George's Hospital has each its staff of consulting physicians
and surgeons, why should not Hanwell and Colney Hatch Asylums,
which have conjointly charge of two thousand patients, or more, be pro-
vided with as liberal a medical staff? Or, looking to the provinces, if
the Bedford General Infirmary, or the Cheshire General Infirmary, has
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 473
each its consulting physicians, why should not the lunatic asylums of
those counties have medical officers of analogous status attached to them?
Why should these asylums, as far as the medical staff is concerned, he
organized on narrower principles than even the medical dispensaries in
every city and borough town in the kingdom? Is the treatment of dis-
orders of the mind or brain of less importance to the community than
that of diseases known to be infinitely more curable and less distressing?
If the Liverpool dispensaries have some half-dozen consulting physicians
attached to them, why should not the County Asylum of Rainhill, only
a few miles distant, organized for the reception of more than 500
patients, not have one connected with its staff ? The public hospitals of
this country, whether instituted for the cure of diseases of the body or
the mind, ought to have the most eminent medical practitioners in the
profession appointed to them. The arrangement, to secure their ser-
vices, should be permanent and not fleeting, temporary or optional. In
general private practice, either the rank of the patient, or the expressed
wishes of the family generally suggest, in doubtful or difficult cases, the
propriety and expediency of calling in additional advice. Why should
not the poor inmates of a hospital, whose indigent relations cannot ori-
ginate such a suggestion, be provided with the same advantage of hav-
ing the best professional advice that can be commanded at hand to
assist them ? Does not humanity suggest that the most experienced
and skilful medical practitioners in the kingdom should be appointed to
these institutions ? Assuredly it does ; and the high reputation of the
physicians and surgeons connected with our public hospitals sheds a
lustre on these noble charities, which greatly tends to promote their
prosperity, and realize the objects which the munificent founders and
donors to them originally contemplated. Were there no such official
appointments, no consulting physicians permanently attached to these
hospitals, many of them would lose the prestige which they now enjoy,
and with it the confidence of the public. When the commissioners
suggest that, instead of there being any visiting physician officially at-
tached to lunatic asylums, and recommend that medical superintendents
should, in extraordinary cases only, call in additional advice, they forget
that their recommendation of the abolition of the office seems itself to
imply that such consultations are, in their opinion, very seldom, if ever,
required. We, indeed, believe that, if left optional with medical
superintendents, the opinion of a consulting physician will seldom or
never be sought, as it ought to be in the ordinary routine of professional
duty. The appointment has been abolished at Hanwell Asylum; and
what will be the result ? We are not prophets, nor are we gifted with
the mesmeric faculty of prevision, but we will hazard a conjecture that
the late consulting physician to this asylum will not, upon the free-
474 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
trade principle, be called in to give the benefit of liis opinion and advice
in as many cases during the next five years as he was in the habit of
seeing in one week?we should rather say in a single day?during the
period he held his official appointment. We believe that the medical
superintendents and medical officers connected with public and private
lunatic asylums are, for the most part, very well informed and practically
competent men; but, without the least disparagement to any of them, we
still think the addition of visiting or consulting physicians to the ordi-
nary medical staff very desirable. To the medical superintendents them-
selves, individually and collectively, it would be a very great advantage;
in cases which are not very extraordinary, but still perplexing, they
would, without going out of their way, have additional advice at hand;
they would find themselves thereby relieved from much responsibility,
and supposing we regard the consulting physician as holding a higher
professional status than his junior officers, the recognition of the office
would, among them, be an incentive to further zeal and assiduity, and
an encouragement to honourable emulation. In one speciality it is well
known that the best and the highest class of psychological physicians do
not, for reasons that must be obvious to our readers, offer themselves
for the post of resident medical officers to our county lunatic asylums;
many of them may have gone through this probation, and there acquired
their knowledge, their experience, and their fame; after all which, we
may fairly ask, is the highest rank they can arrive at in this department
of the profession to be cut down to the level of a medical superintendent-
ship, a compulsory residence in an asylum, upon an income of two or
three hundred a-year ?
When, indeed, we look over the table before us, it is sad to observe
how small is the unincreasing salary of many, doubtless, able, well-
informed, and accomplished medical men, holding, as resident super-
intendents, an office which entails upon them much personal confine-
ment?amounting almost to a total deprivation of liberty?unceasing
toil and ever-fluctuating anxiety. When years have thus elapsed?and
the prime of life is almost gone?what have they gained? no pecuniary
? fortune certainly?and as little honour if they cannot attain the
recognised status of being consulting physicians in their own speciality.
Are not the observations of the commissioners, in reference to the inex-
pediency of appointing visiting physicians to the county lunatic asylums
calculated to inflict an injury upon the profession? The office of visiting
physician to county asylums being declared by them unnecessary,themost
experienced physicians in lunacy would thereby be precluded from con-
necting themselves in that capacity with these institutions, and therefore
cannot hold a position which their medical brethren?eminent in other
paths of the profession?enjoy, in being officially connected with other
hospitals, where they have the opportunity of exercising their pro-
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. -175
fessional skill with honour to themselves and with advantage to the
public. With the other suggestions of the commissioners we cordially
agree, and particularly with the observation that " when a medical man
is elected to any new asylum he should enter upon his duties some
months before the building is open for the reception of patients." They
truly observe that " the amount of additional salary so incurred will be
far more than saved if, during the intermediate period, the committee
have the benefit of his active services, and advice in the laying out of
the yards and grounds, in the fitting up, and furnishing of the asylum,
and in selecting the subordinate officers and attendants, and regulating
their respective departments and duties."
The commissioners next direct the attention of the Lord Chancellor
to the subject of the boroughs?in number upwards of fifty?including
the City of London, which have not yet made legal or adequate pro-
vision for their pauper lunatics ; but we have no doubt that when the
new Lunatic Asylums Bill has come fairly into operation, the different
boroughs and comities which are now without asylums will be obliged
to provide them, however unwilling some of the local authorities may
be to incur such expense. Indeed, the report before us furnishes us
with conclusive evidence that the Commissioners in Lunacy frequently
find their recommendations disregarded, and their wishes thwarted by
the justices of certain boroughs and counties. It is an old grievance,
and one which may be easily understood. Under the present system,
two authoritative powers co-exist in the provinces; the justices at
quarter sessions grant the licences of lunatic asylums, the management
of which is under their immediate jurisdiction. They visit the licensed
house every three months, or perhaps much oftener, accompanied with
their medical officer, and make their entries in the visitors' book and
the patients' book. The administration of the law being vested in the
commissioners, they also have the powers of supervision; and in the
meantime, twice a year, or oftener, they make their visit; and without
reference to the magistrates they inscribe their own remarks and recom-
mendations as entries in the same books : what follows ? The visiting
justices not only frequently disregard the suggestions of the com-
missioners, but in some instances* they set their authority at nought.
Thus, in the report before us, the commissioners give a detailed state-
ment of their contumacious treatment by the justices of the Hull
Borough. In vain, since the opening of this asylum, did they repeat
then visitations, and remonstrate against defective accommodation and
general mismanagement; the attention of the Board in New-street,
Spring-gardens, was in vain called to the pertinacious obstinacy of these
justices, until, wearied with official correspondence, and " having no
reasonable expectation," they state, " that any steps'would be taken by
NO. XXIV. L L
476 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
the committee of visiting justices to tlio remedy of the manifest
defects," upon which they had animadverted, they inform us that they
had recourse to the dernier ressort?an appeal to the Secretary of State
?and with what success ? The Secretary of State for the Home
Department transmitted, we are told, the document which the com-
missioners had drawn up, reciting the causes of complaint, down to the
visiting justices for their information, and " they in reply, after denying
the necessity for many of the changes and improvements recommended
by the commissioners, stated that several of their recommendations had
been carried out." Here, for awhile, the matter rested, after which the
report informs us that " the asylum was again, in August, 1851, visited
and animadverted upon by two of the commissioners, who reported that
its construction and general arrangements were the same as noticed in
previous entries." The visiting justices, be it observed, had already
treated their previous recommendations with the most perfect indif-
ference?and thereupon it seems the commissioners again made a variety
of suggestions for the improvement of the institution?and again without
effect, inasmuch as they state that" At the last visit made to the asylum
on the 4th March last (1852), the visiting commissioners reported that
although some few additions had been made, the asylum was substan-
tially in the same state as before. Upon the perusal of this report, the
Board addressed a letter to the visiting justices on the 28th March, press-
ing for a general reviewal of the whole arrangements and economy of the
asylum, and offering every assistance on the part of the commissioners?
and to this communication the Board have as yet received no reply beyond
the acknowledgment of its receipt.'''' The commissioners add, addressing
(as their report does) the Lord Chancellor, "Your Lordship is aware that
as the Hull Lunatic Asylum is a borough asylum (established under the
provisions of the Act 8 and 9 Yict. c. 126), we have no means of com-
pelling the justices of the borough to adopt our recommendations, how-
ever beneficial they might prove to the patients, otherwise than by
calling in the assistance of the Secretary of State." But the assistance
of the Secretary was confessedly called in by the commissioners?their
statement was transmitted to the justices, and the justices in their turn
remonstrated, and after all still set the authority and recommendations
of the Commissioners in Lunacy at defiance.
But this is not the only part of the country in which this species of
" flat rebellion" appears to have been committed. We find by this
same report that the justices of the city of Norwich have been equally,
if not more refractory, although the extracts which the commissioners
have given of their two last entries clearly enough establish the exist-
ence of defects and abuses at the asylum at Norwich which ought not
to have been tolerated; yet, after all the visitations and official re-
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. -177
monstrances of the commissioners, the justices appear to have made no
manner of concession, and the report of the commissioners before us
winds up with this brutum fulmen:?" Should the justices of the city of
Norwich persist in neglecting to make a fit provision for their lunatic
paupers, conformably to the directions of the Act 8 & 9 Vict. c. 126"
(sect. viii. of the new Lunatic Asylums Bill), " it will be our duty to
bring the subject of borough asylums again under the notice of the
Secretary of State."
Our object in calling attention to these cases is to show, that although,
speaking generally, we believe the justices of her Majesty's Com-
mission throughout the country, willingly co-operate with the Com-
missioners in Lunacy, they in some instances act otherwise, and
even appear to be in direct antagonism with them. This is to be
regretted, and evinces the inexpediency of a twofold authority which
docs not act in unison?and the obvious consequence is, that the
managing officers of such asylums pay more deference to the visiting
justices than to the commissioners?in whose hands, notwithstanding
their supervision, little immediate power is placed. The power which
the visiting justices possess consists in their being able to withhold at
quarter sessions any particular licence, in the granting of which not
only have the commissioners no influence, but their advice not to grant
a licence to certain houses has, in some cases, been disregarded, and the
licence granted in the very teeth of their disapproval.* Who can read,
without perceiving the force of these remarks, the following extract
from the Report before us ?
" The licensed house called Castleton Lodge, near Leeds, has of late
years been frequently the subject of our animadversion, although no
particular case of abuse has occurred which has justified us in con-
demning it altogether as unfit for a licence.
" In the opinion of the visiting commissioners, the establishment is
gloomy and defective in cleanliness. It is unfit for the accommodation
of as many patients as are permitted by the licence to be received
therein; patients are allowed to be in bed, without having any bodily
ailment, and the art of judiciously managing the patients seems not to
be understood, or at least very little practised by the proprietors of the
house.
" Unfortunately the local visitors do not appear to eoncnr in the views
winch ice have here expressed of the short-comings of Castleton Lodge as
a place for the treatment of insanity, and ice regret to be obliged to add
that, in the abseenc of their cordial co-operation, our own efforts towards
, * SJeeilthf la,st Annual Report of the Commissioners, (the sixth, page 12,) where it is
stated that a letter was addressed by the Board of Commissioners to the Chairman
ot one ot the Quarter Sessions, requesting the justices not to grant or renew a licence
to a certain asylum, upon which^ occasion they state " no reply was received from
the justices to their communication, and the licence was renewed cis u$uo.l?"
JuL 2
478 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
correcting its various defects and enforcing a generally improved
system of management have been attended hitherto with but indifferent
success."?p. 28.
It appears to us, that if the commissioners are to have a supervision
and jurisdiction over the management of provincial licensed houses they
ought to have a voice in the renewal or non-renewal of their licences,
which, at all events, ought not to he granted in direct opposition to
their sanction and authority. The appeal to the Secretary of State does
not, it is clear, from the evidence in the Report before us?readily
assist them, hut only entails upon them a long official correspondence,
which does not lead to any satisfactory result. The Lunatic Asylums
Bill, however, has now come into operation, and it remains to be seen
how far the justices will consult the opinion or defer to the judgment
of the commissioners in erecting new lunatic asylums, and in providing
adequate accommodation for their pauper lunatics.
Within the circuit of the metropolis are the registered hospitals of St.
Luke's, Guy's, and Bethlehem. The commissioners state that many of
the defects which they had occasion to notice in previous reports in
the management of St. Luke's Hospital, have been remedied; but they
still complain that the hospital continues to be placed under the medical
care of only one resident surgeon and apothecary, and that the two phy-
sicians and surgeon, who are also on the medical staff, although they
have considerable power, do not reside there. They emphatically
recommend that here, as at Bethlehem, the medical staff should com-
prehend the services of at least two medical officers, one of whom should
have paramount authority. They reiterate their opinion, which we
apprehend cannot in principle be contravened, that in all the various
lunatic hospitals, and public asylums of the country, the paramount
authority should be invariably vested in some resident medical officer
rather than any non-resident physician or surgeon, whose means of
observing the wants and condition of the patients must obviously be
very imperfect. So thoroughly do we concur in this opinion, that we
are often surprised to find the commissioners sanction the residence in
asylums of non-medical superintendents, and, above all, that women
should be given licences for keeping asylums. By the present Report it
appears, that during the year to which it refers, five new licences have
been granted in the metropolitan district, three of which have been
given to women, which certainly seems very contradictory?or, at all
events, not in accordance with the opinion here so strongly expressed.
The commissioners express themselves well satisfied with the improve-
ments which have since their last annual report been introduced into
the ward appropriated to insane patients at Guy's Hospital; but
announce that the project of establishing a lunatic asylum for the recep-
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 479
tion of the patients, in a more suitable site in the county of Surrey, is
under the consideration of the governors of the hospital. We have
next in this Report a detailed account of the different steps taken by
the commissioners in communicating with the Secretary of State and
the governors of Bethlehem Hospital respecting the state of Beth-
lehem ; and we have no hesitation in saying they appear throughout
to have acted with the greatest consideration and courtesy towards Sir
Peter Laurie, as the President of the Board of Governors, and the other
governors of the hospital. As, however, the commissioners have suc-
ceeded in getting the hospital placed under their immediate juris-
diction, which it now is by the 35th section of the Lunatics' Care and
Treatment Bill, and the controversy therefore is at an end, no advan-
tage can arise from recapitulating details which cease to possess any
further interest. We believe the resident physician of Bethlehem
Hospital hails with satisfaction the circumstance of the institution
being placed under the supervision of the commissioners, which must,
viewed in a proper light, be a great protection to every lunatic asylum.
From the review which the commissioners have taken of the entries
made in the books of the provincial and metropolitan asylums, during
the twelve months included in this Report, it does not appear that any
very serious defects or mismanagement were found to exist in any of
them. This is a very gratifying circumstance, and speaks volumes in
favour of the resident medical officers and proprietors of these establish-
ments. The censorious animadversions which are passed upon some
few houses, we pass over, thinking it probable, as we have already pre-
mised, that during the interval which has elapsed between the date of
these entries and the publication of this Report, the proprietors of these
asylums may have removed the causes of such complaints. While in
all public and private lunatic asylums great improvements have been
effected, the commissioners state with regret that the law respecting
single patients in unlicensed houses continues most unsatisfactory, and
they further attest the impossibility of more than a small proportion of
them being visited by the private committee, the duties of which must,
it is evident, be as multifarious as they are onerous. We may add, that
we have reason to know that there is a very great difficulty in bringing
the provisions, perhaps of any act of parliament, to bear upon individual
and private cases. Look, we repeat, at the advertisements in the
Times newspaper?it is not reasonable to suppose that the " experienced
medical practitioners," widows, and private families, daily advertising
to take charge of invalids afflicted with nervous and mental complaints
(ancjlice, lunatics) will voluntarily place themselves under the jurisdic-
tion of the Commissioners in Lunacy. They take individual patients and
say nothing about it?nay, the relations of some insane persons, under
480 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
the old notion that insanity inflicts a ban upon the family, stipulate
against such reports being made. They are unwilling the affliction
should be made known, and bargain for secresy being an element of
their agreement. Here then is an evil which the law confessedly cannot
reach; for it is certain that single patients are more liable to be mal-
treated than several patients domiciled under one roof. Numbers give
individual protection, which is further guaranteed by the supervision
of the commissioners; but this very grievance, the evil of taking single
patients, would, we submit, be greatly increased if private asylums
were abolished, and the attempt made to constrain persons to send
their relations to public lunatic asylums. Rather than submit to so
obnoxious a law, which, as we have explained, would, in many cases,
be very revolting to their feelings, they would have recourse to any
alternative, and the cottage treatment would be revived with all its
manifold abuses. We believe one of the soundest principles of legis-
lation is, not to enact any law the operation of which may suggest its
own violation ; and we believe, by giving the public confidence in the
management of private asylums, the importance of early treatment in
cases of insanity will be recognised, and these single patients drawn
out of their hiding places. The commissioners, during the period
to which the Report refers, have not found it. necessary to institute
more than three prosecutions against persons attempting to keep
lunatics in unlicensed houses?and in each case they obtained a ver-
dict. Their Report concludes with observations upon the expediency
of establishing a separate asylum for the confinement of those
patients usually described under the objectionablo appellation of
" criminal lunatics." It appears that Lord Shaftesbury, as Chair-
man of their Board, having promised to bring the matter under
the consideration of the House of Lords, they have, with the view of
obtaining as many particulars as possible, addressed circulars, containing
various inquiries, to the visitors of county lunatic asylums, and the
superintendents and proprietors of hospitals and licensed houses. They
requested, first, a return of all patients confined under the Royal
authority or Secretary of State's warrants, or confined by order of justices,
as persons apprehended under circumstances denoting a derangement
of mind and a purpose of committing an indictable offence; and,
secondly, their opinion on the subject of criminal lunatics generally
being allowed to associate with the ordinary inmates of asylums. They
then enumerate the main objections to the association of the two
classes of patients, which may be briefly stated as follows:?
" 1. That such association is unjust, and that it gives pain and
offence to ordinary patients (who are generall3r very sensitive to any
supposed degradation), and also to their friends.
STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 481
" 2. That its moral effect is bad, the language and habits of criminal
patients being generally offensive and their propensities almost in-
variably bad. That in cases of simulated insanity (which seem to be
not infrequent) the patient is generally of the worst character, and that
even where the patient is actually insane the insanity has been often
caused by vicious habits. That patients of this class frequently attempt
to escape, and cause insubordination and dissatisfaction amongst the
other patients.
" 3. That a necessity for stricter custody exists for one class than for
the other, and that this interferes with proper discipline, classification,
and general treatment, and strengthens the common delusion that an
asylum is a prison.
" 4. That criminal patients concentrate attention on themselves, and
deprive the other patients of their due share of care from the at-
tendants.
" 5. That the effect on criminal patients themselves is bad; that
they are taunted by the other patients, and are irritated on seeing such
other patients discharged."?p. 33.
We must consider that the whole of this very important subject is at
present sub judice. It will, doubtless, next session, be brought pro-
minently before the Houses of Parliament; in the meantime the com-
missioners have in this report furnished us with a summary statement
in a tabular form of the numbers, classes, and sexes of criminal lunatics
confined in asylums, lunatic hospitals (including Bethlehem), and
licensed houses in the month of March, 1852. By this return it will
be seen that the number of patients falling within the designation of
" criminal lunatics" (which the commissioners allow is, in many cases,
a very inappropriate designation) amount to 439, of which, 3 GO were
males, and 79 females. The number charged with felonies against life
was 138; and against property 188. We conclude our observations
by subjoining the Table.
CRIMINAL LUNATICS.
Abstract of Returns from County and Borough Asylums, Registered Hospitals, and Licensed Houses, and the Royal
Hospital of Bethlehem. March, 1852.
Circumstances.
Indictable Offences.
Felonies.
Against Life.
f Acquitted on ground of
I Insanity . . . .
Tried. . .?{
I Convicted and sentenced,
and become Insane .
Not yet tried ^
Foundlnsaneon arraign-'
ment
Committed for trial, and
l_ become Insane . .
Totals. . . . ,
M.
80
9
15
104
F.
31
Total.
10G
10
138
Against
Property and
Persons.
M.
103
35
1G3
F.
25
Total.
28
121
39
188
Misdemeanors.
M.
35
F.
Total.
13
21
40
Other Cases.
Committed for
want of Sureties,
or as
Insane Persons
suspected of
Criminal Inten-
tions.
M.
30
F.
Total.
43
Summarily
convicted for
Vagrancy or
Wilful Damage,
and become
Insane.
M.
F.
Total.
30
Grand
Total.
M.
3G0
F.
Total.
439
482 STATE OF LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
