Mental Dynamics, In Relation to the Science of Medicine
========================================================

221
?rtqtnal (ZDommum'cattcms.
A COURSE OP LECTURES DELIVERED BY M. LORDAT, PROFESSOR OF PHYSIOLOGY
IN THE UNIVERSITY OP MONTPELLIER. ARRANGED AND TRANSLATED 
:Author: Stanhope Templeman Speer M.D., CHELTENHAM.
Lectoke III.

Gentlemen,?It was stated in the last lecture, that from the moment of birth
the human principle of intelligence undergoes a gradual expansive development,
as does likewise the vital force. This simultaneous growth on the part of
the two principles has been noticcd by Lucretius; but the poet, wishing to prove
that they were derived from the same source, and were of an identical nature,
has allowed us to take for granted that they in reality ran a parallel course ;
such, however, is far from being the case, and I shall therefore endeavour to
represent by certain lines the relative progress of zoonomic and intellectual
existence, so as, if possible, to determine in what the essential causes of the
two elements of life differ, and in what they agree. The respective lines
employed for this purpose, while starting from one and the same point, will
diverge, but they will not remain parallel. That which represents the vital
force having, as will be seen, a certain start, it is necessary that the intellectual
principle should undergo an acceleration through the intervention of favourable
circumstances, such as education, study, &c. &c., in order that its represen-
tative line may regain lost ground, overtake and even outstrip its competitor.
Thus, according to primitive disposition, to the mode of life, or to education,
do we obtain an athlete, a hero, an academician, or a shepherd. True, it may
happen that at a very early period the diverging lines which represent the
principle of intelligence may outstrip those of the vital force; or that, on
the other hand, they may remain closely united within the area of the diangle,
up to the critical point?mind being thus buried in matter. Such variations,
however, ouly serve to prove the non-identity of the two principles.

But what shall we say of the progress of the intellectual principle during
those alternations of health, disease, and convalescence peculiar to zoonomic
life ? Should the former be represented by scolloped lines, such as we have
shown to indicate the progress of the vital i'orce ? As a rule, no?facts do
not allow of it; upon the supervention of the disease the two principles cease
to run parallel, they no longer follow the same track, and consequently can no
longer be represented by the same figure. In the scolloped diangle (mentioned
in the last lecture), and intended to stand as an emblem of man's zoonomic
existence, I showed you the vicissitudes to which the vital principle is subject;
its alternations of strength and of weakness, its relapses, its dangers, its
diseases and its recoveries; but when wre attempt to unite the line which
represents^ the life of the intellect with that of zoonomic life, we find that such
unison is impossible. Allowing that disease may impede the natural develop-
ment and the spontaneous budding (so to speak) of the intelligence, this latter
principle can never be reduced by it to such an extremity as that to which the
same disease has brought the vital force.

In instituting such a comparison, we recognise at once that this latter prin-
ciple has in its proper essence suffered a diminution in quantity, of which the
intellect is incapable. The principle of intelligence, conscious of its expansive
powers and of its diverging action, cannot consent to any limitation, to any
restriction, incompatible with its own peculiar nature.

I have here stated, however, what is the. general rule. I have no wish to ignore
the exceptions, should there be any. And we must allow that there are certain
diseases in which the two powers, apparently co-operating with each other,
would seem to be alike doomed to sterility, alike thrust out of their natural
course; I allude now to what is denominated mental alienation. Do such
cases authorize us to assert that the life of the intelligence, like that
of the animal, is liable to alternations of debility, convalescence, vigour, &c.;
and that the figurative line by which it may be repre-
sented, should, as a consequence, be festooned thus
I should hesitate before coming to such a conclusion. The theory of mental
derangements is up to the present moment more or less obscure. Before the
eighteenth century the history of these diseases was too incomplete to hope
for any satisfactory physiological deductions capable of being derived from
them. Since then, however, facts have become clearer and more circumstantial,
but, unfortunately, Organicism has contrived to hamper this part of our science.
It is indeed much to be wished that physicians should be undeceived, and
diverted from what are too often merely anatomical delusions, convinced of
the duality of the human dynamism, and capable of demonstrating what is the
part played by the intellectual principle in these sad scenes. Is it really the
subject of an affection comparable to those which disturb the vital force, com-
promise its existence, render it incapable of properly executing its peculiar
functions, and then subject it to a process of convalescence which, after all, is
but an imitation of adolescence ? Or, on the other hand, is the principle of
intelligence in a similar condition to a troubled sleep, in which, by the establish-
ment of a truce between the two agencies, the vital force ruptures those
legitimate bonds which should naturally exist between the intellectual prin-
ciple and the external world, leaving the latter devoid of all guidance, liberty,
or logical capability.

If this were really the case, the intellectual principle would be neither active
nor passive, nor would it be liable to erratic deviation or dangerous prostra-
tion.?After such a species of hallucination, its figurative line could no longer
follow the inflexions of the curve alluded to in the last lecture.

Now this appears to me to be exemplified in the disease with which our
unfortunate king Charles YI. was afflicted. You are aware that it consisted in
a furious but intermittent mania, the paroxysms of which were often of long
duration?such as six or ten months, while the intervals between them were
short. After the first attack, which had lasted six months, "the king recovered?
awoke as it were from a dream," says Anquetil, and was much astonished and
grieved at what had taken place during what might be termed his " absence
proving that the intellectual past was connected with the present, just as when
in health the past of yesterday is linked with the present of to-day, in spite of
the intervention of sleep. After the attack which he suffered in 1403,
when 35 years of age, Charles YI., says the same writer, " took advantage of
a lucid interval to fix upon a settled form of government. Up to this period
his arrangements had merely been provisional; but the king now gave to these
all that solemnity and importance which might render them permanent."
You perceive, therefore, that when reason returned the intellect did not require
re-educating. It appeared as vigorous and sound as at the moment when the
attack supervened; nay, it had even improved, since its own calamity had
proved its instructor. As long then as I entertain a doubt upon these
momentous aud practical questions, so long shall I avoid compromising the
truth, and must consequently refrain from representing such aberrations by lines
similar to what I employ in figuring the irregularities to which the vital force
is subject. I prefer breaking off such lines at the points which correspond to
mental alienation, taking them up again at those which correspond with the
return of reason.

Let us now revert to what Galen, has termed accelerated or antici-
pated senescence. You are perhaps aware that he designated as old
age or senescence, all tendency to death, irrespective of age, " Senium
est vita ad interitum." We have already represented this by the
annexed figure.

In it we perceive a premature inflexion of the lines which represent
tlie vital force, such inflexion rendering the tendency to death, or, in other
words, the progressive declension of the vital force, more hasty or more rapid;
but can we, in?represeuting the life of the intelligence, employ similar figures
indicative also of its premature decay? Certainly not; materialists themselves
dare not deny the insenescence of the intellectual principle in cases of premature
old age. They mention it not, and even allow that under such circum-
stances the dying man often gives evidence of reason, talent, or genius, scarcely
manifested before, and what lias been proverbially denominated the
swans song. Tliey have not, however, learnt that this divergence of
the lines which represent the life of the intellect contrasting with the
convergence of those which represent the animal existence, thus?
upsets at a blow the JLpicurean theory.

The number of men who, like Pergolesi, Gilbert, Mondonville, Mozart,
Drouais, have died of a languishing disease, in the prime of their intellectual
faculties, is too considerable even to make choice of a few, as examples. But
we have so recently to deplore a loss of this description, that I cannot allow
it to pass over in silence. M. Casimir Delavigne has just departed, at the
close of a premature old age, and while engaged in a work requiring the greatest
possible amount of intellectual perfection and integrity. A friend who
witnessed his end, has given an account of it in the following words :?
" C. Delavigne, at the time of his demise, was on his road to Montpellier, his
physicians having held out to him a hope of cure in a less rigorous climate.
On his arrival at Lyons, on the day of his death, accompanied by his wife and
son, he became somewhat discouraged by the fatigue he had undergone. A
physician of the town assured him, however, of restoration to health, and
encouraged him greatly, while he at the same time informed his wife that he
had but a few hours to live. Such was, nevertheless, the illusion under which
the invalid laboured, that he wished to start again immediately, and merely
consented to retire to bed from a wish to please his sorrowing relatives.
The fatal moment took place at 9, p.m. "At 8 o'clock, in order to divert
his son, M. Delavigne requested his wife to read aloud from one of Sir Walter
Scott's novels; she did so for three quarters of an hour. At a quarter to nine,
he asked for something to quench his thirst, and as his wife, in order not
to fatigue him, took some little precaution in offering the glass, the poet
exclaimed: " Give it me; give it me; I am strong!" and raised himself into a
sitting posture upon his bed; then, leaning his head on his hand, he requested
Madame Delavigne to continue reading. But death was at hand; the counte-
nance of the sick man was already undergoing a change. His wife perceived
it, but repressing her grief, she read in a voice rendered unintelligible by
emotion: "How!" exclaimed the poet, " you are omitting entire phrases;" then
addressing his son, he ordered him to read instead. In another minute the
head of Casimir Delavigne fell back on the pillow; he then began to recite
aloud some lines from a tragedy at which he had been for some time engaged,
and which was to have been styled "Melusine," and ten minutes after, the
author of "Les Messeniennes" was no more; the work which occupied his last
thoughts perishing along with him, for it is well known, that Casimir Delavigne
never wrote his pieces until they were completely finished, reciting them by
memory at the moment they were to be handed over to the theatre."

It is therefore sufficiently evident, that in this premature, or, so to speak, Galenic
senescence of C. Delavigne, the vital force was on the eve of destruction while the
intellectual powers were in full operation. He was instructing his son, com-
plaining of a want of succession in the ideas to which he was listening, finding
fault with his corporeal organs and with that vital force now 110 longer obedient
to his dictates, and then consoling himself by having recourse to poetry, or, in
other words, to one of the most exalted operations of which the human mind
is capable, up to the last moments of his existence. Judge then from this, if
in such cases it be proper to approximate those curved lines which we have
made to represent the intellectual life of man.

We now arrive at a point to which I have been long looking forward; we are
at the apogee of the vital force, and, as a consequence, upon the threshold of
normal old age. What now becomes of the intellectual principle ? I have
already answered the question;?it does not undergo progressive declension.
In other words, I abstain from giving to the lines which represent mental
existence such an inflexion as would lead to their junction.

Such is the assertion which I must now endeavour to prove, in opposition to
those which the materialists maintain, and of which the following are speci-
mens :?" At the close of the period of maturity," says Cabanis, " there occurs
a gradual decomposition in the humours of the body, to which succeed gout,
stone, rheumatism, apoplectic predisposition, &c. Sometimes the acrimony of
the humours excites a species of nervous reaction upon itself, and produces
momentarily a renewal of youth, but soon the old man becomes evident, acting
and thinking with difficulty, caring only for himself, and seeking but for that
repose which is destined to close this melancholy condition Again,
we may remark, that in old age the weakness of the brain and of those opera-
tions which emanate from it, impart to their objects the same uncertainty and
the same characteristic^ which they presented during childhood. The extremes
resemble each other."

To render the above propositions, so necessary to the support of materialism,
at all tenable, we must show that the decay of the intellectual faculties, and
the renewal of childhood's characteristics, are not accidental events, resulting
from a variety of diseases such as have been noticed at all periods of life . . .
but a constant and unvarying termination of old age, and that senile death is
always preceded by a state of imbecility, as it certainly is by a decline of the
vital force, and by progressive incapacity on the part of every corporeal function.
Without such a condition, the materialist theory is absurd. Facts, then, are
distinctly opposed to such assertions, for?1st, It is not true that the intellect
becomes infallibly weaker after the vital force has passed its culminating point;
2nd, it usually happens, that the understanding acquires more strength during
the first half of that period which we designate as old age ; 3rd, it is impossible
to assign any period of existence, at which the reasoning powers naturally suffer
deterioration; and 4th, nothing is more common than to behold senile death;
that is to say, the natural extinction of the vital force; having as an intelligent
spectator and witness, the intellectual principle, its congenitor.

Let us here remark, that the opinions of Lucretius and his followers, relative
to the decay of this principle during the decline of life, are not derived from the
fathers of medicine.

Hippocrates has taken cognizance of the infirmities and diseases of the
aged, and enters into a detailed account of the imperfections which supervene,
relative to their sensorial _ capabilities, without, however, saying anything of
intellectual decay. Not, indeed, that he believed them to be exempt from
imbecility, eccentricity, or mental alienation, to all of which the human race
are liable; but he rather looked upon such diseases as eventualities or accidents,
and not as the natural and infallible termination of the human understanding.
Without doubt, wre may consider Galen as one of those who have laid the most
stress upon old age and its inconveniences. In his numerous works on physiology,
hygiene, pathology, &c., he never loses sight of it for a moment, but notices all the
successive deprivations which the vital principle suffers, the alterations in the
chemical constitution of the fluids and solids, the breaches made in various
organs, their diminished functional activity, the morbid sensations resulting
therefrom, the enfeebled movements, the sense of debility, the absence, or what
is worse, the vitiation of the appetites and of the instincts, the perversion of
the vital affections and tastes nothing is wanting to the picture, if you
only take the trouble to study its different items in the Medical Encyclopedia of
its laborious author. But observe, that in this description of old age, Galen
(who, although a Deist, had a decided leaning to materialism, and to the muta-
bility of the intellect) does not attempt to add to the foregoing characteristics
an enfeebled condition of the latter principle. He indeed says, that the aged
" have but little capability to execute any voluntary actbut none deny this;
the proverb which we daily hear, " Could youth do what age knew," is but an
expression of the fact. They have the will, they have therefore intelligence.
If the will be not obeyed, it is not the mental powers that are to be found fault
with, but the vital principle, now too debilitated to answer the solicitation, or
to obey the injunction.

Galen has not failed to observe in the aged a very characteristic trait?namely,
a weakening of the memory, of so common occurrence as to be almost consi-
dered infallible. But this does not prove a weakening of the intellectual prin-
ciple. I have on another occasion, in my lectures on the transmission of thought,
already shown that the memory (or the preservation of ideas in their full
integrity) and the rememoration or re-collection of these ideas, with their
manifestation to the powers of thought, are complex functions, executed in
concert by the two principles. The remembrance of a fact is usually composed
of two elements, the one concrete, the other abstract. The first of these is
rather the offspring of the vital force than of the intellectual principle. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the aged condition of the former should manifest
itself, while the latter power preserves its full integrity. Bememoration being
thus an operation in which the whole human dynamism is concerned, a certain
degree of oblivion must always be noticed in the memory, since age has of
necessity produced its effect upon one of the co-associates.

I would therefore request you to bear in mind those characteristics by which
we estimate the value of the intellect. It is impossible to attribute to it a
process of decay until there be a weakening of the judgment, of reason, of the
appreciation of ordinary events, of the power of abstraction, or of the faculty of
logically combining ideas, which, whether abstract or concrete, are the offsprings
of the natural psychical tendencies of the individual. As long as these faculties
preserve their ordinary condition there can be no mental senescence.
Among the problems of Aristotle we find the following:?" Why is it that
in youth we learn more quickly, and wherefore is it that as age advances
the intellect becomes more powerlul? Cur semores ampliusrnente valeamus,
juniores citius discimus V' It is unnecessary now to demand a reason for
such assertions; but it is evident that the philosopher looked upon the facts
they express as above all doubt, and this it is which would lead to a belief that
the do^ma relative to the senescence and normal decline of the intellectual
principle must have arisen and have been fostered solely by the sect of the
materialists.

But in order that the principle of intelligence should participate in the sene-
scence of the vital force, it must be shown that after this latter has attained its
apogee, the intellectual faculties at once deteriorate, while the productions of
the mind, subsequent to this epoch, become daily less profound, less perfect, or, in
other words, that tlicy retrograde. It would require that the "Eemmes Savantes,"
composed ten years after the culminating point (40 years) of the author's vital
principle, should bear evidence of inferiority of intellect to the " Etourdi," com-
posed seven years before its culmination: that " Athalie" should be inferior
to " Alexandre," that the " Spirit of the Laws" should evince less power of
understanding than the " Lettres Persannes." It would require that the works
of Kant composed at 40 years of age should much surpass those which he pub-
lished at 60. He himself, in reality, blushed at the remembrance of the former,
while the public have adopted only the latter. If the later productions,then,possess
more value than the earlier ones, it becomes impossible to say that the authors
have aged intellectually since the commencing declension of their vital force.
Let us then avoid, by all means, the doctrine of the senescence of the intellec-
tual principle, since the understanding is never so fertile, never so vigorous, as
after the culmination of the vital force.

M. Chateaubriand, doubtless, did not believe in a senescence of the intelligence,
isochronous with that of the vital force; since, in speaking of the death of
Madame de Stael, which occurred at the critical age of this illustrious woman,
he says, " We cannot too much regret the premature end of Madame de Stael;
her talents were on the increase, her style became purer in proportion as youth
weighed less upon her, while her ideas were gradually disengaging themselves
from their corporeal tenement, and partaking more and more of immortality. (1)"
{Etudes Historiques, Preface.)

The celebrated Father Sirmond, whom Naude designated as "an inexhaustible
treasury of ecclesiastical lore," likewise entertained no doubt but that the in-
tellectual principle acquired an increase of power when the vital force was
already on the decline. He advised all sages to postpone committing their
thoughts to paper until the age of 50, and he himself adopted the precept,
having attained to 52 before he determined to become an author. And then, as
if to prove that years could not daunt his intellectual powers, he continued to
write for 40 years. The vital force was extinguished within him (but not by
disease) at the age of 93, and his understanding, which had never failed, then
only yielded to the inevitable decree.?(Life of Father Sirmond by Colomiez.)
This integrity of the intellectual principle is not limited to certain points of the
human understanding. Authors and artists of every description have often pre-
sented examples of it. Our own painter, Yien, continued to exercise bis art up
to the period of his death?that is, up to 90 years of age. Solimene did the same
up to 84, at which epoch an accident rendered him sick and infirm. His last
production was worthy of all praise. He was, moreover, a poet. " It was a
matter of wonder," says his historian, "that at the age of 80 his memory
enabled him to select the choicest specimens from the different poets, and to
apply them in the happiest manner." At 88 he became both blind and deaf;
" and during this period of his existence he was visited by his pupils, who, by
his expositions relative to the difficulties of their common art and the means of
surmounting them, profited as much as by seeing him actually engaged in its
practice. _ He was in the habit of telling them, that being deprived of all cor-
poreal vision, he could see more clearly with the mind's eye than when able to
represent on canvas."?{Abridgment of the Life of Celebrated Painters, etc.,
by M. d'Argenville.)

You may possibly remember what M. llaoul Rochette has lately said relative
to the last days of the composer Cherubini, whose conversation at the age of
82 was as brilliant as during the meridian of his existence.

Gossec, at the age of 78, composed a Te Deum, considered by connoisseurs
as one of his best productions. " Galuppi, the master of Sacchini, retained
up to an advanced age (82) all the vivacity and gaiety of his youthful days,
both in his disposition and in his works. It is even said that the taste, talent,
and imagination, of which he gave evidence in his last operas and church com-
positions, caused them to surpass all those which he had published during the
preceding period of his existence."

The Jesuit Sirmond deduced from his own observations, and proved by his
works, that the most solid and durable productions of the intellect emanated
from their authors at a period of existence when the vital force had passed at
least the first quarter of its progressive declension?i. e., between 40 and 50 years
the science of medicine. 227

of age. The great Corneille certainly could not liave imagined his intellectual
powers to be of less calibre at 70 than at 30 years of age. "Although covered
with laurels," says the Abbe Ilaynal, " Corneille would not allow that the hour
had arrived for him to withdraw from the eyes of the world; and in a poetic
address to the king, he assures him that while fashion may have diverted the
popular taste into another channel, if he, the monarch, would but reiterate
those professions of regard which had formerly so inspired his poetic muse, he
himself would be fully capable of recommencing and of composing lines equal
in every respect to his former ones."

II. The facts just narrated, suffice, I think, to show that the intellectual prin-
ciple does not necessarily undergo a process of decay after the culminating
period of the vital force. This assertion requires to be reinforced by proofs,
which I purpose to adduce, of the truth of the following proposition:?
That it is not possible to assign a particular period during old age at which
the understanding is of necessity prone to decline.

Nothing, indeed, is more common than to witness aged individuals preserving
all their intellectual faculties up to the close of a most protracted existence,
although time may have made all the corporeal ravages which it is accustomed
to inflict. This resistance of the mind to the senescence of the vital system
becomes then a problem in the eyes of the physician. It would appear to us a
prodigy, did we not always bear in mind that " solidarity " which exists, not only
between various organs, but likewise between the two great principles of the
human dynamism?a solidarity of which I have often reminded you, and which
constitutes one of the great fundamental principles of Medical Physiology.
Instances of the insenescence of the intellectual principle are so numerous,
that I have but a difficulty in selecting them. If, therefore, I confine myself to
examples furnished by historical characters, it is but for the dignity of public
instruction. There can scarcely be an individual, who is not capable of citing,
whether in his own family, in the place of his birth, or even in the street lie in-
habits, several examples of this kind. I do not wish, however, to adduce those
hoary sages of remote antiquity, who ceased not to think and write till the hand
of death was upon them ; such as Plato, Chrysippus, Carneades, Varro,
Isocrates, Sophocles. I might by so doing expose myself to discussions
relative to the exact duration of their lives. We find a sufficient number of
examples in modern time of similar individuals, whose first and last moments
have been accurately and legally chronicled.

I might here allude to several centenarians, of whom the journals have ever
and anon made mention, and who were full of life aud intelligence when we last
heard of them; for instance, M. des Quersonnieres. 116 years of age, now re-
siding in Paris, an accomplished poet, remarkable for his powers of conversation,
and full of vivacity. Again, I might adduce M. Leroy, of Rambouillet, who at
the advanced age of 100, composed a remarkably beautiful and spirited poetic
eifusion. But I shall probably be told that such insenescence is merely provisional,
inasmuch as they still live and enjoy good health, and that we should await their
decease before asserting that their intellectual powers have resisted the various
stages of decay; I must therefore confine myself to those cases in which the
understanding has remained unscathed up to the period of vital extinction.
Be it so : I will restrict myself to such.

The life of Pontanelle is one upon which I am prone to lay much stress;
inasmuch as his character has been, as it were, constantly before the world;
while all the details connected with his life are authentic. In him we may
follow, step by step, the phases of increase and decrease which the vital force
underwent, and at the same time observe the inscncsccnce and immutability of
the intellectual principle. Should we fail to perceive any sensible augmentation
of its brilliancy, it would be at least impossible to discern any dimness in that
very temple of light. You are aware that he died a centenary. Hear what has
been said of him a short time before and after his decease :?" The intellectual
faculties," says the Abbe Trublet, " with the exception of a slight defect of
memory, had preserved their integrity in spite of corporeal debility. His thoughts
were elevated, his expressions finished, his answers quick and to the point, his
reasoning powers accurate and profound."

The duality of the human dynamism, the decay of the one principle and the
permanence of the other, are especially remarkable in a correspondence between
Eontanelle and the Cardinal do Eleury his contemporary, who governed France
as prime minister from the age of 70 to that of 90. When near 80 years old,
Fontanelle, feeling the need of physical repose, wrote to his eminence, asking
permission to vacate his post as perpetual secretary of the Academy of Sciences.
The prime minister, knowing something of the effects of age, since lie himself had
attained that of 84, refused his request, but in the mildest terms. Three years
afterwards, Fontanelle reiterated his demand. This time the Cardinal answered
in his own handwriting, " You are but an indolent, lazy fellow," says he, " but
wc must, I suppose, occasionally indulge such characters." In truth, on the one
hand, the seventeen years of idleness and liberty in which the suppliant indulged,
justified the accusation brought against him by the prime minister; while on
the other, his deafness, impaired vision, general debility, gouty disposition, &c.?
sufficiently exonerated him for indulging in repose and independence.

All who now hear me arc aware of what Voltaire was, when, at the age of S I,
lie came to Paris, to " seek a triumph and to find a tomb" as he himself said.
The account of that journey sufficiently shows that he was still, what he had
been during the last forty years.

Marshal llichelieu, who died at the age of 93, could only be considered aged
in relatiou to the vital force. Up to his latest breath, his mind, so pre-eminently
the reflection of the epoch, remained perfect. His last words, uttered but a few
minutes previous to his departure, were characteristic of that gallantry of which
lie had all along been a model. His daughter-in-law, wishing to encourage him,
said, " You are not so ill as you would wish us to believe; your countenance is
charming." " What!" said he, with the utmost vivacity, " has my face been
converted into a mirror ?" Was it possible to say with more delicacy, that the
charming countenance she beheld was but the reliexion of her own ?
Another example presents itself to my mind, which I cannot omit to mention.
The Count Simeon, who died at the commencement of the year 1842, was bom
in 1749. His panegyrist, M. Portalis, when delivering his funeral oration in the
Chamber of Peers, says of him: "About fourteen months have now elapsed since
lie expired without suffering. His death came upon all but himself, as an un-
expected blow, so much had they becomc habituated to seeing him live without
scarccly appearing to grow old." During the above discourse, M. Portalis, in
alluding chronologically to the events of the Count's life, says of the year 1838,
" This year was to him pregnant with remembrance of the past. In the spot I
now occupy, he pronounced the eulogy of an illustrious peer, a nonogenarian
like himself; and who, after sharing his labours and proscription, had preceded
him to the tomb. If Homer's description touches us, where lie describes the
hoary Nestor bidding farewell to the youthful heroes destined to survive him,
is there not something especially solemn in the spectacle of this aged man pay-
ing the last tribute of affection to the worthy companion of his own career and
its concomitant perils, and uttering with a calm, sad voice over his tomb, those
sublime words so soon to re-echo over his own? At all times solicitous for the
dignity of this chamber, he in the year 1840 suggested a proposition for the
amelioration of its internal arrangements."

In our own epoch there is perhaps no man who lias furnished so many proofs
of the insenescence of the intellectual principle during corporeal old age, as
M.Lantier, author of the "Travels of Antenor," "Travels in Spain," "Travels
in Switzerland," besides many poetical works; lie died at Marseilles in
the year 1826, aged 92 years. At 91 he offered a parting tribute to the muses,
in publishing "Geoffrey Rudel, or the Troubadour;" a poem in eight cantos.
His historian says of him, " He lias written and repeatedly asserts, ' that they
are but fools that grow old.'" In saying this, however, it must be understood
that he alludes merely to the principle of intelligence; since as regards the se-
nescence of the vital force, lie sufficiently recognises and acknowledges it in a letter
written eighteen months before his death, and of which a fac simile has been pub-
lished. His trembling hands, his failing vision, his wandering but continual
bodily pains, his complaints against a condition which permitted him neither to
live nor die, and his playful determination and vow, at once to quit this earth,
are all the expressions of conscious decrepitude. In reading this epistle, it is
impossible not to be as much struck with the endurance of the one principle of
the dynamism as with the decay of the other.

As' regards the exception made by M. Lantier relative to those whom he
designates " fools," we must enter our protest against it. It appears to be as
arbitrary a decision as that of Spinosa against philosophers on the one hand,
and the vulgar-minded on the other. To the former he granted immortality,
to the latter annihilation both of body and soul. I may be permitted to enter-
tain doubts relative to such off-hand expressions, inasmuch as the truly intel-
lectual are unfortunately somewhat prone to designate as fools all who do not
think along with them.

For my part, I have not perceived this change for the worse after the lapse
of time, in those whose intellectual powers were below the average. Their
mind was the same, and they had merely lost those corporeal attractions which
had served to veil its imperfections in youth. I hear, for instance, that such
and such a female, 60 years of age, dotes. On visiting her, I find her conver-
sation the same as it was 40 years ago, when she was considered beautiful,
vivacious, worthy of all admiration. In youth, she had borrowed with com-
pound interest from her lovely countenance wherewith to counteract the defx-
ciences of the mind, and now that the pledge has lost so much of its value,
* It were impossible at the present moment, and while engaged in considering the
inseneseence of the intellectual principle, to pass over a most prominent example, occur-
ring in one whose fame had rendered him the cynosure of his native land, and whose
every action was looked upon with interest by a grateful country. AVithiu the last
month England's greatest military hero has paid the debt of nature at the advanced age of
83. In the person of the illustrious dead, the great Duke of Wellington, we have indeed
strong evidence of the duality of the human dynamism, and of the relative value of its com-
ponent parts during the latter years of man's existence. In him the decay of the vital
principle, spite of his general good health, his abstemious habits, his Spartan-like sim-
plicity of life, and his rigid attention to the welfare of the body, had become during the
last few years but too evident. Whether on foot or on horseback, at the review, the
chamber of state, or the brilliant assembly, it was plain to all who beheld him, that the
conqueror of Europe's scourge?he who had stood on the eventful field of /Waterloo in
the full bloom of manly vigour and perfection?the restorer of a dynasty, the herald of
a long-continued peace to the trainpled-down, blood-stained nations of Europe?was
now an aged, infirm, grey-headed man, whose trembling hands could scarce support that
sword of state, which the veriest stripling might have wielded with comparative ease.
But if such were the condition of the vital force during the closing scenes of the great
duke's life,what shall we say of the intellectual principle? Did this aiford similar proof of
rapidly-approaching annihilation ? Did its aged possessor in aught realize the assertions
ofCabanis? Did he aspire only to a termination of his career? Did he think or act
with difficulty ? Was lie regardless of all but of himself? The records of the la^ ten
years nay, his speeches and actions during the past twelve months?abundantly refute
such suppositions. That his mental activity was still a prominent feature in his cha-
racter is evinced by the interest which he took in objects of so dissimilar a character, as
a umveisity commission on the one hand, and in the regulations for the militia and
transport of soldiers by railway on the other?matters which would appear to have
cngiossed his attention up to the very portals of the tomb. That his powers of judgment
and foresight ^were unimpaired, is evident from his last speech on the Militia Bill.
His Grace, it is said, spoke with difficulty, and the long pauses between his sentences,
the creditors have thought better of it, and will 110 longer believe in the solvent
condition of that intellect upon which they had calculated, and which never-
theless has lost but the value of the security.

III. Too much is said respecting senile imbecility, to neglect a further
examination of the subject.

If we carefully study the facts which have been made to serve as texts for
this fiction, we shall find that they are in reality, cases of accidental idiotism, to
which we all arc liable at any period of oui' existence. A progressive idiotism
of such a nature as to bear out this doctrine has never been witnessed. Were
an observer worthy of confidence to tell me of a man who had lapsed into this
vegetative condition, in as gradual and continuous a manner as occurs in the
case of the vital force, I would accept the fact, but I could not admit of its
explanation, as being founded upon a normal progressive extinction of the
intellectual principle. I should consider it rather as an accidental disease,
inasmuch as the senescence of this said principle ought to be as common as
constant, and as infallible as that of the vital force.

I know not from whence llicherand has drawn his ideas relative to the
soperose condition of the aged. There is a poetical proverb which asserts the
contrary, and tells us that the tendency to sleep is as much a morbid symptom
in their case as is wakefulness in youth, llicherand would have us believe
that this condition is the result of an obliteration of the ideas. The morbid
sleep of the famous Moivre does not, however, support such a theory. " To-
wards the close of Ins career, he lost his hearing and his eye-sight, and the
necessity for sleep increased to such a degree that he required at least twenty
hours of it." It is not, however, said that during his four waking hours he
had lost ought of his mathematical genius, or of that excellent, memory which
allowed him to repeat " entire scenes from the c Misanthrope,' with all the
emphasis and intonation with which lie remembered to have heard them deli-
vered sixty years before, at Paris, by Moliere's own company."

and sometimes between the very words, betrayed the effort it required to proceed. But
while thus struggling against the results of vital incapacity, his remarks, it is added,
were, as ever, fully to the point; and none would appear to have taken so rational, so
liberal, or so unimpassioned a view of the militia question, in its ultimate bearings upon
national defence, as the veteran but decrepit soldier, who once more raised his voice
in behalf of his country's welfare. On this, as on all previous occasions, his opinions
were received with a respcct and consideration which in itself constituted a tacit
acknowledgment, a silent homage to the intellectual principle manfully struggling amid
the crumbling ruins of its earthly tenement. Such homage, however, was not confined
to the august assembly upon whose ears his final accents fell; it was universal; it was
even innate in the breasts of Englishmen. Has a foreign invasion been uppermost in
their minds, the fact that the great duke was still alive to direct his ancient paladins,
and head his country's small but gallant host, too often sufficed to quell a salutary fear;
and could we suppose such a calamity to have been really imminent, to whom would
England s sons have looked with such anxiety, with such hopeful anticipations of success,
or such visions of domestic security, as to the venerable, grey-headed warrior, whom all
acknowledged to be, as of old, the trusty guardian of his country's honour, the cliiefest
warrant for a continuance of her inviolate condition. But, again, when the demon spirit
of iutestine insubordination had given evidence of a mighty but slumbering eruption, to
whom did the partizans of loyalty and order look, but to the aged hero, who with all the
alacrity and freshness of youth had at once taken upon himself the protectorship of the
world's metropolis, and whose arrangements upon that memorable occasion were, for
efficiency and completeness, worthy of the same master mind that had once planned the
lines of Torres Vedras. It was enough, on the 10th of April, 1848, to know that the
duke had taken the matter in hand, and was again at the head of his troops, for each
citizen to feel that all was done, and would be done, that could be done; and in this
additional acknowledgment of the veteran warrior's intellectual and moral superiority,
we may again recognise an indirect tribute to that mental insenescence of which our
author was so ardent a supporter, and of which he himself, while delivering the above
lectures at the advanced age of 82, afforded so striking an example. S. T. S.
In truth, can we confound accidental disease with the natural tendencies of
the intellectual principle ? No; setting aside mental affections, the theory of
which has no relation to decay, the aged, as aged, are not imbecile. A man
may become as blind and deaf as Moivre; his hand may tremble to such a
degree as to prevent him tracing a line or even a character; his organs of
speech may refuse to give utterance to a single word; his memory may fail to
recal the sounds which were wont to express his thoughts, as may be noticed
in healthy-minded persons suffering from verbal amnesia; but with all this, he
will not resemble the idiot, since he may still possess the whole system of
ideas resulting from and acquired by a long existence, and may combine them
intentionally, as before he had lost the power of verbal expression.

In opposition to misconstrued facts, I shall adduce the following:
In the solemn audience of the Court of Cassation of the present year,
M. Dupin, procurator-general, pronounced the eulogy of M. Etienne Pasquier,
author of " Researches on Prance." This celebrated lawyer of the sixteenth
century, after having for a long period discharged the duties of king's counsel,
retired from his post at the age of 74, in order to give up his time and energies
to the pursuit of literature; and to these his favourite studies he devoted the
remainder of his existence up to the period of his death, which took place on
the 31st of August, 1G15, at the age of 86. It has been remarked as a singular
fact, that he closed his own eyes previous to the fatal moment. Again, his-
tory has handed down to us an anecdote relative to the death of Julius Ca?,sar,
where the mighty conqueror, falling under the blows of his murderers, calmly
arranges his toga, in order that his fall might be decent. The fact is worthy
of remembrance in a moral point of view; such presence of mind, and such
resolution under such circumstances, are of rare occurrence even in a man 50
years of age. But the previous observation, made in connexion with the
natural extinction of an individual of 86, is truly a precious antliropic pheno-
menon ; do we not see in it a hidden principle, preserving all its consciousness,
witnessing the destruction of the vital system it had hitherto inhabited, and
even performing the funeral rites of its own host ?

Pacts analogous to the above are to be found everywhere, and my sole diffi.
culty is to keep within proper limits. I cannot, however, omit to mention the
following example, on account of the remarkable expression of the dying man
himself. The individual in question is Pierre Louis Auquetil, no less remark-
able for his own intrinsic merits, than for the additional proof which he affords
of the truth of my argument. I shall quote a short passage from his bio-
graphy:?"Auquetil had attained his 84th year; his robust constitution and
moderate habits having preserved him from the ordinary infirmities attendant
upon old age. While still meditating great achievements, he was attacked by
erysipelas of such severity, that his physician at once perceived his end to be
nigh at hand, and informed him thereof. Anquetil heard his doom with the
resignation and tranquillity of a philosopher, and said to those who came to
take their last farewell, " My friends, you behold a man dying, full of life."
The prognosis of his medical attendant was but too soon realized; the disease
gained ground; and on the 6th of September, 1S06, the author of "The Spirit
of the League," and of "The History of Prance," breathed his last,preserving
the full power of his intellectual faculties up to the very portals of the tomb.
In the above phrase,?" a man dying, full of life," many may see only an
ingenious amalgamation of words. But to ns it should seem the accurate and
forcible expression of a truth, which it would be in vain to contest. It is
indeed an evidence of the duplicity of the dynamism in one and the same indi-
vidual; a proof of the union of two active causes simultaneously created,
hitherto inseparable, and the survivor of which, is the biographer of the other.
The imaginary return of the aged to the condition of the infant, has so many
charms for a certain sect, that its more zealous members have represented it
under a variety of aspects. You may possibly have noticed the following pas-
sage from Cabanis :?" In old persons, the feebleness of the brain, and oj those
functions which originate therein, gives to their determinations the same
mobility, the same characteristic uncertainty, which they possessed during
childhood. Extremes resemble one another."

Now, this alleged resemblance is but another popular delusion. In enouncing
it, the author has not hesitated to advance a theory, which of itself thoroughly
overturns materialism. The fundamental principle of organicism is, that the
vital force is the result of organization. But if the vital force of the aged and
that of the infant be identical, their respective brains should be so likewise.
It happens, however, that (as anatomy teaches us) the brain of the latter- is
remarkable for its softness, while, on the other hand, that of the former is of
excessive consistence. We must, therefore, allow that vital force so alike, can-
not be the necessary physical result of organs in themselves so dissimilar.
Not content with propagating this doctrine relative to the second childhood
of the aged, by hardy assertions, exaggerations, theories, &c., an attempt has
been made to represent the same through the medium of the aesthetic arts. I
have already alluded to that satire upon human existence which is to be found
in the writings of_Shakespeare. The idea there embodied has been reproduced
by the art of the painter. The "Magasin Universel" has lately published one
of these attempts, and with such success, that I now never meet an artist who
is either ignorant of it, or who does not praise it in the highest terms. This
obliges me to examine, along with you, both the idea itself, and the manner in
which art has expressed it.

And first, let us glance at the description of human life, as given by Shake-
speare, and at the manner in which a modern sculptor has represented it,
through the instrumentality of his art. A short prologue which precedes the
translation in question, will suffice to show the zeal with which a so-called phi-
losophic sect labours to disseminate this second childhood of the aged, and with
it, doubtless, the doctrine of complete annihilation.

" Tub Seven Ages?A Basso-relievo after Shakespeare.
" Among the most remarkable of the poetic descriptions of Shakespeare may
be cited the piquant and philosophic tirade of Jacques, relative to the different
periods of man's existence, in the play of 'As You Like It.' This passage has
suggested a beautiful specimen of modern sculpture, greatly admired in one of
the expositions held at Somerset House, London. We shall first give a trans-
lation of the Shakesperian description, and then institute a comparison between
the idea of the poet and the representation of the same in sculpture, as ema-
nating from the studio of M. Belmes.

" All the world's a stage,
And all tlie men and women merely players;
They have their exits, and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms;
And then the whining schoolboy, with satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail,
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woful ballad
Made to his mistress's eyebrow. Then tli3 soldier,
lull of strange oaths, aud bearded like the pard;
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined;
With eyes severe, and beard of formal cut;
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
the science of medicine. 233
Aud so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon;
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side;
His youthful hose well sav'd, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
Turning again towards childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful histcry,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything."

I know not whether the above description of human existence, when placed
in the frame from which it has been withdrawn, be capable of producing a
remarkable effect or not. Certain it is, that there is nought but what may-
acquire some merit from the objects amid which it may happen to be located.
But, in my eyes, this isolated extract is but an insipid, frigid caricature, without
point, without instruction. Nor indeed am I exactly aware as to what may
have been the design of Shakespeare in stringing together such a succession of
incoherent details." It may have been intended as a history of the different
ages of a particular individual, but it certainly is not a faitluul delineation of
Man during the successive stages of his terrestrial existence.

With regard to the sculptor himself, it is evident that he has not merely
considered the matter in an aesthetic light; he has endeavoured to moralize as
well as to philosophize. A glance is sufficient to prove the fact, and one of
his admirers endeavours thus to fix our attention on the profound idea which
appears to have animated the artist:

" The form of the basso-relievo is circular, persons of all ages being grouped
around. M. Belines (says he) has chosen the circular form, in order to unite
the extremes, or, in other words, to place in close proximity the child just
born and the aged man now scarcely conscious of his own existence. _ The two
meet at the foot of a tomb?a truly philosophic idea; upon this tomb is
inscribed the Latin quotation, 'Mors janua vitce,'?Death is the portal
of life."

In truth, on one side of the monument may be seen a foetus enveloped in its
membranes, after it come five babes, each somewhat older than the other;
beyond is a young man pondering over a half-closed volume, while his wife and
child stand behind.

? Further on we perceive a warrior braving every danger, in order to plant
a standard. Fame is rewarding him with a laurel crown.

. To the right, the descending series of figures is composed, first, of a group
Of three persons, a judge on liis bench, an allegorical representation of justice,
and a fettered criminal; to this succeeds an aged individual, attentively
examining a page on which some figure is represented, and lastly, a decrepit
old man, sitting down almost as closely enveloped in drapery, as the foetus in
its membranes. You see that here the second half of existence is made to
decrease alike physically and intellectually: it is, therefore, a tribute to
Lucretius.

But I would ask, has the artist attained his object? has he succeeded in
clearly demonstrating the repuerescence of the aged?his intellectual resemblance
to the newborn infant ? Has he given me to understand how that death really
becomes the gate of life ? Has art been able to fascinate me so far as to
render similar, two things which I well know to be dissimilar ? No, far from
it; art has just contradicted, that which the artist would wish to convince
me of.

Of one thing I am persuaded, in spite of the artist's project, and that is,
the dignity of the latter half of human existence, which is invariably
intellectual, and not subject to declension, as compared with the first half. The
naked figures on the left, all in the ascending scale, merely show motion, brute
force, generative power. Those in the descending scale, all decently clad,,
evince only intellectual, moral, or scientific tendencies. Say what you will,,
the first half represents the preponderance of the vital force and its aggregate,
material, with but little evidence of mature wisdom. The second half represents
the pre-eminence of the understanding, and induces me to suspect the progres-
sive decline of the vital principle, since the artist veils with drapery, the
ravages which this power undergoes, in that body once so vigorous and
flourishing.

The artist and his admirers think to cast a slur upon the sixth agc_ of
Shakespeare, by representing the man as occupied with matters of trifling
importance. The commentator says that he is working out his horoscope.
But be the subject what it may, thought is engaged, and a thought possesses
in the psychological hierarchy, a higher rank than an action without thought
for its origin. The studies of this period of life have always as their object the
elicitation of truth. Be that object real or chimerical, be the method employed
logical or not, be the ultimatum sought for, present or future happiness
the intention is at least always elevated and noble, nor can I ever believe that
such occupation is inferior to that of a young man indulging (it may be) in
immoral reveries. As yet, therefore, I see no tendency to annihilation.
But the artist may imagine that I cannot fail being convinced of such a
catastrophe, when he points out to me the inaction of utter decrepitude; he
may suppose that by approximating the representation of the seventh age to
that of the child still enveloped in its membranes, I may be led to believe that
two individuals, in spite of their corporeal differences, can yet be identical as
regards their intellect. But there is in reality nothing that authorizes me to
credit such a resemblance. Imbued with the tenets of Lucretius, the artist
presumes that a decrepit and aged man is of necessity fatuous, yet even the
great mass of mankind know well enough that such is by no means the case.
The sculptor should by rights have previously informed me of the imbecile
condition of the man he represents, otherwise what reason have I for supposing
that the one in question, no more possesses the power of thought and reflection
than does the foetus ? Why should I imagine that he is but a living automaton,
when so many in the same condition have been pregnant with original ideas,
with logic, reason, and moral sentiment ? He is silent, he makes no sign. It
may be so, but lie may think not the less. What is to prevent me from believing
that it is Theophrastus, finishing his " Characters " at the age_ of 99, or medi-
tating his last adieus to Lastenia, from whom lie is still anticipating a visit.
{Voyage d? Anterior, chapter xi.)

Why may I not believe the figure to represent the illustrious St. Jerome,
full of learning, genius, and faith, preparing himself, at the age of 88, to receive
the last supper ?

Why may I not believe it to represent Buyseh, meditating, at the age of 93,
over the formation of a new anatomical collection, similar to that which he had
just disposed of to a foreign potentate ?  Why may I not believe it to
represent Morgagni, aged 89 years, pondering over the information he had
received relative to the sensation produced in the medical world, by his great
work " On the Seat and Causes of Disease," a work which he had published
but a few years previous ?

Why may I not believe it to represent the Duke of Nivernois, who, at the age
of 82, perceiving death rapidly approaching, wrote a poetic epistle to the
physician, dissuading him from seeking a consultation upon his case ?
Again, why,, may I not believe it to represent the academician Teissier,,
who died at the age of 97, and over whose grave M, Merat thus spoke:
"Teissier has run ja long career, appreciated and beloved by all who knew
him. The gcntlenes's of his manners, the suavity and amiability of his dispo-
sition, fully justified the attachment of which he was a general object; in him
old age presented nought but what was pleasing, while the charms of his con-
versation and of his past recollections appeared to increase with his years."
Is it sufficient, then, to be aged and decrepit to be forthwith looked upon as
fatuous ? Not more than being idiotic would suffice to be considered aged.
What value, then, must we attribute to this philosophic sculptural repre-
sentation, which strives to place upon an identical footing the new-born infant
and the hoary head of age ? Will common sense permit of our assimilating
the two F  Have the moral sentiments produced within us by such
beings, aught of resemblance ?_

"Mors janua vita " such is the inscription graven upon the tomb, at the
foot of which the first and seventh ages are represented as meeting .... I
could pardon the quotation, if man were in a condition identical with that of
the silk-worm, and that the day of his death were that of the birth of his
descendants. But no, man creates his like only while in the full enjoyment of
his vital powers, and shortly before the divergence which takes place in the
respective progression of the two principles.

In what scientific acceptation, however, might we say that " Death is the
gate of life ?" I know of but two?the one which tells us that the same
chemical elements may serve to form a variety of successive material aggre-
gates ; the other, which shows us how the decomposition of a corpse gives rise
to a multiplicity of worms. But these truths are so common and so ordinary,
as to be unworthy of typification in a philosophic or poetic point of view.
From the preceding facts, and the deductions which may be drawn from
them, you will I think be convinced that the intellectual existence of man is
endowed nominally with an indefinite insenescence, and that the principle
of intelligence may even be witness of the extinction of the vital force, its con-
genitor; while, should it happen that a species of somnolence, of short duration,
prevents the understanding from beholding the last moments of life, there
would still be much difficulty in explaining the same, were causes of a physical
nature alone sought for in elucidation of the fact.

The integrity of the intellectual principle amid the ruins of its old abode, is
that which attacks, most directly, the doctrine of the Materialists. Cabanis
endeavours to ward it off by hardy amphibological assertions, thrown out at
random, and utterly wanting in doctrinal value. Now, according to Cabanis, " the
aged man thinks but of himself" Looking upon egotism in a particular point
of view, La Ilochcfoucault will tell us whether such a tendency be exclusively
that of the aged man. But considering it in the ordinary acceptation, you
merely calumniate him, inasmuch as he is frequently occupied in thinking of
those about him; his children and pupils may serve to bear witness of this. If,
for instance, Monthyon were over-careful of himself during the prime of
zoonomic life, his will would absolve him of his old failing, affording as it does
ample evidence of love for his fellow-creatures. " The aged think with diffi-
culty." It happens, however, that the world at large tacitly allows the
thoughts and ideas of the aged to be the most substantial, the most fruitful, and
most worthy of remembrance and respect. In the programme of the fete dedicated
to the Supreme Being and instituted by the Convention, may be found the fol-
lowing :?" In the midst of the people, appear their representatives ; they are
surrounded by infancy adorned with violets; by youth with myrtle; by virility
with oak; and by age with olive and vine leaves." It is unnecessary even to
hint at the conventional value of these different emblems. Again, M. Jubinal,
wishing to compare the Rhone and the Escaut in relation to the utility of each,
compares the former, impetuous, angry, and rapid, overturning everything in
its course, doing as much harm as good, to an impetuous, headstrong youth;
and the latter, tranquil, slow, and majestic, a source of industry and riches, to a
hoary sage.

Is not such testimony sufficient to counterbalance the assertion of Cabanis :
" The aged man requires repose" ? Physical repose, truly; this to him is in-
dispensable, in order to retard tlie destruction of his corporeal system, the
crumbling away of which he is but too sensible of. Doubtless it is he alone
who can regard eternal repose, viewed in this light, as a sovereign good. But
docs he alike desire intellectual repose ? no, certainly; it docs violence to his
feelings, it is his mortal enemy. For him no pleasures now remain, save those
derived from new combinations of ideas, and from mental communion with his
own thoughts, past and present. Can such enjoyment be designated repose ?

Do we perceive any desire for repose in the following extracts from M.
Clavering??"Walter Scott conversed with facility,fluency, and vivacity. The
traveller, Simond, and the metaphysician, Bonstcttin, might well have entered
the lists with him on this point. Well do I remember the eccentric Bonstettin at
the age of 87; lively, sparkling, sprightly, coquetting with young girls, and in-
variably confining his attentions to the prettiest. A pardonable weakness, after
all, and amply compensated for by his good humour, his wit, and his general
information. At 70 years of age he learnt the Danish, Icelandic, and Celtic
languages. Did this indicate a desire for repose ?

It is well known that the celebrated Athenian lawgiver, Solon, when at the
point of death, and hearing his friends conversing together in an under tone,
demanded their reason for so doing. Expressing their surprise at such a
question, under such circumstances, lie replied, " I merely wished to know the
subject of your discussion before I die." (Val. Max., lib. viii. 21.) Do not,
however, imagine that such a trait pertains but to a single individual, it is the
expression of a characteristic, common to all men whose minds are stored with a
certain amount of ideas.
" The aged aspire only to the termination of their existence." (Cabanis.)
To aspire would mean that they are impatient for the annihilation of the
intellectual principle. But this is false; there is not an aged man, who, provided
his mind and body be in health, does not feel a shudder pass through him at
the thought of complete annihilation. An unhappy existence, of which almost
every hour brings with it a loss, a privation, a pain, a remorse, may perchance
engender the wish to die, with a view to the enjoyment of a happier existence,
or the return to a condition of inanity. The loftiest intellect even may aspire
to such a termination. But this aspiration, the result of mature deliberation,
and of which the human understanding is capable at every age, has nothing in
common with a tendency to extinction, as though the intellectual principle
were as indifferent to such a termination as is the vital force.

You must surely all perceive the repugnance of the intellectual principle in
the aged to the idea of its own complete destruction, when, witnessing the
demolition of its quondam tenement, it shows forth as strong, as brilliant as
ever. What are so many systems of rational psychology, so many divers crceds
imagined by those to whom the Almighty has not vouchsafed the knowledge of
the true one, but continuous glimpses of the future, which have pre-occupicd the
imagination of the aged, and which prevent them from reverting to an impor-
tunate and repugnant idea?that of annihilation ?

I have not here undertaken to examine into all that may happen to the human
intellectual principle after death, since the domain of our science is limited by
that event. But I denounce, as fallacies, the ordinary acceptation relative to
the annihilation of the intellect in the aged. -The motives of which I have just
spoken, and my own observations, are alike opposed to such an assertion. Never
have I seen an aged individual aspiring to annihilation, but I have witnessed
those imbued with the idea, living in the agonies of despair. A few Materialists
have indeed appeared to meet their fate with resignation; but to be resigned
is not to be satisfied or desirous of its approach; and so far from this dispo-
sition of the mind supposing a tendency to extinction, it, on the contrary, indi-
cates a sublime power and integrity.

As far as my own experience goes, the frame of mind most common to those
who have not enjoyed the blessings of faith, has been one of scepticism. These
persons, as they became advanced in years, were daily more and more convinced
of the contrast existing between the senescence of the vital force and the
insenescence of their own intellectual principle; such conviction showing how
each succecding year served to weaken their preconceived notions relative to
the annihilation of the mental powers.

The examples which I have lately brought forward of the insenescence of the
human intellectual principle at the most advanced periods of life, have been
so numerous, that to adduce more would be unnecessary and useless. To
this argumentum ad judicium, which should in itself suffice, I shall add
another of a different kind. The world at large, without exception, shows by
its actions that it accepts this doctrine, if not textually, at least tacitly; foi-
lowiun- in this respect a line of conduct which comes into direct collision with
the dogmas of Lucretius and Cabanis; and I trust that my auditors will, after
mature reflection, no longer deny that insenescence of which I speak, lest they
find themselves opposed to the majority of the human race, and, at the same
time, thinking that which their own actions contradict. These two arguments,
ad vera cundiam et ad hominem, it is necessary to consider somewhat fully.
1st. A respect for the aged constitutes a species of law, which has existed
from the remotest periods, flourishes in every civilized community, and forms
part and parcel of the public morals. It is not indeed a natural law, one derived
from a sentiment of humanity, or of such a kind as was styled by Cicero, innate,
not instituted. Nevertheless, being almost as unexceptional as natural laws
themselves, it must be derived from a feeling of consideration, itself deduced
Avithout effort from the nature of things. "What therefore can have implanted
this sentiment of respect for age in the members of civilized communities, if
not an unreflecting conscious persuasion of the increasing value of the intellect
in advanced life ?
Let it not be objected to this, that the sentiment is not one of respect, but
rather of compassion for the weak, or of gratitude for past services. A
respectful consideration for an equal, is not to be confounded with the above
feelings. The respect of which I speak, is accompanied by a certain deference,
by a conviction that lie who is the object of it merits the preference, and by a
wish to obtain his approbation.
Consult now your ownfeeliugs, and you will perceive that your considerationfor
an aged man is not proportionate to the number of years lie may have attained,
but to the sum of intellectual acquisitions which he has made from among the
most enlightened classes. An old man, whose station in life presupposes a
condition of profound ignorance, or premature fatuity, will not elicit a senti-
ment much higher than that which we possess for a beast of burden, that has
long and faithfully served us, and which we lack the courage to put an end to.
But the hoary sage, placed in the same intellectual sphere as yourself, whose
education has in all probability equalled your own, and who, at your age, may
have resembled you .... such au one will inspire respect, since you
cannot but feel that you are his inferior. You are not tempted to affect an
equality with him, and in this, not only are you obeying certain conventional
rules, but listening to a prudent and self-spcaking interestedness which warns
you from attempting to risk a competition. The dogmas of Lucretius and
Cabanis may have told you that the sexagenarian is but your equal mentally
speaking, since he is as much beyond the culminating point as you are on
this side of it, but you believe it not. A knowledge of the world has taught
you the reverse; here, as in many other circumstances, experience outstrips
science, and what experience has taught you is simply this?that the intel-
lectual principle of the aged man has not returned to that level at which you
now stand, and that from its peculiar progressive tendency you cannot possibly
determine whether your own mental powers will ever be similar to his.
At all times, and in every age, it is and has been deemed advisable, that a
body of men, whether assembled for political, religious, or scientific purposes,
should have an individual, or body of individuals at their head, as a source of
reference. In the earlier ages even, these were composed of men in whom the
decay of the vital force had already become evident, as if wise resolutions were
only to be expected from the aged. Is not this a tacit confession of my pro-
position, that the intellect may remain unscathed, while corporeal senescence is
even rapidly advancing ?

The mere name of Senatus, amongst the Romans, shows that tlie_ individual
members of this body had already past their meridian. True, Sigouius speaks
of senators who were admitted at the age of 30; but it is unnecessary to dis-
cuss the question as to whether these elections were illegal, and whether they
were the result of an infraction, or simply of toleration; should such exceptions
have been the recompencc of superior talents and acquirements, or intrusions
achieved by bribery and corruption: it is sufficient for us to remember the
original spirit of the institution, designated as it is by the name.

It is true that in the Roman Senate there was a decree, that no one should
be entitled to become a member after the age of GO. But it was implicitly
agreed, that the interval between 50 and GO was a period of life more calcu-
lated to inspire confidence, in discharging the senatorial duties, than the interval
between ^0 and 30. Besides which, the period of disqualification was not
determined upon from any preconceived notion relative to the decay of the
intellectual powers: it was instituted rather in reference to the aspiration of a
numerous youth, burning to enjoy the honours and advantages attached to
public office, and whom it was not expedient to retain too long in suspense and
abeyance. Moreover, the superiority of the mental power in advanced life was
not only recognised but taught; and Cicero himself says?"that in the admi-
nistration of a republic we should act as in the management of a ship, in
which the younger and more active are employed as sailors, while the aged,
men of deliberation and resolution, are preferred as pilots."

IY. The technicalities of jurisprudence define senescence as " a weakening
of the bodily and mental powers, the result of accumulating years." We
must presume, therefore, that, legally speaking, the protraction and debility of
the vital force do not constitute senescence, unless there be at the same time a
weakening of the intellect. As this latter condition, however, is not infallible,
it follows that, juridically speaking, scnescence is but an accident, an eventuality,
and this again agrees with my proposition.

Y. How is it that certain ecclesiastical dignities in the Romish church,
requiring the greatest amount of mental capacity, intelligence, and wisdom,
such, for instance, as the Episcopate, are not attained until after the culminating
point of the vital force ? It is evident that we have here again an expression
of the fact, that the understanding perfects itself at the time the vital force is
beginning to decline.

V I. Another proof of the fact, that the world in general tacitly acknowledges
the insenescence of the intellectual principle, is this?that while legislators have
considered it indispensable to appoint guardians during a considerable portion
of the first half of life, they have never thought of instituting an obligatory
guardianship of the same nature for the latter period of existence; . . . . and
no one appears ever to have considered this as an omission.

In truth, the law has certainly not forgotten that portion of human existence
of which senescence is an inevitable accompaniment. On this head there exists
an explicit dispensation. At 70 years of age, the individual is exempt from
corporeal offices, from military service, from the functions of juror, and from the
office of guardian. It is evident, therefore, that the legislature has not been
forgetful of those who are stricken in years; it has come, as it were, to the
rescue and succour of vital senescence. This senescence it alone recognises as
resembling the condition of the infant, and as such has exacted of it nought
that decrepitude, defect, or infirmity could render incompatible with duties
requiring energy and manly vigour.

But the legislature has, on the other hand, carefully esehcwed all ideas which
might presuppose a belief in the senescence of the intellectual principle. It
has exempted no age from the observance of civil and natural laws. Be he a
very Methusaleh, the individual is still subject to them. He has 110 legal
guardian, curator, or tutor, he possesses a full share of civic liberty, and is in
consequence responsible for all his acts, and punishable for any infraction of
law, without being able to plead want of discernment as an excuse for such
infraction.

Is not the reason of all this sufficiently evident ? Is it not a tacit avowal
of the insenesccnce of the intellectual principle during the different stages of
zoonomic senescence even up to the renewal of infantile incapacity. During
infancy, such is the helpless condition of the vital force, that a certain amount
of protection is necessary until the understanding has become developed and
capable of exercising its own rights and privileges. Were the mother's solici-
tude to be withheld, the infant must perish. Law steps in to the mother's
assistance, and the infant is preserved. When age, however, has again rendered
the vital principle as powerless as it was during infancy, must the law again
intervene, and render the same assistance as formerly ? No. The moral prin-
ciple of the man is in full vigour, and should be the most zealous, the most
interested guardian of its own system. It may still point out what is necessary
for its conservation, and seek, demand, or implore the same, according to the
position which its possessor may occupy in the social scale. If by chance,
however, the intellectual principle should become dimmed or oppressed by the
supervention of a disease which incapacitated it from thinking or acting aright,
then a guardian would become indispensable, and the legislature Avould not fail
at once to appoint a competent one. But as such an event is only casual, the
remedy can merely be extemporary. Would you, I ask, submit to the dictates
of an official guardian, while enjoying the full powers of the intellect, simply
because a certain number of years had passed over your head?

To think and act thus, however, we must feci convinced that nought can
authorize the belief in a dogma so erroneous, as that the intellectual principle
should of necessity deteriorate at any given and fixed period of existence, how-
ever protracted; or that there can be any specific epoch, at which a citizen,
a magistrate, a priest, a bishop, a king, or a pope, should become naturally,
and without exception, ineligible for the exercise of those intellectual functions
which the title renders imperative.

In conclusion, let us at once admit the natural and habitual insenescence
of the intellectual principle, in spite of the senescence of the vital force, under
the penalty of falling into the most absurd contradictions; while we at the same
time endeavour to establish an agreement between the sciencc we are striving
to illustrate, and that common sense which directs us almost by instinct.
It is now time for us to acquire a clear and comparative view of the intel-
lectual existence of man in relation to his zoonomic life.

The lines by which this zoonomic life may be represented, constitute a figure
termed a diaugle. We have already observed that intellectual does not com-
mence simultaneously with vital action, and have also shown that there is an
interval between the moment of creation and that of primary action; which
interval may be represented by a line drawn from the creative point, to that
from which the curve commences; thus?

"VYe also see that the angle of the diangle, which is that of an ogee arch, thus,
does not efficiently and accurately represent the first attempts at intel-
lectual manifestation, and that consequently the origin of mental activity
must be represented by a curve, the commencement
of which it is difficult to define distinctly; thus?
b Action commences.
A The generative point.

Tlie curve which represents the progress of the intellectual principle cannot
be subject to interruptions or breaks, since the intellect is not liable to varia-
tions of increase and decrease, as is the vital force. The two branches of the
ellipse, therefore, must be continued during their entire course, or at least
interrupted merely by an eclipse, so to speak, if we deem it necessary to represent
at the same time those passing alienations to which mental existence is prone.
Having, then, arrived at the meridian of life, what must we do with the
curve ? ?? Are the lines again to approximate, as in the spindle-shaped figure
which wc have shown to represent zoonomie life r?No; inasmuch as all I have
hitherto said has been to show that the collective value of intellectual existence,
far from diminishing or becoming restricted within limits gradually narrowing,
increases in vigour and develops itself more and more during a considerable
period of vital senescence. The curve, therefore, by which it is represented,
must have some resemblance to a parabola, whose extremities continue to sepa-
rate slowly, in proportion as they become distant from the point of origin.
Here, however, an objection presents itself, which I have no wish to avoid.
The branches of a parabola, while separating, naturally increase the amount of
space included between them. But we cannot admit that the amplitude of the
intellect invariably increases during old age. Allowing that we may not dis-
cern an evident diminution in the powers of the understanding, it is at least
certain, that in very many instances its psychological value does not increase,
and consequently the parabolic form will not give a figurative representation of
the truth.

I admit the fact, without, however, renouncing my original idea, I admit
that, taken collectively, the faculties of the understanding do not increase?
nay, that they even diminish somewhat during the final period of zoonomie life.
But it must be borne in mind, that in the exercise of many of these faculties
the vital force co-opcrates; and as, in regard to this latter principle, its inten-
sity of action invariably diminishes during old age, we must allow that an
increase, and even a stationary condition, of the understanding, indicates a
neccssary augmentation on the part of the intellectual principle, since it is
forced to execute, unassisted, those functions in which it formerly had a coad-
jutor. Jfrom the moment at which the vital principle begins to slacken in its
exertion, does the intellectual principle require to make up for ihe deficiencies
of its colleague. A period then arrives, at which debility renders the vital
force powerless, and throws the whole burden upon the intellectual principle.
It is easy to conceive that there may be cases in which this cxcess of activity
would be inadequate to achieve what could have been done by the two powers
when in conjunction, and yet the survivor may have done more than when
actually co-operating with its defunct partner.

I see, therefore, no reason for altering the form of the curve. The parabola
will still be the figure best capable of representing the truths which I desire to
propagate.

The intellectual existence of man may therefore be imitated by a solid body,
resulting from the revolution of an elongated parabola around a central axis,thus?
The generative point A represents the moment of conception. The
dotted line extending from this point to the commencement of the
curve E represents the latent period of the intellectual principle during
intra uterine existence. The curve not uniting again, it is impossible
to assign the limits of the parabola; in proportion, however, as its
length increases, does the eversion of its including lines bccome less
evident.

Having- hitherto represented the two periods of human existence separately,
through the medium of linear configuration, let me endeavour to show them
in a similar manner, but in a state of combination.
I or this purpose I unite the diangle which represents the vital force, and
the parabola which represents the human intellectual principle; .causing them
FCC,
to interlace in sucli a manner as at once to demonstrate their mutual relation-
ship in the system which they^constitute; thus?

The dianglc A B C D indicates the entire duration of life, A and C
being its conimeneement and its termination. The intersecting line
B D divides it into two parts. At the commencement of the part
marked A is the generative point of a parabola; a dotted straight line
starting from it, represents the latent phase of the intellectual prin-
ciple. The beginning ol the curve at E is an emblem of the earliest
operations of the intelligence : its branches remain within the limits
of tlie diangle, to remind us that the vital force preponderates over the intel-
lectual principle during the first half of life. At the point of intersection the
parabolic lines begin to make their exit from the area of the diangle, and con-
tinue to diverge slowly up to the level of the terminal point C of the dianglc,
at which point life becomes extinct.

A figure of this kind, intended not to represent corporeal objects, but to fix
the attention upon abstract ideas, rtocs not require tlie accurate tracing
of a ruler and compass; and I should wish it to bccome as familiar to
you all, as an ordinary letter of the alphabet. A combination of the small
Greek theta, 0, and upsilon, v, with an iota, i, beneath, appear to me
sufficient to embody the idea in toto; thus?

A symbolic figure like this may then serve to express the fundamental prin-
ciples of the science of Man, conceived in an Hippocratic spirit, in opposition
to the doctrines of the Materialists, the Cartesians, and the-Stahlians. In
laying before you these views upon the subject, I have endeavoured to re-
main strictly within my own sphere, feeling too well my deficiencies, to
attempt to trangress its limits, and have therefore reasoned upon facts and
inductive philosophy alone, eschewing all a, priori theory.

I have laid down the insenescence of the intellectual principle, inasmuch as
it is an ascertained fact; but I cannot prove its insenescibility, since this is
not to be demonstrated by observation or logic?the only means that arc at my
command.

It is something, however, to have proved that, in the course of human
existence, there is but one portion of which Ave know by experience the begin-
nin0" and the end; and that the remaining one is unfinished, since we merely
see its initial point, and are not even aware whether it be susceptible of a
terminal one. . .

Buffon has said, that the saddest reflection, or, 111 other words, that which
most mars the happiness of man, is the certain prospect of his approaching
end, and that this idea is a canker in the heart of every aged individual. At
the age of 70 he set about calculating the probabilities of life during the suc-
cessive years of advanced age, and he thinks to have rendered the aged a real
service, by showing them, that at any period a man who is in health may
entertain a legitimate hope of yet living several years. "The best use," says
he, " that a man can make of his mental powers is to collect around him the
images of all that is pleasing, and to ward off all disagreeable objects?more
especially those ideas which may give him uneasiness; while, to effect this, it is
sometimes sufficient merely to regard things in their own proper light."

The service, then, which Bulfon has rendered, consists in regarding the
proximity of death as always doubtful, whatever be the age of the individual;
but there are some to whom such a doubt is of but little consequence, when
once aware that their end is inevitable and not far distant. They look merely
to that vital principle which is about to escape them, and which has afflicted
them provisionally with all the miseries of caducity. But feeling themselves
morally the same as heretofore, and dreading annihilation, would they not find
hope and consolation in a conviction of that insenescence of the intellectual
principle, which daily renders more probable the continuation and imperish-
ability of this principle ? When of two self-associated causes, the one has run
through its phases of duration and is on the point of achieving its destiny, is
it not allowable to remain in doubt relative to the extent of the survivor's
vocation, when its possessor is unable to perceive the slightest refraction of
its rays?the least convergence in the onward progress of the glorious cone ?
Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Silhon, Leibnitz, and many other philosophers,
have endeavoured to demonstrate the immortality of the principle in question.
Their premises, however, are all of an a priori nature. Such isolated theorems,
devoid of experimental basis, cannot be alleged as pertaining to our school,
whose philosophy is essentially that of Bacon. On tne other hand, I do not
hesitate to affirm that the insenescence of the intellectual principle, if fully
admitted, must tend strongly to favour any theory which should have for its
basis not merely the insenescibility, but likewise the immortality of this
priuciple.

The above idea being susceptible of diverse applications, be not surprised at my
associating it with a symbolical figure, equally capable of being multiplied at plea-
sure, and of which I may avail myself as it were, of an amulet. Not only does
it impress 011 the mind a fact, the deductions from which are necessary to
science, and to our own individual happiness ; but, further, it will constitute a
link in the chain of memory, serving to connect me with those for whom these
lessons have been prepared, and who have hitherto been so willing to follow me
during their somewhat complex details.
