Insanity in India
==================

350
Art. III.

There is, perhaps, no country which presents a more extensive field
for psychological observation, nor which offers to the mental pathologist
more abundant materials for induction, than that of India. It is, how-
ever, deeply to be regretted that the labourers in this field hitherto have
been few, and that as yet no work on the subject, alike comprehensive
and systematic, has issued from the press. The author of the brochure
before us must have had, as medical superintendent of the Lunatic
Asylum at Dacca, very favourable opportunities for studying insanity
in a section of our Indian colony. Many of the facts which he has
published, are full of interest; he has, however, been led into error, by
making hasty deductions from necessarily imperfect statistical data, and
has also advanced some views which are not only unsubstantiated by
facts, but even contradictory. We require much more research, ere a
correct knowledge of the various phases of insanity, as they are deve-
loped in India, can be arrived at.

It would take more space than this journal could afford, at the present
time, to give other than a hasty allusion to the various momentous topics
which are suggested at the mere mention of the name of India. We
need only refer to her remains of ancient grandeur, her high state of
civilization before the conquest of Alexander, her peculiar religion and
unequalled fanaticism, the singular division of her people into castes
and their highly intellectual capacity, the fearful ravages to which she
has from time to time been subjected by the sword, pestilence, and
famine, to show the importance of the subject, as well as to establish the
fact, that all the known predisposing causes of insanity have been in
operation for centuries, and that Dr Wise, consequently, takes a very
partial view of the subject, when he infers (though, by the way, he sub-
sequently contradicts himself) that the prevalence of insanity in India,
is owing to the illiterate condition of the people. But did we admit the
fact, that ignorance is to be ranked among the causes of insanity, which
we do not, no one acquainted "with the history of India can agree with
him that the Hindoos are " perhaps in a lower state of mental develop-
ment than even the rudest savage."

He affirms that, " although intimately connected with the educational
department of the Bengal government, during a long series of years, I
never knew of a well-educated native becoming insane." This expe-
rience is not borne out by the observations of our best authorities, who,
on the contrary, find that insanity frequently, perhaps most frequently,
* Practical Remarks on Insanity in Bengal. By Thomas N. Wise, M.D., late
Surgeon H. E. I. C. Service.

attacks the refined and mentally cultivated. In our consideration of the
causes which are likely to engender that peculiar condition of the brain,
whatever it may be, on which the predisposition to insanity depends,
and which are in operation in our Indian empire, Ave must not forget
the excitement of their superstitious idolatry, and of that unnatural
fanaticism so closely allied to insanity ; a fanaticism so intense that it
leads the miserable devotees to practise the most cruel tortures upon
their own bodies. Nor must we lose sight of the high development of
the imaginative faculty, as evinced in the ancient poetry of India, and
m her gigantic architecture.

It may not be out of place to mention, in connexion with the former
and more general causes, a practice which is common in India, and
which must, no doubt, exert a considerable degree of influence, in giving
rise to a particular form of mania. We allude to the barbarous mode of
treating parturient women. Col. Sykes, in his interesting tracts of
the "Vital Statistics of India," published in 184G, states that with a
view to shorten the stages of labour, the parturient woman is subjected
to the coarsest and roughest usage. This violent treatment generally
fails to produce the desired object, but I have no doubt that it must
irequently give rise to cases of puerperal mania.

Dr Wise draws a comparison between the number of cases occurring
in India, and that which obtains in England, but we are inclined to
believe that he has underrated the amount of insanity in Bengal. He
observes :?

" Thus, let us compare the number of the insane with thecensus of the
inhabitants; and suppose that, in Ceylon, there are from 120 to 130
insane patients under treatment, and from 400 to 500 lunatics in the
island. In the circle of Bengal districts, from which lunatics are sent
to the Dacca- asylum, 157-5, the average of four years, may be supposed
to be under treatment, and probably from 2000 to 2500 is the actual
number of lunatics. The following is an approximative comparison with
the returns from England and Wales :?

Island of Ceylon
Dacca Circle .
England and Wales.
Lunatics.
Population.
Under Treatment.
1,009,008
9,891,484
17,905,831
125
157-5
13,400
Probable
Actual Number.
450
2000
13,400
Per Cent.
?00,440
?00,202
?00,754

It would appear, however, from the returns of the various dispen-
saries established in India, through the benevolent exertions of Lord
Auckland, that insanity occurs more frequently than the above tables
would lead us to infer. The returns to which we allude are published
in Col. Sykes' interesting tracts. "We have made a selection, not only
of maniacal, but of paralytic and other kindred affections, and it
is extremely probable that amongst the very large number of cases of
paralysis, many of the subjects were afflicted with some impairment or
derangement of the mental faculties, which complication might have been
overlooked in drawing up the returns, which are admitted by Col. Sykes
to have been defective. Moreover, in a general inquiry of this sort,
it is of the greatest importance to ascertain the existence and amount of
every description of cerebral disease. With this view, we have made
the following resume of nervous affections, common to Bengal and the
northern provinces of India:?

Mania. Epilepsy. Paralysis. Apoplexy.
534 839 ] 18*2 130
Total number of nervous affections treated at Dispensaries onlj . . 2185
The returns were sent in half-yearly, and extended over a period of
several years, but Colonel Sykes says, " unfortunately there were many
omissions, and want of continuity hence, the aggregate we have given
is below the mark, and it is probable that there exists a greater amount
of insanity than Dr Wise's statements would lead us to infer.
The following remarks, which Dr Wise makes on the popular notions
of insanity, and on the establishment of lunatic asylums in India, will
be read with interest.

" The Hindus, like many other people, usually consider the insane and
the deformed as divinely favoured and protected. ' The lamp,' of the
madman is said ' to be out,' and the soul, at certain phases- of the moon,
is supposed to return to the great god Mahadevci: this is called 'the
hour of folly.' Other rude nations suppose that certain forms of in-
sanity are produced by devils, or evil-disposed spirits. The conse-
quence of a belief in such fancies is, that while some have a strong pre-
judice against sending their relatives from home, to which they are sup-
posed to bring prosperity, and particularly to an asylum where they are
believed to be harshly treated ; other families attach a degree of shame
to insanity, especially should the patient be a female of good extrac-
tion, and there is, consequently, a desire to bury her existence in
oblivion. It is therefore the wish of many to keep the insane mem-
bers of a family in their own homes, unless when they become very
troublesome. When the members of the family are poor, they usually
neglect their insane relatives, who receive food from the charitable, and
are generally allowed to wander about, until the disease is incurable, or
until they have injured some one ; when they are sent by the police to
the district jail, where a ward was formerly appropriated for them
This plan lias been changed, and capacious asylums for tlie insane have
been formed in central positions in India, to which those of the neigh-
bouring districts are sent. The Dacca asylum receives patients from
ten districts, including Assam ; and they often arrive without the phy-
sician even knowing their names, or past habits ; or whether it is the
first attack, of a few days' standing, or a confirmed and hopeless case of
long duration. So that all statistical calculations must be considered as
approximate rather than exact. Very few of their friends or relations
will even take the trouble to furnish any particulars of the lunatics, so
that little can in general be gleaned of their previous history, unless a
few faint traces of the past may sometimes be obtained from the recol-
lections of an individual, on his recovery."

The establishment of lunatic asylums is indeed a noble work of
charity, and will confer greater honour on the names of our Indian
rulers than the achievement of their proudest victories.
With respect to the influence of the seasons in producing insanity,
Dr Wise makes the following observations :?

" Seasons.?The greatest number of insane patients are brought to
the asylum between the months of April and November, which em-
brace the hottest months of the year; the largest proportion of
recoveries occurs during the cold months; and the most fatal months
are from July to January, which embraces the most unhealthy season
of tlie year. Hence we may conclude, that the great heat of the
weather has an influence in producing insanity, so that when the hot
weather occurs suddenly, the number of admissions is increased, and is
diminished by a long course of cold weather, during which the system
is invigorated."

We were rather startled to find our author expressing a superstitious
belief in the influence of the moon ! He gravely states :?
" Careful observations have convinced me that, in the humid atmo-
sphere of Bengal, the influence of the moon upon the paroxysms of
insanity is considerable."

It seems the practice of grinding is not conflncd to the purlieus of
our colleges. The following is a good example of the pernicious
effects of cramming :?

_ " Mahammud Agem,-a' sickly youth, twenty years of age, became a
disciple of a fanatic, and, under his guidance, was taught Persian and
Arabic. The Koran and other works he learned by rote, so that his
memory was fatigued without his understanding being enlightened :
inheriting a weakness of the mind from the total want of intellectual
culture of his parents, he became disturbed in his sleep?saw visions?
and became alarmed by the appearance of devils, who threatened to
punish him for not performing some fancied work. The studies being
continued, he became insane, and was then sent to the asylum. Ho at
first refused to eat, and milk was injected into his stomach. He soon
improved in health, took much exercise,?and by the relaxation of the
mind, change of residence, and the healthy atmosphere of the asylum,
he soon got well."

Grief, as in this country, can number its victims. Many cases are
instanced of derangement of mind from the bereavement of relatives,
the failure of trade, and the loss of caste. Dr Wise does not consider
the abuse of spirituous liquors a very common cause of insanity,
the priests being opposed to their excessive use, although the statements
of Col. Sykes would lead us to an opposite conclusion. He, the Colonel,
states that drunkenness is very rife in Patna, and that the town is sur-
rounded with toddy trees, from which the natives are known to extract
a highly intoxicating drink.

Our readers will, no doubt, feel interested in the following particulars
relative to the use of those deleterious eastern luxuries?opium, gunjah,
and eliurus.

" Opium. ?Opium is very generally employed by the Mussulmans
from its supposed property of lengthening life, and removing certain
diseases, such as disorders connected with looseness, as diarrhoea,
dysentery, cholera, and other discharges, as fluor albus, diabetes, water-
ing of the eyes, coughs, etc. I have known an infant, a few months
old, so habituated to the soothing influence of opium, that it required
a supply every night to keep it quiet. It was given in this case to
save trouble, and to strengthen, as it was supposed, the child, and pre-
vent it suffering from the bad effects of cold, whereas it must have had
quite an opposite effect. Such a habit in the adult produces great
debility and emaciation, curtailing the enjoyments, and shortening the
duration of the life of the individual. The effect of opium, when
taken in large quantities, is succeeded by that painful longing, and
most distressing irritability and weakness, which often destroy its
votaries, by rendering them subject to other diseases, and sometimes
unhinge the mind."

" Gunjali.?The use of the preparations of Indian hemp or gunjah
(Cannabis Sativa), has a much more pernicious influence on the mental
faculties than opium or spirits, which are more transitory in their
effect. Gunjah was well known, and its effects understood for many
ages, in the South of Africa, in America, and in the greater part of
Asia. It appears to have been employed in the temples of the ancient
Greeks for its intoxicating quality, and it is still employed for the
same purpose by the Brahminical priests of India, and by the dissi-
pated and depraved, more particularly of the lower class. With them
it is supposed to be the ready agent to enable the person to bear hard
and continuous labour without fatigue, to prevent the pain accom-
panying physical injury, to guard against insalubrious climates and
unhealthy seasons. It likewise produces pleasing and cheerful intoxi-
cation, and has other qualities which lead to its deleterious use?as it
kindles the imagination, inflames the sensual passions, and the appetite
for food. Some who use it state that it renders them more fervid in
tlieir devotions, circulates tlie blood, and clears tlie voices of singers.
But it is also "well known that a constant, or large consumption of it,
makes the person unfit for business, and, if continued, produces
insanity.

"When gunjah is employed as a luxury, it is used in combination
with prepared, or dry tobacco leaf; each pipe-full (chillim) being filled
up with from two to eight annas' weight of the compound. Some-
times from twenty to thirty cliillims are used daily. The cost is about
one rupee and eight annas, the two pounds (Seer). Such is the quantity
consumed, that three or four rupees a month are often spent by one
individual on this deleterious drug; and such is the fascination, that to
increase the gratification the smoke is often passed into the pharynx
and nostrils, and after remaining some time it is discharged.
" It is customary for several of these miserable votaries to meet at
one of their houses, and sit on the floor in a circle ; each then takes a
draught of the hookah, which has been prepared with gunjah and
tobacco, and hands it to his neighbour. Intoxication soon occurs, as
it is stated that four or five moutlifuls are sufficient to intoxicate
persons, even accustomed to the use of the drug. In my inquiries, in
the Dacca Insane Asylum, as to the cause of such persons' insanity, I
found that of those who had formed the habit of using gunjah before
admission into the asylum, and whose statement was confirmed in every
case by relatives and friends, when that could be done, out of 286 that
were in the asylum at the commencement, and were admitted during
the year of report, seventy-seven, or nearly a third, had been rendered
insane by the pernicious use of gunjah, to which the lower classes are
so often habituated, from its agreeable intoxicating nature, and cheap-
ness. The effects, however, are after a certain dose transient, and are
soon followed by great debility.

" The remarkable effect of gunjah is, that it in an agreeable manner
excites or modifies sensibility and combination of ideas, but it does
not itr,elf give origin to them. The enjoyment is entirely moral, and
not like the gratification of the amatory passion. It, by use, weakens
the animal passion, memory, the power of voluntary control of the
thoughts, or fixing the attention. By a great effort the mind can, for
a moment, be restored to its original powers. The gunjah creates an
increase of appetite, a moderate exhilaration of spirits, sometimes an
intense sensation of happiness. In other cases there is a weight of the
head, and an uncomfortable sense of restlessness and palpitation of the
heart. Occasionally the person exhibits a disposition to assume the
recumbent position, and to bring the limbs and trunk together. In
one case the patient took a poisonous dose given by an itinerant
beggar, to ensure the good will of his neighbours. It produced intoxi-
cation and great heat of the body, which induced him to proceed to
the river to bathe, when this disposition was so great that both his
head and arms went under water, and he would have been drowned
liad he not been observed. In this case the single dose produced
insanity, for which he was sent to tlie asylum ; and it was three months
before lie was discharged as cured.

" These religious mendicants are a great curse to India. One day I
asked one of them, a notorious gunjah-eater, what was his occupation.
Placing his hand on his stomach, lie said, ' Eating, and smoking gunjah.'
The dreadful cannabis! 1 But, what is your trade V He added, ' To con-
template the Great God.' ' And where is your home V He pointed
downwards, and answered, ?In the earth.' The effects of gunjah are
most pernicious. A young man, twenty-five years of age, was admitted
on the 1st August, and discharged from the asylum on the 22nd, well:
He was brought back in six days, much worse than he had been during
his first attack. I found he had again indulged in gunjah, having
taken five or six cliillims daily. He recovered in three months; and
requested to be allowed to remain in the asylum, as he could not resist
the longing desire for gunjah, and dreaded the fearful consequences.
This is the usual course of these unfortunate individuals. They get
well, and return to the old habit, as soon as they leave the asylum, and
either die, or are sent back. During the year of report, of the seventy-
seven patients, twenty-six were" cured, and five died from bowel com-
plaints. The others remained in the asylum. Several had been more
than once there. It must be allowed that there are other causes which,
at the same time, aggravate the effects of the gunjah, such as exposure
to the sun, bad food, unhealthy climate, and the irregular and bad habits
of the individuals who are the chief sufferers."

" The difficulty of breaking the habit of using gunjah is always very
great, and the recurrence of the insanity is generally the consequence
even of a slight indulgence. Some years ago, I tried to prevent an
unfortunate young man from obtaining his usual supply. He was re-
duced to a skeleton, took little or no food, and lived only to enjoy the
fascinating drug. He was in a state of great nervous distress on the
withdrawal of the gunjah, and complained bitterly of the privation: but
no bad effects followed, and his health and strength improved while he
remained in the hospital. In the Dacca jail it was found that the
privation of the usual quantity of the drug and opium produced
diarrhoea, etc., which was checked by allowing a small quantity
daily."

" Claims, or the inspissated juice of the Indian hemp plant, is usually
taken mixed with water. In lialf-an-hour it produces intoxication of
a most cheerful kind, increases the appetite for food, and for sensual
enjoyments. Should the Government restrict the sale of gunjah,
many would be forced to give up the pernicious habit, as cliurus would
be too expensive to enable them to purchase it."?page 14.
" The cliurus is prepared in Bengal by beating a quantity of the
Indian hemp plant, exposing it to the influence of the night dew, and
pressing the bruised plant with the naked hand, to which the cliurus ad-
heres : it is then scraped off for use. It is of much higher price than the
gunjah, and is more rarely used, particularly as it is far less stimulating,
and produces a lighter degree of intoxication. So great is the difference,
that ten pipes of cliurus will not cause the same effect that one of
gunjah will produce. Still, cliurus is sometimes used by the rich, and
by singers, etc,"

We have again to regret the carelessness with which the author has
drawn deductions from facts replete with physiological and pathological
suggestions. It will be seen in the above extracts, that he flatly contra-
dicts himself when speaking of the effects of the gunjah. In the first
instance, he says, " it kindles the imagination, influences the sensual
passions, and the appetite for food." He subsequently observes, " the
enjoyment is entirely moral, and not like the gratification of the
amatory passion." Dr O'Shauglmessy and other writers on the Indian
hemp, speak very decidedly as to its aphrodisiac properties. It would
seem to act especially on the cerebro-spinal system, producing in small
doses symptoms of inebriation of a cheerful character, followed by con-
fusion of ideas, and lastly, sleep. In large doses it is a powerful nar-
cotic. It is less certain in its operation than opium, but possesses
advantages over the latter drug, inasmuch as it does not impair the
appetite, but, on the contrary, increases the desire for food. Neither
does it arrest the bronchial nor other secretions, as is the case with
opium. We can speak favourably of the efficacy of the Indian hemp,
in the treatment of some forms of insanity, accompanied with great
debility, given with the view, not of producing a hypnotic or narcotic
effect, which has hitherto been the practice, but as a nervine stimu-
lant.

On the physical symptoms of insanity he offers nothing new, and his
observations on the appearances found on dissection are comprised in
the following very brief paragraph.

" On dissection, the skull of the insane is often very thick, and more
serum than usual is found in the cavities of the brain, with marks of
previous inflammation, such as a thickening and opacity of the arach-
noid membrane, and often preternatural hardness of certain parts of
the substance of the brain, with more or less alteration of the cortical
substance."

The mortality amongst the patients at Dacca appears to have been
very great, as will appear by the following statement :?
" Mortality.?The mortality among the patients in the Dacca asylum
has always been very great; but subject to very considerable changes,
from the peculiarities of the season, etc. During one year that an able
predecessor of mine superintended the asylum, the deaths amounted,
among the males, to 32 per cent.; and the cures, including
cases relieved, and made over to their friends, to 51 per cent, of the
admissions. Among the females, during the same period, the per
centage was 45^ cured, to 38| per cent, deaths."

Our author's remarks on the classification of the lunatics in the
Dacca asylum, need not detain us, but the following affecting cases, one
exhibiting an unusual degree of attachment between two lunatics, and
the otlier relative to a melancholy instance of puerperal mania, will, no
doubt, interest some of our readers :?

" Kureem Khan, ret. 39, lost some land, after much vexatious litiga-
tion, which, together with the free use of opium and probably gunjah,
appeared to be the exciting cause of his insanity. He was admitted
into the asylum in a sufficiently sane state to answer questions, and to
agree to diminish the pernicious habit he had contracted of eating large
quantities of opium. This was done by commencing with fifteen grains
of solid opium, his usual daily quantity, and diminishing the dose by
a grain daily, until none was left. He now appeared to feel no want of
the drug. During the interval of the paroxysms, he was a strong
intelligent man, and assiduously worked in the cook-room as an
assistant, or in preparing screens, brooms, etc.

" He took charge of an insane orphan boy, who was brought to the
asylum. This unfortunate child was found near the place where the
Hindus burn their dead. He was very much emaciated from starvation,
and was in a state of amentia, probably from ill treatment. What
a story of cruelty might he have revealed, but this was denied him!
His reason was quite gone??liis lamp was out.' But the broken reed
Avas cherished, and supported by Kureem Khan; and it was an
interesting sight to observe the care with which he attended to the
helpless child, who crouched behind his protector, when any stranger
approached; and then he would look up and smile upon his benefactor
for placing him in security,?and it was such a smile of sweetness!
His spare body supported one of the most beautiful heads I ever saw.
Such a beauty of form!?such a brow!?such large black expressive
eyes, sheltered behind such graceful eyelashes!?and such a beautiful
chiselled mouth, as would have formed a study for Raphael! The
foster father never left his child, and tried to instruct him. He care-
fully taught him to repeat scraps of Sadee; but such was the defect of
the child's memory that he required continual prompting. His own
name he did not recollect. Poor boy! gratitude appeared to be the
only remnant of his ruined mind. His protector, when the paroxysm
of insanity was on him, changed his whole manner; for some time he
remained silent, and seemed to wander about to get rid of the inward
distress that preyed upon him, and the insane child was the first to feel
its effects; indeed, such was the acuteness of his instinct of danger,
that, on the first indication of the coining paroxysm, he fled and hid
himself from his violence. The madman's face assumed a most dia-
bolical expression of rage; and he immediately went in pursuit of the
boy, and his other enemies, who were now to be chastised. This he
supposed he did by rolling up a portion of his clothes, and beating
them with a stick, and heaping all kinds of abuse upon the bundle. In
other eases he took a brick, or the trunk of a tree, and beat it; some-
times with a stick, with his hand, and with his elbow; and this was
done with such violence as to bruise and injure his arm. On these
occasions he changed his elbow for his feet, and struck at his clothes,
or the brick lie had procured, until quite exhausted. I once called him
to me, when in this state. He told me a long list of grievances, of his
riches, liis villages, aud liis rank; which had all been taken from hira
by the base treachery of lawyers, and had reduced him to his present
?state. He then appeared quite satisfied, sought out the boy, and
returned to his work. On one occasion this madman had a visit from
his brother, and they remained for some time on most amicable terms,
until something irritated him; when he suddenly became enraged, and
beat his brother, so as to oblige him to fly for his life.

"To obtain ornaments for the insane boy was the great stimulus to
exert himself, and he executed a good deal of work, to get money to
purchase clothes and ornaments with which to decorate him. Again a
paroxysm of insanity would occur, and the boy was obliged to hide
himself; although a short time before he had decorated him with orna-
ments, promised to make him a landed proprietor, and called him his
son and brother.

" These ornaments were generally stolen during the boy's sleep. At
other times the rupees which the protector got for his work, were put
into the hands of some one in the asylum, and so bad was his memory,
and unjust his friends, that he was often cheated out of them. In other
cases he seemed to accuse those arouud him falsely for having, he alleged,
misappropriated his money.

"Puerperal madness.?The variety of mental derangement incident
to women soon after parturition seems to be less common in Bengal
than in Europe. A respectable Mohammedan requested me to see his
daughter, fifteen years of age, who had become deranged after her first
confinement. The visit was made in the evening, and the picturesque
thatched house was surrounded by numerous majestic palms, plantains,
bamboo clumps, and other beautiful tropical plants, which were
partly illuminated by the setting sun. When we were seated, the
afflicted female, dressed in a thin muslin dress, and guarded by several
attendants, was brought and seated before us. During the interview
she continued laughing, and chattering nonsense. Her parent, in his
long Arab dress, and flowing beard, stood beside her, and related how
she had been happily married, had lost her infant, and by the sudden
stoppage of a dysenteric affection, had been reduced to her present
state. ? She was the apple of my eye.' ' She could recite our prayers,'
he said. ? None was equal to her in learning; but now she has forgotten
all.' ' And I,' continued her father, f was so fond and proud of her;
and now she will not attend to me, or even eat of her favourite dishes.
I prepared them for her yesterday, set them before her, and urged her
to eat them for my sake ; but she spurned them from her, abused me,
and tore my face and clothes. Her loss to me is like the loss of repose :
I shall never recover it.' The father stated these and other particulars
with the minuteness of one intensely interested in the subject. His
pale countenance and tearless eyes proved that his grief was passing
show. He continued,?< She now knows her father no longer ;' and,
turning to me, he added,?' Now, I look to you as her father, and
mother, and her only refuge. Your kindness in coming to visit my
daughter shall receive my evei'lasting gratitude. She will not even
eat any longer for me.'

The treatment which was required in such cases was stated. Her
fine hair was to be allowed to be cut off, with the exception of a central
portion ; but the husband was to be consulted, before the general plan
of treatment was to be commenced. The father declared it would be
a disgrace to the family?who lived in a hut, and found difficulty in
procuring the means of subsistence?to remove the patient to the
asylum, where she would receive the greatest attention and kindness,
which would give her the best chance of recovery from her terrible
malady. But such is the power of habit, and the weakness of human
nature, among unenlightened races."

In the treatment of his patients, Dr Wise appears to have exhibited
judgment and humanity in carrying out the principles established by
our most enlightened physicians. The utility of actively employing the
insane, is well exemplified by the following facts, which serve to show
that manual occupation is of advantage to every class of individual and
not confined to those only who have been previously habituated to hard
labour :?

" This humane system of treatment requires the constant vigilance
of the superintendents. In India this cannot always be relied on;
and we can never calculate that the patients are not neglected, or
degraded by the attendants. There is a^ great difficulty in inducing
patients, even though convalescent, to submit to any sort of labour.
A rajah will pretend to be only able to act in ordering diplomatic
matters, a landed proprietor in arranging accounts, a holy fukeer
in contemplation, etc.; but we have seen that the rajah may become
an excellent basketmaker, a landed proprietor may be employed with
advantage in carrying water, and the fukeer in cleaning the wards in
the morning. When the first sense of repugnance of the person, at
such an employment, and their imaginary high rank is got over, the
new occupation changes their morbid trains of thoughts, and thus acts
very favourably on their diseased minds. A case occurs to me :?A
middle-aged man was brought to the asylum in a state of amentia, and
much weakened in bodily health. He declared he was the father of
mankind; and, as the first man, he never wore clothes. At times he
seemed silent, and would not work. After attention to his general
health, lie was taken to the workshop, and in a few days he began to
work, of his own accord, and to wear clothes. He soon became
quite altered, became very industrious, inoffensive, answered questions
rationally, and improved in health. There was every prospect of his
speedy recovery, when he was attacked with diarrhoea, and died. Thus,
by perseverance, by example, and a little indulgence, especially in diet,
and dress in females, their obstinacy will in general be removed; and
an influence over the minds of such patients will be of great import-
ance to their recovery."

In bringing our brief notice of this pamphlet to a conclusion, we
must observe, that although our duty has constrained us to speak
freely of the treatise under review; this has been done in no un-
friendly spirit, but solely with tlie view of directing the writer's atten-
tion to the partiality of his views, as contrasting with the largeness and
importance of the subject. We have shown our appreciation of his
labours by the numerous extracts we have given from his work, and as
the pioneer of future observers in this interesting field, we give him a
brother's welcome.
