Our Pauper Lunatic Asylums
============================

The Act 8 and 9 Vict. c. 126, passed in 1845, has been very generally-
observed throughout the length and breadth of England and Wales.
Only two or three English counties still delay, on some pretext or other,
to erect asylums; but as the Commissioners in Lunacy possess ample
powers to compel the observance of the act, we feel assured that in a
very few years every county in England will have provided a suitable
asylum for the detention and treatment of its insane paupers.
We are aware that the act has, in some instances, been unwillingly
obeyed; certain counties, chiefly the agricultural, intimidated by the
excessive expense which almost invariably attends the erection of any
large public building in this country, pleaded poverty and decreasing
rates, and wished to defer the providing of a lunatic asylum to more
prosperous times. Nevertheless, upon a little friendly persuasion or
remonstrance, one county after another set to work to fulfil the require-
ments of the law, and when once engaged in the task, manifested no
further reluctance. The result is a number of public lunatic asylums,
which, in architectural design, solidity of construction, comfort, convex
mence, and adaptation to the use for which they were constructed, cer-
tainly surpass those of any other country. We shall presently have
occasion to criticise certain points in the arrangements of some of these
buildings, but taking them one with another we are glad to speak
highly of tliem, and we consider that nearly all the public asylums
recently built confer very great credit on the counties which have
erected them, and on the justices who superintended their construction.
The county lunatic asylum now constitutes a remarkable feature in
many an English landscape. Commonly placed on a gentle eminence
404 OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
in the neighbourhood of the county-town, it attracts immediate-
attention by its size, position, and architectural pretensions, and is fre-
quently a very striking and ornamental object.
Foreign travellers in this country are very prone to sneer at the
paucity and meanness of our public monuments, but in our county
asylums we have a series of edifices, often grand and imposing in them-
selves, and of higher interest to the philanthropist than any remains of
ancient grandeur or mediaeval art.
We remarked that the county lunatic asylum is generally a building
of considerable architectural pretensions; Ave may add that, in some
instances, it is rather too much so. On making a tour of inspection
through the different counties, we find examples of nearly every variety
of architectural style ; here it is the castellated, there the Elizabethan T
next the Italian, and afterwards the county-jail style. In one county
the asylum wears the aspect of an union-house, in another it is quite
palatial; here it is built on the model of a London hospital, further on
it looks like a congregation of suburban almshouses. We do not object
to this variety, for we like variety as well as anybody ; and Ave should
be sorry to see all our county asylums built on one uniform model
nevertheless, on looking at two or three of the recently-erected buildings,
Ave have regretted that the A'isiting justices should have extended the
non-restraint system to the constructive vagaries of their architects. It
has been affirmed that patients are better satisfied to remain in a hand-
some building than in a mean one, that the grandeur of the place of
their detention pleases the fancy, and contributes to reconcile them to
their stay: there may be some little truth in this, but Ave are
satisfied there is not much, for Ave suspect that all the decorative
talent of a Barry Avould fail to render a place of compulsory seclusion
agreeable. We Avould have the asylum spacious, open, airy, and as
cheerful as possible, but Ave would not expend one penny, Avhicli might
be laid out in providing additional comfort, amusement, or occupation
for the inmates, in architectural embellishment or decorative display.
We are anxious not to be misunderstood on this head; Ave wish to see
every asylum as handsomely built as the judicious expenditure of the
money allotted for its construction will allow, but Ave protest against
wasting any portion of that money in useless ornamental Avork. A
county pauper lunatic asylum is a public edifice designed for charitable
purposes ; it is paid for by rates which a few contributors administer in
the interests of many, and which they are bound to administer economi-
cally ; it is an eleemosynary institution, and should therefore be plain
and simple in its character; it is a refuge for suffering humanity, not
a monument raised to the glory of the architect, or the vanity of visiting
justices. When Ave are informed that the cost of building and furnishing-
the different public asylums in England has varied betAveen 110?. and
2201. for each patient accommodated; AA7hen Ave find, contrary to all
anticipation, that the largest asylums have also been the most costly;
we are naturally led to speculate on the causes of this amazing
difference, and to Avonder Avhy the asylum in one county should have
cost just tAvice as much as the asylum in another.
Although there is this diversity in the original cost of asylums, there
OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 405-
is an item in tlieir cui-rent expenditure in whicli they more nearly agree;
we refer to the remuneration of the medical officers. Some committees
are more generous, Ave might say more just, than others; but the
average salary paid to medical superintendents of public asylums shows
liow carefully the justices guard the public purse, when mind and not
matter is to be paid for. A few thousand pounds for useless battle-
ments, or an inaccessible tower, will pass ungrudged; " Sir Portcullis-
Perkins cedijicavit, sub auspicio Sviitliii, Stylesii, Nokesii, Brownii
but the salary of the medical superintendent must be reduced to tlie
lowest figure at which there is any chance of obtaining a qualified
gentleman to undertake the duties of the office.
For illustration, we will take an institution which the justices con-
cerned in its erection pronounce to be " unrivalled as a Lunatic-
Asylum, unique in size, elevation, and accommodation, in this country,,
or perhaps any other" (Report), we mean the Colney-Hatch Asylum,?
and certainly the cost of that building should afford something unique..
When more than 280,000?. has been expended in providing accommo-
dation for less than 1400 patients, the accommodation ought to be of
a superior description. We do not profess to know a great deal about
the expense of house-building, but we are told that a comfortable six-
roomed house may at present be erected for 2501.; consequently a
village, containing one thousand houses, with church, schools, chapel,
market, and cemetery, might be built for the sum which has been spent
on this single asylum. "VYe will not pursue the comparison; we have
paid our rates, and have got in return a building, which, if not precisely
the most convenient, or the best adapted for its uses, is, we will admit,
a very handsome and imposing edifice. In selecting Colney-Hatch
Asylum as the subject of our remarks, we are not influenced by any
peculiar feeling with regard to that establishment; Ave require an illus-
tration, so Ave take that asylum which offers the most striking exempli-
fication of those errors in construction and management which it is-
our intention to indicate and condemn.
The first objection Ave have to make against the Colney-Hatch
Asylum is its extreme size, Avhicli far exceeds that of any similar insti-
tution in the kingdom. The best and most convenient dimensions for
a public lunatic asylum is a question of the highest importance. On
inquiring into the opinions of men Avliose character and experience
entitle them to a hearing on this matter, Ave find them unanimously
opposed to the construction of very large buildings. Several foreign
physicians engaged in the treatment of insanity, have recorded their
disapproval of the extreme magnitude of some of the English asylums.
The judgment of the Commissioners in Lunacy is expressed as follows
(Report, 1844, p. 23),?"From the best opinions Ave have been able to
collect, and from the result of our own observation and experience, Ave
think it desirable that no asylum for curable lunatics should contain
more than 250 patients, and that 200 is, perhaps, as large a number
as can be managed with the most benefit, to themselves and the public,
in one establishment." With this opinion Ave entirely concur. In order
that an asylum may be efficiently conducted, Ave consider it absolutely
and indispensably requisite that it shall be placed under the supervision
406 OUR TAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
of a responsible head. Whether that head is the medical superintendent,
or some other responsible officer, does not affect the question; what we
have to determine is the limit to the size of an asylum, which renders
its effective supervision by the head really practicable. Reflection and
observation have taught us that one person cannot usefully direct the
treatment of more than 250 patients, and that the charge of that
number, demands an amount of labour and anxiety which few men are
capable of sustaining. Even in the best conducted asylums a great
portion of the actual treatment of the patients is of necessity entrusted
to the attendants, and we have found, that although every precaution and
discrimination may be exercised in selecting fit persons for this employ-
ment, yet only a limited proportion may be implicitly confided in, the
remainder requiring constant surveillance to insure the proper perform-
ance of their duties. The eye of the master is quite as necessary in an
asylum as in any industrial establishment, and no system of divided
and delegated authority can compensate for the absence of a responsible
chief. We consider the capability of a perfect supervision a very im-
portant matter in the construction of asylums, and we think it is not
always sufficiently attended to. Take Colney-Hatch, for example:
when we look at the plan of that building, and see its widely-spread
wings and numerous galleries; Avlien Ave are told that the united length
of the corridors amounts to nearly two-thirds of a mile, we are at a loss
to conceive how two medical officers can possibly exercise a satisfactory
superintendence over so vast an institution. In short, we regard
Colney-Hatch Asylum as a gigantic mistake; and we feel convinced
that it would have been better, in every point of view, to have erected
three distinct and separate asylums, each capable of accommodating
about 500 patients of both sexes, with two resident medical officers,
instead of congregating so large a body of lunatics in one overgrown, un-
manageable establishment. So far as we know, there is but one plausible
argument in favour of large asylums, that is the supposed saving of ex-
pense effected in their construction and management. It is stated that,
an asylum capable of containing 1500 patients can be built and main-
tained at a much less cost per head than one which will accommodate
500 patients. There is, we admit, a show of reason in this, nay, more,
we freely concede the correctness of the principle up to a certain point,
for we know that the expenditure of an asylum for 300 patients is,
caiteris paribus, relatively much below that of an asylum for 100
patients. Nevertheless, we are by no means disposed to conclude that
because 300 pauper lunatic patients cost individually less than 100,
therefore the relative expense of 1500 and 500 is diminished in the
same proportion. But it will be more conclusive to appeal at once to
figures. The cost of the care of a pauper lunatic in a county asylum is
divided, as most of our readers know, into two heads: 1st, for accom-
modation, 2nd, for maintenance; the first paid for out of the county
rate, the second chargeable to the parochial union to which the patient
belongs. The amount of these items varies considerably in the different
counties, so that there are not two alike. To obtain a standard of
comparison we have calculated the mean cost of building, fitting, and
furnishing, including also the price of the land, of twenty county and
c
OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 407
borough lunatic asylums, in different parts of England, and we find it
to be 1G0Z. for eacli patient accommodated. Now Han well and Colney-
Hatch Asylums, the two largest in this country, have each cost upwards
of 200/. per patient, that is 20 per cent, above the average?a fact
which does not confirm the opinion that large asylums are erected at a
lower proportionate expense than smaller institutions. With respect
to the cost of maintenance we find, by the respective Reports for 1852,
that the average weekly expenditure for each patient was eight shillings
and threepence at Hanwell, seven shillings and eightpence at Colney-
Hatch, six shillings and sevenpence halfpenny at the Devon, six shillings
and fourpence halfpenny at the Somerset, seven shillings and eleven-
pence at the new Lancashire, and six shillings and twopence halfpenny
at the Suffolk Asylums. So it appears that the cost of maintenance of
patients at Hanwell and Colney-Hatch is above rather than below the
average. But were it a trifle beneath the mean expenditure, we are
not disposed to admit that it would show in favour of large asylums,
for we believe that the slight saving in the housekeeping department
would be balanced by the greater cost of the house service, since in
these very large asylums a considerable amount of service is wasted in
going about the place. And now, having shown that Colney-Hatch
and Hanwell neither cost less to build, nor less to maintain, than
smaller asylums, we dismiss the plea of economy commonly advanced
in their favour.
But it may perhaps be said, Colney-Hatcli Asylum is so complete
in all its arrangements, and so superior in every requirement, that it
cannot fairly be compared with smaller institutions of infinitely inferior
pretensions. Such a remark may have some weight with the general
public, but not with those who estimate the comparative merits of the
various asylums by the number of cures effected in them. In the last
Report of Hanwell Asylum, two pages are filled by a recital of the bar-
barous treatment to which poor lunatics were formerly subjected; but we
all know that these atrocities are now, happily, become matters of history,
and that the pauper lunatic asylums are in our times universally con-
ducted with kindness and humanity. This groundwork of excellence
is common to all, but beyond this there are some asylums which un-
questionably possess peculiar merits, and the best criterion of those
merits is the per-centage of recoveries. In the language of the commis-
sioners in lunacy (Report 1844), "the professed, and indeed the main
object of a county asylum is, or ought to be, the cure of insanity." It
is not merely " a place of refuge," or " a receptacle, or house of deten-
tion" for the insane; it is, in its primary intention, a curative establish-
ment; in short, a special hospital for the treatment of a specific
disorder. In our estimation, grandeur of elevation, architectural dis-
play, and horticultural embellishment, theories of restraint or non-
restraint, physic or no physic, are, in the abstract, matters of secondary
interest only; the first, the great, the all-important matter, is the
curability of insanity, and we regard that system of treatment as the
best which effects the greatest number of cures. Looking at asylums
m this light, we estimate their comparative merits by the proportion of
patients who recover in them. How do Colney-Hatch and Hanwell
408 OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
Asylums stand by this test? We will take indiscriminately five or six
asylums situated in different parts of England, and give the total num-
ber of patients treated during the year, with the number of recoveries
in each.
Asylums. No. treated. Recoveries. Percent.
Somerset, 1852   468 ... 47
Gloucester, 1851 (paupers) . . 380 ... 62
Lancaster (Rainhill), 1852 . . 545 ... 80
Dorset, 1850   206 ... 28
Kent, 1851   682 ... 67
Derby, 1852   212 ... 34
Surrey, 1851 1141 . . . 116
Hanwell, 1852   1080 . . . 43
Coliiey-Hatch, 1852 .... 1628 . . . 132
10 0
16-3
14-6
13-5
9-8
160
10-1
4-0
8-1
' It is seen by this table, that the total number of recoveries at Han-
well and Colney-Hatch Asylums amounted to 175 out of the 2708
patients treated in 1852, which is 6*46 percent.; whereas in 1849, the
mean per-centage of recoveries in the Cornwall, Lancashire, Oxfordshire,
Somersetshire, Suffolk, and Surrey pauper lunatic asylums, was 8*8 of
the total number treated in the course of the year.*
Up to this point, then, we have failed to discover any tenable argu-
ment in favour of large asylums, and we adhere to our statement, that
three separate asylums, each built to contain 500 patients, would be in
every respect preferable to any one asylum capable of accommodating
1500 patients.
Having expressed our opinion that the entire active control of an
asylum should be confided to a resident responsible head, it may seem
almost superfluous for us to state that we think the head ought to
be the medical officer. We would have a central legislative board,
possessed of supreme power, and exercising a general authority, but we
consider that the executive function should be vested wholly in the
resident medical superintendent. Viewing a lunatic asylum as a hos-
pital for the treatment and cure of insanity, Ave hold that all its
arrangements, from the plan of the building down to the details of the
household economy, should be made subservient to that great end, and
we think the medical officer is the fittest person to complete and direct
these arrangements. The system of government pursued at many
asylums is not in accordance with these ideas, for the visiting justices
themselves exercise so general and extensive a control as to make
the medical officer merely an agent of their commands.t We
have very high respect for any body of gentlemen who sacrifice
their ease and leisure to the gratuitous performance of a public duty,
but in the case of lunatic asylums, we fear their zeal for the public ser-
* "Psychological Journal," vol. iii. p. 564. There may be circumstances unknown
to us which render the pauper lunatics of Middlesex more difficult of cure thau the
paupers of other counties; if such circumstances exist, they should be mentioned in the
Asylum Reports.
f " I cannot conclude the Report without expressing my thanks to the Committee for
the interest they have invariably taken in all the troublesome details of the asylum.
No object lias heen considered too insignificant for their notice,?no circumstance too
trivial for their attention."?Dr. Hood. " First Report of Colney-Hatch Asylum."
OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 409
vice sometimes renders them prejudicially active; for without impugning
the humanity, intelligence, and business qualifications of county magis-
trates, we may still question whether they are likely to be so well versed
in the general management of a lunatic asylum, and the treatment of
insanity, as any well-educated medical man who has long made
these matters his particular study. It may perhaps be objected, that
although a medical man may possess superior professional knowledge
and considerable experience in the treatment of the insane, he may at the
same time be wanting in that administrative talent which is indispen-
sably requisite for the efficient direction of so large an establishment as
a county asylum ? but we are not aware of any circumstance which pre-
cludes a member of the medical profession from being as good an.
administrator as any other gentleman, and the visiting justices, in whom
the appointing of the medical superintendent resides, should make
inquiries into the business abilities of the respective candidates, and
give this point due weight in determining their choice.
This leads us to consider the mode of election of the medical officer
of lunatic asylums. The method usually observed is the following:?
the justices cause an advertisement to be inserted in the medical
journals and in two 01* three of the leading newspapers, describing the
nature of the appointment, and requesting candidates to present testi-
monials by a certain day. The publicity of the call seems to indicate
an open contest, and it is presumable that the best man will stand the
fairest chance of success. Many candidates appear; testimonials are
obtained, printed, and distributed, the electors are beset with applica-
tions ; a good deal of money is spent, and a great deal of anxiety excited.
By and by the day of election arrives, when, to the surprise and vexa-
tion of three or four highly qualified candidates, a gentleman whose
qualifications are of the most mediocre description is selected. Oil
inquiry, the rejected candidates learn that the successful competitor is
a relative, or connexion, or 'protege of one of the committee, or that
he possessed great private influence or local interest; and they also
sometimes learn, Avitli considerable indignation, that the whole affair
was a sham, that their testimonials Avere not examined, nor their claims
considered; that the adA7ertising Avas a matter of form, the choice of
the officer having been made before the vacancy Avas announced. We
could name three or four recent elections, of which the above is a true and
literal description, and before Ave proceed, Ave must protest against all
such proceedings; the visiting justices of asylums have the poAver to
elect Avhom they choose to the post of medical superintendent, but
they have no right to advertise for candidates after their choice is
virtually fixed, for by so doing they put several gentlemen to consider-
able trouble and expense, and cause them to Avaste both time and
money. An advertisement published under such circumstances is
really little better than an inducement to invest capital on false pre-
tences, and cannot be too strongly reprehended.
But assuming that the justices are sincere in their request, and con-
scientiously desirous of selecting the best qualified candidate, Avhat are
the qualifications Avhich should influence and decide their choice1? We
think that the requisite qualifications may be divided into three
410 OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
heads. 1, Professional. 2, General. 3, Special qualifications ; and on
eacli of these divisions we have a few remarks to offer. Firstly,
with regard to professional qualifications, we are of opinion that the
possession of any particular diploma should not be too rigidly insisted
on. For the last fifteen years the medical profession has been in a
transition state ; repeated changes have taken place in all the govern-
ing medical bodies, and still further changes are advocated and ex-
pected, so that many medical men defer entering this or that corpora-
tion until matters shall have assumed a more settled aspect. The
justices should, of course, demand satisfactory proof that the candidate
has received a complete medical and surgical education, but beyond
this we see no advantage to be derived from requiring any stated pro-
fessional degree, for, so far as we know, not one of the governing me-
dical bodies has ever made insanity and its treatment the subject of
examination. Secondly, regarding general qualifications; the com-
mittee should take into account the age, health, personal activity, moral
character, temper, disposition, and business habits of the candidate.
They should select a gentleman between thirty and fifty years of
age, of good health and sound constitution, of quick and active
habits, capable of undertaking a considerable amount of bodily labour,
of unimpeachable private character, good-tempered and patient, uniting
perfect gentleness of manner Avith great firmness of will, a tender-
hearted, compassionate, and humane man, having feelings consonant
with his charitable calling, a good manager, likely to maintain dis-
cipline, and able to conduct a large establishment with order and
economy. Thirdly, with respect to special qualifications, we mean by
this, experience in the management of asylums, and practical acquaint-
ance with the treatment of the insane. The committees of public
lunatic asylums would do well to bear in mind, that the treatment
of insanity is a distinct and special branch of the practice of physic,
that the ordinary routine of medical education does not comprise any
instruction in this branch, and that none of the various medical boards
ever test a candidate's knowledge of this subject. It consequently
follows that the medical man who desires to qualify himself to treat
insanity, must make it his particular study; unfortunately, we have
no school of psychology in this country ; a few lectures were formerly
delivered at Hanwell Asylum, and a limited number of medical
students were permitted to accompany the physicians in their rounds;
moreover, an advertisement appears from time to time in the me-
dical journals, acquainting the profession that lectures on insanity,
illustrated by cases, are sometimes delivered at Betlilem Hospital;
still we have no school for the systematic study of mental disorders;
nor any institution where a medical man can obtain a practical know-
ledge of the treatment of the insane, and the management of lunatic
asylums.^ At present the only method by which this experience can
be acquired is by filling a subordinate post in an asylum. Many of
the county asylums, and some of the best private establishments, have
an assistant medical officer in addition to the chief, and it is in this
corps of assistants that the visiting justices are most likely to meet
with a competent superintendent. We consider practical experience
OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS. <ill
tlie most essential of all the qualifications we have enumerated, yet we
know several instances in which no regard has been paid to this most
important point, candidates of very limited experience having been
selected in preference to gentlemen of many years' practice in this de-
partment. In the case of one of the metropolitan asylums, a gentle-
man who had no practical experience Avhatever, was selected in pre-
ference to several highly qualified applicants, but the successful candidate
?was fortunate in possessing extraordinary private influence.*
When the visiting justices have elected their medical officer, it
remains for them to settle and define the extent of his authority. In
our opinion, the entire active administration of the establishment should
he vested in his hands, and with it the sole responsibility. In some
asylums the resident medical superintendent is styled the director; this
appears to us a very appropriate designation, for who is so competent
to direct a curative institution as this medical officer 1 We say to the
visiting committee, " Gentlemen, employ all reasonable caution in
making your selection; weigh the value of testimonials; inquire well
into character and disposition; insist on previous experience; see all the
eligible candidates, and examine them in person; and then, when you
have appointed the best man, repose full confidence in him, and do not
restrict his sphere of action or impair his usefulness by unnecessary
regulations or vexatious interference." We have devoted much time and
inquiry to a consideration of the relative merits of the different systems
of management pursued in various asylums, both in this country and
abroad, and Ave see ?very reason to believe that the best managed and
most serviceable institutions are those of moderate size, in which the
resident medical officer is the sole responsible head. In some of our
county asylums the medical superintendent is placed in a very dero-
gatory position; he is allotted a mere semblance of authority, and is
called upon to share the little he possesses Avith the steAvard and the
matron. He is a servant Avliere he ought to be the master, and is made
responsible for regulations in Avhose construction he had no voice, and
over which he has 110 effectual control. Now, all this is Avrong, and Ave
urge the visiting justices of such asylums to repose more trust in their
medical officer, and to confide to him the management of affairs Avhich
his professional knowledge and experience render him the best qualified
person to conduct.
A very important point, in connexion Avith lunatic asylums, is the
amount of medical supervision, in relation to the number of patients.
We repeat, that Ave consider 250 patients to be the extreme number Avhich
ought to be intrusted to the care of one medical officer. The functions
of the medical officer of a lunatic asylum are not limited to the ordi-
nary duties of his profession; he has not merely to feel the pulse and look
at the tongue, and prescribe physic for his patients, and provide for their
personal comfort, but he has to investigate their mental condition, and
" minister to the mind diseased." To enable him to do this, he must
have time and opportunity to become acquainted Avith his patients, to
* If challenged, we will relate the particulars of this affair for the amusement and
edification of our readers.
412 OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
?gain tlieir confidence, and obtain a personal influence over them. More-
over, as one of the most powerful remedial agents we possess for the
cure of insanity is human sympathy, and as that sympathy is the most
advantageously employed when established between the sufferer and his
medical attendant, the latter should ever strive to win the affections of
his patients, and so lead them to regard him as their best and kindest
friend, and look up to him as a protector, and even as a parent. We
are acquainted with some establishments in which this is the case, and
Ave entertain a firm conviction that the high proportion of cures which
distinguishes these very establishments is mainly owing to the con-
fidential and friendly relations subsisting between the patients and their
medical director. The majority of the insane are just as conscious of
kindness, and quite as susceptible of gratitude, as the generality of man-
kind at large, and it is in the power of the medical attendant to
awaken their gratitude by kindness, and so obtain a standing place in
their affections from which to direct the other means of cure. JSTow
this can be effected solely by personal intercourse ; consequently, if the
number of patients in an asylum is so large as to preclude the possi-
bility of the medical officer becoming personally acquainted with each
case, a most valuable and successful remedial agent is lost, and the
treatment becomes a matter of routine, instead of being a subject of per-
-sonal and individual concern. On this ground, therefore, we limit the
number of patients to 250 for one medical officer. What then shall we
say of the arrangement of Colney-Hatch Asylum, where one medical
officer has the sole charge of more than 500 male, the other of more
than 700 female patients? We disclaim any intention to disparage the
zeal and ability of these gentlemen. We have not the slightest doubt
of their performing their multifarious and laborious duties to the full
extent of their abilities j but we know the limits of human capacity,
and we have had no inconsiderable experience in the management of
lunatic asylums, and we defy any mortal man to execute in a satisfac-
tory manner the unconscionable amount, of work required of these two
unfortunate gentlemen. The medical officer on the female side is
reported to have the care, the exclusive care, of 730 patients. He is
instructed by the regulations to see each of these patients twice daily ; he
has to make the requisite entries of the admissions and discharges, to
collect and to write down the particulars of each case, to devise and
direct the moral and medical treatment, to superintend the general
management of the asylum, to see that the attendants are well
conducted, kind, and attentive to their duties, to settle their misunder-
standings and disputes, to investigate and prescribe for all the cases of
bodily illness occurring among his patients and his corps of attendants,
and after death he has to make a post-mortem examination, and record
the morbid appearance. Now, we ask, is it possible for any human
being to do all this 1 Supposing that, one with another, each patient
daily requires but a single minute of the medical officer's time, but one
minute for all this walking, talking, listening, prescribing, writing, and
overlooking, 720 patients would take 720 minutes, that is, precisely
twelve hours. We have assigned an average of one minute daily to
each individual case, but of course several cases will every day occur,
OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 413
each demanding five, ten, fifteen, or twenty minutes; a case of
pneumonia or enteritis could not be examined or prescribed for in less
than five minutes. It would require at least ten minutes to extract the
essential particulars of a patient's mental state, an additional fifteen
minutes to write them out, and a medical man must be unusually
expert to be able to perform the post-mortem examination of a body in
less than twenty minutes; then there are patients' friends to console
and advise, board meetings to assist at, religious worship to attend, profes-
sional and scientific visitors to receive, letters to read and answer, the
materials of the annual report to collect and arrange, and a host of
minor duties which it would be tedious to enumerate. Again, we ask,
how is it possible for any medical man, no matter how able and zealous
he may be, to perform in a satisfactory manner the enormous amount of
labour above specified. And what are the medical officers paid for all this
labour ? We turn to the report, and find their salaries set down at
??200 per annum each. We also find it stated in the same report, that
the medical officer of the male department had 732 patients under his
care in the course of last year, and his colleague of the female depart-
ment, 89G patients. So it appears that, one of these gentlemen was
paid 5s. 5\d., the other 4s. 5%d. per case. We repeat the fact for the
information of the general reader, and for the edification of our pro-
fessional brethren on the Continent and in America. We repeat that
the magistrates for the county of Middlesex, the wealthiest district on
the face of the habitable globe, the magistrates who have had the
courage to spend nearly 300,000?. in building one pauper lunatic
asylum, also have the courage to entrust the responsible management of
that asylum to two "gentlemen eminently qualified, both by their
talents and attainments,"* at salaries of ?200 per annum each.
But the visiting justices of Colney-Hatch may answer us, by asking
why they should increase the salaries of the medical officers, since so
many suitable applicants present themselves whenever there is a
vacancy. We are fully aware that such is the case, and we have not the
slightest doubt that there would be many eligible candidates, even if the
salary were reduced to ?100 a-year. This, however, does not alter our
opinion as to the wisdom and expediency of augmenting the present
salaries. We hold it to be an established maxim in industrial economy
that the best workmen can be obtained only by paying adequate wages.
So with regard to asylums, if the visiting justices wish to attach first-
class medical officers, men of science and repute, permanently to their
institutions, they must give such remuneration as will command their
services. . >
There are many circumstances to induce a member of the medical
profession to connect himself for a time with an asylum like Colney-
Hatch, were the salary even less than it now is. But Ave do not
imagine that a medical man of any present or prospective eminence
will be found willing to remain there for a permanency, at a salary of
^200 per annum. The appointment may be held for a time to gather
experience, to obtain a professional status, to gain a name, but it offers
* Second Annual Report of Colncy Ilatcli, p. 13.
NO. XXIII. G G
414 OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
no intrinsic advantages calculated to attach the holder to the office, and
render its prolonged possession desirable. We consider frequent
changes in the medical officers of asylums extremely injurious to the
utility of such institutions. Yet, in no other asylum in the kingdom
do such changes occur so frequently as at Colney-Hatch and Hanwell,
and we suspect this is mainly owing to the inadequate salaries. It is
by no means creditable to the justices concerned in the management of
these vast establishments that the medical officers should be worse
paid, relatively to the amount of work performed by them, than the
officers of any other county asylum in England. If report speaks
truly, it was a short-sighted thrift which deprived Hanwell Asylum
of the services of Dr. Conollyj and there are obvious grounds for
supposing that that excellent medical officei*, Dr. Hitclnnan, would not
have exchanged Hanwell for the Derby Asylum had the salary of the
two offices been more nearly commensurate. Two years only have
elapsed since the opening of Colney-Hatch Asylum, yet, in that short
time both the medical officers have been changed, and it requires no
great sagacity to predict that under the system now followed such
changes will be of frequent recurrence. If the Middlesex justices are
truly desirous to carry out their boast of making Colney-Hatch the
" Model Establishment of Europe," they must place the medical staff
on a very different footing from what it is at present; they must
remember that it is not the magnitude, nor the splendour, nor the
costliness, nor the vast expenditure, which confer pre-eminence on such
an institution, for these are mere material elements, but it is the
spirit which animates, the mind which governs it. The fame of such
a building does not consist in the multitude of bricks of which it is
constructed, nor in the wide extent of ground it covers, it resides in
the names of the illustrious men who are connected with it, the men
whose science illuminates, whose humanity hallows it. The first
dungeon which Howard visited, the cell in which Pinel first struck
off the iron fetters of the maniac, are more famous in the world's his-
tory than any other such abodes can hereafter become, even though
their "walls were of jasper, their.foundations chrysolite." We have
but slight hope that our remonstrance will be listened to, we anticipate
the curt reply, "Economy, we must study economy?it is for economy
that we have one asylum instead of three?that we have no visiting or
consulting physician?two resident medical officers instead of six. and
that we pay those officers ?200 instead of ?400 per annum." The
plea is a strong one, time-honoured, and of great weight in this
country, but why, we ask, should its application be restricted to human
intellect and skill when it is not extended to such material things as
bricks and mortar, timber and iron 1 The sum expended in building
Colney-Hatch Asylum is proof that no expense was spared to render
the construction as complete and perfect as possible, and, although we
have criticised the results, Ave do not question the motives of this
enlightened liberality, on the contrary, we only lament that it did not
stretch far enough to effect the remuneration of the medical officers.
The suppression of the office of visiting physician is, in our estimation,
another defect in the management of Hanwell and Colney-Hatch
OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 415
#
Asylums. We have been informed that the Middlesex magistrates
abolished these offices mainly with the view of saving the very moderate
salary that was attached to them.* If such be the case, never was
there a more pitiful or less desirable economy. These vast Asylums
of Hanwell and Colney-Hatch are not paltry parochial establishments,
to be regulated with parochial parsimony, they are public, nay, national
institutions, and as such should be rendered, so far as is possible, a
public and national benefit. The poor inmates who tenant these
charitable institutions have not the power to make any direct or per-
sonal return for the expense and trouble of the care bestowed upon
them, but they may, unconsciously and with advantage to themselves,
be made to aid in the advancement of medical science, and thus reward
the assistance afforded them, by increasing our knowledge of the
curative treatment of the terrible disorder with which they are afflicted;
Before the general foundation of public hospitals how slow was the
progress of medicine and surgery; and even these hospitals would have
been of little utility without the services of these earnest and inquiring
men, by whose industry and talents the sufferings of humanity have
been alleviated, and the duration of human life prolonged. Our public
hospitals are not only benevolent institutions for the cure of disease,
they are also the schools of the healing art, and Ave most earnestly
desire to see Public Lunatic Asylums made subservient to the same
purpose. >Some of the diseases which afflict mankind are almost
wholly confined to the poor and laborious; but insanity is a malady
incident to all, it attacks indiscriminately the monarch on his throne
and the felon in his cell, and unless arrested will reduce them both to
the same extremity of mental degradation. How deeply, therefore, is
society interested in the treatment of this malady, and surely no avail-
able means should be neglected to enlarge our knowledge of its essential
character, and to improve our methods of treating it. Among the
measures best calculated to obtain these ends, none seem so likely to
be of service as that of attaching men of known and acknowledged
eminence in this department of medicine as visiting physicians to our
great public asylums. The visiting physician being relieved from the
toil and anxiety of superintending the details of treatment, is better
able to appreciate results, and has more time and ability to condense,
compare, arrange, and classify those results, so as to make them avail-
able for the instruction and guidance of others. In France the most
talented Psychiatrists of the day are attached to the various public
asylums, so that there is hardly an establishment for lunatics in that
country which has not at least one practitioner of acknowledged
eminence connected with it; why should it not be the same in England?
Another very important regulation in the government of asylums is
the position of the matron with respect to the medical officer. We
have no hesitation in saying, that it ought to be strictly subordinate,
and her functions exercised wholly under his direction. Yet, at Han-
well and Colney-Hatch, and in some other asylums, the matron is not
* This is confirmed by the Hanwell Report for 1852, in which the saving of Dr.
Conolly's salary, ?315 per annum, is mentioned as calling "for attention and approval,
G G 2
410 OUR PAUPEIl LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
only quite independent of the medical superintendent, but holds the
same rank, exercises an equal authority, and obtains the same, or nearly
the same, salary ! So highly, indeed, do the Hanwell justices esteem
their matron, that they print her Report, " replete with interest and
pathos, in an unmutilated form," giving it precedence, we surmise, out
of gallantry, to the reports of the medical officers ! We are well
aware that many of the matrons of our public asylums are very excel-
lent and very estimable persons, still something more than moral
excellence and respectability is required for the successful treatment of
insanity, and considering that no matron, in this country, can possibly
have received a medical education, and that very few women possess
the rare combination of qualities and attainments required for the
management of the insane, it seems to us unwise and hazardous to place
the matron of the asylum above the control of the medical officer.
Moreover, as moderation in the exercise of authority is not a charac-
teristic of the female mind, this equality of power frequently leads to
ill-concealed rivality or more open antagonism, so that the female side
of the asylum becomes the seat of a struggle for supremacy, utterly
subversive of discipline, and most detrimental to the welfare of the
patients. This is no fancy sketch, and we should not have to go out of
the county of Middlesex to find a striking example. Another point in
connexion with this subject, is the question, whether the wife of the
medical officer should in any instance be permitted to fill the place of
matron in the same asylum. Our opinion is decidedly opposed to this
arrangement. We consider that the matron should be as much under
the direction and control of the medical officer as any other servant of
the establishment, and our married friends can tell us whether it is
probable that such would always be the case if the matron were that
officer's wife. Again, it should rest with the medical officer to see that
the matron performs her duties, and to reprimand her if she neglects
them. Now we fear a conjugal relation betwixt the parties would inter-
fere with the strict observance of this useful regulation, ^'ere are
other adverse reasons also; some domestic, which we ne^ja ^o, particu-
larize; others, respecting which, we may tell om1 'non-professional
readers, that most medical men have a strong dislike to their wives
knowing anything about the details of their practice. So that altogether
we think we have shown sufficient cause why the matron of an asylum
should not be the wife of the medical superintendent.
Many of the larger asylums have a resident chaplain, and such as
have not, are periodically visited by some neighbouring clergyman.
This is an excellent regulation, and one of the great improvements in
the modern treatment of the insane. Formerly the poor madman
was looked upon not only as civilly, but also as spiritually extinct,
so that it never entered the minds of our forefathers that a
lunatic could receive consolation from prayer, and participate in the
comforts of public worship. But although a large proportion of the
insane are fully capable of appreciating the privilege of attending divine
service, and derive benefit from doing so, yet there are some patients
in every asylum whose delusions forbid any reference to religious sub-
jects, and upon whose condition the indiscreet zeal of the chaplain
t
OUR PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLURlS. 417
might produce very injurious consequences. For this reason, we hold
that the chaplain should exercise the functions of his sacred office under
the direction of the medical superintendent, and that he should be in-
structed not to address himself particularly to any patient without that
officer's knowledge and approval.
There is yet another officer to whom too large a share of authority is
conceded in some public asylums; we mean the house steward. It
would of course be impracticable for the medical superintendent to see
to all the details of the household economy, still we think he should be
acquainted with them, and that it should be the duty of the steward to
carry them out in accordance with his general instructions; nor would
we allow the steward to originate or alter any of the household arrange-
ments, without having previously obtained the sanction of the medical
officer.
Lastly, we consider it indispensably requisite for the due maintenance
of discipline, that the medical superintendent should possess the full and
exclusive authority to engage and dismiss all the attendants and ser-
vants. The curative success of a pauper asylum depends in great
measure on the character and efficiency of the attendants employed in
it; and first-class attendants can be obtained only by paying liberal
wages, by treating them well and attending to their personal comforts,
and by exercising great care and judgment in their selection. The fix-
ing of the rates of board and wages being part of the general expendi-
ture, falls to the province of the committee; but the selection of atten-
dants should undoubtedly be entrusted to the medical officer, he being the
best judge of the peculiar qualities required in this class of persons; and
as it necessarily devolves upon him to see that they conduct themselves
properly, and perform their respective duties in a satisfactory manner ; as
they work under his directions, and are immediately responsible to him,
they should therefore be placed wholly under his control. If, as at
Colney-Hatch, the medical officer is not allowed to engage or dismiss
the servants and attendants, the chief mean of discipline is withheld
from him, and he is less able to enforce the prompt and implicit
obedience which is desirable in these institutions. Furthermore, when
the power of the medical officer is limited to suspending the offender,
and reporting the offence, he is placed in the false position of appearing
as the accuser in a cause of which he is the most competent judge; and
m the event of the committee dismissing his complaint, sustains a
serious impairment of influence. It is an established maxim in execu-
tive administration, that discipline cannot be effectually maintained by
a divided authority, and as the strictest discipline is necessary in public
asylums, we consider this maxim perfectly applicable to their manage-
ment.
It may be objected against our measures that they would throw the
active government of the public asylums almost entirely into the hands of
their medical officers; we willingly admit this, for it is precisely what
we wish, and we have a deep and settled conviction that the public
utility of such institutions would be largely augmented by the change.
A personal acquaintance with many of the medical superintendents of
our public asylums, enables us to declare that there exists among and
418 AN ANALYSIS OF DR. GUISLAIN'S WORK ON INSANITY. ,
between them a noble emulation to conduct tlieir respective establish-
ments in the most humane and efficient manner, and that in many
instances their efforts would be more successful if not impeded by un-
wise regulations and injurious interference.
To conclude; it should never be forgotten that the abolition of con-
stant mechanical restraint, the introduction of employment, the use of
religious exercises, and all the other practical measures which have
ameliorated the condition of the insane, and improved the treatment of
insanity, have originated with the medical officers of asylums, and with
respect to any further alleviation of this dreadful malady which it may
please the Author of all good to bestow, we may reasonably hope that
the humble instruments of his beneficence will be chosen from the same
active body of philanthropists.
