Belfast Lunatic Asylum and the Chaplaincy Question
===================================================

In another portion of our columns to-day, says the Editor of the Belfast
Commercial Chronicle, March 5tli, will be found the official proceedings
which have taken place between the Board of Governors of the above
Institution and the Irish Executive, in connexion with the high-handed
attempt on the part of the latter to force chaplains upon the former.
Those proceedings are now presented authoritatively to the general public, a
loud call being made for their production in consequence of the intense
interest excited by the extraordinary, we might say most unconstitutional
and arbitrary conduct of the Government, so transparent throughout this
entire affair. We really are amazed beyond expression, now that we have
before us the documents we this day publish, at the complete want of common
sense, to say nothing of common prudence, displayed by those at the head of
BELFAST LUNATIC ASYLUM. 281
affairs in this country as relates to this matter. They would appear by their whole
course, past and present, in regard to it, to be determined to fulfil to the letter
the truthfulness of the expression so perfectly apt on the present occasion?
quern Deus vult perdere prius dementat. Throughout the whole of this con-
troversy we never had any other opinion, but that the governors of the asylum
were in a right, and their autocratic opponents in a false, position. We
formed this judgment from the ever able and admittedly satisfactory manner
in which they discharged their high and important trust; for we challenge it
to be said to the contrary, even by the most factious leaguer, that during the
twenty-four years this institution has been in operation, a single complaint
was ever made against any part of its management. So much to the reverse
has this been the case that its system of general government has been the
theme of universal approbation, and lauded to the utmost, and this not more
so than deserved, by all parties, official and otherwise. Is it not then sur-
prisingly strange, most monstrous, in fact, that those vested with a portion of
the powers of her Majesty, to be exercised for the promotion of the common
weal, should pervert those powers by wielding them in violation of the rules
enacted by themselves, for the due and proper discipline of an invaluable public
establishment like our district asylum ? And yet this is palpably the case, as
we shall now prove. On referring to the Board's remonstrance, it will be
seen that a code of rules and regulations for the government of lunatic asylums
in Ireland was deliberately made, sanctioned, and ordered to be carried into
effect, by the Lord Lieutenant and Privy Council, in Ireland, in the year 1843
?a code which, be it specially remembered, has, up to the present moment,
been unrepealed. According to rule 13 of that code, then, we find it laid
down that the " Board is to make rules and regulations for the admission of
clergymen to visit in that character any patients of their own persuasion.
Frequent visits of the parochial clergy to the institution are particularly
desired ; the Board to make arrangements for the celebration of divine service
before such of the inmates as their respective clergymen and the physician
shall deem fit to attend the same." This rule, so distinct and specific, is a
finisher to this unparalleled attempt, and gross jobbing on the part of Govern-
ment, to saddle chaplains upon this or any other asylum in Ireland. The
Board state with respect to it, " We have made regulations for the admission
of clergymen?we have encouraged the visits of the parochial and other clergy
?we have made arrangements for the celebration of divine service before
such of the inmates as their respective clergymen and the physician shall deem
fit to attend the same; and being convinced that our arrangements were as
judicious as they have unquestionably been salutary, we entreat your Excel-
lency to sustain us in our disinterested and conscientious endeavours to carry
them out as heretofore." In a foregoing part of this " remonstrance" our
readers will see that in the year 1834 the above provisions were made by the
Governors, the meeting at which the same were specially enacted being pre-
sided over by the late distinguished Bishop of the Diocese, and attended by
the late most worthy and venerated Yicar, the Kev. A. C. Macartney, in
addition to another estimable clergyman, the Rev. Thomas Hincks, still,
happily, a zealous labourer in the vineyard, and long to continue so, we
earnestly trust. Another of those still existing orders in Council?rule 45?
is worthy, too, of the best attention. It is as follows?"The physician is to
direct the course of moral and medical treatment of the patients the Board's
remarks upon which being so pertinent that we cannot avoid reproducing
them here?
"And assuredly no portion of moral treatment is so delicate and so
important as that connected with religious teaching and ordinances.
" On behalf of our resident and visiting physicians, therefore, whose fidelity
has been above all praise, and whose labours have been admittedly crowned
with unequalled success, we implore your Excellency not to humiliate them
282 BELFAST LUNATIC ASYLUM.
by disregarding their matured opinions, or to paralyze their future exer-
tions by permitting any novel interference with their professional arrange-
ments.
" We respectfully assure your Excellency, that with the exception of the
Lord Bishop of Down, the Right Rev. Dr Denvir, the Rev. Dr Edgar, and
the Rev. Mr. Monsell, we have not conversed with any individual of any
church, profession, or emplo3'ment, who does not participate in our sentiments
upon this question, and the ardour with which it has been opposed by news-
papers representing, we believe, all creeds and parties, abundantly testifies the
deep interest which it has awakened in the public mind.
" With regard to ourselves, we venture to assure your Excellency that,
cheerfully admitting the sincerity of those who dissent from our views, we do
not yield to them in our Christian anxiety to see the wounded spirit cheered
and sanctified in due time and place by the blessed influence of religion, and
we trust that our earnest pertinacity in this matter will be ascribed not to any
morbid craving for victory or power, but to its true cause?an imperative sense
of personal and public duty."
But there is one portion of this remonstrance which, above all others, must
satisfy the most prejudiced, yea even our Tenant League contemporary, the
Banner, that the conduct of our District Asylum has been so pre-eminently
successful in the treatment of its inmates, that any interference with it would
be the act of one " next door to an idiot." We now refer to that clause of it
which gives a comparative statement of the cured and improved cases, taken,
too, from the official report of Government, as made to Parliament, in reference
to District Asylums, all of them fully chaplained, be it observed, except
Belfast; according to which it will be seen that our own asylum is at the
top of the scale, distancing all the others to such an extent, that they may be
said to be nowhere. Here is a stubborn, here is a great fact, which our
" worthy inspectors," though announced by the Banner?a bad authority, we
admit?to be of such " professional eminence, as to counterbalance all other
medical authority" (!!) never attempted to explain. Again, we find the
inspectors duly recording, time after time, that the management, 11 in detail"
of our asylum demanded the expression of their " unqualified satisfaction."
Time and space, however, prevent us from entering more at length into this
most able and convincing public document; every line of which is telling, and
the whole scope of w hich is creditable in the highest degree to the governors.
We must not, however, forget to direct the attention of all to the paragraph
in it respecting the opinions of the physicians, past and present, of the asylum
itself', on the subject of the systematic performance of religious services by
chaplains. Such testimony, we submit, is most conclusive, if the judgment of
men so highly qualified and experienced, whose talents and standing may, with
every truth, be said?and this, too, without intending the slightest disrespect
to our " worthy inspectors," (neither of whom, we believe, ever spent much
time immediately with the insane, without which their wants could not be
duly appreciated)?to be of "such professional eminence, as to counteibalance
all other medical authority," however valuable.
Having now disposed of our cursory remarks upon the remonstrance of the
board of governors, we cannot conclude without saying a word or two regarding
the authorities by which it was accompanied, in support of the views it con-
tained. And first, we beg to refer to the letter of the resident superintendent
of the Armagh District Lunatic Asylum?a gentleman, whose opinions range
over no less a period than thirty-four years in actual residence amongst the
insane. Is the opinion of such a man not to be respected and acted upon ? If
so, there is no further need of arguing so important and vital a question.
Then we have extracts from medical publications of the highest character,
such as the Dublin Quarterly Medical Journal?the exponent of the opinions
of the heads of the profession in Ireland, all expressing the strongest and most
BELFAST LUNATIC ASYLUM. 283
decided opinions against the so-called " medical aids," to wit, chaplains in
hospitals for the insane. And though last, not least in importance, as regards
our references to the papers now put forth by the governors, we beg very
especially to direct general notice to the strikingly valuable and matured
opinions of the Rev. William M'llwaine (for nearly eighteen years the incum-
bent of St. George's church, in this town), a christian minister, " whose praise
is in all the churches," and whose practical piety and moral worth, as evidenced
by his consistent daily walk in life, and the devoted attachment of his flock,
none will presume to gainsay; opinions which, we hesitate not to affirm, are
as correct as they are argumentative, and most creditable to him, both as a
minister of the Gospel and a man. Another very remarkable evidence against
chaplains is contained in the short but speaking extract from the letter of an
actual chaplain?and in England too?whose testimony is founded on the
practice of " experimental religion," to deny which to " dying lunatics !" some
parties appear so monstrously shocked at.
But we have extended our remarks to a length which the really important
nature of our subject has unwittingly led us on to, and, though much remains
yet to be said, we must defer doing so to another opportunity. In the mean
time we may state, as a very important fact in the present position of this
chaplain question, that the grand jury of the county Down, at the assizes,
now going on, have adopted, unanimously, the following resolution, strongly
supporting the steps adopted by the authorities of the asylum against chaplains
being permitted within its walls, a course which we take for granted the grand
juries of the county Antrim, and the county of the town of Carrickfergus will
likewise adopt:
Grand Jury Boom, V:<wnpatrick, 2d March, 1853.
A copy of a communication lately submitted to his Excellency the Lord
Lieutenant from the governors of the Belfast District Lunatic Asylum,
ljsmonstrating against the appointment of chaplains, having been laid before
the grand jury, together with the written opinions of eminently qualified
medical practitioners, the matter was fully considered and discussed by the
jury, and it was unanimously
"Resolved?That we highly approve and cordially concur in the views
which have induced the governors to resist the appointment of chaplains,
which, from the statements and opinions adduced, would, in our opinion, be
seriously prejudicial to the recovery of the patients.
(Signed) " S. D. Crommelin, Foreman."
We have again to repeat, before concluding, that this chaplain agitation has
stirred up a spirit and a feeling in the north of Ireland, which will not be
quickly allayed. AVe presume that the Government never reckoned upon the
old house they were bringing about their heads, in acting as they have done.
We tell them plainly, they will find that this portion of Ulster is "fierce when
provoked," and will not submit to be trampled upon, or ignominiously com^
pelled to do their bidding, in order to make places for poor clerics, " with
large families and small incomes," or to please grasping tenant-leaguers, or
any other party?whether mitred, or cassocked, or gowned, or otherwise.
No, we are not yet arrived at such a pitch of abject slavery as this, and with
the blessing of Providence we never shall. The governors of the asylum, we
must again remark, deserve all praise, for the independent conduct they have
pursued?conduct not less respectful than determined; they have but to
follow it up, and the}7 may rest assured of "success, and of the good opinion
of all that is good in the community.
