Problems in Child Placing
==========================

Anna Spiesman Starr, Ph.D.
Formerly Psychologist, Municipal Court of Philadelphia, and Consultant
Psychologist, Community Health Center, Philadelphia
The placement of dependent children, whether delinquent or
not, constitutes a fundamental and integral part in any social program. Apart from presenting an immediately urgent need as it
so often does, Child Placing affords the greatest challenge in the
scheme of modern social rehabilitation. No other problem has more
lasting results in time or broader scope in the outcome.
It is the inalienable right of every child to be provided with
such conditions and circumstances as will foster the attainment of
his highest development. His health, his education, his training,
and happiness are all involved. Within him lies the vital force of
his future citizenship and it will grow as the direct outcome of these
factors acting and reacting upon him as an individual. If at maturity, society exacts the price of conformity to its traditions and
laws, it must provide adequate protection for its children. It is
their defender. Since society imposes responsibilities upon its citizens, these same, as children, must be taught and trained accordingly
for their coming citizenship.
Today child placing agencies are cognizant of much that had
grown out of the former hit-and-miss methods of somehow tucking
children away in this available home or that, without much concern
or appreciation of the importance that a particular home be a " good
home," not just in general, but be especially adapted to the particular child to be placed therein. Such subtle factors as the family's
attitudes, family unity and personality types are considered, as
they need to be, with as much care as is the provision of the purely
physical necessities. The child's background, his present attitude,
his mental, physical, emotional and social development and their
probable inter-reaction within the new home are carefully studied
in order, first of all, that adjustment may be possible and that it
may be permanently maintained. To grow up happily a child
must feel a sense of security, must be conscious of being recognized
as an integral part of the group and accepted by the other older and
more powerful members. The birth of altruism, of loyalty, of social
and industrial cooperation emerges from the sense of an abundance
of unchallenged security. This is as true of the child who remains
148 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
beneath his parental roof as it is of the child who is placed elsewhere.
Throughout this discussion child placing is taken to mean the decision which terminates in choosing a particular home for a particular child. It may be the parental home, more often it is not.
As illustrative of the problems involved in the placing of children and of their possible solution, the cases of Sam and his brother
Mart are here presented. They are the sons of rather young Russian Jewish parents; their home situation was decidedly poor, the
children neglected. The father had been sentenced to jail for bootlegging and the mother had returned to her old environment in the
tenderloin. There were no other relatives. Sam was four and Mart
six at the time this account begins and they had just been turned
over to the Jewish child placing society. As part of the routine
preparation and investigation of a pending placement case, the
boys were given a physical, a psychiatric and psychological examination. There were evidences of malnutrition, carious teeth, poor
habits of personal hygiene but no deformities nor serious pathological conditions. Neurological findings were negative.
Clinic notes taken during and immediately after the psychological examination record of Mart:
C.A. 6 yrs. 4 mo. I.Q. 66
M.A. 4 yrs. 3 mo. Basal age, 4 yrs. Upper limit, 5 yrs.
Memory Span?Forward, auditory?5 digits (mode for 7 yr.
level).
Reverse, auditory?failed to comprehend (mode for 6 yr. level).
Vocabulary?restricted, both in extent of vocabulary and ease
in the use of known words.
"Mart's mental deficiency is well reflected in his performance
test results. He was interested only in those well within his ability
(3 and 4 yr. level) and was greatly pleased whenever he completed
one. The difficulties he encountered with the more complicated
ones made his interest lag and he showed no desire to complete
them, even calling upon his younger brother to assist him. (Sam
had been brought into the examining room to be with his brother
in an effort to still his crying.) Mart evidenced little discrimination of form and did not profit readily by practice or experience, showed adequate motor coordination, poor persistence, low
energy supply, deficient comprehension. Mart is poorly informed,
though comparing his performance today with the report of an
earlier examination six months ago, there is some improvement
evident. Basal age on the Terman Revision is four years and of
PROBLEMS IN CHILD PLACING 149
the five year group, he could name the primary colors. He failed
in the comparison of weights, aesthetic comparison and executing
three simple commissions. His auditory memory span of 5 digits
forward would indicate a better range of distribution of attention
than any of the other responses today.
"Tentative Diagnosis, 'Not higher than a middle grade
moron.' "
Having been present for the latter part of his brother's examination, Sam became quite calm emotionally and as long as Mart
was allowed in the room, his cooperation remained satisfactory. The
record of his examination shows,
C.A. 4 yrs. 5 mo. I.Q. 80
M.A. 3 yrs. 6 mo. Basal age, 3 yrs. Upper limit, 4 yrs.
Memory Span?Forward, auditory?4 digits (4 to 7 yr. mode).
Visual?Not determinable.
Reverse?Did not comprehend.
'' Sam was interested from the beginning in all the performance
test material he saAV. With the tests within his range of years, he did
very well. He showed good discrimination of form, and size; displayed accurate muscular coordination, abundance of energy and increased efficiency on the second trial. He appears to have particularly good manual dexterity. Obviously Sam has not been taught
nor given much childhood information, neither has he acquired it.
He cannot count beyond two and he failed to copy the square.
Showed unfamiliarity holding a pencil. Each verbal response was
elicited only after promising that he might ' play with other games.'
Once when opposed, he left the room but returned amicably when
called. He is stubborn, persistent, willful and energetic?a potential
if not an actual conduct problem at present.
"Tentative Diagnosis, 'Normal dull, untaught. His infantile
stammer, if it persists, should be treated at the University Clinic.
Here we have two boys in urgent need of a home. The psychological findings indicate Sam to be of normal intelligence, though
woefully untrained in general and especially deficient in verbal expression; anti-social in his group relations. His brother confided
that Sam "was good for you today. He never talks much, only to
mother.'' Mart on the other hand was passive, uncritical, easily influenced, quickly fluctuating in the quality and time element of a
response?mentally defective.
Where should they be placed? In an institution? Together?
Apart? As neighbors? In a childless family? With other place150 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ment children? Under supervision with their mother? After considerable discussion and several conferences it was determined to
place them together. Accordingly, Mart and Sam, shiningly clean,
equipped with new clothes and a "free from" (contagion) certificate, entered their new home, where several "family-children" of
about their own age accepted them as of themselves. At the office
this particular home was listed as an "average home" from the
material side, presided over by a cheerful Jewish mother and housewife. There was no servant, and each child had a few tasks regularly assigned to him and for which he was responsible. Her own
children obeyed her simple restrictions as a matter of course and
the transient or temporary placement cases who had been there
previously, soon learned to follow their example. She was a busy
mother, though her maternal care could apparently include a few
more than her own. To her, children were children; they were to be
fed, kept tolerably clean, sent to school, early in bed and up
promptly on schedule. They should be busy among themselves and
unhampered by unnecessary "don'ts."
A year later the boys returned for a re-examination. Their
intermediate case histories record regular contacts on the part of
their Visitor but there have been no serious difficulties. Their adjustment had been gradual and at present seemed complete. The
boys' parents were kept informed of their progress. The father
had not yet been released and the mother offered no interference,
neither did she visit them.
As they came into the Clinic, two outstanding gains were immediately apparent?their improved appearance along with physical growth and their increased poise and social security. With Sam
it was almost unbelievable. He opened the Clinic door without waiting for an answer to his knock and greeted me with "I came in to
do some blocks. This is Jack,'' pointing to a boy whose acquaintance
had just been made in the waiting room. Sam appears now an
active happy boy of five, easily expressing himself clearly and well.
The pent-up rebellion of last year is released in the spontaneous expression of his interests and energy. He has attended Kindergarten and progressed satisfactorily. Mart too shows some improvement but to a lesser degree. He has gained in persistence and is perhaps less passive. Physically, the boys were given a clean bill of
health.
The report of the psychological re-examinations is in substance
as follows:
PROBLEMS IN CHILD PLACING 151
Mart?C.A. 7 yrs. 8 mo. M.A. 5 yrs. 9 mo. I.Q. 75
Basal age, 5 yrs. Upper limit, 7 yrs. Vocabulary limited.
Memory Span?Auditory, forward?6 digits (mode for 10 yr.
level).
Learning?Not 7 digits on 6 trials.
Reverse?Did not comprehend.
Visual?5 digits.
"Mart showed some improvement in liis performance tests over
last year's efforts. They are however still below the median for his
age group. He worked happily, even pleased with himself, and was
not critical of his errors. Proceeded purely by trial and error method
when the solution was not pefectly obvious. Showed some increased
efficiency on second trials. His range of information has broadened
but not sufficiently to bring him up to the average of his age. He
remembers few specific items taught at school, though he makes a
better analysis of a simple situation. He does not know right from
left nor can he count beyond twelve. Failed to copy a diamond. He
does however know "what is the thing to do" in situations familiar
to children of his age, such as probably being late for school or having broken another's property.
"Diagnosis confirmed. Subnormal intelligence, not above middle grade moron."
Sam?C.A. 5 yrs. 10 mo. M.A. 5 yrs. 9 mo.
Basal age, 4 yrs. Upper limit, 7 yrs. I.Q. 98
Vocabulary?apparently adequate in scope but does not comprehend definition.
Memory Span?Forward, auditory?6 digits (10 yr. mode).
Reverse?Did not comprehend.
Visual?Not determinable as he does not know digit signs.
"Sam demonstrated superior ability in manual dexterity. His
analysis of form and position is exceptional for one of his years. This
ability should be fostered and taken into consideration especially at
the time of choosing a vocation. He has good energy supply, is persistent and steady in his effort; works quietly, spontaneously, critically and apparently with enjoyment. He assembled the Healy Construction B within two and a half minutes (10-12 yr. level) and replaced the blocks of the Dearborn Formboard correctly within 6
minutes when all of them had been removed. He wanted to try
the Healy Pictorial 'Day at School' and failed completely, not
placing one correctly, though he worked earnestly and long. This
would seem to indicate that his discrimination and analysis are as
152 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
yet concerned with form and concrete material rather than with
situations and ideas involving judgment. His range of information
has expanded greatly and his manner of speech has also improved.
He still speaks softly though with assurance. Perhaps the greatest
development during the year is in his manner of social contacts.
The shy, uncomfortable child of a year ago, entered the Clinic today
self reliant, smiling, eager to do whatever was asked of him.
"Diagnosis: Normal intelligence. Shows particular ability in
manual dexterity."
These clinical notes of the re-examination portray interesting
companion pictures to those of the year previous. Their graphic
representation clearly shows the progress made. Taking the previous scores, records and reports together with those of the reexamination, I have evaluated on a five point scale the different
abilities and characteristics of each boy at each examination. The
scale is purely arbitrary though consistent?1 being the lowest value
referable to all children, 5 the highest ; 1 indicating low grade defective, 5 superior ability. 3 is average, normal. The scores of
the first examination are indicated by the solid lines, those of the reexamination by the broken lines. Each score level has been further
divided into low, middle and high, which means that the boys' performances have actually been rated according to a 15 point scale.
The subdivisions have been indicated by the position of the marker
within the diagnostic column. The list recorded contains only those
qualities which were definitely evaluated at the first examination.
It makes no pretense at being complete.*
Graph I represents Sam's scores; Graph II those of Mart.
At a glance we see what different types of children these brothers are; Sam characterized by wide variations from the median,
Mart always centering about the zone of bare sufficiency. At the
first examination Sam was untrained, repressed, handicapped in
speech but energetic and clever along the lines of manual dexterity.
His sociability was decidedly low. At the re-examination, his most
* In determining the evaluations made, both the quantitative and qualitative factors were considered. For instance in rating the performance tests, the
responses "were compared with the percentile distribution of the time scores
already standardized for that particular test. This comparative rating was
then modified by the qualitative rating, determined by the method of performance, viz., trial and error or planfulness. As to the I.Q. rating, being considered indicative of general proficiency, I would indicate a score below I.Q. 50;
II above 50 but below 70; III above 70 but below 90; IV above 90 but below
115, and V above 115.
PROBLEMS IN CHILD PLACING 153
obvious development is noted in the field of motivation. Within
the space of a year he has grown in social poise, in ease of conformity to accepted social standards and in cooperation and control; the range of his general proficiency has widened and he has
become spontaneous in verbal expression, free from embarrassment
and stammering. What did it?
Mart's psychograph shows some development but not such
striking advance as his brother's. His low intellectual mediocrity
^710.^/1 r
5 0/wv
G*(Uh/| t O
154 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
remains fairly constant, though his social reactions did improve. He
gained too in range of information. He is, however, a borderline
case, passive and lacking the forceful energy which so characterizes
Sam.
From the child placement point of view these graphs illustrate
what a satisfactory home can do in one year for an anti-social child
of normal intelligence and what the same foster home can do in
the same time for a passive conforming subnormal child. Certainly
their individual abilities are in the ultimate outcome a largely determining factor. There is nothing in the case record nor in either
boy's attitude which would give the slightest indication that either
had been favored in the home, or had been subjected to discrimination in favor of the other or indeed of the family-children. In
fact the children apparently "just grew" and grew with one another. I am inclined to hold that therein lies the secret of the success in this particular situation. Of course it is unwarranted to
suppose that this home is the best of all possible ones for Sam and
Mart. Obviously, however, it has afforded a setting in which each
has had the opportunity to develop his individual possibilities
with a remarkable degree of freedom. The ideal of the best home is
to be self-disciplinary. Necessary discipline should be inevitable in
its certainty, but its importance never over-emphasized. Many a
child of imagination filled with a sense of the dramatic consciously
enjoys holding the center of the stage in his family-drama every
time he plays the role of enfant terrible. Anything to gain attention ! Why not enliven a dull rainy day or one when everybody is
too busy to give much attention to his young Lordship ? The punishment which follows is usually administered in a high, emotional key
and may smack of injustice, thus affording the best kind of a situation to enkindle defiance and retaliation or foster ingrowing misunderstanding.
Homes of children should consistently maintain standards well
enough within their individual reach, so that no child feels himself
to be held apart from the group. For child welfare it is more essential to be emotionally stable than intellectually brilliant. This
does not mean that the lives of the older members of the family
should be entirely dominated by the whims of the younger, but it
does mean that each as an individual should be conscious of sharing
the freedom of self-expression which the home affords. "Whether
aware of it or not, this foster home seems to have incorporated
these characteristics in the every day living, with the result that the
PROBLEMS IN CHILD PLACING 155
mechanics or structural framework of discipline was largely submerged in the children's full busy days of school, work, play, sleep
and off again to school. Their home materially satisfied their physical needs and afforded the boys enough of the simple luxuries for
them to be accepted as substantial citizens in the neighborhood and
at school. Socially they were "secure" within the family and within the community.
Undoubtedly play also contributed very largely to the development of Sam and Mart during the past year. Contrast their pent-up
lives amid intrigue, law-evasion and the necessarily hurried movings
from place to place. Under no conditions do children develop as
spontaneously as in competitive and cooperative sport?especially
when their equipment largely depends upon the player's ingenuity.
Team-play, obedience, subjection of the individual to the power of
the group, speed of decision, quick right action, "game" acceptance
of criticism and defeat, modesty in victory?these are the lessons
best learned at play, for here they are self imposed and clearly
justified without being personal and without the dictatorial imposition of adults.
Whether or not their present home will continue to meet their
individual needs is a matter of conjecture. That they have grown
and have been happy there, is beyond doubt. The problems of the
future will largely depend upon the boys' personality development.
With periodic re-examinations?physical, psychiatric and psychological?serious pitfalls should be avoided.
