Methods and Results of Teaching a Case of Congenital Word-Blindness
=====================================================================

Charles A. Ford
State Bureau of Juvenile Research, Columbus, Ohio
Congenital word-blindness is characterized, according to Hinshelwood,1 by normal or near normal intelligence, inability to read
words, though other symbols such as music and numbers can be
read, and the eventual development of a reading skill when the
proper technique can be found. The frequency of this defect in
the public schools is really unknown because of the inexact definition of how severe the defect must be to be dignified by such a
name. Dr. Wallin2 has estimated its frequency to be as great as
epilepsy, but this is higher than most other estimates.
The important points concerning the condition are three. First,
that such a condition is found now and again in the public schools.
Second, that the children have approximately normal intelligence.
And third, that the condition can be alleviated, somewhat, by education alone. This last condition is extremely important because
it puts the problem of the social competency of the child squarely
on the shoulders of the school staff.
This paper is an attempt to show a method used in the instruction of such a case, together with objective and subjective measures
of the results of such instruction. As is so often the case with such
cases, the gross result of Paul's3 defect was far more than mere
inability to read but extended into a severe social maladjustment
that eventually brought him before a juvenile court. In our work
with Paul, no attempt was made to develop his reading skill to
the point of mastery. We only tried to find a method that would
show that Paul could be taught to read and at the same time could
be continued in his local school.
One of the outstanding facts in Paul's case was his ability
to identify a printed word when the name was given him but an
utter inability to name the word when the word alone was seen.
For instance, if we were asked to find such a word as "Rover"
1 Hinshelwood, James: Congenital Word Blindness (1917)
a Wallin, J. E. W.: Clinical and Abnormal Psychology (1927)
sFord, Chas. A.: "A Case of Congenital Word-Blindness Showing Its
Social Implications"?Psychological Clinic May-June 1928, 17, pp 73-84.
Paul's case is to be found here, reported as a case study to show the method
of diagnosis and the factors that contributed to his social mal-adjustment.
CONGENITAL WORD-BLINDNESS 227
in a page, he could do it, but shown the same word before or a
few minutes later he could not pronounce it, and it carried no
meaning for him. Yet he could analyze the word as far a? letters
were concerned and he had some idea of the phonetic sounds of
individual letters. Even when Paul would apply these sounds,
he could not synthesize them so that the word as a whole had
sufficient sound similarities to known words that he could recognize it. We are not yet certain that this condition is typical of
the congenitally word-blind, but it has been found in many of
the cases we have seen at the Bureau.
Paul's feeling of inferiority, because of his inability to read,
offered another big problem in selection of a method. Mistakes
served to inhibit further responses and he would become very
timid. Yet, as with any normal person, he had to see progress
and marking time on the same material had the same effect as
mistakes. For these reasons, it was essential that many arrangements of the same learned vocabulary were available so that he
would have many contacts with it, without the feeling of having
to do his work over.
Because of his severe reading defect, it was essential that a
simple system be used. Phonics were essential, we felt, because
he needed a power to attack new words. But the phonics system
needed to be the very simplest devised because the feat of learning
to read was hard for him even when a simple method was used. He
had been given all his phonics training by the family method. Five
years of this had shown its inability to meet his situation, so something else needed to be found. Furthermore, the material he was
to use had to be attractive to one of his age. Too simple material
would not stimulate him, but the usual material for eleven-yearolds was too difficult.
In short, our method must be one that would give him the
ability to recognize words easily; that would be so simple that mistakes would be few; that would allow him to see progress but
offer much drill with new arrangements of the same vocabulary;
and that would give him not only visual but kinaesthetic contacts
with the same words. A further condition was that the method
should be useable in his own school.
For these reasons the "Beacon"4 system of phonics was
1 The "Beacon" system is published by Ginn and Co. of Boston. The
Phonics system is outlined in a teachers' manual written to accompany the
"Beacon Gate to Reading."
228 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
adopted and the "Beacon" readers were used as basal readers.
Modifications of the method were made to fit the particular case at
hand, but these modifications were probably no greater than would
have been needed for any other individual type of instruction. The
advantage of this system over others was the simplicity of its
phonics, and its well worked out flash cards.
Each morning and each afternoon, Paul was given a thirty
minute period of individual instruction.5 By means of objects,
or pictures of objects, and printed cards, a small working vocabulary was developed. The method was simply to show Paul a card
with the name "ball" on it, explaining that the word was the
same as the name of the object. Then a picture of ball would be
shown and he would be asked what it was. The card with the
name on it would be represented and it would again be explained
that in this case the word "ball" rather served as a photograph
of a ball. The words would then be written on the black board and
Paul would be asked to trace the letters and pronounce the name.
Then he would copy it and pronounce the name. And so on, until
several nouns had been learned more or less thoroughly.
Next, he would be shown a ball and asked what he saw and
he would say: "I see a ball." Then a card would be shown, reading, "I see a ball" and it would be explained that the card said
the same thing he had said. Then he would be asked to point to
the word "ball" on the card; asked to write it, etc. Then the
sentence would be taken apart so that the card reading, "I see"
was by itself and it would be explained what the card said, etc.,
through the same order as in learning the nouns. Then a book
having the same sentence would be shown and he would be asked
to read it. And so on with word and phrase after word and phrase.
After he had learned several cards, he would be given them
to play with and encouraged to build new sentences with them,
then to tell Mr. Bell or others what the sentence said. Each period
consisted in presenting, in a random order, all the cards he had
learned up to that time. He was told never to guess but if he did
not recognize a card to say nothing. By this device, errors were
kept at a minimum. After he had learned the cards, they were
not just shown an indefinite time for him to look at ibut they were
flashed so that he would attain speed in the recognition of his vocabulary built upon the "look and say method."
B This instruction was given by Mr. Eric F. Bell, an assistant psychoclinician at the Bureau of Juvenile Research.
CONGENITAL WORD-BLINDNESS 229
The cards used were the "Beacon" flash cards, so that his
vocabulary would correspond to available books. As soon as the
necessary vocabulary for a story had been attained, he was given
the book to read. Following this, he would be given construction
work with the same vocabulary. So that his contact with the
words were many and various.
In eight weeks of such drill, Paul had learned the vocabulary
of the "Beacon Gate to Beading," finished the constructive seat
work that accompanies it, and had attained considerable facility
in recognizing the words in new places, although he was far from
perfect in this ability. It was apparent that the contextual setting
of the word assisted him greatly in recognizing it.
While he had fair ability in word recognition of learned words,
he had no ability to pronounce or get the meaning of new words.
It was therefore essential that phonics be introduced. Because of
a variety of circumstances, it was necessary to change teachers
at about this time, so the entire phonic development was left for
a new person.6
This change in teachers also necessitated a new time arrangement. Three fifty-minute periods were arranged, one each Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday morning. Had it been possible for the
same time distribution to have continued as in the previous period,
better results could probably have been attained, but even under
these adverse arrangements, it is interesting to see the progress
that was made.
The methods used from this time on were to have: (1) drill
on Beacon phonies; (2) written work with oral spelling of words
as they were written; (3) drill on word reading (continuation of
flash card method); and (4) drill on the various exercises, with
the known vocabulary. Each of these were used for short periods
so as to prevent exhaustion. Letter names, consonant sounds, and
consonant combinations had been fairly well learned before this
time. The vowels, which are the main phonetic elements in the
Beacon system gave the most trouble:
A, O, and I, were presented in the manner outlined in the
Beacon Manual, in a twenty-minute period. The next day A and
0 were recalled but I was not. That day, I and E were taught.
" Miss Lois Weaver, a special reading teacher of the Dayton, Ohio public
schools was selected for this work because of her interest in the problem and
experience with reading methods, although she had had no previous experience with the "Beacon" system.
230 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Next day, A, 0 and I were recalled but E was not. That day,
I, E and U were drilled. Next day all vowels were recalled except U which has consistently remained troublesome. The
method of teaching was to write the vowel and sound it, then
Paul would do the same. Then words having that phonetic sound
would be written and pronounced. Paul would then be asked to
add words to the list that had that sound and they too would.be
written and pronounced. The same method was used in presenting
digraphs.
The combinations ar, or, er, ir, and ur, were then presented.
Next came oo, all, aw, au, then ow, ou, oy, and oi. Daily reviews
were carried on with combinations that proved difficult. The
method was for the instructor to first write them, then Paul would
say them and mark each one he would miss. He would then go back
and correct the ones he had missed. The next step was to have
him write the combinations as they were dictated. Combinations
were in every case first presented in words then later they were
isolated. Despite, this, he found it easier to recognize the isolated
combination unit than the same unit in words. This phonic work
was given during the first part of the fifty minute period and consumed an average time of twenty minutes. It was not an invariable time but as soon as Paul showed any fatigue or lack of
interest, the next part of the lesson was started.
The second section was given to reading, mostly oral. During
this period much encouragement had to be given him as he was
quite reluctant to re-try words that he failed to pronounce correctly
the first time. He would say, "I know all the sounds but can't
put them together." This was usually true and when he was
asked to sound them aloud, he could usually put them together
without further difficulty. The greatest trouble was his reading
from context. All too often he would call "father,"?"daddy"
or "papa" or insert a word that could as well be there as the one
that was actually there. In short his speaking vocabulary was developed far beyond his reading vocabulary.
The remaining part of the fifty minute period was spent in
answering questions in two ways. (1) by doing things, and (2) by
writing things. In each case the questions were written. He had
to read them and then carry out the directions. The questions,
to which he was to write answers, were about pictures from magazines pasted at the top of the page. On either side of the picture
was a vocabulary concerning the picture. Under the picture were
CONGENITAL WORD-BLINDNESS 231
the questions with spaces left for the answers. Doing this work
he showed his greatest spontaneity and would pronounce words
that were expected to be difficult. This ability to pronounce the
words was probably because of the cues offered by the pictures.
His outstanding difficulties ran true to type. His most difficult
vowel sound was "u" which he often sounded as "i" or "e." In
single consonant sounds, it was "d" which he would call either
"p," "b" or "t." There was a constant tendency to pronounce
"s" as"sh" and to insert "1" and "r" in words not having them,
such as "biggerst" for "biggest," and "black" for "back." There
was also difficulty in changing a vowel sound from short to long.
Words beginning and ending in the same letters were troublesome.
It was exceedingly difficult for him to remember words and when
they were sounded out at the top of the page, they were equally
as difficult at the bottom of the page. To pronounce a word he had
to sound it orally and there was an utter disability to do it without
sounding the syllables aloud and a further difficulty, in that,
though he sounded out words correctly, he often mispronounced
them by combining the sounds into meaningless words. But usually
context helped to pronounce words after they were sounded.
The most important item in attempting to teach any child is
the child's attitude. This was even more true of Paul. Because
of his difficulty he had developed a feeling of inferiority and had
lost confidence in himself. He was timid, afraid to assert himself,
afraid to make mistakes, and was never sure of anything. A mistake, if made, slowed the whole process. New words, new stories
and new situations were nearly overwhelming because of the possibility of error. It was this attitude that made his teaching difficult.
"With such an attitude toward life, encouragement and praise
in large doses is the best medicine. As far as possible, Paul was
kept from making errors by being given timely help. He was allowed to select the stories he read. He was praised for all that
he did, was given extra institutional privileges, and taken to places
that might interest boys of his age. Though he enjoyed this, he
was not exuberant about it as were other boys who went with
him.
Despite his attitudes, and the meager time allowance for instruction, it was gratifying to see how much he improved. Detailed, objective tests of his ability before training will be found
in the case study previously mentioned. Suffice it here to say that
232 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
his reading ability was near a zero plane, and as far as serviceable
reading ability was concerned it was absolute zero. One of the
outstanding things in his case was his ability to recognize words
when they were pronounced but an inability to pronounce the same
words himself. After his training period which lasted, in all, about
five months, but with some lost time because of sickness, there
was an apparent measurable improvement not only in reading but
in social attitudes.
On the Pressey "First Grade Reading" scale, Form A, he
succeeded in a perfect score and could read all words and sentences
he had circled. Previous to his training he circled 21 words and
12 sentences correctly and could read none of them. On the Los
Angeles Primary Word Recognition Test, Form 1, Part 1, which
requires lines to be drawn from a word to the correct element of a
picture, he made a perfect score. On the Pressey Second Grade
Reading Test, Form A, Test 1, he did 22 lines in twenty minutes
(Standard time three minutes from whole test). This test is to
cross out nonsense syllables from a line of words. He was successful in only 12 of the 22 lines. This simply shows that words outside
a contextual setting carry very little meaning for him. On the
Gates Primary Reading Test, Type 2, Form 1, he missed only two
of the twenty-five parts of the test. This test is to circle pictures answering a description printed above. Tests such as these last three
were impossible previous to his training as he could read nothing.
But his reading was very slow and far from accurate. On
some non-standard reading tests designed for practice work, it
took him eight to ten minutes to do what it would ordinarily take
a first grade youngster two or three minutes to do. These consisted of typed simple directions followed by pictures to which he
was to do something. For instance, one said, "Put a tail on the
animal that barks" and was followed by a drawing of a dog and
a cat. He read it "Make a tail on the animal Ted backs" but
actually put the tail on the dog. This performance illustrates
his reading from context and his substitution of letters.
In addition to these improvements in ability, he succeeded in
raising his Stanford-Binet mental age from 9 years, 5 months to
10 years and 6 months in the five month period. On both Stanfords
he failed the tests involving reading. But it was gratifying to note
that while he couldn't read any of the material in the first test,
he read much of it in the second, even though too slowly to be
credited. There was also a noticeable change in his spontaneity and
CONGENITAL WORD-BLINDNESS 233
playground activities. So marked was the change that his parents
wrote after his return to them: '' He has changed so much that he
does not seem like the same boy."
We felt that this short and rather inconsistent training period
had demonstrated two things rather clearly. First, Paul could
be rehabilitated and made into a socially competitive being, and
second, a usable method for his instruction in reading had been
devised. Our recommendations were largely along the line of
outlining a continuation of the instructional method and suggesting
certain family adjustments that would be apparent from the complete case study.
Some time after Paul's return home, it was the writer's good
fortune to be in his city. It was gratifying to know what had been
done concerning his case. First, the family situation was changed,
as had been suggested. Second, a school supervisors' meeting had
been called and it was decided to place Paul in a borderline class
where special emphasis could be placed on reading methods. After
a short period of this, he was placed in the second grade and sent
into other rooms for more advanced work when possible. At the
time of the visit, for instance, he was doing third grade reading,
fourth grade arithmetic and geography, and fifth grade history.
Practically nothing but hand work was done in his home room
and in this he was doing very well. The principal of his school
reported him as being "very comfortable in his present placement." He had not been truant from school a single time nor had
he been a disciplinary problem.
His home was visited at the same time and his family was very
much pleased with the results obtained. He no longer was timid
and retiring but occupied his leisure time by building air planes
and engaging in all sorts of group activities with children his own
age. He had caused them no trouble and they felt confident of
his ultimate successful adjustment.
