Stanford Binet "Indicators" of Mechanical Ability
==================================================

G. Riley, Research Fellow, The Training School, Vineland, N.J.
One of the common practices in clinical psychology is the use
of the results from one test to indicate the advisability and the
direction of further testing. The development of this method is
largely a matter of individual clinical experience and is rarely
validated quantitatively. This study is an attempt to make a statistical evaluation of the items in the Stanford Binet and, incidentally, of certain performance tests that might indicate the
presence of mechanical ability.
The theory that general intelligence and mechanical ability are
distinct traits is consistently confirmed by the low correlations found
between tests of intelligence and mechanical ability. Almost all of
these studies are based on the total score or verbal "pencil and
paper" type of intelligence test. Because of the variety of tests
in the Stanford Binet, which presumably taps many functions, some
might be sufficiently prognostic of the presence of mechanical ability
to be of practical clinical value. The Stanford Binet has the
further advantage in that it is more frequently used as the base
of a test battery than any other test.
Performance tests seem to require, in common with tests of
mechanical ability, speed of activity, motor coordination, manipulative skill, and a certain ability "to see relationships of a concrete
nature." From this overlapping in the functions necessary for
these two types of tests a higher correlation between them might
be anticipated than with Binet and mechanical ability, and so be of
greater prognostic value.
The Arthur Performance Scale1 was used in this study. It
is composed of nine tests (in this experiment the Kohs was omitted
to conserve time) : Knox Cube, Seguin, Two Figure, Casuist, Manikin and Feature Profile, Mare and Foal, and Healy I?Picture Completion. The scores were obtained by applying a differentiating
formula to the norms of Pintner and Paterson2. This weights the
1 Arthur, Grace: A New Point Performance Scale?Journal of Applied
Psychology, 1925, 9: 390.
'Pintner, B., and Peterson, D. G.: A Scale of Performance Tests.
"INDICATORS" OF MECHANICAL ABILITY 129
tests according to their ability to separate an age level from the succeeding one. The tests are combined into a scale by taking the
Median mental age.
As a test of mechanical ability the Minnesota Assembly3 was
Used. This is a revision of the Stenquist Assembly. It is arranged
in three boxes containing thirty-three common mechanical objects.
There are to be put together correctly, as rapidly as possible. The
time is cumulative for each box and the score is from zero to ten for
each object.
The reliability and validity of this test are comparable to the
Results obtained for intelligence tests. The correlation of odd and
even items raised by Brown's formula gives a reliability coefficient
for the total scale of plus 94. The criterion of mechanical ability
used was the quality of the boy's work in shop graded in a semi?bjective way against certain standard objects. This correlation
was plus 55.
The subjects of this study were sixty-five boys from the Hennepin County Probation Office. The usual procedure in giving an
individual test battery was employed. Special care was taken to
establish rapport because of the type of subjects and to avoid fatigue
because of the length of the examination (about three hours).
The life ages of these boys extended from 10 to 17 years (median
14.0 years). Their mental ages on the Binet ranged from 8.0 to
18-5 years (median 12.1 years) and on the Arthur Performance
Scale from 9.0 to 15 plus years (median 13.0 years). On the
Assembly they made scores from 160 to 320 (median 255).
Their scores on all tests were in line with other findings, keeping in mind the selection and small number of cases. Although
the distribution is not normal, this would not materially vitiate the
results for the purpose of this study. A wide variation might do so,
but this as indicated by the standard deviation of the Binet I.Q.s is
13, which is similar to Terman's result and identical with the pupils
?f one of the city high schools.
A summary of the correlations computed from these data is
given in Tables I and II.
As shown by the intercorrelation of the various boxes, the
Minnesota Assembly shows a reliability comparable to the coefficients
at its formation. In its standardization two boxes of ten items each
3 Anderson, D., Paterson, D. Gr., et al: Tests of Mechanical Ability
(manuscript).
130 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
gave a correlation of 63. The average in the present study for the
three boxes is 66 (Table I).
The low correlation (r 13, life age constant) between the Binet
M. A. and the Minnesota Assembly in consistent with other findings
and confirms the "unique trait" theory.
As was anticipated, the Arthur Performance Scale gave an
appreciably higher correlation than the Binet with the Assembly
(r 44, life age constant). This is 11 points higher than the correlation with the Stanford Binet. If the validity and reliability of
the Arthur Performance Scales were known, this might have certain
theoretical implications regarding the nature of intelligence.
The individual tests of the Arthur Performance Scale show
some range in their correlation with the Minnesota Assembly (r 42 to
13). The Knox Cube (r 52) and the Casuist (r 40) show the highest
coefficients and therefore are the most valid indicators of mechanical
ability as measured by the Minnesota Assembly.
Considering the separate items on the Stanford Binet, the
scores (passes and failures) form a series of dichotomous measures
which are to be compared with a series of graduated measures, and
so the biserial r method was used. Correlations were not calculated
for tests having less than ten passes or failures. The results (Table
II) show a rather wide range (58 to ?14). In general the verbal
and memory tests show little relationship with mechanical ability
while the problem and perceptual tests are fairly close, although
the clock test is an exception to the latter statement.
The ten tests in the Binet showing the highest correlation with
the Assembly (starred in Table II) were combined into a scale by
adding up the number of mental ages represented in the scattering
in each case. This was expressed as a per cent of the possible starred
tests in the scattering and the results correlated by the product
moment method with the Assembly. As this gave a correlation of
only 45, the complexity of its formation would not warrant the
slight gain in validity.
The application of these findings to clinical procedure may be
illustrated by the situation which originated the study. Part of the
subsidiary work for the Minneapolis Child Guidance Clinic consists
in a brief study of certain cases from the County Probation Office.
The minimum psychometric datum is a Stanford Binet. The schedule allows about an average of forty-five minutes for additional testing.
"INDICATORS" OF MECHANICAL ABILITY 131
Studying the Binet scores on some two hundred cases shows
there is a bimodality in the distributions of I.Q.s. The high points
occur at 85 and 105. This, with other data, suggests that one of the
chief factors in the delinquency among these boys is that they have
reached their academic limit. In such cases the advisability of their
transfer to a vocational or trade school is the paramount problem.
This in turn raises the question of their mechanical ability. As
there is insufficient time to give every case the Assembly Test, which
takes an hour, it can only be used in cases where is will be of positive
prognostic value. This will be indicated by comparing the "scattering" on the Binet with the correlations in Table II. If the
highest tests passed are those showing the highest correlations (the
starred tests), or if a high score is made on the Knox Cube and
Casuist, the Assembly Test should be given to obtain confirmation of
the presence of mechanical ability.
Table I
Correlations N-65
Inter-correlations of the Minnesota Assembly
Box A?Box B r equals 61? .05
Box A?Box C r equals 63? .05
Box B?Box C r equals 73? .04
Life Ages and Tests
Life Age?Stanford Binet r equals 55? .07
Life Ago?Arthur Performance Scale r equals 49? .07
Life Age?Minnesota Assembly r equals 42? .07
Partial Correlations (Life Age Constant)
Stanford Binet (MA.)?Arthur Performance Scale (score) r equals 39? .07
Stanford Binet (MA.)?Minnesota Assembly r equals 13? .08
Arthur Performance Scale (score)?Minnesota Assembly r equals 44? .07
Arthur Performance Tests?Minnesota Assembly
Knox Cube?Minnesota Assembly r equals 52? .07
Casuist?Minnesota Assembly r equals 40? .07
Two Figure?Minnesota Assembly r equals 34? .07
Feature Profile?Minnesota Assembly r equals 24? .08
Knox Cube?Minnesota Assembly r equals 18? .08
Seguin?Minnesota Assembly r equals 17? .08
Healy Pictorial I?Minnesota Assembly r equals 13? 08
132 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Table II
Biserial r's between Stanford Binet (test items) and Minnesota Assembly
Scores
Test Year Name r
10 *1 Vocabulary .38
2 Absurdities ?
*3 Designs .58
4 Beport ?
5 Comprehension .03
6 Sixty Words .14
12 1 Vocabulary .25
2 Abstract Words .26
*3 Ball and Field .31
4 Dissected Sentences .11
*5 Fables .37
6 (Six) Digits Backwards .16
*7 Pictures .40
8 Similarities .18
14 1 Vocabulary .20
*2 Induction .33
3 Difference of President and King .24
4 Problems .14
*5 Arithmetic .33
6 Clock Test .21
16 1 Vocabulary ?
2 Fables .28
3 Differences of Words .21
*4 Problem Boxes .42
5 (Seven) Digits Backwards .09
*6 Code .30
18 *2 Binet?Paper Cutting .33
3 (Eight) Digits .11
Mean .24
Scale of starred tests?Minnesota Assembly r equals 45? .07
* Tests used in forming scale to indicate mehanical ability.
