II. Bobby
==========

Arnold Ginsberg and Arthur Phillips, Clinic Teacher,
University of Pennsylvania
Bobby, aged 7 years and 5 months, was brought to the clinic
by his mother in October, 1928, because of retardation since an
attack of encephalitis. He was referred to the clinic by his aunt
who is a teacher. Bobby is the youngest of two children. His older
sister, Ethel, is 16 years old and is doing good work in the first year
of High School. A "nervous breakdown" prevented her from
starting school at six years, accounting for her relatively low grade
in High School. The health of both parents is reported to be good
although an enlargement of the thyroid gland was observed in the
mother.
Conditions at birth were normal, although the child did not
receive nourishment from his mother's milk. At two months he
suffered from mal-nutrition. At three years he had a severe siege
of encephalitis lethargica. After his recovery from the illness, it
was necessary to teach Bobby to talk and walk all over again. He
also had measles and whooping cough. A recent operation for
tonsils is said to have improved his school work.
Bobby's school history consists of three terms in 1A grade.
His conduct is good. He has begun to show signs of improvement
and according to reports from his teacher Bobby may be promoted
this June. For some time after a seat was assigned him in the
school room, he had difficulty in finding it.
Bobby received an I. Q. of 93 placing him in a 10% group
superior to 20% and inferior to 70% at his age level with respect
to I. Q. His Basal age was 5 years, and he passed three tests at the
Six Year Level and two at both the Seven and Eight Year Levels.
This score seemed to be a fair estimate of his ability at the time of
the examination.
His performance on the Witmer Formboard was superior to
30% and inferior to 60% of 6 year old boys on a quantitative scale.
His discrimination was fair and his co-ordination good. A slight
tremor was observed in these performances.
Bobby failed both trials of the Cylinders although he demon-
strated sufficient discrimination to complete the test had he not been
overcome by fatigue.
His audito-vocal memory span forward is four, placing him in
BOBBY 59
a group of 30% superior to 10% and inferior to 60% for 6 year
?lds. He is unable to give a reverse span which makes him inferior
to 50% at the 6 year level. His knowledge of colors is good.
According to Philadelphia School standards anthropometric meas-
urements are exactly right except his head girth which is inferior
to 75% of 5 year old boys (50.5 cms.).
Bobby is a very affectionate child of normal appearance. He
is well-behaved and shows the result of excellent care and training
in his home, without which the youngster would have been unable to
make as much headway after having had encephalitis. Diagnosis
was deferred until "an attempt to teach" should be made and he
was recommended for clinic teaching.
In the first term of the current school year his clinic teacher
taught him the large letters of the alphabet with much difficulty.
He also learned some of the small letters and counting up to 30
after a fashion.
When Bobby returned to the clinic after a short illness for the
second term of teaching, I was assigned to the case. I spent the
first few lessons reviewing the work he had studied under his pre-
vious teacher; finding he had forgotten a great deal, I had to re-
teach him the large and small letters of the alphabet.
Our progress along these lines was quite rapid and within a
few weeks Bobby was able to recognize all the large and small
letters of the alphabet. Through conversation with him I dis-
covered his appetite for reading was voracious, but this can be
compared to the trite saying "his eyes were bigger than his
stomach.''
I started Bobby in a primer, Under the Story Tree, teaching
him to read by the analytic method, that is, learning words from
the story content. His progress was amazing, within two lessons
Bobby apparently could read two printed pages of the first story.
But when in the next hour he began to review his previous reading
work by starting with the second line in reading matter and point-
ing to the first, I had discovered that Bobby had not learned to
read but he had memorized the entire two pages. He was unable
to read words picked out of the regular reading order.
Since this method of reading had failed I turned to the old-
fashioned phonetic method, teaching him the sounds of the letters
separately and building up the words by integrating the sounds.
It seemed very difficult for Bobby to memorize the sounds of the
letters and the procedure was slow. He had particular difficulty
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
with certain letters such as H, R, K, etc. After a few hours of drill
Bobby had mastered the sounds well enough for us to start on the
process of word integration from the sounds. I attempted to teach
him to read short monosyllabic words phonetically. We began with
the most simple members of the '' at" family. I first wrote words on
the board and had Bobby sound out each letter, then pronounce
the word as a whole. This type of work seemed to bore Bobby and
the amount of concentration of attention he gave to the Primer was
even further reduced. Bobby seemed unable to comprehend the
fact that in reading the members of the "at" family the syllable
'' at" was repeated in each word, such as cat, rat, sat, etc.; for him,
each letter of each word presented a new problem.
After a few hours were spent with the anagram card work, I
felt that Bobby had advanced enough in the reading principle to be
able to tackle a primer and read the words from the printed page
as he saw them, instead of memorizing them or interpreting the
pictures on the page as he was prone to do previously when I had
attempted to teach him by the analytic reading method. I started
him on the Elson Primer and to my astonishment Bobby was able
to read after a fashion. The great interest Bobby showed in read-
ing was more gratifying than the result itself. We continued in
this book, reading each hour as much as possible until fatigue
forced us to abandon the work for the day.
I now had Bobby keep a copy book in which I wrote the new
words in each lesson and had Bobby learn them by writing each
word five times and reading them aloud. Thus he was able to get
both the visual, auditory and kinaesthetic images of each new word.
The practical success of the plan has not been proven as Bobby
knew very few of the words in the following session although his
mother claimed he knew them the previous day.
In short, his reading now has progressed to the point where it
is a cross between memorization of sentence ideas and real reading.
The perfection of his ability to read, to my mind, depends on the
ultimate solution of the following problems.
I believe Bobby's most serious problem is that of his mental
fatigue. From my observation of him at play and from his
mother's more inclusive observations Bobby seems to have tireless
energy for play. At play, he is alert and vivacious and reacts
normally in that field of endeavor. This fact I believe brings up
the question of whether or not we will be able to reroute some of
the energy used in play along channels of educational pursuits.
BOBBY 61
Directly related to this problem of fatigue is that of Bobby's
attention. It is said that the attention span of a normal person is
very short. Therefore, the period of constant concentration is
limited, but fortunately we are able through persistence of atten-
tion to remedy this condition. In Bobby's case fatigue first takes
its toll of his ability to bring back his attention as soon as his
ability to concentrate fails him. The attention problem has also
another phase in this case. Extreme distractability seems also to be
the result of fatigue so much so that if Bobby is writing something
on the blackboard he is distracted by the chalk he is using and the
eraser.
A problem that is slight but I believe worth considering is that
of motivation. Bobby is a very undependable child as far as
trainability is concerned. Some days he is literally hungry for
school work, other days his trainability is reduced to the irreducible
minimum and practically nothing is accomplished. This condition
may be interpreted as due in a small part to negativism, that is I
believe that the boy either willfully decides that he will give no
concentrated attention to his work or some days he is unable to give
any concentrated attention due to prevous fatigue. Hence I think
his extreme variation in trainability may be partly due to motiva-
tion and partly due to previous fatigue.
The problems I have discussed such as fatigue, attention and
motivation together with a slight tremor of the hands as demon-
strated in the performance tests and his excessive affection for any
one who seems to please him for the moment are behavior sequehe
of encephalitis. We naturally ask what can be done for the dis-
orders resulting from epidemic encephalitis. This is chiefly within
the province of medical science to investigate so that an answer
may not be possible. The disease is so new, the actual germ, if
epidemic encephalitis is a germ disease, has not been isolated and
therefore very little has been accomplished. Meanwhile supple-
menting medical treatment, Dr. Hallowell in her study of Epi-
demic Encephalitis reported in Vol. XYI, Nos. 5-6, of the Psycho-
logical Clinic, recommends, "the usual measures of hygiene,?
rest, good food, regular living habits and non-exciting environ-
mental conditions."
The fact that Bobby found it most difficult to see that the
syllable "at" was repeated in all the words of the "at" family and
other similar conditions leads me to believe that his secondary or
memorial area for vision is poor. He seemed to forget the sounds
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of the letters when they reappeared immediately in the very next
word and each word having two letters that were always similar
aided him in no way to pronounce it. Each word seemed to present
an entirely new problem. The fact that Bobby's secondary area for
verbal visual imagery is poor leads me to believe that with a
greater amount of stimulation of his memorial areas for verbal
kinaesthesia, that is, encouraging lip movements in reading and
audition will help Bobby to make up his deficiency sufficiently for
him to make greater progress in reading.
Due to the fact that little work in Arithmetic is attempted in
the 1A grade, I also spent a relatively small part of the hour with
the subject. Bobby is able to read, write, recognize and count
numbers from one to one hundred. We also worked with simple
problems in addition and subtraction such as 2 plus 2 and 3 minus
1, etc. I believe his progress in arithmetic, although his proficiency
now is just about that of the first grade, will also depend on the
ultimate solution of our problems of fatigue and attention.
The prognosis of this case, to my mind, is wholly dependent on
our ability to treat the behavior sequelae of encephalitis with the
aid of medical science. If this is not possible, I venture the opinion
that Bobby's condition if not naturally outgrown will become
worse, for as his age increases these deficiencies will become more
and more apparent.
