Studies in Diagnostic Teaching I Albert
=======================================

:Author: Edward Watson and Arthur Phillips,
Clinic Teacher, University of Pennsylvania

If yon were to talk to Albert for a short time and hear him tell
of his toys or his games with his friends, or of his trip to Cuba you
would probably say, '' Here is a superior child or at least a boy who
is better than average." Or if you were to judge him by his appearance and general manner you would probably say that he was
a normal boy of ten with a pleasing personality and winning ways.
Hence it is not at all strange that the principal of Albert's school,
when he saw the boy in a B division class, a class for slow moving
and retarded children, wondered why he was there, and sent him
to the Psychological Clinic to see if he could be placed with average
children.

Albert was first examined on July 20, 1928. At that time he
was eight years and eleven months old, but was at the median for
ten year old boys in weight and height.

His school history showed that he entered school at the age of
six and never repeated a grade but had been placed in the slow
moving division. At the present time he is completing the fourth
grade. His conduct in school is fair, outside of the fact that he
talks a good deal and often refuses to work.

The medical history shows that he had measles, mumps, chicken
pox, bronchitis, influenza, congested kidneys and one accident causing a concussion of the brain. None of these diseases, however,
affected him permanently. He walked at eighteen months, talked
at three years and is still enuretic.

His psychological examination showed him to be inferior in all
the performance tests and in memory span. His audito-vocal
memory span was five forward and four reverse, and his visual span
six. His Intelligence Quotient was 93.

Albert's results in the psychological tests and his I.Q. nevertheless point to normal mentality. The case became complex only
when an attempt was made to determine the boy's school proficiency. At the time of the examination he had successfully completed
three years of school work; yet when he was given a reading test,
it was found that he could not read a single word. When he tried
to read he read backwards or started from the second syllable of
the word. Although he could not read at all he could spell most of
the words in the first reader. He could recognize the letters, he
knew the spelling of the words, yet because of his complete lack of
any idea of phonetics, he could not read the simplest words. His
arithmetic was also poor. He could do only problems requiring not
more than 2B competency. One wonders how a boy with such poor
school proficiency could ever have completed three years of school
work.

The examiner, on finding these results, recommended that Albert be taught at the clinic in order to determine the cause of his
failure to learn to read.

Although the teaching of Albert proved a difficult task it was
much simpler than was expected. He learned rapidly and by the
end of the first five months of teaching he had read seventy-four
Pages in a primer. This is the usual amount of work covered in
grammar school during the first year. His teacher used the phonetic method and built up new words in families. Not only did she
teach the boy the elements of reading but also succeeded in improving his attention and creating within him an interest in reading.
At this point I took up the teaching duties. At this time, also,
Albert's school teacher requested that the boy be taught arithmetic
along with reading. I spent three hours a week with Albert and
divided the time equally between the two subjects. In the beginning I continued the methods of Albert's first teacher. He
grasped the new words quickly and recognized them when he came
across them in the text. Several difficulties, however, soon presented themselves. Although Albert quickly learned new words
when they were taught to him, he could rarely ever put together a
new word which he encountered while reading. Often when he did
try to read a new word, he started from the end and tried to read
it in reversed order.

During this time I had been building up new words by the
family method using word cards or writing lists of words on the
board. After a short time, however, I noticed that although Albert
Was reading these new words correctly, he was actually reading
them backwards. He found that the last syllables of all of the
words were the same and all he had to do was to read the first
syllable. Accordingly he said the last syllable first to himself, then
tried to tack on to it the first syllable and when the whole word
was finished he would say it aloud. Sometimes, however, he would
forget himself and say the last syllable first. For example, suppose
we were taking the '' ake'' family. I would write on the board the
syllable "ake" then prefix to it "c" forming "cake" or "r" forming "rake" or "sn" forming "snake" and so on. Albert would
soon discover that in all these words the "ake" was the same.
When I asked him to read one of the words, he would say to himself "ake," "sn," "sn," then aloud "snake." Sometimes, however, he said to himself "ake," "er," "er," then aloud "aker"
instead of "rake." It was easy to observe these processes within
Albert because he always moves his lips and talks to himself when
he tries to form a new word.

Thinking that this mental process contributed largely to Albert's reversed reading, I discontinued the use of the word cards
and the family method. Instead I used the method of forming lists
of words whose beginnings were the same. I also made a list each
day of the new words in Albert's lesson. After the lesson was
over I would have him reread these words then take them home
and study their pronunciation and spelling. In this way Albert
learned from ten to twenty new words a day. "Whenever he came
across a new word in the book I put my finger over the last syllables
and had him read the word syllable by syllable in the proper order.
The results of this method were most gratifying. After a
short time Albert acquired the habit of reading from the left side of
a word to the right. He soon forgot the family method and when
he encountered a new word he looked first at the first syllable and
figured out the word in its proper order.

From this point on, his reading ability developed most rapidly.
At the beginning of the term he read at a rate of five to six pages
per hour in a primer. At the end of three months he was able to
read twenty-two pages per hour in a second reader.

Only one obstacle yet remains in Albert's reading ability and
that is his attention. When there is a picture on the page he will
not read until he has examined the picture and explained it. Once
he is allowed to do this, he continues to turn the pages and look
at all the pictures in the book. If he is permitted to do this, he
turns pages until the book is finished and then puts it away without
going back to the reading. If, while reading, something in the room
attracts his attention, he stops reading and examines the object.
Often for no apparent reason at all he gets up and runs around the
room or plays with marbles which he always carries with him.
Even when he is reading he moves all around and kicks his feet
under the chair and plays with his tie or does anything rather than
sit still. So distractable was he that it became necessary for me to
hold him in his seat. I always put two chairs next to each other
and sat at Albert's side. When he started swinging his feet, I put
one of my legs across his knees and made motion of his legs impossible. When he started playing with his tie or with any object
within reach, I removed his hands from the object and put them
down on the desk. Whenever he stopped reading for any other
reason than to figure out a new word, I immediately called his
attention to it and made him go back to his work. These measures,
however, only served to keep the boy still in the classroom. I do not
believe that his attention improved at all. Often he sat still and
read for as much as thirty minutes. This, however, was not because
his attention had improved, but because he could not have moved
even if he had tried.

In most cases when Albert came to a new word he first guessed
at it. I never told him he was wrong but instead asked him to read
^ a second time. He would then look at the word more carefully
and attempt to figure it out. If I found he could not do so alone,
I assisted him by covering part of the word and asking him to read
^ syllable by syllable. Sometimes, however, when I asked him to
reread a word he would continue to guess and insist that he was
right. At such times, I would write the word syllable by syllable
0n the blackboard and show him where he was wrong. Sometimes
he would look at a word and say an entirely different word which
meant the same thing. For example, he was told that a troll was a
goblin. When he came across the word "troll" in the book, he read
it "goblin." This, however, only occurred with a few words and
did not form a serious defect in his reading.

Albert's distractabilit.y becomes much more serious outside of
the classroom. I do not believe that he could read three or four
Pages by himself without someone watching him. He would probably skip the hard words and soon find something else outside of the
book to interest him. Toward the end of the term I made an
attempt to improve this defect. Albert told me that his father
often read to him the comics in the Evening Bulletin. Accordingly
I brought with me, each day, a copy of that paper and had Albert
read the comics himself. I hoped that as soon as he learned the
vocabulary he would read them himself at home. This would serve
to make reading more interesting to him. As far as the experiment
went it seemed successful. Albert became interested in three of the
comics. These he read without any urging and in them made an
attempt to read the hard words. However there was not enough
time for him to acquire a sufficiently large comic vocabulary for me
to expect him to be able to read them without assistance and the
outcome of the experiment is unknown.

During the term Albert finished reading Barnes' Primer (about
twenty pages), read completely Elson Reader, Book One (160
pages), part of Elson Reader, Book Two (64 pages), part of
Bolenius Third Reader (25 pages) and two pages of Spaiding and
Bryce Fourth Reader. He had no difficulty at all with the Elson
Readers. I had him read completely Book One only to stimulate an
interest in reading. Book Two was also easy for him and he read it
at about the same speed with which he read the easier book. The
third reader was more difficult but he read it at sufficient speed to
enjoy the stories told in it. This, however, was not the case with
the fourth reader. Here Albert had to stop too often and after he
read two pages he could not tell the story. His reading proficiency,
therefore, is about 3A.

The arithmetic lessons presented only one problem?attention.
Only once during the past school year has Albert received a passing
grade in arithmetic. The reason is simple. Albert does not have
the ability to stick to a problem until it is finished. In the beginning of the term, I had great difficulty in making him do any
kind of a problem at all. He would go to the board and look at the
problem and then draw pictures or make lines in any direction.
When I called his attention to the problem he would start to guess
and always guessed wrong. Nevertheless, no teaching was necessary
in the arithmetic lessons. Albert knew the methods of doing any
problem requiring fourth grade proficiency. All that was necessary
was to keep him at his work.

Albert did not know the multiplication tables very well. However he knew how to get any desired multiplication by adding or
subtracting from one he did know. Hence he was constantly doing
little problems on the side of the board. In order to correct this, I
spent an entire month on short multiplications. Each day I gave
him a number of such problems until he was perfectly sure of himself. This made the long problems seem shorter to him and he
began to take more interest in them. During the rest of the term
I drilled him on fourth grade problems.

I found it necessary to use the same methods of keeping him at
his arithmetic as I had used in the reading lessons. Here, however,
the method was much more successful and I can definitely say that
Albert's attention, as far as arithmetic is concerned, has noticeably
improved. Before the end of the term I could give him a problem
in long division, walk out of the room and feel reasonably sure that
he would do the problem without an error. Not only was this so
at the clinic, but at school where there was no one to hold him down,
and on his May report he passed arithmetic for the first time this
year.

One year has passed since Albert came to the clinic. During
the year one great problem was overcome but a greater problem was
brought to light. Albert is no longer a case of orthogenic teaching
?f reading for he is now at a point where the usual methods of
teaching may be applied to him. He, however, presents a case of
distractability of attention which may prove the greatest deterring
factor of his life. The work of teaching Albert has merely been a
search for methods of combating this defect and his teachers of the
future will succeed only if they find such methods.
