Clinic Reports
==============

Case 8305
This case, a boy eleven years and two months old, was referred
to the Neurological Clinic of the University Hospital by his teacher
because of what she called "nerves." The examining physician in
the hospital suspected mental deficiency and referred the case to
the Psychological Clinic.
Earl, as we shall call this boy, is decidedly microcephalic. His
head goes up in a peak from the forehead. His eyes are dull and
the whole picture is one of heaviness, thickness, dullness. He sat
in a chair without sign or sound, showed no interest?scarcely any
sign of life. He looked as though he would have stayed put all day
if he had not been forced into some activity. During the examination he was compliant rather than cooperative.
The history showed that Earl had been going to school for five
years, but he was still in the second grade. His Intelligence Quotient of G5 was no surprise, but his performance on the Witmer
Cylinders and the Dearborn Formboard was. From a quantitative
point of view his performance was consistently superior to that of
80% of boys at the ten year level. Qualitatively it showed excellent comprehension and discrimination. He has given signs of
mechanical ability at home. On one occasion he took apart an old
clock and with the "works" rigged up a windmill which he had
running. This he did without help or suggestion from any one. The
question raised here is whether this mechanical ability is really sufficient to amount to a talent when compared with the mechanical
ability of other boys or whether it stands out as a talent as compared
with the low proficiency level of Earl in other, i.e., intellectual fields.
This is the kind of case which Dr. Witmer differentiates as mentally normal but intellectually an imbecile. In intellectual pursuits
Earl is a Low Grade Imbecile on the Barr Classification?trainable
but only slightly educable. He is not likely to get beyond second
grade proficiency in school. Nevertheless he has good enough judgment to take care of himself and he has excellent mechanical ability.
Case 8348
This case, on the other hand, is an imbecile on every scale. Amos,
a little colored boy, nine years and nine months old, came ambling
into the Clinic accompanied by his mother. His gross motor move222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ments were somewhat uncertain. His face wore a perpetual grin.
His head was large. The girth was equal to the median for twelveyear-old boys. His weight was average for his height and age according to the norms used by the Philadelphia Board of Education.
The Pediatric Clinic at the University Hospital had referred
Amos to the Psychological Clinic for a determination of his mental
status. The medical history showed that the child had convulsions
from the time he was ten months old until he was four years old. He
was three years old before he talked, and four years old before he
walked or was clean. The medical diagnosis was rickets and tetany
with convulsions. The examining physician suggested that it was
probably a case of hemorrhage during convulsions with low grade
cerebritis.
An investigation of school proficiency demonstrated that after
more than three years' training, Amos had not learned to recognize
printed letters or write any part of his name. Although he has
been placed in the second grade of a special orthogenic school for
backward children, he has neither first grade proficiency nor first
grade competency.
On the Stanford revision of the Binet-Simon scale, Amos received
an Intelligence Quotient of 49. His mental age was four years, nine
months, his basal age three, and the highest level at which he passed
tests, seven. The I.Q. and mental age obtained from these tests are
too generous an estimate of the boy's intellectual level.
Work on the performance tests was quantitatively and qualitatively very inferior. Amos's discrimination or discernment is excessively low. He has sufficient efficiency to pick up the blocks of
the Three Block and Witmer Formboards and to place them over a
hole, but he has not sufficient form discrimination to place them correctly even after careful training.
Amos has a very restricted span of attention. The forward auditory span for digits is three, and four once out of about five presentations. The visual span is four and he did not comprehend the reverse span.
In short, all psychological test results in this case were inferior
to 99 per cent of boys at the ten year level of competency. Amos has
no intellect and a very low degree of intelligence. His intelligence
was not accurately measured in the Clinic since he did not successfully complete any of the new problems presented to him. However,
it is probable that his intelligence is not greater than that required
CLINIC REPORTS 223
by such a response as putting on more clothing when he feels cold
or, in the common vernacular, coming in out of the rain. Amos is
neither educable nor trainable. His general performance level was
estimated by Dr. Witmer at about two years. The diagnosis is feebleminded, not higher than a Low Grade Imbecile, Barr classification.
Case 83C2
November 23rd there was seen in the Psychological Clinic a little boy of three years and three months who presented an interesting
manifestation of the motivation of superiority. He was brought because of evidences of precocity. His parents complain of his embarrassing behavior at home. He will get up before a gathering of
grown people and endeavor to entertain them by reciting poetry
which he has taught himself to have on hand for such occasions.
This practice is very annoying to his mother who finds children's
recitations painful. One day before company, he asked his father to
tell him the meaning of antediluvian. The father whose education
and intellectual interests are very restricted was much embarrassed
to have to admit that he did not know the meaning of the word. To
this, young Leo replied in high scorn, "Why father, I am ashamed
of you!'' Fancy this from a three-year-old, and you have something
of the joys attendant upon rearing a child with superior intellectual
motivation, in an average middle class family. If any adults pay
much attention to another little child in his presence, Leo will drag
his playmate, be it boy or girl, by main force from the group of admiring elders, and will establish himself in place.
When the boy was a mere baby of one and a half years (he had
had but six months' experience in the art of walking upright), he
fell all the way down a flight of stairs. At the bottom he picked
himself up, with teeth and fists clenched to brace himself against
tears. In a rage he turned upon his mother and demanded why
she had not taught him to walk downstairs properly so that he would
not fall.
Again, on the street, Leo can beat all the other children in races.
This has become such tame sport that now he will give them handicaps and if, as he overtakes them, they do not hear him coming and
get out of his way, he runs deliberately into them and precipitates
a wreck. The mother asks if this is wickedness in her son. We can
only say that this behavior is typical of the manifestations of superiority. It is successful non-conformity to the accepted pattern
224 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of behavior in a child. We say it is successful because he is getting
away with it among his peers. They accept him as their leader, and
the bigger boys cannot bring themselves to whip such a little fellow.
Here is a picture of boundless energy coupled with enough discretion to know how much tyranny he can carry off. He has the motivation that will not be denied, to excel in all competitions. He has
the desire to surpass even the superiority of his own performances.
His behavior is typical of the egocentric genius who will not be deprived of the center of the stage.
Three Mongolians and Two Cretins
Throughout the academic year, 1928-29, and perhaps during the
last two or three years no cretinous child has been brought to the
Psychological Clinic for diagnosis and there have been very few
mongolians. "With a curious tendency of cases to appear in groups,
which physicians have noticed in connection with their clinic practice, three mongolians were brought to the Psychological Clinic for
examination within a period of two weeks.
The first of these was 6 years, 4 months, of age and was referred
by a School Principal who refused to take the child as one of his
pupils and advised the mother to bring her to the Clinic for an examination. She presented a very typical mongolian appearance with
many of the accompanying symptoms. Her muscular tonicity was
greatly diminished. She sat tailor fashion and could put her heels
over her head and was very active. It was interesting to observe
that the child had a Caesarian birth and that her mother was 40
years old at the time of her birth.
The second of these children was 9 years, 5 months old, a child
of Russian parents. In her case the mongolian facial appearance
was not nearly so striking and indeed was no greater than might
be expected from the admixture of mongolian blood in the Russian
race. Nevertheless, she was definitely feebleminded and would have
to be classed as a mongolian imbecile.
The last of these mongolians was 4 years, 8 months, of age, referred by a physician because of '' absence of the thyroid gland.'' He
could not talk plainly and was not yet clean. He is the youngest of
5 children, his mother being 44 years of age at the time of his birth.
His mother had whooping cough from the fifth month of pregnancy
until he was born. This boy is not higher than an Idio-Imbecile on
the Barr Classification.
CLINIC REPORTS 225
Of even more interest is a cretinoid girl, age 6 years 4 months,
brought to the Clinic for examination November 12th. This child
was referred by the Hospital of the Graduate School of Medicine of
the Universtiy of Pennsylvania and was brought to the Clinic by a
Social Worker from that institution. The girl did not walk or talk
until she was 4 years old and was not clean until she was 5. She has
been under treatment supervised by the Hospital ever since she was
6 months old.
She was suffering from rickets and intestinal infantilism and was
so mal-nourished that at the age of 3 she weighed only 11 pounds.
At the Hospital she is called the "banana baby" because according
to the Social Worker she lives on bananas and butter milk. Her
daily diet consists of 16 to 20 bananas and 2 to 4 quarts of butter
milk. At the present time the girl is up to the average for her
age in weight and height. She has, however, a very large and pendulous abdomen.
The interesting thing about this case is that the child has just
the faintest suggestion of the physical appearance and physiognomy
of a cretin. The slope of the shoulders and her walk, which has just
a slight approximation of what the Germans described as the bear
walk of the cretin, suggested cretinism to the examiner. Her skin,
however, was neither cretin nor mongolian, but in perfect condition
and one has to feel her flesh in order to feel the myxedematous texture. Her hair also was in good condition and she had very lustrous
eyes. The child has that slow responding rather vacant expression
characteristic of the cretin and she is emotionally normal and good
natured. She is not lively enough to be called witty as is sometimes
the case in cretins. With this girl it was just like stirring up in a
pond to get a little reaction but you have to stir her up every time.
Curiously enough the following week a child Avas brought to the
Clinic who presented all the sjmiptoms of true cretinism. At the
age of eight her height was below the median for five-year-olds, she
had the physiognomy and chalk-white, pudgy skin characteristic of
the cretin. In short she represented the classical picture of cretinism
so completely that further description is unnecessary.
Three Superior Children
Last January, a girl, seven and a half years of age, was referred
to the Psychological Clinic by a student of Psychology at the University of Pennsylvania because of difficulty which the child's mother
226 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
experienced in the way of discipline. This girl was examined and
her competency proved to be superior to ninety per cent of girls her
age. She had an audito-vocal memory span of seven forward and
five reverse and her Intelligence Quotient was 132. She showed signs
of very early development. She walked at eleven months, talked at
nine months and was clean at eight months. She had a brother,
fifteen years of age, who was a sophomore in high school. He was
doing excellent work in the academic course. Out of interest, the
mother was asked to bring him to the Psychological Clinic for an
examination. His competency proved to be practically equal to that
of his sister. He had an audito-vocal memory span of seven forward and six reverse and an Intelligence Quotient of 122. He also
showed early development. He walked at ten months, talked at ten
months and was clean at eight months. The parents of these children were of Polish Jewish extraction.
This year a cousin of these children, a little boy, three years old,
was brought to the Psychological Clinic having been referred by the
mother of the other two children. The fathers of these children
were brothers. This younger boy, it was interesting to note, likewise, proved to be superior. At the age of three, he had an auditovocal span of five forward and an Intelligence Quotient of 148. Like
the other children he showed a specific talent in language ability.
He has no brothers and sisters.
Report of the Psychological Clinic
Summer School
July 1 to August 9, 1929
Number of New Cases    93
Number of Old Cases  5
98
Diagnoses
Normal mentality   58
Deferred   10
Borderline   1
Retardation  4
High Grade Imbecile (Barr)  1
Middle Grade Imbecile (Barr)  1
Low Grade Imbecile (Barr)  4
CLINIC REPORTS 227
Types:
Mongolian   2
Hydrocephalic  1
Constitutional Psychopathic Inferior  1
Mild Cretinism  1
Idio-Imbecile (Barr)  2
Dyslalia  2
Profound Stammer   8
Deaf  4
Negativism   1
Cleft Palate   ... 1
98
Recommendations
Clinic or Diagnostic Teaching  16
Speech Training  8
Pre-School Class at Psych. Clinic  2
Specific Vocational Guidance given   6
Specific Educational Guidance given  33
Appropriate Medical Exam, and Treatment  23
Examination in psycho-biochemistry laboratory  2
Specific advice concerning home treatment  10
Treatment accorded a normal child  9
Re-examination in Psych. Clinic  6
Swimming   3
Institutional Placement   7
COOPEEATING ORGANIZATIONS
Educational Social
School or Teacher  22 San Christopher's Day Nursery 1
School Nurse   1 Family Society  1
Parent-Teachers' Assoc  3 Media Community Center  1
Mt. Airy School for Deaf  1 Religious
Social Worker for Board of Ed. 1 Main Line Federation of....
Medical Churches   1
Physician  12 House of Holy Child  1
University Hospital  3
Mt. Sinai Hospital  1
Out of Town Cases
Abington, Pa  1 Camden, N.J  1
Ardmore, Pa  2 Churville, Pa  1
Audubon, N.J  1 Collingdale, Pa  2
Barnesville, Pa  1 Collingswood, N.J  1
Bethlehem, Pa  1 Darby, Pa  1
Brooklawn, N.J  1 Fox Chase, Pa  1
Bryn Mawr, Pa  1 Haddon Heights, N.J  2
228 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Hazelton, Pa  1 SoudertoAvn, Ta
Lansdowne, Pa  1 Tamauqua, Pa
Newton Square, Pa  1 Upland, Pa
North Wales, Pa  1 Westville Grove, N..J
Norwood, Pa  1 Wilmington, Del
Oxford, Pa  1 Woodbury, N.J  2
Sharon Hill, Pa  1 Wyncote, Pa  1
Springhouse, Pa  1
Report of Clinic Teaching Social Service Report
Number of Old Cases Taught. . . 1 Home and school visits  4
Number of New Cases Taught. . 13 Demonstration Cases  19
14 23
Total number of hours taught. . . 211
