Martin
=======

By Alberta Gutmann and Charlotte Easby-Grave,
Clinic Teacher, University of Pennsylvania
Despite the fact that Martin was referred to me for teaching in arithmetic, before long I realized that he had no real deficiency in that line. If he wanted to, he could do sums and long
division with amazing speed. In fact, he rushed through each problem with little regard for accuracy. Nevertheless, it was evident
that his inaccuracy was due, not to any lack of ability, but to
carelessness, hurry and lack of interest. "Let's do something else,"
he would invariably say after a few problems. It seemed to resolve itself into a question of discipline. If he were forced to work
and work correctly in order to do 'something else,' he would.
Martin was not a prepossessing child; his very thick glasses
(without which he can scarcely see at all) did much to mar his appearance. In both height and weight, he was noticeably below
the norm for his age; he looked more like a child of nine years
than one of twelve. Though he had had few serious illnesses, he
had never been robust and strong. He is alert and observant; one
glance at his animated little face, always smiling, would immediately give that impression which would be thoroughly substantiated after listening a few moments to his comments on what he
had seen.
Candidly, I was puzzled. He was referred to the clinic for
"backwardness," for he has been in a special class for years, yet I
had found nothing to indicate retardation. In the Binet tests, he
had a basal age of twelve years and an Intelligence Quotient of
100. In the performance tests, he did faitfly well?having an unusually good rate of discharge. His analytic discrimination with
the Witmer Formboard, however, was poor. He grasped the idea
of the cylinders quickly and solved the problem well.
Martin and I talked together a great deal. The child talks
volubly and without discrimination, in a very infantile voice. His
knowledge of the sciences?of biology, botany, physics, mechanics,
and especially of hygiene?is no less than astounding in a child
so young. This knowledge he has gained through his own initiative and observation. When he asks 'Why?'?and he does this
continually?he insists on knowing all that he can possibly find
out, and has no qualms about going to limitless trouble to gain
286 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
this information. In what interests him, he is persistent, but only
in what interests him. I began to feel that Martin was undoubtedly a precocious child?a child with normal intelligence and an
intellect far above average. Anatomy fascinates him, as does medicine, and each time he came to the clinic for teaching, he would
bring a list of medical terms for me to look up for him. His intense interest, or shall I say curiosity (wholesome or unwholesome as it may be), led him once, upon finding a medical book
written in Polish, to find a Polish-English dictionary and spend
an entire afternoon locked in his room in an attempt to translate
it.
Our subjects of conversation were varied. One thing, however, colored them all, and that was something of his mother. She,
apparently, is the only person whom he regards with any degree
of affection and respect. His father, he thoroughly dislikes and
he admits it, and to his sisters he is utterly indifferent. His love
for his mother practically amounts to a passion. When his mother
dies, he is going to join a gypsy band and never come home again.
He would like ever so much to be kidnapped, but his mother would
worry, he says. Perhaps that was the clue. A 'mother-fixation'
like his not only is unusual but unnatural, and a knowledge of his
social background was necessary in order to make a diagnosis and
recommendation.
Poor boy! how unfortunate that one who at the outset was
given a peculiar make-up should have been born into a family
that did not understand him nor his needs?but which gratified
his every wish, acting on the false assumption that this was kindness to him. Martin's mother is charming and interested in her
boy; she is anxious to do anything to help him. She feels that all
of his life she has done everything that mortal could do to make
him happy. Before his birth, the family was in financial difficulty
and forced to move from a home in the suburbs to the city. Because of the reduced financial condition and the resultant changed
environment, she has always felt that Martin has never had a fair
chance?that just before his birth, she was extremely worried, and
due to that, may have brought into the world a handicapped child.
After his birth, conditions were not as pleasant as they had been
with her other children. From the very beginning, therefore, everything that he did was approved, and all of his errors and mistakes
she condoned. She gives yet another excuse. Even as a baby, any
interference with his freedom of action caused a violent outburst
MARTIN 287
of temper?a knocking of his head on the floor with such force that
the family would do anything to appease him. In such an environment he has grown.
For four years, he has been in a special class and is given
fourth year standing, yet he has a precocious mind and from the
results of the tests, has been diagnosed as having normal mentality.
Why then must he be in a special class? My thought before I saw
him in his classroom and before I spoke to his teacher was precisely
that. He goes to the ''movies" incessantly and in school does practically nothing but write movie stories. '' Are they good ?'one naturally asks. No one really knows, for no one can read them?they are
written so poorly. When one explains to him that he should take
more pains with his writing since his stories may be good, and since,
when he is a man, he may pursue writing as a profession, he retorts, "0 gee! I could have a typewriter then." He is never still,
and is a constant source of worry to the other children. His teasing
is not only mischievous, but malicious. He can never be allowed his
recesses because he causes so much trouble, sneaking up and hurting
his school mates when they are not looking, but utterly powerless to
protect himself if someone turns on him. The child has no companionship, not one real playmate, for he cannot get along with
children at all. As things are, Martin has really very little in common with boys and girls of his age, for his thoughts and ideas run
along entirely different channels. He was sent to camp in the hope
that he would gain some wholesome companionship, but instead, he
associated with no one and was miserable the entire time because
of his fear of swimming.
The special class is like a jail to him and he is right in the
assertion that he should not be in an orthogenic backward class
with children some of whom are feebleminded. Our difficulty is in
finding a place for him, and as yet I fear there is no such place
in the school system. It was felt some years ago that the special
class had been a serious drawback?that the teacher was prejudiced
against him, and since Martin had come to hate not only the class
but also the school, that he should be removed and given a trial
elsewhere. Acting upon that decision, he was put into the fourth
grade of a private school. The class was composed of thirty-five
children with a competent teacher. Here, his actions were abominable. He veritably disrupted the entire organization of the class
and after four months, he was told that his influence was so demoralizing that he could not be allowed to continue. This is a most
288 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
unusual occurrence in a private school. Only a few weeks ago, he
was given a trial in a regular fourth grade class and again he
would not measure up and this experiment proved a failure.
His reactions to any stimulus can never be predicted, but it
is usually safe to predict that whatever the reaction, it will be
non-conformed. If he is asked to take a note to the office, instead
of walking in a normal fashion, he will try to imitate a butterfly
or the like, with no qualms of conscience whatsoever because of
the disturbance he is causing. He would like to go into the wilderness this summer and dig a large hole in the ground and live
there. He says he would not be lonesome because he would get a
lot of books and read every minute. He enjoys reading even more
than he enjoys "movies," but he is unable to secure enough books
to read.
The psychologist for the Children's Aid Society examined Martin, and she says he is a spoiled baby and needs to become more
independent. The problem, then, is to find a means to make
him more independent?but is that all? The child revels in the
goriest stories?he likes to see blood, and delights to see suffering.
It is of no avail to try to reason with him and show him he is
wrong, for to him unless you have murdered someone, you are
still good. That seems to be the criterion as far as he is concerned.
A prognosis is difficult until it has been determined definitely
whether Martin's peculiarities may be attributed to lack of discipline
or to a disorder?to the fact that he is psychopathic. The most
suitable treatment would be to remove him from his home and
place him in an altogether different environment, where he would
receive firm discipline. The placement would be temporary; he
needs only to remain until he showed distinct improvement. Undoubtedly, however, the process would be long and troublesome but
well worth the while. If he does become independent, placement in
a military school could then be recommended. To send him now to
a military school would be an extreme, and in all probability an unwise procedure because he might easily go to pieces if cut off suddenly from his accustomed props. He has been made to feel that
a military school is a virtual prison where only bad children are
sent, and has made up his mind that should he be sent there, he
would run away.
Martin presents an unusual case and one worthy of continued
effort. His intelligence and intellect provide something substantial with which to work and if he can only be led to use his abilities
in the right direction, society will be fortunate.
