A Study of Five Problem Cases
=============================

Eston V. Tubes, Ph.D., Director- of Curriculum,
Chicago Public Schools
The American people are thoroughly committed to the principle of universal education. Vast sums of money are being spent
each year to maintain our public schools. As the burdens of taxation increase, intelligent citizens are coming more and more to ask
the question, "Is the community receiving an adequate return for
the generous outlays it is lavishing upon the schools?" This is
symptomatic of a feeling on the part of the taxpayer that the
schools are lacking in efficiency and that they are not rendering
the type of service demanded by a social organization that is constantly increasing in complexity. Indeed there is a good deal of
damaging evidence at hand which indicates quite clearly that this
suspicion is well founded. In the field of administration, there is
a conspicuous lack of co-ordination of school functions and a prodigal waste in the expenditure of funds. Teaching methods and procedures in most of our schools are archaic and antediluvian.
One of the great problems confronting educators at the present
time, is that of adjusting the school to the interests and the needs
of boys and girls. Within recent years, substantial progress has
been made to enrich the program of studies, and to vitalize the
subjects taught. More and more attention is being given to the
physical well-being of school children, and there is increasing interest in the mental, moral, and social natures of school children. In
view of the fact that human failures are costing at least $500,000,0001 more annually than we are spending to enable people to be
self-supporting and successful, we cannot fail to realize that serious
consideration should be given to the reconstruction of our social
service organizations, and an effort made to convert human liabilities into assets. The business acumen of the American people is
beginning to assert itself in the administration of our schools.
Of all the intriguing problems in the field of school management there is none more inviting and at the same time more
challenging than that of adjusting the pupil to the work of the
school. Sometimes this problem takes on the form of organizing the
work of the school to conform to the needs of the pupil. Society
1 Groszmann, Maxmilian P. E.?1' The Exceptional Child," p. 7.
250 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
cannot afford to wait until one of its members becomes derelict
before an effort is made to save him. It is then too late. Some
reliable authorities estimate the annual cost of crime in the United
States to be approximately $13,000,000,000. The annual expenditure for education is less than one-sixth of this amount.
School boards and superintendents have been altogether too
much absorbed in matters which have to do with buildings, equipment, supplies, salary schedules, and other problems which have to
do with the material side of education. These interests have effectively kept in the background the needs of the individual pupil.
There are, however, many indications that a new day is dawning.
We are coming to realize that every boy and girl is a potential
problem. It is of the utmost importance that they be trained properly and surrounded by wholesome influences during their early
years in school. Education in its final analysis is an individual
matter. It is more economical, to be sure, to educate children in
groups. But in each group, no matter how small, individual differences very quickly assert themselves.
The number of mentally defective children is much greater
than most people imagine. In the most extreme of such cases, the inherent implications postulate institutional treatment. In the great
majority of cases human failures, whether they be simply ineffectives or criminals, cannot be laid solely to defects of mental constitution. Many persons, who in many respects are well endowed in
the matter of ability, have failed because their environment was not
of the right sort. Frequently the social relationships into which some
children are born all but preclude normal physical and moral development. Some social derelicts are the victims of their own misdirected energies.
The mistake is too often made by many people of assuming
that the denizens of the underworld are totally lacking in all forms
of morality, honor, and intelligence. Our most dangerous criminals
are uncannily brilliant. There are certain codes of honorable conduct they live up to with religious devotion. In many instances,
victims of the law are potentials gone wrong. Very frequently the
conviction is thrust upon thinking people that some who have
become social pariahs and derelicts would very probably have developed normally had they been given the opportunity of living
in an environment that was clean, wholesome and upbuilding.
Between the two extremes of the brilliant pupil on the one
FIVE PROBLEM CASES 251
hand and the subnormal on the other, there is the great multitude
of youth with its infinite variation in attitudes, abilities, physical
and mental characteristics together with a multiplicity of moral
and emotional complexes. Each one is reacting in his own individual
way to the forces that are playing upon him, and his life is being
shaped accordingly. In our schools we are forced more by circumstances than by choice to pour all the children into one mould. This
process may be economical, but it tends to uniformity of product.
It is not only futile but dangerous to attempt to repress the highly
imaginative individual, the organizer, the master of abstract mental
processes to the level of mediocrity.
Some way must be found to give a more intensive and personal
consideration to the individual as such. The solution of this problem must go to the very bottom of our educational practice and
procedure. The exceptionally brilliant child will, in a large measure, give tone and direction to the progress of events of his own
generation. His outstanding mental characteristics defy both conformity and mediocrity. The "average" or "general run" type
constitutes the great mass of the population. This is the group that
is usually patient, stable, and dependable. For the most part they
are able to make their own way in the world without a great deal
of effort on the part of or danger to society. The slow, backward
child who must wage life's battles under serious handicaps and in
an unfavorable environment is deserving of all the interest and
help which our educational and social service organizations can
extend to him.
Before taking up for consideration the individual cases studied
in this investigation, there are two important points which need to
be emphasized, as they constitute the background that must be kept
in mind in arriving at conclusions. The first factor is social in character and the second consideration is the influence of heredity.
The district in which these children live is essentially foreign. The
chief element composing the population is Jewish. There is a wide
range of other nationalities including Lithuanians, Poles, Bohemians, Swiss, Greeks, Italians, Swedes, and negroes. A very large
part of the adult population were immigrants and quite a number
of the older children were born in Europe. The outstanding and
most important fact relating to these people is that they have been
unable to adjust themselves to the crowded factory district conditions in which they live. Their earning capacity for the most part
252 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
is low. Being of the unskilled working class they are subject to the
hazards of irregular employment. In order to make both ends meet
they are often forced to live under congested and sometimes
revolting conditions. The mother frequently contributes toward
the family income by taking in boarders. It is not unusual for as
many as fifteen people to live in three rooms. Wherever there is
close habitation of children and adults there is a resultant breaking
down of modesty. Brazen exposure of person marks the beginning
of looseness in personal relationships. This leads to immorality
which sooner or later results in social disease and degeneracy. This
has a direct bearing upon the second factor, namely?heredity.
Heredity explains a great many things in the lives of children
who are either physically or mentally subnormal.
Dr. Herman Bundesen, former Health Commissioner of Chicago, made a determined effort to direct the attention of the people
of the City to the ravages of social diseases, and the tremendous
heritage of feeble-mindedness, degeneracy, and crime which are
transmitted from one generation to another. Perhaps the best
known illustration of the transmission of physical and moral degeneracy is that of the well-known Kallikak family. It should be
borne in mind that this is an extreme case, and must therefore be
accepted only after due allowances have been made.
On the congested West Side of Chicago the same degenerating
processes are at work. Ample proof of this statement is to be found
in the cases studied in this investigation. It is of paramount importance that public attention be centered upon this festering situation and that something be done to save the children who are the
innocent victims of vicious social conditions.
This study was undertaken in the hope that some insight might
be gained into the methods and technique in arriving at intelligent
judgments in dealing with problem cases. The five children chosen
as subjects for this investigation were selected from the files of
the Institute for Juvenile Research. Morons and other feebleminded children were purposely passed over. These were rejected
for the reason that they are subjects for special institutional treatment. The school can do very little for this type of individual.
Four boys and one girl were selected for the purposes of this
study. Their ages ranged from twelve to fifteen years. Three were
attending the Foster School and the other two were enrolled in
the Spalding School for Crippled Children. The problem of adFIVE PROBLEM CASES 253
justment in all five cases was a very definite and pressing one at
the time the investigation was made. Each child was under careful observation for a period of one and a half hours. Three sustained application profiles were made for each pupil in different
recitations and under somewhat varied conditions. The investigator talked with the teachers of these children and the principals
of the schools they were attending regarding their personal characteristics and family history. Conferences were arranged with
the four boys during which they were questioned rather intimately
in order to ascertain first hand what their interests were, and to
get information that could hardly be procured in any other
way. The information secured through personal observation and
contact with the children studied by the investigator was supplemented by statements of teachers, principals, truant officers, and
school nurses. The records of the Foster and the Spalding Schools
were drawn upon, and some of the data were obtained at the Institute for Juvenile Research. Any conclusions that were justified
by the facts and all suggestions by the teachers of these children
as to remedial measures were carefully considered, and an attempt
made to work out adjustments that would enable these pupils to
develop into the kind of citizens we need so much to have in a
democracy such as ours.
The detailed personal records of the pupils studied are as follows:
Case I.?Samuel G-.
Heredity: The father was born in Russia in 1868. He died
of cancer of the stomach in 1920. He was shiftless and illiterate.
The mother was born in Russia in 1868. Both parents were of
Jewish descent. Before the death of the father, the mother had to
work out to help support the family. Until recently the mother
was strong and energetic. She earns the living for the family by
selling fish in the Maxwell Street market, and by taking in boarders.
She can neither read nor write. There are six children in the
family?four boys and two girls. One of the boys is of low intelligence, and one of the girls has been classed as a low grade moron.
There is a tendency toward tuberculosis on the mother's side.
Social History: The family lives in a six-room flat, and pay
a rental of twenty-three dollars a month. In the winter they
live mostly in two rooms in order to keep down coal bills. Needless
to say, the home conditions are terrible. The meals are prepared
254 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
irregularly, and the rooms in which they live are dirty and unkempt. On the day that Samuel was under observation he stated
that his breakfast that morning consisted of coffee and two pickles.
For supper the evening before he had coffee and biscuits. He said
he couldn't drink milk.
Developmental History: Samuel was born in Chicago in 1911.
The mother was in good health during pregnancy, and the child was
breastfed for fourteen months, When two years of age he had
three or four convulsions probably due to teething or a deranged
stomach or both. Development during early childhood on the
whole seemed to be normal. Some evidences of precocity.
Physical Condition: Samuel is at the present time thirteen
pounds under weight and is four inches under height. His teeth
are bad, he has pediculosis, catches cold easily, and is poorly developed. His clothes were filthy and ragged. He complains a
good deal of headache and hurting in his stomach.
Psychological Examination: Samuel's chronological age is 12
years. He has a mental age of 8 years and 11 months. His intelligence quotient is 87. His reactions were responsive and quick but
somewhat inaccurate and unreflective. His vocabulary is very
limited.
Personal: This boy is a real problem case. His teacher told me
his mother has very little control over him. He is subject to fits of
anger, and while in a tantrum he strikes and beats his mother. He
goes to the movies nearly every night. Very frequently he stays
for three performances. This means that he is out until ten thirty
or eleven o 'clock several nights a week. He says he gets his money
to go to the movies from men who are drunk. He smokes some, but
the habit is not strongly fixed.
His principal informed me that Samuel was a sex case, and this
was confirmed by the records of the Institute for Juvenile Research.
He is very frank and open in talking of his sex experiences. He
has related incidents with girls of his age in an old shed in the
vicinity of Maxwell Street. He justifies these acts on the ground
that it is a common practice among his associates. No doubt he has
seen more or less indecent behavior on the part of grown-ups in his
own home. His teacher says he cannot be depended upon to tell
the truth.
His ideal man is Douglas Fairbanks, and he has ambitions
to be a movie actor when he gets a little older. He likes to play
FIVE PROBLEM CASES 255
ball and hunting games. He says he can ran for hours at a stretch
and never get tired. He has read a good many books. Black
Beauty is his favorite. He likes to read about the Brownies. Arithmetic is his best-liked subject. He always gets a hundred in seat
and blackboard work. He doesn't dislike any subject.
Conclusions: Samuel seems to have gotten a good start in early
childhood physically. At two years of age his troubles began. No
doubt these were due to ignorance on the part of the mother which
resulted in neglect and lack of care. This is a clear case of malnutrition. In spite of the fact that he is undersize and underweight, he could be built up physically if the proper opportunity
were afforded him. The school could do nothing better than install
shower baths, if Samuel were required to take a bath every day
followed by a rest of a half hour after the bath the effect would be
decidedly wholesome. Although the subject has been guilty of
gross immorality, he is not a court case. It is very evident that as
a result of his poor physical background he has clearly developed
symptoms of being an emotional problem. Little can be expected
in the way of favorable development so long as he must live in such
hopeless home environment. Under present conditions the school
cannot be expected to do much to help this unfortunate lad. An
open air room would undoubtedly prove a benefit for Samuel.
Case II.?Mary L.
Heredity: Father is 40 years of age, and was born in Russia.
He has been in the United States for sixteen years and has taken
out his first citizenship papers. His physical condition is poor. Pie
is troubled with asthma and bronchitis; has a chronic cough. Has
only partial eye sight. Two operations have been performed on
eyes. Can neither read nor write. Temperamentally, he seems to
be a good father and a considerate husband.
The mother is thirty-eight years of age. Birthplace was in
Russia. Came to the United States sixteen years ago. She worries
a good deal. Is somewhat rheumatic. She helps the husband at
his fruit stand on Maxwell Street. She is illiterate, excitable and
uncooperative. Both parents are Jewish.
Six children have been born in the family. Four are living.
One brother is feeble-minded. He had convulsions when teething.
Quit school when twelve years of age to work in a paint factory.
He seems to be in good health.
256 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Social History: The family live in four small rooms which can
hardly be called a home. The rental is twelve dollars a month.
They have gas and running water in the house, but no bath or toilet
facilities. The mother does a good deal of nagging in the home
which keeps things more or less upset all the time.
Developinent History: Mary walked and talked when she
was nine months old. She had whooping cough and measles when
she was eight years of age. She has tubercular glands. Tonsils were removed three years ago. She has pediculosis capitis. Her
vision is somewhat defective, her left eye being irregular in outline.
Her teeth are in good condition. Her development has been normal,
and she seems to be well nourished.
Psychological Examination: Mary's chronological age is fourteen years and nine months. Her mental age is a little over twelve
years. Her intelligence quotient is 82. She should be classed as
dull and backward.
Personal: Mary's teacher says that at the beginning of the
school year she was a difficult problem. She used to fight a great
deal with the boys. Her clothes were dirty and filthy. The better
girls in her room shunned her. The teacher took a personal interest
in the girl. She invited her to her home, and in other ways got
into her good graces. Finally the teacher prevailed upon the other
girls to be more friendly toward Mary. The general result has
been quite satisfactory. She now takes a great deal of pride in
dressing neatly and in good taste. I was very greatly surprised
when Mary was pointed out to me as a problem case. Her general
appearance was not at all what one would naturally expect in one
who had been selected as a problem case.
Mary's principal stated that she had been immoral, particularly last summer. It appears that a decided transformation has
come about since last fall. Her attitude toward her school work
seems to be very good. The teacher depends a great deal upon
Mary to take the attendance and many other things that need to
be done in connection with the routine of the school work. While
I was in the room the teacher asked the pupils for a show of hands
as to who were planning to go to high school and then to college.
Mary's hand went up on both of these propositions. I should say
that her ability to do college work is seriously open to question.
She is at present in the eighth grade.
Conclusions: Through the personal interest of the teacher a
FIVE PROBLEM CASES 257
good piece of work has been done in the way of adjusting the subject to her school environment. The present moment is critical with
this girl. If she could be placed in a different home atmosphere
the gains which the teacher has been able to bring about could be
consolidated. Under the proper conditions and with sufficient encouragement, she should develop to the level of average ability and
accomplishment. The fact that she has tubercular glands requires
that she should be under the doctor's care. Eyes should be examined by an oculist.
Case III.?David R.
Heredity: The father is fifty-two years of age, and was born
in Poland. He has lived in the United States for twenty-nine years
and is a citizen. Deals in real estate. Religious affiliation is Catholic. He punishes subject frequently. The father is domineering
and arbitrary in the home. Is not considerate of the mother. Gets
drunk every two weeks. Seems to be in good health.
The mother is forty-eight years of age. Born in Poland. Belongs to Catholic church. Health seems to be good, but she is of a
nervous disposition. She cries without much provocation. Seems
to live in great fear of husband.
There are six children and all are boys. All discontinued
school work in upper grades to go to work. The oldest son is a
boiler-maker and earns forty-five dollars a week. He is married
and has two children. Is healthy and strong. The second son who
is twenty-four years of age served time in the navy during the war.
Is a good steady worker. The third son is twenty-two years old,
and lives at home. He is assistant foreman in a paper-box factory.
This boy is "hot headed" and excitable. He drinks occasionally.
The third son is a cook on a diner in the service of the Northwestern
Railway Co. He was delinquent while in school being arrested five
times for petty larceny. He was never taken before the juvenile
court, however. He is steady and industrious. He takes a great
deal of interest in David, and cooperates to the fullest possible
extent with the school authorities in dealing with his youngest
brother who was one of the subjects of this investigation. This lad
is regarded by David's teacher as the "boss" of the family. There
is a fifth boy fifteen years old who is now in the eighth grade. He
is described as a good boy, and is doing excellent school work.
Social History: Two of the sons being married there are only
six in the home at present. The family lives in five rooms of a
258 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
building which they themselves own. Home conditions are fair.
They have some modern conveniences. The neighborhood is not
of the best.
Developmental History: There is no information at hand relating to the birth of the subject or the condition of the mother during pregnancy. David had influenza about two years ago. Subsequent to this illness he had sleeping sickness and is now suffering
from post-encephalitis. He has a crooked neck, and holds his head
to one side as a result of this.
Physical Examination: The subject's eyes are somewhat defective. The pupils are unequal in size. They do not react quickly
to light. Teeth are in poor condition. Enlarged tonsils. His
muscles are rigid. Reflexes are exaggerated. Middle brain affected.
Psychological Test: The chronological age of the subject is ten
years. His mental age is nine years and eleven months. He has
an intelligence quotient of 98.
Personal: David is friendly and cooperative. He is very fond
of his teacher, Miss 0 'Brian, although she sometimes has difficulty
with him when he gets "mad." He is alert and responsive in answering questions. His replies are quickly given, but not always to
the point. He is highly temperamental. When he first came to the
Spalding School he made things very interesting for the teacher.
He was put out of one school because of misconduct. He seems
to be very considerate of others. He spends lots of his time running
the streets. He knows the loop district of Chicago much better
than most men living in the city. He has had a broad experience
which has not been particularly wholesome for a boy of his age.
He attends the movies nearly every day in the neighborhood of his
home and in the loop. His home habits are very loose. He stays
out late nights and doesn't get enough sleep for his own good. His
mother is at present rather frail, but she does what she can for
David. His diet has been regulated at home in accordance with
the recommendations of the school nurse. He has a bath at school
every day, and has a rest period after the bath. Miss 0'Brian
says this expedient has worked wonders with the boy. At first he
was very recalcitrant about taking the baths, but he is always glad
to go to the shower now. He likes to play baseball and basketball.
His ambition is to be a chauffeur. He likes arithmetic and history,
but is only fair in arithmetic. He runs errands to earn money. He
gambles considerably. He is fond of music, and sings well for a
boy his age.
FIVE PROBLEM CASES 259
Conclusions: This is primarily an emotional case. Particular
attention should be given to this side of the boy's nature in order
that the proper direction may be given to wholesome reactions and
responses. The teacher seems to be doing just this thing in a very
intelligent manner. She understands the subject, and is doing a
fine piece of constructive work with this individual. His habits
of running the streets and staying out late nights should be displaced with others that are more wholesome. The corrective measures relative to diet and cleanliness are being carried out. The
psychological examination shows that the subject is capable of
doing good school work. The school marks are good, but special
attention is needed in arithmetic. Eyes should be examined by an
oculist.
Case IV.?Tony L.
Heredity: The father was born in Italy, and is thirty-five
years of age. His religious affiliation is with the Catholic church.
He has been in the United States seven years. Is rather easygoing. Bears the reputation of being a kind husband and a good
father. Is literate. He works in a freight house and is in good
health.
The mother is twenty-eight years of age, and was born in Bohemia. She has been in the United States only five years. Is a
member of the Catholic church. She is impatient and quick tempered. Slaps the children upon slight provocation. Rather intelligent.
There are four children in the family?three boys and one
girl. All the children are in good health. Teachers state that their
conduct and attitude are very good.
Social History: The family lives in a four-room flat on the
third floor, and pays sixteen dollars a month rent. The rooms are
good size. Plenty of window space. Most modem conveniences in
home. They have lived in this one flat three years. The general
character of the neighborhood is good.
Developmental History: Talked at one year of age. Crept at
seven months; walked at one year. Has developed normally. Tony
does not eat very much. His breakfast usually consists of bread
and coffee. For lunch he has bread and eggs. At night he has
soup and meat. He wears good clothes (for this neighborhood) and
is neat in appearance. He has formed the habit of washing his
teeth once a day. Is robust and well developed physically.
2G0 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Physical Examination: The subject has some stigmata. He
has a low forehead, crooked teeth, adherent lobules, little hands
and short stubby fingers. He had influenza when six years of age.
His present state of health is good.
Psychological Test: The chronological age is eight years. His
mental age is seven years and eight months. He has an intelligence
quotient of 101.
Personal: This subject is a truant. In disposition, he is happy
and sings a great deal. He enjoys teaching smaller children the
songs he learns at school. He cries without much cause. When he
is punished he will cry for a time, and then will remain stolid and
quiet for hours at a time. He is considerate of others. When there
is sickness in the family he is always anxious to help and wait on
the one who is ill. At times he says he wants to be a priest, but
on the day I interviewed him he expressed the desire of becoming
an auto mechanic. He is well thought of by teachers and those
who know him, although he showed some disposition toward misconduct the day I observed him. He does not take any interest in
girls. His principal told me that he was known to have been guilty
of sex practices with other boys.
When questioned he answered in a rather low, subdued voice.
He was not talkative although he answered all the questions that
he was asked. He likes to play baseball. He likes to read such
books as "Skinny Harris on a Venture," "Scout Burton," and the
"Boy Soldier of 1812." He likes all school subjects although he is
poor in arithmetic. Does not have the patience to go over work
second time when he makes a mistake. He smokes cigarettes.
After admitting that he did smoke cigarettes he followed this up by
saying that smoking "spoils your brain."
* During the past year Tony has done considerable stealing. He
has been taking candy, gum, milk, and other things from the neighborhood stores. He also steals money from his mother. He has
taken as much as twenty dollars at a time from his mother's pocketbook. He gets his closest friends, and treats them generously to
candy, sodas, etc., and then they all take in the movies. Several
weeks ago his mother gave him seventy-five cents to go to the drug
store and buy some medicine needed in the home. Tony went to
two movie shows, staying out late, and when he returned he had
neither the medicine nor the money. He always denies any wrong
doing, but his father usually whips him, and then he confesses
everything.
FIVE PROBLEM CASES 261
Sometimes he plays truant from school for a week at a time.
He goes to school very much against his own will. The teachers
report his conduct and scholarship as both being good, but he is
absent so much of the time that he does not do the quality of school
work of which he is capable.
His associates are thoroughly bad. There is a gang of boys
in the community that is headed by a boy whose first name is John.
He seems to exercise a powerful influence over the other boys.
Whenever Tony steals anything he always divides the haul with
John. John is the oldest boy of the group. He leads, and the other
boys do what he does. It was through John's initiative that Tony
first played truant from school.
Some of the older persons who are interested in Tony have
made attempts to get him under the influence of Hull House. Some
time ago he was enrolled in a wood-carving class at Hull House,
and seemed to enjoy the work.
Conclusion: A close check should be made on Tony to see that
he attends school regularly. He should be enrolled in as many
recreational activities as possible. The intelligence quotient is high
enough for him to do better than average work in school. The
one important thing with Tony is to keep him away from and
beyond the influence of his associates. The power of the gang
leader is bringing about the ruin of this lad. This power must be
broken or this boy will surely be a liability to society and not an
asset.
Case V.?Tito V.
Heredity: The father is an Italian. He is a Catholic, and is
illiterate. His reputation is good throughout the community. He
runs an elevator in one of the office buildings in the loop. He earns
twenty dollars a week. He takes a good deal of interest in his
family. Is a good husband and father.
The mother is also Italian. Her condition is not at all good.
She is subject to fits of despondency. These are particularly severe
during pregnancy. The school nurse said the mother had delusions
of persecution by the husband.
There are eight children in the family.
Social History: The home conditions are described as moderately fair. The mother has struggled hard to make a good home
for the husband and the children, but she was not equal to the task
either physically or mentaly. She constantly interferes with the
262 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
father when he attempts to correct the child for any misdemeanor
or misconduct.
Developmental History: Very little information was procurable
regarding the subject's developmental history. At some time during the early childhood of subject he was stricken with infantile
paralysis. His right leg was crippled. He wears a brace constantly. Aside from this, the boy seemed to be rugged and strong.
He appears to have plenty of wholesome food at home. His clothes
were clean and well made.
Physical Examination: His teeth are in bad condition. Enlarged tonsils. Slight visual defects in both eyes.
Psychological Test: Tito's chronological age is fourteen years.
He has a mental age of only nine years. His intelligence quotient
is 65. He is classed as feeble-minded in the group of high grade
moron. His reactions are slow and immature for his age.
Personal: Tito is fidgety and restless. He cannot sit still long
enough to do effective studying. He is not allowed to go out much.
His home is in the crowded Italian quarter. The subject is in the
fifth grade, but his teacher feels, as do the others with whom I
talked, that he has just about reached the limit of his ability in
academic work. They have been unable to detect very much improvement for several months. However, he is beginning to do
better work in manual training. It would seem advisable for his
energies to be turned in the direction of vocational training. He attends the movies about once a week. He likes very much to play
baseball. The work that is being done in the school clinic in restoring the crippled children of the Spalding School is most remarkable. At a certain time in the morning of each day Tito goes
to the clinic where his crippled leg is massaged and exercised in
order to bring back the circulation and build up the muscles. He
is always anxious to do any chore or errand he can for the teacher.
His attitude is very cooperative.
Conclusions: One of the chief benefits the subject can derive
from attending school is the treatment he receives in the clinic.
This is invaluable. He should be taken to the oculist to have his
eyes tested. His energies should be directed toward some form of
manual training, wood-working, or metal work as he cannot profit
much more by further study of academic subjects. In addition to
physical defects noted, there is undoubtedly some emotional disturbance here that has not been fully recognized. The boy should
be carefully examined by a psychiatrist,
FIVE PROBLEM CASES 263
There are two points that stand out very prominently in all
five of the problem eases studied, namely?heredity and environment. In going through hundreds of files at the Institute for Juvenile Research these two things impressed themselves idelibly upon
the mind of the investigator. If society could correct these conditions, thousands of children, living and unborn, would be saved
for honorable lives and useful service for mankind. As was pointed
out in an earlier part of this paper, the cost of delinquency and
crime is tremendous. The policy that has obtained in the past
regarding these conditions has been wasteful in the extreme. We
must come to realize soon that it is far more economical to have
a situation where human beings can live decently than it is to build
jails, asylums, and almshouses.
In all the cases studied, there are very clear evidences of the
influence which heredity has had in the lives of these children.
Nothing can be of greater import in the education and training
of children than a careful study of the early manifestation of
their nervous responses which lie at the basis of character formations. We need to analyze the emotions of individual children
in their elemental state. Practically all very young children
are normal so far as neural responses are concerned. The evidence shows that all five of these children started life under
favorable conditions. The circumstances surrounding the pregnancy of the mothers, with one exception, seemed to be perfectly
normal. At about the time they were emerging from the infant
stage their troubles seemed to begin. These were due in a large
measure to the ignorance of the mothers. This was the time when
the trend was being given to the future adult. These are the days
when the experiences of the child fundamentally influence the
character and temperament of the man or woman.
The facts brought out by this study emphasizes the intimate
relationship that exists between physical defects and the quality of
work children do in school. In a large measure, the same statement holds true of environment. John Munroe asserts that, taken
in childhood, an individual's life can be made over three or four
times. This is the time when society must do its work in directing
potential citizens in right paths. He has come to the conclusion that
environment has a great deal to do with the intelligence quotient
of any particular boy or girl. It may be either raised or lowered
depending upon the character of the environment and the type of
associates.
264 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
In the schools of tomorrow, more attention will be given to the
individual child. This problem is fundamental. If it is attacked
intelligently and scientifically the net result will be a general toning up of society as a whole as the social group is only a composite
of individual units. When this situation is adequately taken care
of, a great economy in both money and human life will have been
affected and human happiness and joy will much more abound.
