THE constancy of the intelligence quotient of Mental Defectives
================================================================

Catherine E. Chipman, Psychologist, Walter E. Fernald State
School, Waverley, Mass.
In any institution in which a psychological examination is a
part of the routine of admission, it is of great value to know the
dependence that can be placed upon the I.Q. as obtained by the
Stanford revision of the Binet tests as a measure of probable limit
of mental development. To this end, a study was made of the records in the Psychological laboratory for the comparison of the I.Q.
as obtained on admission by the Stanford scale and that on the
latest. In those cases in which the admission test was the Goddard
1911 scale, the first I.Q. by the Stanford revision was used as the
original. This seemed justified in view of the fact that there was
no attempt to keep the time interval constant; and by thus ruling
out the Goddard scores, the error arising from their re-evaluation
according to Terman was eliminated.
Since the results of tests by several different examiners were
used, due to rather frequent changes in personnel, the ever-present
question of the personal equation is opened. It is impossible to say
how much effect differences in leniency of testing may have had on
the results, but it is to be hoped that the number of examiners may
have served to offset individual differences.
This study deals with 1,751 cases, 1,086 males and 665 females
representing admissions to the institution over a period of thirtyodd years. According to diagnosis of degree of defect, there is a
distribution of 40 per cent morons, 37 per cent imbeciles and 23 per
cent idiots, making the aggregate a representative sampling of the
defective institutional population. The cases are unselected and
constitute the entire number recorded in the psychological index.
These cases were grouped in respect to chronological age at admission, one group coitfaining those from six to sixteen, and the other,
those sixteen years and over.
In each case the I.Q. at admission, or on the first Stanford
test, was taken as the basis of comparison, and the discrepancy
between it and the I.Q. on the latest test (disregarding any intervening) was recorded under the appropriate heading "Decrease" "No
104 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
change" "Increase." "Decrease" was taken to mean a loss of
five points or more from the original I.Q.; "No change" a variation
of not more than four points either gained or lost and "Increase"
a gain of five points or more over the original I.Q. The wide range
covered by the designation "No change" was due to the fact that
with different examiners, a change of less than five points could not
be considered significant.
Study of the figures and percentages resultant on this procedure, shows that the original I.Q. has been an accurate diagnostic
agent (within the limits prescribed as constituting "No change")
in four-fifths (79 per cent) of the entire number considered. Of
the remaining 21 per cent, 12 per cent show a loss of at least five
points and 9 per cent a corresponding gain. It seems reasonable to
conclude from this that in those cases in which the original I.Q. has
been inaccurate, it is more likely to show a decrease than an increase
with time.
Within the component groups, however, there are several facts
to be noted. Considering those under sixteen as contrasted with
those sixteen and over, we find that the proportion of I.Q.'s remaining constant is somewhat larger for the older group, which is quite
in accord with the theory that maximum intellectual development is
usually reached by the age of sixteen. There is marked disagreement in the distribution of decrease and increase in respect to the
original I.Q. In the younger group 15 per cent show a loss as opposed to 1 per cent of the older group; and an inverse ratio holds in
regard to increase; 8 per cent of the younger group show such gain
as compared with 16 per cent of the older group. There are several
possible explanations for this difference, but the most logical seems
to be that two types of defective are represented; that which in its
extreme form constitutes the "potentially feeble minded"; that is,
those who show a spurious evidence of rapid development during
their early years but gradually become relatively more and more
retarded; and that type which shows a long-continued but very slow
rate of growth over a greater number of years than is common.
These results are summarized in the following table:
Table I
Under 16 16 and over
Decrease   15% 1%
No change   77% 83%
Increase  <?? 8% 16%
CONSTANCY OF INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT 105
Considering the group under sixteen years of age at admission,
some striking sex differences are apparent. There are approximately
twice as many boys as girls in this group and the grade of defect
represented is not quite equal. The moron group is the largest for
the boys and the imbeciles comprise the largest for the girls. The
percentages of cases showing decrease, no change, and increase in
I.Q. were figured separately for the males and females according to
mental diagnosis "moron," "imbecile," or "idiot."
Table II
TJnder 16 16 and over
Males Females Males Females
Morons   41% 30% 33% 50%
Imbecile   35% 40% 50% 40%
Hiots   24% 30% 17% 10%
In both sexes, the idiots showed the greatest proportion of
constant I.Q.'s the imbeciles and morons a progressively smaller
percentage. In both sexes, also, the proportion showing decrease
in I.Q. is about equal. Here, however, the similarity ends. The
percentage of constancy is larger for the males than for the females
and the proportion showing increase correspondingly smaller. In
fact, the ratio is that of two girls for each boy who shows a five
point increase in I.Q. between the first and the last Stanford tests.
This proportion holds good no matter what the degree of defect.
The following table shows these results for the group under
sixteen years of age:
Table III
Male Female
Decrease No change Increase Decrease No change Increase
Morons  25% 70% 5% 23% 57% 20%
Imbeciles ...11% 80% 9% 13% 76% 11%
Idiots   7% 90% 3% 6% 87% 7%
In the group sixteen years and over at the time of admission
the percentage of males and females is reversed, and there are
nearly twice as many girls as boys. The findings, however, are in
accord with those for the younger group.
The boys show a slightly greater tendency toward loss of I.Q.
and their proportion of constant I.Q.'s is larger than that of the
girls. These differences do not seem great enough to be significant,
but a consideration of the "Increase" group brings out the fact
106 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
that female imbeciles show an increase of at least five points three
times as often as the males, and female morons show such gain almost five times as frequently as do the males.
The following table shows the results for the group sixteen and
more years of age:
Table IV
Male Female
Decrease No change Increase Decrease No change Increase
Morons  4% 90% 6% 2% 70% 28%
Imbeciles  1% 96% 3% 0% 90% 10%
Idiots  3% 97% 0% 0% 100% 0%
These findings need a check, however, because, under the policy
of parole effective at present, the girls remain in the institution
for a longer period of training than do boys of equal brightness.
This would mean that in the file from which the data for this study
were taken, there would be a larger number of older, brighter girls
which might possibly distort the percentages as recorded. For this
reason the group on parole from the institution was studied, since
these cases would be comparable on the basis of degree of defect as
well as non-institutional environment. Of the fifty-eight cases under
consideration, twenty-six boys and thirty-two girls, the percentages
showing "decrease" "no change" and "increase" corroborate the
findings of the entire group. The boys, with larger percentages of
"decrease" and "no change" in the I.Q., show only 27 per cent
with an increase of five points or more as contrasted with 47 per cent
of the female group.
Thus far, the fact seems to be established that while the original
I.Q. has been an accurate measure in about eighty per cent of the
cases in this study, there still remain twenty per cent to be accounted
for. The question which immediately arises is that of the distribution of this number among the moron, imbecile and idiot groups. We
already know that 12 per cent of all the cases show a decrease in
I.Q., and of this number 63 per cent are morons, 26 per cent imbeciles
and 11 per cent idiots. Of the 9 per cent to show an increase, 55
per cent are morons, 35 per cent imbeciles and 10 per cent idiots.
It is then, in the moron group that the greatest number of inaccurate predictions on the basis of I.Q. are found. This is only
in accord with the common knowledge that the nearer the approach
the borderline status, the more difficult a precise diagnosis, and it
is included in this study simply to emphasize the need of extreme
CONSTANCY OF INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT 107
caution in applying the I.Q. as the final criterion in the case of
high grade defectives.
The following conclusions can be reached from the study thus
far:
1. The I.Q. as obtained by the Stanford revision of the Binet
tests has been a reliable basis of prediction of limit of mental development in 79 per cent of the cases admitted to this institution.
2. The variation found, showed a slight tendency toward decrease in I.Q. rather than increase, in the entire group.
3. The younger group (those less than 16 at admission) showed
more variability than those older, and exhibited a marked tendency
toward decrease in I.Q.
4. The girls, irrespective of degree of defect, showed a much
larger percentage of gains in I.Q., especially in the older group.
5. The idiots, irrespective of C.A., showed the largest percentage of constant I.Q.s, the imbeciles and morons progressively
smaller.
6. The majority of inaccurate I.Q.s fall within the moron
group, regardless of C.A.
The computation from which the foregoing conclusions were
drawn was done on the assumption that development of mental capacity is arrested at the age of sixteen; and since there is disagreement as to whether or not fourteen represents more accurately the
limit of such increase, the effect of this substitution upon these conditions may well be considered. The ideal method of settling the
question would be by the use of a wide-spread and protracted program of annual testing on a large number of subjects ranging in
chronological age from twelve to eighteen?to insure an allowance
for those showing unusual retardation or acceleration of development.
The difficulty of conducting an investigation of this sort lies
in obtaining a representative sampling of the population, and on
this ground the figures which have been used are open to criticism,
for they represent a group of 161 cases selected from the total number studied, according to specifications given in detail below. This
being true, it can readily be seen that the conclusions drawn from
them are applicable to defectives only, and study of the results
may indicate that the point of arrest for the feebleminded does not
coincide wTith that for the so-called ''normal" group.
The value of any measure lies in its reliability, which, in the
108 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
case of the I.Q. is its constancy (within a range of four points lost
or gained over the original). Therefore it would seem that the
age of arrest which yields the greater number of constant I.Q.s is
the more satisfactory.
Of necessity, the group on which the work of this portion of
study has been done was a selected one, since it could include only
those individuals whose record showed an I.Q. by the Stanford
revision before the age of fourteen and another after the age of
sixteen. The psychological files contained 161 cases which fulfilled
these requirements 95 boys and 66 girls. The distribution according
to mental diagnosis '' moron," " imbecile," " idiot,'' was not equal;
more than half the entire group are morons, while the idiots make
up only seven percent.
For each individual the I.Q. before the age of fourteen and
after the age of sixteen (using sixteen as the chronological constant)
were listed and the discrepancy between them recorded as "loss,"
"no change" or "gain." In this case, "no change" is equivalent
to a variation no greater than four points either lost or gained. A
third I.Q. was obtained by using the mental age of the test after
sixteen and fourteen as the chronological constant. The difference
between this re-evaluation and the original I.Q. of the test under
fourteen was tabulated in the same way and from these tables the
respective percentages of constant I.Q.s compared.
Table V
C. A. 14 C. A. 16
Male Female Total Male Female Total
Loss   9% 2% 6% 22% 17% 20%
No change  31% 27% 29% 75% 65% 71%
Gain  60% 71% 65% 3% 18% 9%
According to the theory of distribution, a curve showing the
scattering of cases under the classification "loss," "no change,"
"gain" should have the greatest frequency at the "no change"
point, since constancy is the criterion of the accuracy of the measure. If such distribution is not present, it is conclusive evidence
that the measure is unreliable and cannot be used as a basis for
prognosis. In a graphic presentation of our results the normal
distribution curve obtained by the use of the sixteen year constant
would be completely distorted by the substitution of the fourteen
year basal. This is, instead of 114 cases (71 per cent) whose I.Q.
showed no significant change when sixteen was taken as the age of the
CONSTANCY OF INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT 109
limit of development of mental capacity, 48 cases (29 per cent) prove
accurate when fourteen is used.
The results showing the comparative distribution of "loss" "no
change," "gain" with the two constant chronological ages do not
take account of the fact that a certain proportion of the cases
which show "no change" with fourteen as a basal showed a loss
in I.Q. when sixteen was used. Therefore, considering only that
group which were constant with the sixteen year basal, the 114
cases are re-distributed as follows:
Table VI
Male Female Total
No change  21% 16% 19%
Gain  79% 84% 81%
In other words, of the entire group of 161 cases, only 22 are
not materially affected by the change in basal year, for of the fortyeight cases recorded as constant with the fourteen year constant
chronological age, 26 are raised to this category from the original
"loss" group.
The full significance of this is apparent when we consider the
effect upon the I.Q.s of high grade defectives. For example, a girl
who, upon her admission to the institution, is accorded 61 per cent
of the average intelligence by the Stanford revision, is diagnosed
"moron-improvable." By the time she is sixteen or more, improved physical conditions coupled with the more adequate training
which the institution offers have succeeded in raising her I.Q. to
72 per cent. Technically this places her in the Borderline group, but
in view of lack of judgement, suggestibility and general social inadequacy, she will do much better in an institution for defectives for
an indefinite period of time.
If, for the sixteen year level we substitute fourteen, the case
becomes quite different. The low borderline I.Q. automatically
rises to 83 per cent?which corresponds to the Dull-normal category.
Common sense, public opinion and the definition of the term itself
preclude any possibility of keeping an individual classified as normal, even with the qualifying "dull," in a school for the feebleminded. Therefore, M.J., with a mental age of about eleven and the
veneer of assurance which so many high grade feebleminded girls
possess, is summarily discharged as a case unfit for the institution
and left to shift for herself as best she can. On the other hand,
110 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
with an I.Q. of 72 per cent, after a suitable period of training she is
placed on parole with an employer selected and approved by the
school; her activities are carefully supervised, and when she was
proved competent to manage her own affairs, she is discharged into
a community to which she has already adjusted.
In addition to the economic and social implications of the use
of the fourteen year chronological constant, there is an appreciable
influence on the accuracy of prediction of ultimate pedagogical
achievement. Until the age of fourteen the I.Q. has been reasonably constant, and the limit of scholastic development capable of prediction on this basis. For the case between fourteen and sixteen, the
difference in basal year has a cumulative effect that cannot be ignored. If fourteen is used as a basal, the I.Q. steadily rises after
this age, so that if the grouping is done on this basis alone, there
is an increasing probability of misplacement in grade during the
last two years of school attendance. Consider the case of John,
who is fifteen, with a mental age of eleven years and six months.
Shall he continue. in the regular grade?taking two years to complete the work or shall he be placed in a special class for older boys
where the emphasis will be shifted from scholastic to industrial
training? The I.Q. becomes the deciding factor.
With the use of sixteen as the constant chronological age John
has an I.Q. of 76; using fourteen, his I.Q. is 82. If the latter be
considered the basis for recommendation, it is almost certain that
he will continue in grade, for the dull-normal usually gains more
from association with his peers and superiors than from contact with
those less able than himself. In this case, the work presented will
become more and more beyond John's grasp and from an educational standpoint his last year of school training will be a complete loss.
The I.Q. based on sixteen would place John in the borderline
group whose members do better to work with their equals or even
inferiors, in order that they may experience the stimulus of success
in equal competition. Therefore, John would attend the special
class for a year and leave school at the end of that time knowing,
at best, the rudiments of a trade or at least with some experience in
actual manual work.
All this has been written on the rather remote possibility of
John's attending school until the age of fifteen without coming to
the attention of the school authorities for examination. Suppose
CONSTANCY OF INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT 111
now, that, when he was a younster of eleven still struggling in the
third grade he had been referred to a clinic and diagnosed "Borderline?advise special class.'' In this case the next four years of his
school life would have been spent in academic training adapted to
his ability and in manual work which would be preparatory to enabling him to earn his living. If, now that he is fifteen, his I.Q.
is figured on the fourteen years basis we find it to be 82 per cent, as
stated above, and the situation is just what it was in the first instance? "dull normal boy, put him in the regular grade."
This time John will be more of a burden to the teacher and
hindrance to the class than before, for instead of being a leader as
in the special class, he is now the well-known "lame duck" trailing
in the rear, always outdistanced by his fellows and increasingly
conscious of his shortcomings. This situation is more than likely
to develop in the boy a very objectionable social attitude and lead
to difficulties more serious than the school room misconduct by
which he hopes to gain a sort of supremacy. Much has been written
concerning the seriousness of branding an individual "feebleminded, '' but the emphasis must not be so placed as to obscure the
importance of recognizing and dealing with the defect present in
the borderline group, for their own protection as well as that of
society.
In any institution of this sort there are inevitably a few individuals with I.Q.s over 75 per cent who, though they cannot be
called "feebleminded" on this basis alone are misfits in the community. Of the 161 cases considered in this part of the study, there
were 11 who belonged in this group on admision, eight boys and three
girls. According to the latest test, this number was reduced to six,
four boys and two girls; showing that nearly half the cases which
seemed hardly defective enough to warrant admission have settled
to their real mental level. These six comprised 4 per cent of the entire group?about the proportion of atypical cases one would expect
to find in any distribution. Ee-evaluation of the latest I.Q. on the
basis of fourteen years as the chronological constant changes this
number to 47 (17 girls and 30 boys), or about 30 per cent.
In the light of the evidence presented, it can be seen that the use
of fourteen as the age at which intellectual development ceases
destroys the validity of the I.Q. as a diagnostic or prognostic agent,
and renders worthless a scale which has proven itself reliable in the
great majority of cases in which it has been employed.
