The Function of the Psycho-Biochemistry Laboratory
===================================================

Max Trumpee, Ph.D.
In charge of Psycho-biochemistry Laboratory, Psychological Clinic
University of Pennsylvania
There has been a rapid multiplication of specialism in all sciences since the "World War. This has enormously extended our
detailed knowledge in the laboratory and in the clinic. The available data have become unwieldy. At a recent meeting of the British
Society for the Advancement of Science, it was stated that we now
need abstractors of abstracts and reviewers of reviews. It now
becomes essential to inter-relate the data gathered in the specialties.
This furnishes a fertile field for mutual advances. This need has
been recognized by the establishment of the pioneer Psychobiochemistry Laboratory in the Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania, in September, 1924.
The inter-relationship of physiology and psychology is becoming more evident. The recent example of Pavlov and others
who presented papers at both the meetings of the International
Congress of Psychology and the International Congress of Physiology is a case in point. It is of interest to note that the point of
view in physiology has shifted from the mechanical and morphologic to the dynamic and biochemical. With this change have come
extensive advances in the field of physiology. While it is true that
psychology cannot afford entirely to wait for progress in other experimental sciences, it should not, however, neglect the findings that
become available in the fields of physiology and biochemistry. This
was impressed upon the writer by the papers presented this summer
at the sessions of the XHIth International Congress of Physiology.
A number of the papers were as important to the psychologist as
to the physiologist.
By making a biochemical approach to clinical cases as well as
by research along experimental lines, Psychology can make its contributions more comprehensive. In this way the diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of Clinic cases, especially those with metabolic
etiology, will be better understood. Furthermore it will serve to
rule out organic disease as a predisposing or actually exciting cause
of a given mental disturbance. A vast unexplored field lies in the
chronic forms of poisoning both exogenous and endogenous which
PSYCHO-BIOCHEMISTRY LABORATORY 193
affect in varying degrees the mental processes. This is assuming
increasing importance in the industrial field. The problem of
fatigue in industry as well as in school, necessitates at least in part
a biochemical approach.
It has been observed in this Clinic over a period of years that
many of the problem children of school age were apathetic, phlegmatic and even lethargic, without any apparent physiologic or
metabolic defects. By studies made in our Psycho-biochemistry
Laboratory it had been found from analysis of the alveolar air and
the hydrogen-ion concentration of the saliva that many of these
cases were overloaded with carbon-dioxide.1
It is known to students of acid-base equilibrium2 of the blood
that the lungs daily excrete the carbon-dioxide equivalent of twenty
to forty liters of normal acid, while the kidneys excrete daily the
equivalent of only one-tenth of a liter of normal acid. In view of
these facts it is surprising that medical men have neglected to observe and study breathing defects until gross pathology developed.
I made blood chemistry analyses, complete counts, metabolic and
vital capacity tests including spirographic tracings and found the
cause for this overloading of carbon-dioxide to be due to inefficient
breathing. I further found that several of these individuals had
developed a tolerance for carbon-dioxide, giving a spirogram of
slow breathing which is similar to that obtained in early emphysema.
In this regard I want to emphasize the fact that breathing efficiency cannot be estimated merely by inspection. "A doubling of
the volume breathed per minute is scarcely or not at all noticeable
either by the breather himself or by the casual observer unless he
measure it."3 All spirograms were obtained by the use of the
Sanborn Metabolic apparatus under basal metabolic conditions and
in every instance a trial test was made at first to acquaint the subject with the procedure and to insure a state of mental calm which
is essential to an accurate metabolic determination and the spirographic tracings.
On all subjects showing a tolerance for carbon-dioxide rebreathing tests were performed (increasing amounts of carbon-dioxide
1 Henry, E. Starr. The E-ion Concentration of Mixed Saliva as an index
of Fatigue. Amer. Jour. Psych., July, 1922, p. 394.
Concomitants of High Alveolar Carbon Dioxide. Psychological Clinic,
March, 1928.
2 Leffman-Trumper. Compend of Chemistry, 7tli Edition, p. 233.
? Henderson and Haggard, 1925. Noxious Gases and Respiration.
194 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
were given) and the extent of their tolerance determined. This
type of inefficient breathing afforded an explanation of some of the
fatigue or toxic symptoms which brought these cases to the Clinic.
Briefly, fatigue is due either to an excess of the end products of
normal metabolism especially of carbon-dioxide, or to toxins resulting from abnormal metabolism or to chronic but mild asphyxiation.
The psychological effects of fatigue, though variously produced are
strikingly similar. We can, however, classify causally the fatigue
by biochemical analysis, particularly by carbon-dioxide and respiratory quotient determinations, metabolic tests, blood studies and lactic acid production.
To date I have six cases with more or less marked nasal obstruction showing what I have termed a definite type of resistance
breathing. These cases show instability, become easily fatigued, the
latter as a result of chronic asphyxiation. A few of these cases have
consented to the surgical removal or correction of the obstruction.
A new approach to the compensatory mechanism of the blood
was studied and reported last year.4 Those subjects showing shallow
breathing compensated for this inadequacy by an increase in the
number and volume of the red blood cells and the amount of hemoglobin. This year I examined forty additional cases, the findings of
which confirmed the above principle of compensation.
In addition an extension of this principle has led me to apply
it to a new interpretation of cases that have been diagnosed cryptogenic polycythemia, a rare blood disease, in which marked fatigue
and symptoms of mental instability are present. My studies on
one of these cases show that the breathing is very shallow, inefficient
and fixedly so, with a markedly low vital capacity, compensated for
by an eighty-nine per cent increase in the number of red blood
cells.5 The accepted treatment is giving phenyl hydrazine in order
to destroy the excess red cells. But inasmuch as the breathing is
fixed in type and the blood compensation automatic, the medication
has merely a transitory effect. I therefore contend that the proper
therapy should be daily, extended inhalations of oxygen with minimum physical exertion, in order that the blood shall not continue
to compensate by producing an oversupply of red cells and hemoglobin. Nervous excitement and mental worry have been suggested
4 Trumper, Max. Hemato-Bespiratory Compensation. 1928.
B Trumper, Max. Spirograms and Their Significance. International
Clinics, June, 1929.
PSYCHO-BIOCHEMISTRY LABORATORY 195
as the exciting cause in some of these cases. The point I wish to
emphasize, however, is the marked fatigue symptoms of the cases
studied which illustrate once again the inter-relationsliip of Psychology and Biochemistry and demonstrate the ways in which the
Clinical Psychologist may utilize the findings of the biochemical
laboratory.
