Gordon? A Clinic Picture
==========================

By Madella Rigby, Recorder, The Psychological Clinic,
University of Pennsylvania
When the examination of Gordon began on January 17, 1929,
I was far more interested in comparing his responses with those
of his previous examination in July, 1928, than in observing the
boy himself. This attitude may be explained by the fact that he
is none too attractive a youngster either in appearance or in personality. Even a first impression of that protruding jaw and those
thick shapeless lips is unconsciously repellant. In some mental
sub-stratum you realize that you are happier when he is busy
answering questions than you would be if he turned his energies
to work to impress you. However that may be, I did not feel
inclined to give the boy the full encouragement of my undivided attention. The examination was progressing quietly but rapidly, so
I felt free to leave the room in the pursuance of other duties.
It was not many minutes later that I returned to find Gordon,
having risen from his chair, standing with both feet on the floor
and his body extended across the table in total disregard of the
case records and testing materials which were lying there. His
elbows were on the table, his chin was in his hands and he was
looking up into the face of the somewhat perturbed examiner.
Even as I walked across the room, I was amazed to see that his
feet began kicking violently in the several directions possible to
feet, and he had wriggled on to the table by means of the wellupholstered abdominal areas of his anatomy. In the abandon of
the moment, Gordon was wholly unconscious of anyone's approach.
The examiner, in a state of impassive calm, was endeavoring to
continue the testing, to which Gordon replied that he was tired
and did not want to go on. His tone of voice was slightly whining,
and he was wearing a diabolical grin. In spite of the fatigue of
which he complained, there was a light in his pale blue eyes that did
not bespeak weariness.
It was at this moment that two other members of the staff
reached the spot. Gordon was taken in hand and placed on his
chair. The examiner continued with the questions but Gordon
could not be cajoled into compliance. He was threatened with a
ruler. The effect was not particularly successful. Gordon declared in full voice that he would not try to answer the questions.
266 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
He wriggled and swung his body from side to side in an effort
to free himself from his captors. The examiner, still seated and
still calm, was holding the boy's legs, while three others were
holding him in his chair,?one for each arm and one for his head.
The noise was so great that a fourth member of the staff came
running in to see what was happening. Fearing that a scandal
might arise from the tumult that Gordon was causing, she brought
cold water and threw it in his face. This stopped the noise and
the struggling at once, and even before the sobbing had completely
subsided, the examiner was again pelting the boy with questions.
An informal interview with Gordon's mother as a consequence
of the violence committed by and upon her son showed her to
be quite accustomed to such proceedings. The mother certainly
met the incident with perfect confidence in the Clinic methods.
She is an extremely high-strung, excitable person herself. She
talks in a deep masculine voice and her speech is staccato, her movements restless and jumpy. She has the same protruding lower lip
that her son has, although in Gordon, the pugilistic contour is
more marked.
During this respite the examiner had taken Gordon into the
shop where perfect rapport was re-established with the help of
the new electric music-box that was being tried out. Now Gordon
was willing to continue with the examination.
At the time of his second examination Gordon was seven years,
eleven months of age. On the Stanford Revision of the BinetSimon tests Gordon's mental age was eight years, six months.
His Basal Age was seven and the Upper Limit was twelve. At
Year VIII he failed the vocabulary test (for his score of
this test was but 8) and he failed the 3rd degree comprehension. (It is interesting to notice that to the question, "What's
the thing to do when a playmate hits you without meaning to do
it?" he replied, "Hit him back.") At year IX he failed to give
the date, to arrange the weights correctly and to make change.
(In this last test, he subtracted on his fingers but even that method
did not yield him a correct answer.) At year X, he was able to
answer correctly only the test of reading and report, and the test
of 60 words in three minutes. His memories were nine and his
method of giving words was to name the contents of the room and
occasionally to resort to rhymes. He achieved an Intelligence Quotient of 107 which places him in a group of 10% superior to 50%
and inferior to 40% of boys at the Six Year Level.
GORDON?A CLINIC PICTURE 267
These tests on the Binet-Simon Scale form an interesting comparison with those of the previous summer. At that time his
Chronological Age was 7-4 and he achieved a Mental Age of 8-1
with a resulting Intelligence Quotient of 110. His Basal Age was
6 and the Upper Limit 10. At year VII he failed to give the differences and only received half credit for tying the bow-knot. At
year VIII he failed to evolve even an inferior plan in the ball and
field problem; he failed to give similarities and his vocabulary score
was minus. At year IX he gave tlie date and was able to give
rhymes satisfactorily.
There is no striking variation in Gordon's scores on the Performance Tests at the two examinations. He showed good coordination, planfulness and comprehension of the problems. Sometimes he would try to force blocks into wrong holes but he showed
a fair amount of analytic discrimination ^in searching for the block
to fit into each particular recess.
His Memory Span shows slight variation. At the first examination the visual span was 6, auditory 6 and reverse 3. At the
second examination the visual was 7, auditory 5, and reverse 4.
A physical examination of this case showed mixed signs of
thyroid imbalance. He has the hands, eyes, head, walk, and
temper tantrums of a high grade Mongolian, and his protruding
abdomen suggests Cretinism. His tongue was normal but curious
in its changes of color and shape. Only one testicle had descended
and that was very much undersize. During the examination there
was no evidence of sexual interest or excitement.
At play Gordon is very destructive. He tears his toys apart,
and is quarrelsome with other children. At the age of four he
choked two kittens to death. According to his mother, however,
he likes animals now and since that cruelty has not been seen to
harm them. He often fights with other children and will even pit
his strength against people older and stronger than himself. He
feels that he can fight anyone and shows little discrimination in
choosing an opponent. Yet his mother insists he is affectionate.
At school Gordon is in the 2B Grade and his teacher believes that
he is capable of learning but his conduct interferes with his own
progress as well as the progress of every one of his classmates. In
fact he declared his ambition to be a prize-fighter like Dempsey
(not Tunney), and he said he keeps in practice at school. It is
only too easy to believe him a bully and a disciplinary problem.
During the conference between his mother and Dr Witmer, the boy
268 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
played the show-off. Even at the age of 7 he shows the physique
as well as the temperament and desire admirable in a pugilist.
The remarkable factor in this case is the high intellectual level.
This alert mind and intellectual capacity combined with moral imbecility make a type of feeblemindedness that is exceedingly dangerous to society. From the case as reported, it is evident that
Gordon's standards of conduct are not those of the law-abiding
citizen of today. The abilities which he possesses will be perfected
according to his lights. He has already demonstrated that his
orientation is not that accepted as desirable in the eyes of our
present day social organization. Gordon has good motor control
but his idea in regard to its exercise is definitely frowned on by
our society. There is no place for a fighting man in our everyday
life. It is no longer necessary to beat the wolf from the door by
sheer brute force. Social standards have so changed that cunning
even in a physical weakling is more successful than are bodily
strength and an instinct to fight in an individual of mental and
intellectual qualifications. So it is that Gordon must come to be
restrained lest he commit an act of violence that will seem mere
child's play to his distorted point of view. Therefore, in spite
of the high Intelligence Quotient, the diagnosis in this case reads:
Feebleminded on the moral scale, Socially non compos mentis, Intellectually competent, Type: non-sexual.
