News and Comments
==================

The proceedings of the First Colloquium on Personality Inves-
tigation held in New York last December under the auspices of the
American Psychiatric Association Committee on Relations with the
Social Sciences have been published. Copies of these proceedings
can be secured from the Committee's Secretary, Harry S. Sullivan,
Towson, Maryland. Paper bound copies are sixty cents each; cloth
bound copies are one dollar.
Dr. Frances I. Gaw, formerly Assistant Supervisor in the De-
partment of Psychology and Educational Research of the Los An-
geles City Schools and Extension Instructor in Psychology in the
University of California took charge of the Child Study Laboratory
of the Seattle Public Schools on September 1.
In connection with his article in a recent number of The Psy-
chological Clinic Joseph Miller was erroneously reported to be
Counsellor in the Wilkesbarre High School. He is Director of Edu-
cational and Vocational Guidance in the thirty grade schools and
two high schools of that city.
A study made last year in Washington, D.C., by the United
States Public Health Service has very considerable significance for
all who are concerned with the education of children. Complete eye
examinations with suspended accommodation were made on 1,860
unselected white children in the AVashington schools ranging in age
from six to sixteen years. It was discovered that lees than 4 per
cent of the children were entirely free from refractive defects, and
that only a little more than a third of these could have been detected
by the ordinary tests of visual acuity. Experts said that 34 per cent
of these children needed glasses, while glasses for reading and study-
ing were recommended for 10 per cent more. It is particularly
significant that hyperopia or far sightedness was twelve times as
common as nearsightedness. The latter is easily discovered by simple
tests, but not the former. Furthermore the adaptability in the
young is so great that the results of most school tests are not valid.
