John
=====

Charlotte Easby-Grave, Clinic Teacher, University
of Pennsylvania
John made his first appearance at the Psychological Clinic in
January, 1922. He was a small, slightly built boy?on first glance,
about six years old. His clothes were shabby, his blond air was
drab and neglected, but his brown eyes told the most significant
story. They were dull and apathetic like their owner, awakening
only to the emotions of fear and distress.
John's history was not a pleasant one to contemplate. His
mother came from a family of bad reputation. Her marriage to
John's father was a forced one. She was reported to be both im-
moral and feebleminded, and had been diagnosed as a "constitu-
tional psychopathic inferior.'' She had had immoral relations with
both colored and white men, and had syphilis at the time of John's
birth, according to the grandmother. Of the father, we had no
history except that he was a laborer and that he had deserted his
wife.
John came to the clinic as a ward of the Children's Aid So-
ciety. He and his sister, aged ten, had been placed with a care-
taker or guardian. The mental examination had to be carried
on with tact and care. John shrank fearfully from contact with
strangers, and from the new and incomprehensive tasks given to
him. However, he did the Witmer Formboard well, and proved
to have an auditory memory span of six digits. His mental age
on the Binet-Simon scale was five years and six months, as opposed
to his chronological age of seven years and five months. His
Intelligent Quotient was 74?only four points above the score
designated by Terman as indicative of feeblemindedness. But the
clinician, from the wealth of his experience, could see further than
mere test scores, and did not diagnose John as borderline or feeble-
minded. John's record read "Normal mentality. Pedagogically
retarded. Marked infantile stammer. Shows the results of serious
deprivation in infancy." Clinic teaching was recommended in
order to confirm the diagnosis, and if possible, to start John on
the right path scholastically. He attended the clinic for two hours
of teaching per week from January until June, 1922. During this
time, his improvement was especially marked. When he first came,
he was unusually silent and repressed for a boy of his age. He
JOHN 2
ib
was suspicious of all advances made toward him because earlier
years of social contact without family protection, had brought him
nothing but ill treatment. By June, he gave a normal display of
physical energy, looked healthier and more alert, and was full
of enthusiasm about his friends and his play. His foster mother
is a good common-sense woman. She was willing to do anything
for John's improvement and cooperated with the clinic splendidly
in the matter of careful diet and regimen, and follow-up work in
speech correction at home.
From the standpoint of personality and social contact, John's
transformation was most interesting. He is naturally an affection-
ate and warm-hearted boy, and under the influence of a good
home, good food, good clothes and sympathetic family protection,
he expanded into an attractive, winning personality. His conduct
was sufficiently conformed to make him an easy pupil to manage,
and yet he was mischievous enough to be amusing and interesting.
He was cheerful and happy during the hours of work at the
clinic, and he seemed to be unusually free from childish egotism
or vanity. If anything, John might have been said to have an
inferiority sense, and certainly a lack of self-confidence in the
matter of school work. He will never be a leader, but he is an
excellent follower. He is cooperative and adaptable, the type who
will always be liked by many people, but whose ardent champions
?or enemies will be few. In the first months of his attendance at
the clinic, John's reactions, emotional, social and intellectual, were
infantile except for an unusually dogged persistence of effort. By
June, much of this infantilism had disappeared and John was more
like other seven-year-old boys. He met new people without shrink-
ing, and was proud of his attainments in school and at home.
In January, John had no school proficiency. He did not even
[know how to count his fingers, nor to print any letters even though
he had attended a first grade since September. At his first diag-
nostic teaching lesson, he was taught to draw horizontal and verti-
cal lines. Then, at direction, he made the printed letters, T, L,
and E. He was drilled over the naming and identification of these
letters. We passed on then to other letters in the alphabet, but
John was not enthusiastic until at the third lesson, he learned to
print the letters of his name?J-O-H-N. Here was a real achieve-
ment. Letters began to take on some significance, but in spite of
the fact that John began to see faintly that writing was a tool
of expression, a curious thing was evident in the process of learn-
276 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
' ing. The letters were always exercises requiring certain move-
ments, rather than pictures with names or sounds associated. In
other words, John proved to be noticeably kinesthetic. The motor
method of teaching was used as far as possible with all the material
presented to him. By June, John was able to write his name well,
and could also write simple sentences at dictation. He could count
to twenty, and do a few simple number combinations. His read-
ing proficiency was tested, for he was spending considerable time
on the subject in school. He could read from his own book so
glibly that one would have given him credit for being a star pupil.
An amusing incident took place, when John was given a reader he
had never seen before. He picked out what he wanted to read.
At the top of the page was a picture of Bo-peep and her sheep.
John pointed painstakingly to each word in the printed lines be-
neath and read, with great savoir faire, "Baa, baa, black sheep,
have you any wool?", etc. In his own reader was the story of
Baa, Baa, Black Sheep, which John had memorized with no diffi-
culty, while in the school room. He had no idea of phonics, and
could not even recognize words he had already learned when they
appeared in new combinations.
He was ill and away from the Clinic during nearly all of
April, but in May, John was given a little systematic drill in the
sounds of letters and simple letter combinations. His retention
of this material was poor, and he seemed to have great difficulty
in associating the sounds with actual word groups. By the end of
the term, John's school teacher, who had been kept in touch with
the work of the clinic by the foster mother, reported that the
boy was doing well in his class, and the original plan to have him
attend the Summer Observation School was abandoned. In the
course of the teaching, John's speech had shown some improvement,
but was still infantile. From January to June, he received weekly
speech training and the defect practically disappeared. The teach-
ing was now simplified by the fact that he was progressing satis-
factorily in school, and had learned to read. In March, of the
following year, John returned to the clinic because his school
teacher reported that he was not doing well in arithmetic. The same
difficulty in proper association was at the bottom of his trouble. He
was given careful drill in the fundamentals of addition and subtrac-
tion, particularly, and was taught short cuts and proofs wherever
possible. His marks in school began to be good, and in the fall, he
entered the 2B Grade. During the next academic year we heard
JOHN 277
nothing of John. We were anxious to keep in touch with his prog-
ress. A telephone talk with his foster mother in April brought an
encouraging report. John was then in the 3A and was getting 7's
and 8's on his reports. Arithmetic is still his most troublesome
subject, but even in that he is keeping up to grade. His speech
defect has entirely disappeared. The valvular heart condition
which had made him fatigue so easily during our first contacts
with him, is clearing up satisfactorily. The physician says that
there is no reason why John should not have all the activities of
other boys. He is alert, energetic and full of mischief, and is
displaying all a normal boy's affection for a collie, which is his
own pet, and constant companion.
The foster parents have not legally adopted either John or
his sister. The Children's Aid Society advises them to wait until
they are sure of the entire normality of both children as evidenced
by continued successful school progress. However, the family is
moving to the country for their sakes, and the foster mother's
maternal pride in both of them is evident in all her conversation.
The future of these children seems well assured. John will never
be a brilliant student, and probably not phenomenally successful
in any business, but he is fast making up his deprivation in in-
fancy, and is confirming the diagnosis of normal mentality. He is
on the way to become a good citizen and a respected member of
r.ny community.
Coupled with his foster mother's care, the course of diagnostic
teaching brought John to a better social adjustment, started him
on the right path scholastically, and through the success of its
preliminary findings, helped to make John a permanent member
of his adopted family group.
