William
========

By Helen E. Pennypacker and Genevieve McD. Murphy,
Clinic Teacher, University of Pennsylvania
When we first saw William, he had come to us for his first
hour of diagnostic teaching. He appeared to be a sturdy ten year
old, tall for his age and well developed physically. Added to the
attractiveness of his blond good looks, was the fact that he was well
groomed, quite evidently the recipient of all of his adoring mother's
care and attention. He bore himself very quietly and shyly, in
marked contrast to his mother's vivacious conversation and eager
manner. When spoken to, he answered in low voiced, slow mono-
syllables of "ye-es" or "no."
Mrs. M. told us that William was her only child. He was
born September 10, 1916, under normal conditions and was a
healthy intelligent baby. At two and a half years, however, he
was very ill with a disease that the doctors diagnosed as diphtheria
although the State Department of Health reported negative cul-
tures. William walked at eleven months and talked at twelve
months, but after his illness, he had to learn to talk all over again
and was extremely backward. At the present time, his speech is
infantile although he has had extensive corrective training in a
speech class of the public schools. Friends of the family say that
Mrs. M. fosters this tendency by talking "baby talk" to him and
by not forcing him to depend upon himself a great deal more than
he does at present.
This picture of dependency is an interesting one because as it
unfolded, it definitely had two contributing factors. Undoubtedly,
the mother's affection as lavished upon the boy, served to under-
mine any desire that he might have felt, if he had had obstacles
to confront and overcome for himself, to be self sufficient and
aggressive. What the chief factor was, however, developed as we
studied the boy.
William's auditory memory span was five and his visual mem-
ory span was seven. On the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon
Scale, his Intelligence Quotient was 77. He was in the third grade
in school, upper half. His proficiency in reading and spelling was
up to the level of his grade when only mechanical processes were
involved. He could analyze words into their component parts but
showed no comprehension of what he read. For example, he was
WILLIAM 279
given very simple commands to read, such as,?'' Clap your hands,''
"Fold your arms," "Hop to the blackboard," etc. No amount of
instruction on our part could make him understand that he was
to carry out these commands. In the same way, he knew the funda-
mental processes in arithmetic for the 3 B grade but he seemed
, unable to organize and use his knowledge in the solution of even
the simplest problems.
It was learned that the school principal considered William a
very interesting problem. He had observed the boy since his first
appearance in the school and reported that at one time William's
coordination had been very poor, that in trying to run he would
often fall. He also said that William seemed to be "in a daze"
and that he marveled that William was able to go to and from
school unaccompanied.
Thus far in his development, William had been no active con-
duct problem. He was docile, obedient, unobtrusive and well man-
nered. All his virtues were negative. When he was sent to the
store, he always took a note and his mother never held him re-
sponsible for any accuracy in getting the proper change or the
right article. Play interests and normal contacts with other chil-
dren were also lacking.
This is the picture, then, that we had of William when he
came for diagnostic teaching. The ostensible reason for bringing
him was to discover whether individual teaching would aid him
with his arithmetic. Actually, we found ourselves confronted with
the more serious problem of discovering whether the boy was edu-
eable or merely trainable and to what degree. Also, what was
tthe cause of his mental retardation? Was his infantilism super-
ficial or did it permeate his whole mental and emotional structure ?
What was the prognosis for his future development and the recom-
mendation for his treatment?
In clinic teaching, we found William very amenable. He fol-
lowed directions .... but they had to be very explicit. For ex-
ample, it was not sufficient to tell him to sit down, he had to be
told where to sit each day. In conversation, he never passed the
stage of being monosyllabic. It was not that he seemed repressed
or unwilling to talk but rather that he actually had nothing to say.
His manner was always smiling, eager to please. To the casual
observer, William's hesitancy to take any action on his own initia-
tive would have appeared to be mere bashfulness, but it was so
consistent and he was so unproductive of any of the natural buoy-
280 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ancy and aggressiveness that goes with the picture of the normal
ten year old that we finally concluded that he had not the spirits
nor the ideas to motivate him to action. With all his appearance
of normal boyhood, he lacked the fire to make him live. We were
given an illustration of the fact that when he had an idea he
could express it on the day after he received a Wasserman Test
at the hospital. He then told everyone whom he met in the clinic
with his slow, babyish lisp that. . . . the bad doctor stuck a
needle in my arm .... and he hurted me .... and I'm not
going back any more." Each time he told the story, he took
off his coat, rolled up his sleeves and pointed to the place on his
arm. He seemed unable to remember which arm had been hurt,
so showed either one indiscriminately. His mother was astonished
that he showed so much concern at the hurt for recently he had
walked for a whole day with a bad limp but had insisted that his
foot did not hurt when he was questioned. When bedtime came,
his mother found that he had rubbed a large and painful blister
on his heel. In discussing this occurrence, we could not credit
William with unusual bravery, for there was no occasion for his
suffering if he had had intelligence enough to associate the limp
with a need for help. It is barely possible that he felt no pain.
Our eight hours of intensive clinic teaching verified the tenta-
tive diagnosis that William was trainable but not educable. He
could read words but did not comprehend them. He could name
and count numbers and in a mechanical way, could add, subtract,
and multiply. We spent six lessons teaching him that five pennies
have the same value as a nickel. Part of the drill was spent in
teaching him to make change. He was able to do this as long as
the five pennies were before him, but otherwise showed no under-
standing of the problem.
What was the cause of this lack of life in an apparently
healthy boy? A thorough physical examination gave him a clear
slate. Psychologically speaking on the basis of the clinical teach-
ing, we would say no more than that lie failed to show any sign of
educability due to a weakness of associations which make the link
between the concrete and the abstract. He could draw no conclu-
sions nor form abstract concepts.
It remained for the neuro-psychiatric examination to trace the
condition to its cause. It seems that when William had "dip-
theria" he also showed a marked tendency to sleep a great deal.
His retardation and abnormality also dated from that time. It
WILLIAM 281
was in 1918, that epidemic encephalitis was prevalent. The
history of prolonged sleep at the time of his illness as well as a
slight muscular incoordination and tremor, the infantilism and the
vacant stare characteristic of William, marked him as a victim of
the sequellae of epidemic encephalitis. The case was diagnosed as
one of mental arrest due to this disease. In a great number of
cases, the base of the brain is affected and a Parkinsonian complex
arises. This was a case of cortical encephalitis.
The prognosis for William's future condition was unfavorable
as far as improvement was concerned. He would always need su-
pervision and direction; he would never be independent mentally
or socially. He had reached his maximum development educa-
tionally and so it was recommended that he be placed in an insti-
tution or means be provided at home for his training in some very
simple manual work that would keep him occupied.
Thus, we passed on from a child who looked normal, who ap-
parently had physical equipment to succeed in life but who in-
reality was only a physical specimen with his mental abilities ir-
remediably impaired .... no energy, intelligence, motivation.
