Clinical Field Work in Social Service as Presented in the Psychological Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania
=================================================================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1929, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XVIII, No. 5
October, 1929

BY E. B. TWITMYER, Ph.D.
By Marion Braungard, M.A., Assistant Social Worker,
Psychological Clinic
University of Pennsylvania
In recognition of the value of practical experience to advanced
students of an applied science, a number of courses in supervised
clinical field work have been developed in the Psychological Clinic
at the University of Pennsylvania over a period of about twenty
years. The purpose of this article is to describe one of these courses
which has been designated as Clinical Field Work in Social Service.
It offers field work in hospital social service combined with individual
investigation of an organization, movement or topic pertinent to
social welfare. This is supplemented by a weekly seminar in
which students compare experiences, report investigations, express
attitudes and confess difficulties or prejudices.
For a number of years, the administration of the course itself
was in the nature of an experiment. The program was varied each
year for the purpose of discovering how students could be directed
to put their training into practice with the greatest profit to their
characters and personalities as prospective workers in social service
or allied fields of work.
The course is not carried on for the purpose of adding to the
store of knowledge that has been amassed by the student, nor yet is
it concerned with developing any special technique for social work.
Rather does it aim to provide an opportunity for testing the strength
and worth of the students' theories and attitudes before they have
left the sheltering class room. Contact at close range with the
problems of hospital patients and their families produces gratifying
effects on the students. As the year progresses, we see them become
more mature, less certain of panaceas, more aware of the individual134 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ity of each problem, less prone to snap judgments, more sympathetic
toward people.
When Dr. Twitmyer meets the students in the weekly seminar,
it is not necessary to encourage them to become interested in different phases of social work. Their curiosity is constantly aroused
as they go about their field work, so that suggestions for research
problems come spontaneously from the class. These are never the
same from year to year and the range of topics will appear in
rapidly going over the reports presented during the last year. Students investigated city and state provision for feeblemindedness,
epilepsy, tuberculosis, criminal insane, healthy paupers, illegitimacy,
blindness, and specific diseases as well as the machinery for administering state and city welfare. The activities and aims of the Birth
Control League were presented. Other reports satisfied questions
concerning the Welfare Federation and the Federation of Jewish
Charities and the various agencies included under them. The effect
of whipping posts in Delaware on repeaters was discussed; dental
hygiene was explained; the different types of clinics in hospitals
were individually presented; one or two phases of the Philadelphia
Conference on Social Work were discussed by the class; a resume
of the history of hospital social work was attempted. There was
even a report and discussion on what might be considered as '' Righteous Indignation.'' The topics for the preceding year overlap about
one-third of these, but the other two-thirds of the list is very different. That particular group became intensely interested in the
whys and wherefores of conventions and common prejudices. Problems of prohibition, Judge Lindsey's "Companionate Marriage,"
Stokes' book on '' The Third Great Plague'' and a number of other
books were reviewed and discussed. Reports are never long and
discussion is encouraged and directed by Dr. Twitmyer.
In building up this course, Dr. Twitmyer has been fortunate in
securing the cooperation of a number of Philadelphia's outstanding
social workers. Notable among these in the early days of the course
was Miss Rita Scudder, then Head Social Worker at the University
Hospital, also Miss Sara Laughlin of the White-Williams Foundation. At present, Miss Henri-Ette Kirch, Director of Social Work
at the University Graduate School for Medicine is making a splendid
contribution. The members of the staff of the Psychological Clinic
who have assisted Dr. Twitmyer in conducting the course are Dr.
Rebecca E. Learning, Miss Margaret C. Brooke, and Miss Marion
Braungard. An effort has always been made to restrict the number
CLINICAL FIELD WORK 135
?f students taking the course. Only seniors who have done advanced
work in Psychology are eligible. Besides the one hour of seminar
each week, students devote three, six, or occasionally nine hours a
week to field work. Students are not permitted to enter the course
for less than an entire school year.
At present, the field work in hospital social service is handled
by the Committee on Education for the Middle Atlantic District
of the American Association of Hospital Social Work headed by
Miss Henri-Ette Kirch, Director of the Department of Social Service at the Hospital of the Graduate School of Medecine of the University of Pennsylvania. This Committee on Education is made
up of the directors of the Social Service Departments in about seven
Philadelphia hospitals. Each member of the Committee undertakes
to provide supervised field work for a number of students in her
department. At stated intervals they* meet with Dr. Twitmyer's
representative to discuss students and compare notes.
This arrangement for the organization and direction of the
field work in hospital social service can be regarded as an achievement. It has been brought about because the directors of the departments in which students have worked have gradually become
convinced that the course is valuable, not only to the students, but
to their department and to their profession. Formerly, it was necessary to solicit opportunities for the students to do almost any type
of voluntary work for experience. At present, it is necessary for
departments to meet the requirements of the committee in charge in
order to qualify for training students. There is a carefully worked
out program to be followed during the year so that the students'
contact with the hospital is not haphazard but includes in order the
various features of social service work in a hospital.
The program used for the students working in hospitals was
drawn up under the leadership of Miss Kirch in conference with
Dr. Twitmyer's representative and the Committee on Education.
It is the result of the accumulated experiences of the various individuals who have been instrumental in developing this course under Dr. Twitmyer's direction during almost two decades. It is presented here as a plan which has been successfully used with students
who devote as much as six hours a week to field work. It has been
found too elaborate for students devoting less time to the work, and
a plan better suited to their requirements is in the process of being
formulated.
136 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Guide Used in Working with Psychological
Students from University op Pennsylvania by
Committee on Education
I. Period of Orientation (5 weeks).
A. Observation.
1. First 3 weeks.
a. Tour of inspection of entire Institution.
b. Accompany Supervisor to lier Clinic for
observation.
2. Second 2 weeks.
a. Rotate students in all Clinics where Social Workers are assigned (do not change
Supervisors).
B. Assignments. (No Field Work.)
1. Read Case Records (not too difficult and involved).
2. Read Department Policy Book.
3. Assign for Reading and written summary.
a. The Art of Healing (Dr. Cabot).
b. Social Work a Family Builder (Townsend).
c. Technique of Hospital Social Work Pamphlet, etc.
Comment. The purpose of the First Period is to give the student the
feel of the Institute, the Social Service Department and the Work and to
give her a sense of belonging.
A. and B. Should be carried on simultaneously.
II. Period of Field Work (19 weeks).
A. First Week.
1. Explain office routine, record forms, etc.
2. Explain as much of Hospital and Dispensary
routine as seems practicable.
3. Explain Registration of Cases, theory thereof
and Department's procedure in this regard.
B. Second Week.
1. Group visit to Social Service Exchange.
2. Assign enough simple case work tasks to engage
time of student until next period.
C. Third Week.
1. Proceed from this point forward according to
CLINICAL FIELD WORK 137
Department's own training plan, i.e., easy tasks
to difficult.
Comment. 1. First Interviews should not be given in this period.
2. Sometime during this period student should be required to read Social
Work in Hospitals (Cannon) and turn in a written report on it.
3. It is suggested that students be given material to read which deals
with Medical specialty to which they are assigned and that all students be given
simple material to read on Venereal Disease. Today's Problem in Disease
Prevention (Stokes ) is suggested.
4. Students during this period should keep up a very active Clinic contact otherwise relation between the Social Work and the medical work is lost.
Hi. Period of First Interview (6 weeks).
A. Preparation.
1. Two group Conferences with Director.
a. Discussion of First Interview.
b. Assignment of simple case analysis (see
suggested outline attached).
B. Assignment of First Interview (By Supervisor).
1. Group discussion with Director.
a. Experience meeting.
b. Methods of recording.
c. Reading of material.
Comment. It is understood of course that it is desirable to follow broad
outlines of the above and that details will vary in each Department.
Suggestions:?That students be appointed to Supervisors at beginning
of work and continue with them throughout year. That students be permitted
to visit alone.
Experience in introducing university students to social work
has lead to the realization that in most cases they are very much
more unsophisticated and uninformed in social matters than they
are commonly believed to be. It was therefore found necessary to
prepare a list of general subjects to be used by the social workers
to whom students were assigned. This list is presented because it
offers an insight into some of the problems which have been found
important considerations in handling these students.
General Suggestions for Supervisors op Students in Hospital Social
Service Departments
It is wise to go on the assumption that the students are pretty unsophisticated and that social and medical conditions which no longer phase us, may be,
and probably are new to them. Every effort should, therefore, be made to
explain and interpret new experiences and ideas to them.
138 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Go on the assumption that your student does not know anything about
the work. This will make you careful to explain things fully to her.
Always give your student a reason for doing the things you ask her to
do, i.e., why a certain visit is justifiable, necessary, etc.
Always explain medical diagnoses to your student and their significance
to the patient and his family.
Some, perhaps, all of the students have not justified in their own minds
our right to enter patients' homes and to advise and present plans to them.
Make every effort therefore to get over to the student the basis of relationship
between the social worker and patient.
Show tact and discretion in discussing cases especially those having to do
with pregnancy, illegitimacy, venereal disease, sex problems, etc. Be sure
they understand.
Before sending student on her first visit be sure to discuss with her ways
of approach.
Make your assignments definite so student knows exactly what she is
expected to accomplish.
Never send a student on visit, etc. on a case before she has read the
case and you have discussed it with her. The better she understands the
problem and the more she knows about previous contacts the better able she
will be to accomplish her task.
Try not to curb student's initiative and imagination but do not give her
too much leaway.
Choose your assignments carefully. Be sure that tasks set are not too
difficult.
Avoid monotony of assignments especially at first.
It is well to assign one or two cases to student which she may feel
are her own. This will give her a sense of continuity.
Eemember your attitude of interest, of enthusiasm and belief in the
necessity of the things you and she are doing, will influence her attitude
toward social work and social conditions.
Strive never to seem in a hurry. Set aside a definite time for Conference
and keep your appointment meticulously.
Have all assignments thought out and planned in advance. Never meet
your student without previous preparation.
From time to time, questions are asked concerning the value of
a course including field work in social service for university students
who can devote only a few hours a week to the work. Inquiries
are made as to how much can be expected of the students and
whether they are sufficiently able to comprehend the spirit of the
work to make the effort expended worth while. Such a course not
only introduces the possibility of social work as a profession, but
provides an opportunity for discovering the students' ability and
liking for the work. It is worthy of mention that every student
who has taken the course and desired to do social work has been
successfully placed in a position.
CLINICAL FIELD WORK 139
As one possible type of illustration of actual accomplishment,
I am presenting three case summaries written by studentsi six or
seven months after entering the course. They were prepared for
presentation at a staff meeting of the Social Service Department of
St. Christopher's Hospital for Children under the direction of
Miss Edith J. McComb. The work done by the student is described
as well as the impressions she gathered from her contact with the
case and her analysis of the problem.
Of particular interest to us, as psychologists, are the situations
in these cases which make a background of Psychology necessary for
a full understanding of the problem. The first case by Esther
0'Shiver and the third case by Martha Atlas involve children who
are not making normal school progress, the second case by Ruth
Karlson is complicated by a father who is unstable and inadequate
for the demands made upon him. That the students' courses in
Psychology were useful to them in doing social work is apparent
in reading the cases which answers another question which sometimes arises as to the justification of a course in social service being
given in the Psychology Department.
CONCERNING THE DIFFICULTIES OF WORKING WITH
THE ILLITERATE MOTHER OF TWO BACKWARD
AND UNDERNOURISHED BOYS
I first met the Gordons when I went to visit Mrs. Gordon's
mother to tell her to bring John into the dental clinic and to the
nutrition class. I had been told that she was a drunkard, and not
dependable. When I first saw her she was poorly and carelessly
dressed and her house was in a terribly dirty condition. She explained to me that they had started to remodel it but did not have
the money to finish the job. She told mo she would do her best
to see that her daughter brought John to the hospital, but she felt
that no matter what she might say, she would have very little influence. Throughout my whole contact Grandmother Gordon seemed
to be disgusted with her daughter's way of living and her ideas concerning life, whereas Mrs. Gordon seemed to feel that she had a
dependable friend in her mother. As a result of this visit John
did come to the dental clinic once but failed to return a second
time.
In the meantime I visited the school. The truant officer was
there and she told me that she was quite disgusted with Mrs. Gordon.
140 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
It seems that she goes off on sprees every once in so often and the
children suffer for it. Up until that time they had not been able
to get her to dress John properly and to nourish him adequately.
When asked why she did not do so she said that she had no money,
but not long afterward it was found that she had gone to New York
and returned with quite an expensive fur coat. How she got it no
one knows. I think the school set the S.P.C.C. on her, or if not, it
was some other authority who made her send in money for John's
milk every day and see that he got to school regularly.
Mrs. Gordon has an older boy, George, who is 13 years old.
He was with her sister in Atlantic City until November. He is not
as much of a problem as John. The latter is undernourished, anemic,
formerly addicted to masturbation, and backward in school. He is
only in the 2B grade although he is almost eleven years old. Mrs.
Gordon's husband, she says, deserted her after John was born and
she does not even know where he is.
About a month elapsed between my first and second visits.
In the meantime Mrs. Gordon had moved away from her mother's
to a house that is rather large and is situated across from a coal yard.
She rents most of the house to roomers and she herself has the downstairs which consists of a kitchen, a dining room that serves as a
bedroom, and a parlor. The two boys sleep with her in a large bed
and the whole place is rather dingy and untidy.
I really saw her for the first time in this house and she promised me that she would get John to Nutrition Clinic as often as possible and said that it would be easier for her now that George was
back, because he could take John to the hospital. She was working
now at the coal yards from six to ten in the morning and taking in
washing. This and the rooms she rented gave her her income.
John came to clinic with a fair degree of regularity for some
weeks and then stopped. I went to see her about it and she said
that as far as she knew he had been going, unless John lied to her.
When I saw her it was during the morning and John was at home.
When asked why he was not in school, she replied that he had no
rubbers, his shoes were torn and the snow was too deep for him to
go in this condition.
We decided to give both John and George a psychological examination and when I told her to bring them in she was very interested
and asked me whether it would bring out any streak of criminality
in them. In my conversation with her she has always seemed to
fear this possibility.
CLINICAL FIELD WORK 141
The whole business came to a head when I went last week to
tell her the results of the examinations and to ask her to cooperate
with us more in helping these children. I visited about eleven o 'clock
and when I arrived the window shades were down and two men
were knocking at the door. I asked them whether Mrs. Gordon
expected them and they said that she did. They were plumbers
whom she had called to fix her gas range. She finally answered the
door, carelessly dressed, with her stockings hanging down and her
hair untidy. After directing the plumbers she apologized to me saying that she had been out the night before and had gone to bed
Very late. She had just gotten up to send the children to school, and
then had gone back to bed. Consequently she had not gone to work
that morning. I started to explain to her that John was slow and that
the school was right in keeping him in the second grade instead of advancing him as she had thought it should do. I explained to her that
his physical condition was poor and might cause much of his slowness
school; also that we wanted her to cooperate and see that he got
to Nutrition, and went to school regularly, and so on. She then
became terribly excited and told me that, although she was not
angry at me personally, she was with all the higher people who ran
these things. She insists that she cannot cooperate when nothing
is done to help her children as they should be helped. She thinks
that since they are so slow they should be put into some institution
where they can be aided and sees no reason why this cannot be done
other children whose parents are drunkards are thus put away,
whereas she is willing to pay $3.50 per week for each boy to see them
taken care of. I told her I would do the best I could to see what
might be done in this respect and would answer in a week or so.
I visited the school next and spoke to the principal about the
ease. She feels that the trouble is not so much with their native
ability as with their home environment. She feels that the least Mrs.
Gordon could do would be to send them to school clean and regularly. They have had quite some trouble with Mrs. Gordon themselves.
The whole problem seems to boil itself down to the mother,
rather than to John and George, for once we get her straight the
rest is comparatively easy. She has a very interesting and peculiar
personality. She is good looking, has poise, and is socially very
competent. On the other hand, she is very low on the intellectual
seale, can hardly read or write, and is hopelessly ignorant in ordinary school subjects. What is so strange is that she has analyzed
142 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
herself perfectly, knows her assets and liabilities, and can calmly
present them to you. On my last visit she spoke more intimately
than she had ever done before. She outlined her whole situation
for me and showed me the reason why she wanted her boys taken
care of. She said first of all she was young, and with her looks, if
she had the opportunity to get out and meet people, she could probably get an opportunity to marry?a thing she certainly would do
if the man was nice and could support her, because she did not
intend to go on working forever. But the trouble was that she was
now considered a scrub woman and no real man would marry her
because of it. She had tried getting various positions on a higher
scale and had always succeeded because of her outward appearance,
but she could never hold the jobs because the people found out
only too soon her lack of education. Therefore, realizing this handicap, she did not want her boys to be placed in the same position
when they grew up. She felt that they resembled her for she had
gotten no further than the second grade herself, simply because
she just could not remember things. Now, if the boys could be
placed somewhere where she would not have to worry about them
immediately, but could know that at sixteen they could go out and
earn a livelihood, she would be able to apply herself to getting
established in society. If she went into a hole, she knew her mother
would help her out, although she had very little herself.
REPORT OF A FAMILY SITUATION INVOLVING AN OVERWORKED MOTHER, AN IRRESPONSIBLE FATHER
AND HEALTH PROBLEMS
The 0 'Brien's became known to us in November of 1928 when
Anna, the baby, was brought to clinic. A month earlier one of the
child's eyes began to trouble her. Mrs. O'Brien treated it herself
but with no success; at our clinic it was recommended that Anna
be sent to the ward for a foreign substance in her eye. There it
was found to be an ulcer, and Anna was discharged to attend eye
clinic?diagnosis, purulent conjunctivitis.
I visited the home and found the O'Brien's living in a run
down neighborhood, in a dark, chilly house, that was in poor repair.
The mother was a stout, pleasant, even tempered woman and was
in good health at our first contact. She works as a janitress at the
Bell Telephone to supplement the irregular and inadequate wage of
her husband. He works as a plumber or laborer when he can. His
CLINICAL FIELD WORK 143
wife says he is very nervous, but she is not able to persuade him to
go to a doctor nor would it be possible for us to talk matters over
with him as Mrs. 0 'Brien says he would make it uncomfortable for
her if he knew strangers knew all about them. Mr. O'Brien has a
cousin who is a doctor, one Dr. James O'Brien, but it is alleged
that even if Mr. 0 'Brien were persuaded to go to him, Dr. 0 'Brien
would not treat him without charge.
There are five children in the O'Brien family: Joseph, born in
1920 and now in the third grade at Saint A's School; Mary, born
in 1921 and now in the second grade at the same school; and three
pre-school children, Thomas born in 1924, Gerald in 1925 and Anna
in 1926. The parents are aged?Joseph 38, Josephine 34 years.
As all the children were found to be pale and undernourished,
Well Clinics were urged, and in January, 1929, the children were in
Well Clinic. The usual recommendations concerning diet, tonsillectomy, dental treatment, Schick tests (with vaccinations for the
two youngest boys) were given. Mrs. O'Brien promised to bring
the children to carry out recommendations when she could.
However, she was able to bring Mary and Joseph to dental clinic
but once before she fell ill with the grippe. They did not come
again until the end of February. At that time Anna's eyes which
were being treated regularly in our eye clinic had seemed to clear
up. Mrs. O'Brien said that as soon as she was over the grippe she
would bring Anna in to eye clinic for a discharge examination.
Previously the worker had visited St. A.'s Church where the
family is connected, and Father Sullivan had promised to visit the
family and become acquainted with their needs. At the time we
visited and found Mrs. 0 'Brien ill with the grippe, she told us that
a visitor from St. A. 's had brought her a $5.00 store order, while a
sister of hers had sent a ton of coal.
On March 22 I visited the family again. Nobody had been
in Clinic in the interval. Mrs. O'Brien had recovered three weeks
ago from her illness. The grippe she had had on our last
visit had developed into pleurisy. Anna had been taken to the
home of her mother's married sister to be cared for. (The brotherin-law allowed his wife to do this much for her sister; he would not
however, let her give Mrs. O'Brien any financial aid.)
While Anna was with Mrs. O'Brien's sister she received very
good care except that her eye, which had become sore again, and
was treated by a private physician, did not seem to get well or even
improve. The reports of Anna's continued illness discouraged Mrs.
144 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
O'Brien very much. One day a Miss Jones who employs Mrs.
O'Brien's unmarried sister heard of the child. She placed the child
in a private room in another hospital where she has remained since.
The eye is now well, Mrs. O'Brien says, but they intend, at the
hospital, to keep the child indefinitely (she is to be vaccinated, etc).
As for Mr. O'Brien, the very week that his wife got sick, he
was employed for only four days a week and so since then. Mrs.
O'Brien says the Bell Telephone has been very good to her, and
now that she has returned to work she finds she is putting on weight
(due to the good food she gets there, she says). At the end of her
illness, Mrs. O'Brien owed a $60.00 store bill at the corner grocery.
She now owes but $5.00. Mr. O'Brien earns about $12.00 a week,
she earns about $16.00 and their rent is about $16.00 per month.
She says she will bring the two boys in clinic the week of March
29 if she has the carfare. She wants both boys to have their tonsils
out before the hot weather.
Thomas and Gerald were in Clinic May 2 and listed to have
their tonsils and adenoids removed. A phone call to Dr. James
O'Brien brought forth the following information.
Ten years ago he had tried to help the O 'Brien's by getting Mr.
O'Brien jobs from time to time. But Mr. O'Brien never kept
them. At that time there was nothing physically wrong with him,
but Dr. O 'Brien says he had and has thev mind of a mere child.
Dr. O 'Brien felt that he could do nothing for them. Mr. O 'Brien,
he thought, was burdening down a rather nice wife with his own
incompetency and a number of children. At present Dr. O'Brien
says St. A.'s Church is doing what they can to help. As for
himself, he decided years ago after many unsuccessful attempts to
help the family, to give it up. Dr. O'Brien gave the impression
however that his cooperation might be gained if, just if, an "infallible" scheme to help the family demanded it.
May 11?wrote to the hospital where Anna had been treated
for her medical history.
problem : viedical?centering around Anna, the other children
and the father
social?inadequate income, overworked mother, irresponsible father.
social plan : 1. to try to supplement the inadequate income
from some source.
2. to manage to get the father to Pennsylvania
Neuropsychiatric Clinic.
CLINICAL FIELD WORK 145
medical plan : 1. to keep in touch with Anna
2. to carry out Children's Well Clinic recommendations.
A SUMMARY OF SEVERAL YEARS' CONTACT WITH A
DIABETIC MOTHER
The Green family first became known to us in November, 1924,
when Francis was admitted to Medical Ward. The diagnosis was:
Abitis Media and Paratitis. She was discharged a few days later.
The family consists of George, the father, Emma, the mother, and
seven children, Cathrine, John, Rita, Joseph, Francis, Margaret and
Henry, all of whom attend St. M.'s school. The father is a bottle
washer at H.'s Dairy and earns $27.00 a week. The Greens live
in a neighborhood where housing conditions are poor, but the home
is clean, comfortable and orderly. The rent is $13.00 a month.
In 1925 Margaret and Joseph had had diptheria, and in consequence were referred to Heart Clinic. Francis, John and Joseph
had tonsils and adenoids removed in 1925. The family came to clinic
irregularly since it was only necessary for them to report to Heart
Clinic for observation from time to time. The case was closed to
Heart Clinic Follow up Department.
The Case was then reopened in November, 1927, when Margaret
was admitted to the Medical Ward. The diagnosis was pneumonia.
The family conditions were apparently the same as when the case
was closed in May, 1926, except that the mother seemed more cooperative and willing to bring the children to Well Clinic. She had
developed diabetes and had been going to a doctor for this trouble
until recently when she had stopped because of the heavy expense.
The social worker thus suggested that she go to a hospital. Mrs.
Green told the worker she would try to do this very soon. In the
meantime, Cathrine worked for $5.00 a week and the mother hulled
berries at a cent a box, at a cannery. This added to the income of
the family.
A visit to the family revealed the fact that Mrs. Green was
not giving the proper attention to her diabetes. Since Henry was
diagnosed as rachitic Mrs. Green had been very faithful in her
visits for his heliotherapy, but in her care of him had neglected
herself. Mrs. Green then managed to evade the worker until January, 1928, at which time her condition was so bad that she had to
go to the hospital and remain two weeks for treatment. The prog146 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
nosis at the time was good, providing Mrs. Green attended the clinic
regularly.
When Mrs. Green came home she had difficulty keeping the diet,
because the children wanted to eat her food. Besides this, the expense entailed in following the prescribed treatment troubled her.
"When the worker called to see about Well Clinic recommendations
she found Mrs. Green out. Mr. Green told the worker that she was
working part time at the canning factory. The next time the worker
called she found that Mrs. Green had been quite ill with a gangrenous condition of the left leg. The worker endeavored to make clear
to the father the necessity of Mrs. Green's sticking to her diet and
taking treatment. The worker explained that it was a matter of
life and death.
As a means of getting Mrs. Green to attend clinic regularly, the
hospital had arranged for her to get medicine at a reduced rate.
Rita, Margaret and Henry had their tonsils removed in March,
1929. Rita is having a great deal of trouble with her school work
because she cannot read. In a psychological examination her Intelligent quotient was 67.
On April 9 the Social Service Department of the hospital reported that Mrs. Green had not been to clinic for some time.
Analysis of this case shows that here we have a fairly good type
family living on a marginal economic basis. The neighborhood is
bad but the intimate home surroundings and atmosphere are superior
to the neighborhood. There is no kind of emotional instability to
contend with in this family. Both the father and mother seem to
be fairly intelligent. Mrs. Green is very much interested in her
children's welfare. She is suffering from a severe case of diabetes
and is neglecting herself in order to care for her family and household. The fact that she is too proud to accept outside financial aid
may be another reason for her negligence. Other than the mother,
there is no serious medical problem.
Rita, the third child, is twelve years of age and of very inferior
intellectual ability. Removing her from Parochial School is neither
practical nor desirable. Little can be done except to educate the
mother to the fact that Rita will never be able to make normal
school progress and will have to earn her living in some occupation
in which ability to do school work is not necessary. The problem
in this family centers around the mother.
