Jack Q.? A Clinic Study
========================

Madella Rigby, Recorder, Psychological Clinic, University of
Pennsylvania
It was in March, 1927 that Mrs. Q. first brought her son to the
Psychological Clinic for examination. Jack was eight then and in the
IB Grade at school. He had entered school at the age of six and
one-half years, and his record has been one of poor work and good
conduct. His teacher complains that he is inattentive but she
hastens to add that he causes no disturbance at all. He likes to go
to school but he seems to be immune to education in the classroom.
Exposure to it the second year brought on chorea. In short, Jack's
trouble is that he doesn't seem to retain anything he has been
taught, and consequently he does very poorly in reviews and is not
promoted. He is fast growing too large for First Grade. Some-
thing must be done. The question raised by his teacher is whether
individual instruction will do more for Jack than the classroom
method has done.
The study of Jack's case has been an interesting one among our
Clinic records. He has been examined three times with an interval
of one year between the first and second, and the second and third
appointments. Different examiners did the testing at each of
these sessions. He has been a case for diagnostic teaching under
two different student teachers,?the first time was just after his
first examination in 1927, and he is at present being taught two
hours a week in our Clinic. This study is a synthesis of the records.
Jack's family background and home environment seem to be
very good. His father is in the employ of the Pennsylvania Rail-
road, and, if we can judge from Jack's appearance, the family must
be in comfortable circumstances. Mrs. Q. is an intelligent woman,
energetic, and eager to follow our recommendations. She earnestly
desires to do all she can for this, her youngest son. Jack is one
of four siblings. The oldest is a boy of twenty-one who is a drafts-
man. The next child is a girl of nineteen who is a typist. The third
child died at seven months of age of diphtheria, leaving a wide
difference between the ages of Jack and his brother and sister. He
is a child living in a world of grown people and this seems to have
had its effect on him in making him very sober and quiet.
In his manner he seems to be quite a little man, in behaviour a
JACK Q.?A CLINIC STUDY 113
conformist, a child who is seen and not heard,?even his school
teacher has attested this. Jack comes and goes through the Clinic
neatly dressed, a clean little fellow wearing his glasses as we re-
commended. He is well built though not large, his frame is well
knit, and he walks with a normal gait. His straight brown hair
is brushed back from his freckled face and he has a well shaped
mouth and chin, but his teeth are somewhat uneven. He has a
most engaging way of closing his lips with an air of finality that is
emphasized in the way he draws in the corners of his mouth about
which dimples play and seem to mock his seriousness. He gives
you the impression that he is one of those with a capacity for
long, deep thoughts, but when he speaks his replies are often irrela-
vant and disappointing?to such a degree as to suggest that he
has not been thinking at all but has been in a sort of daze?miles
away. This day-dreaming is very hard to credit in the face of his
seriousness and perfect conformity of behaviour. He makes no
protest but submits manfully to teacher or examiner though he
sometimes looks scared to death and on the verge of tears when he
is pressed for an answer. The more he is urged the surer he seems
to be of his failure, with the result that he withdraws into his shell
and refuses to say anything at all. Sometimes he seems evasive
and introduces his own topics instead of attending to the matter of
the teaching. He is a charming conversationalist and doubtless
feels that he should provide his share of the entertainment. He helps
the teacher along by injecting little comments on the weather, or his
watch, or a new pair of shoes he is wearing. A delightful little
codger, indeed! But from the educator's point of view he is an
enigma. One teacher reports, "Sometimes when I tell something
to Jack (he listening very attentively apparently all the while) and
I ask him to repeat immediately after me, what I have said, he isn't
able to give me one word of what I have just told him. Once I had
him repeat a sentence three or four times. He said it perfectly
three times, and on the fourth repetition got stuck in the middle and
could not finish it."
He is very apprehensive. The presence of anyone besides his
teacher in the room is very upsetting to him. Signs of the chorea
are still noticeable in the twitch of his eyebrows and forehead. It
is quite amazing that in spite of the timidity excited by the teaching
periods, Jack can look as fresh after the lessons or after the long
siege of an examination as he did before. He does not show fatigue.
114 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
His rate of discharge is very slow, his responses are often long in
coming but this seems to be due to stage-fright, for it is more ap-
parent at the beginning of the testing than at the end.
The results of the three examinations in the Clinic in the last
three years are remarkable principally for their uniformity. On
the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon test, Jack, at the Chrono-
logical Age of 8-0 had an Intelligence Quotient of 85, a Basal Age of
5, a Mental Age of 6-10 with the Upper Limit 10. One year later,
with a Chronological Age of 9-1, he had an Intelligence Quotient of
83. At that time his Basal Age was 6, his Mental Age, 7-6, with
the Upper Limit 10. The next year, with a Chronological Age of
10-0 Jack had an Intelligence Quotient of 73, with a Basal Age of
6, a Mental Age of 7-4 and the Upper Limit 10. On the Memory
Span test for digits, Jack's score in 1927 was Visual 5, Auditory 5,
Reverse 2. In 1928 his score was, Visual 6, Auditory 6, Reverse 4,
occasionally only 3, but he was credited with 4. In 1929 he gave
a Visual Span of 6, and Auditory Span of 6 and a Reverse of 3
occasionally. In a like manner his trial time on performance tests
shows little variation. In 1927 on the Witmer Formboard his
scores were (1) 48", (2) 45". It was noted that he showed good
analytic descrimination but had difficulty with the two triangles.
His concentration was good. In 1928 his scores were (1) 32", (2)
54". It was remarked that his method was trial and error, his
motor discharge was slow, he used but one hand, he showed good
concentration of attention. In 1929 his scores were (1) 37", (2)
39". He used but one hand and seemed to confuse the forms, es-
pecially the triangles. On the Witmer Cylinder test he showed
greater improvement in the three years. In 1927 (1) Failure in
five minutes (2) 106". In 1928 (1) 235", (2) Failure in five
minutes. In 1929 (1) 277", (2) 74". His method in all these ex-
aminations was trial and error. The nature of his errors in 1927
strongly suggested some visual defect. He was therefore sent to
the Graduate Hospital for examination. The condition was hyper-
opia, glasses were prescribed and he has been wearing them ever
since. His third examination again showed errors that suggested
eye defect so he was sent again to the Hospital to have his glasses
readjusted. This has been done and Jack's progress with lessons
since he has been wearing his new glasses seems to have improved.
The uniformity of the results in the course of three years seems to
point to the fact that Jack has reached his limit of development in
JACK Q.?A CLINIC STUDY 115
many respects. The validity of the test results as a measure of school
competency is further borne out in the success or, to be exact, the
lack of it, which we have experienced in teaching this case in our
Clinic.
When Jack first reported for diagnostic teaching after one and
one-half years in the public school it was discovered that he had been
subjected to the word method of teaching reading. This had not
been very helpful to him. He did not know the alphabet. T, he
called The. B, he called By, and Y was Yes. He did know
M, 0, J, A, and H; and he was able to write digits from 1 to 10 on
the board. The first session of Clinic Teaching that Jack enjoyed
in 1927 was spent in trying to write and recognize the letters of the
alphabet. He came only four times when he developed chorea and
was taken from school altogether. In the one lesson that he had
wearing his newly acquired glasses, he showed definite improvement.
Jack's success with the letters in the course of four lessons was un-
certain. He came again for Clinic Teaching in the spring of 1929.
At this second term he seemed to have found himself in spelling.
He had more confidence in his ability to spell than in his ability to
do arithmetic. With gratitude Mrs. Q. writes to us, "He was talk-
ing to me about his work in school a few days ago and looked up at
me and said, 'Well Mother, it was the University that started me'."
This confidence, aside from the question of whether or not there is
occasion for it in his present success, is a great step forward for
Jack. After long drill he has learned to read now from the Third
Grade Reader. He is still very slow but he is at last able to recog-
nize words that he can spell and words that he learned in the 1st and
2nd Grades. He cannot, however, read to himself for meaning.
When this is tried the result is nil even though he is able to read
the passage aloud and tell its meaning in his own words. In the
course of the teaching Jack has come to recognize this fact and to
make use of it in helping himself. His memory seems to be greatly
aided also by the use of kinaesthetic imagery. He does all his les-
sons whether spelling or arithmetic, in a stage whisper before he
writes the answer.
The exceedingly slow discharge, both motor and mental, is an
outstanding characteristic of the case. Jack's work on performance
tests and Binet in the examinations shows a low degree of train-
ability, which is borne out in the very slow learning process. In
spite of the infinite repetition of stimuli in the kinaesthetic, auditory,
116 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
and visual fields, the certain progress has been very slow and very
small. His defective vision has been corrected by glasses, his vaca-
tions have been spent in improving his physical condition so that
very little trace of chorea is left. It would seem that this little
fellow at the age of ten has about reached his maximum capacity
and the conclusions must be that the boy is of poor material. The
attractive appearance of the child and his conformity of behaviour
make it possible for him to come and go before your eyes daily with-
out raising at once a suspicion of the elemental incapacity. His
apparent freshness and immunity from fatigue are just so because
he undergoes no strain during the teaching process. His alleged
concentration is but detachment from the world about him and his
rate of discharge augurs he will never catch up to the mad pace of
this living. The chorea is another proof of his weakness. His
sobriety that is interpreted by adults in terms of thoughtfulness is
merely inertia.
Every conceivable aid to the learning process has been used in
teaching Jack, and repetition has been the keynote. Nothing, how-
ever, seems to be able to surmount the obstacle of the slow, very slow
motor response and the low degree of comprehension. In arithmetic
Jack knows his Two, Three and Four Tables in sequence, but iso-
lated problems from these tables are subject to error. In paper
work he is very slow to start and rarely completes a problem with-
out some word of encouragement from the teacher. He knoivs the
process of addition, but his incomplete mastery of the fundamentals
keeps him from arriving at a successful solution of the relatively
involved problems. Jack's progress seems to be anything but uni-
form.
To find the cause of this condition is our next concern. A
summary of the early history of the case shows that he had a normal
birth. He walked at sixteen months, talked before he was two years
and was trained in habits of cleanness at the age of two. From
these records we judge that he was not a precocious baby, but neither
was he seriously retarded. Following his medical history in sketchy
detail we find that he had measles when he was one year old. When
he was three he fell from a " kiddy-kar" and was unconscious for
half an hour. At five years of age he had whooping cough and a
light case of scarlet fever. Pneumonia?a severe case?attacked
him when he was six. He had chicken pox the next year and an
acute case of chorea. He has been circumcised and his tonsils and
JACK Q.?A CLINIC STUDY 117
adenoids were removed when he was six. The array of diseases is
formidable to be sure. It must be confessed that the pneumonia is
the one of which we are most suspicious. The attendant fever of a
case of measles alone has been known to lead to sequeilae similar
to those of encephalitis. Jack, however, doesn't show the physical
nor the dispositional symptoms of this disease. The only suggestion
of the encephalitis that we find in this case, besides the dulled men-
tality, is the owlish way in which his eyes stare out from behind his
glasses, slightly suggesting the facies of Parkinsonism. For lack
of more positive evidence then, we can only bear these facts in mind
and accept Jack meanwhile as a healthy boy.
The next problem is that of disposal of the case. He has been
promoted now to the Third Grade in school with the help of the
teaching he has received in the Clinic. The teacher's question of
the best procedure for Jack,?individual instruction or classroom
method?has been answered by combining the two. The Clinic has
undertaken the individual coaching that is necessary to keep him
abreast of his class. The most that can be done for him in the long
run is to try to teach him to read, and to write, and to figure. He
must be kept up to his grade in school for a few years. It seems
fairly well established that Jack will have to earn his living with his
hands, and that at unskilled labor, for his trainability and rate of
motor discharge are both too low to raise him to the level of a skilled
workman. He is apparently not so good as any of the rest of his
family.
It is the unhappy truth that Jack, in being kept up to the formal
education of the school system is just another victim of the mistaken
truth upon which our democracy is founded.
Since the apprentice system of education has been discarded
and the democratic form of government has had its vogue the field
of education has not become adjusted to the changing times. Kevo-
lutions of social custom have been enacted, but education has been
remarkably tenacious to its old standards. Ever since the begin-
ning of our own nation, years and generations have been spent in
trying to fit everyone with the academic type of education. The
idea is all wrong. Citizens obsessed with the desire to take ad-
vantage of the opportunity offered in our public schools, are be-
ginning to learn to their sorrow that academic training is not like a
salve to be applied externally with wondrous results. It is only
recently that educators have begun the gigantic enterprise of fitting
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
each one with the sort of education he can best profit by. To date
it seems that they have achieved this much: They have begun to
appreciate the fact that academic training (i.e., in the formal classi-
cal studies) is wasted on certain types of minds. When a child
fails to learn by the methods arranged for large scale teaching, he
is brought to a psychologist and examined individually. Those cases
where the retardation is due to specific defect?like the deaf, the
blind, the lame or the incorrigible?have been provided for with
considerable competency by the public school systems throughout the
country. Even the undernourished and the physical weaklings are
attended to. But the great mass of children of middle-class families
who are undoubtedly normal (in the sense of being able to maintain
themselves without supervision in society) and yet who do not possess
the mentality to become academicians, who have no fondness for
learning, must by the laws of our fair democracy stay in school to
waste time, harrass the college-bred teacher, and grow in habits of
idleness, wherein they are unhappy and disorderly themselves, a
burden to their families and a reproach to the state. Only too few
of them are as passive and conformed as young Jack. Too many
of them with youthful vigor, chafe at the restraint that keeps them
in school. They grow daily in hatred of authority and disrespect of
learning. The great problem of training these children to care for
themselves physically, and guiding them gently to a better use of
their leisure time has on the whole been fairly well done so far by
the schools. The task of fitting them consciously for some occupa-
tion for which they possess the mental requirements and the
physique has scarcely even been started. Too much thought and
energy have been expended on the inferior and the superior mem-
hers of society in proportion to that given to the overwhelmingly
large group of normal, lower-middle class people. The uncomplain-
ing middle class struggle under school training in academic subjects,
wasting much of its youth from six to sixteen, when all its members
need to read?now that we have the talkies?is the newspaper and
the scandal sheet, and all the figuring required is the week's wages
and the butcher's bill. For a long time now it has been well nigh
impossible for him to receive adequate medical attention. The best
physicians and surgeons attend the poor in free clinics, have the
rich as patients in their private hospitals. It seems that in the
schools too he is being cheated. For after he spends ten years in
school he must then begin (by learning a trade) to fit himself for
economic competition.
