A Case of Non-Conformability
==============================

By Arthur Phillips, Clinic Teacher
The Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania
Howard, age eight years and six months, was brought to the
Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania on October
10, 1929, by his mother because of inattentiveness in school and
failure to make promotion. He was referred by the Principal of a
suburban school in the environs of Philadelphia. He was examined
in Dr. Witmer's Clinic. The diagnosis is normal mentality. He is
a case of simple retardation, infantilism and lack of emotional control
over attention. The prognosis is favorable. The recommendation is
diagnostic teaching, proper treatment of his eye defect and glandular
treatment for symptoms of dyspituitarism.
Howard is the oldest of two boys, both of whom have been ex-
amined in this Clinic. The family is of modal American type. There
is nothing significant in the medical history of the father or mother.
The mother, however, is of a nervous disposition and at present is
under the care of the family physician for nervous indigestion. How-
ard had a normal birth. He walked at fourteen months but fell
readily and frequently held his breath. He was diagnosed as a case
of rickets. With a change of diet, his general health improved
and has been good since that time. He talked at eighteen months but
he was tongue tied. He had an operation for this defect and also
had his tonsils removed. His eyes have been refracted and glasses
prescribed. Despite the heavy lens glasses he wears, he has a myopic
attitude toward his surroundings.
He entered first grade at the age of six and is now repeating
the second grade in a slow moving section. The Social Service De-
partment of the Clinic sent a visitor to the school. The report shows
that Howard ranked C in reading, music and drawing, D in arith-
metic. He had been tried last year under two teachers without suc-
cess. The Principal reported that Howard is not impressed with
authority and suggested that the boy showed lack of proper rest and
proper food. Sometimes he brought a half of a loaf of bread to
school. Often he appeared at school dirty, especially about the ears.
In the school he is in a class younger than himself. This suits How-
ard perfectly as he likes to associate with younger children. He
disobeys the directions of the teacher. In spelling when given a word
N ON-CONFORMABILITY 171
to write down he writes whatever comes into his mind instead of
attempting to spell the word. At the blackboard he shows the same
disrespect for authority. Instead of following directions, he scrawls
all over the board. The Social Service Department visitor observed
Howard in the school room. His conduct was non-conformed. When
told to sit down after a failure in reading, he slouched in his seat
with his back toward the desk and looked at the back of his book.
When the class was being prepared for dismissal and all were seated
properly, Howard was attracting the attention of a small girl be-
hind him by spinning his pencil on the floor. He read a list of words
the teacher had placed on the board correctly and a few minutes
later his attention had wandered so that when called upon to read
one of the words he was unable to do so. His whole conduct was
characterized by a lack of persistence of attention. He scores high
in distractability.
In the psychological examination in the Clinic, Howard obtained
a high rating for his comprehension-discernment span as tested by
the Humpstone digits. His audito-vocal span is seven and his re-
verse span, five; which locates him in the upper decile at the ten
year level. The range of his comprehension and the number of units
that he can discriminate at one moment of attention would indicate
good intellectual organization?superior to at least ninety per cent
?f boys in the fifth grade of Philadelphia public schools. His In-
telligence Quotient is 89. By the norms for boys in the fifth grade
of the public school this locates him in a group of ten per cent
superior to thirty per cent and inferior to seventy per cent?just a
trifle above the lower quintile. The contrast between his rating for
comprehension-discernment and his performance level as indicated
by his Binet-Simon Intelligence Quotient and his failure in school
achievement in the second grade is striking. The problem here is
to discover why the ratio between the intellectual quality and the
intellectual achievement of this boy is so small.
Howard's performance on the Witmer Formboard test, first trial,
correlated well with his basic Co-di-on. He displayed good motor
coordination. In the second trial his performance was not so good.
His effort to speed up interfered with his efficiency. On the third
trial he exhibited planfulness indicating good observation and the
ability to profit by experience. On the Witmer cylinders he failed
on the first trial. His approach was exclusively trial and error. He
Was exceptionally distractible and completed the test with the excep-
172 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tion of a finer point of analytical discrimination in 180 seconds.
However, as he made no attempt to correct his error, he was scored
failure. The second performance was qualitatively better and was
as good as that of the upper decile of six year olds. Qualitatively
he showed good trainability.
Howard entered the Clinic Teaching Department upon recom-
mendation of Dr. Witmer. He has received eight hours of individual
instruction. On the first day he made an excellent impression, was
very eager to learn and alert in taking advantage of instruction. He
was not distracted by another teaching case which was being con-
ducted in a large room, but went on with his work.
This picture changed. There were days on which he was atten-
tive and worked hard and had no difficulty with his lessons. On
other days he was inattentive and did not appear to care whether he
knew or whether he did not know. The errors he made were largely
errors that he could correct on demand. On these days he needed
a firm hand.
His proficiency in reading and arithmetic when he came to the
Clinic was a poor 2 B. He could read Bolenius' second reader, but
it was soon discovered that he was reading from memory as the book
was the same as he had in school last year. His knowledge' of phone-
tics, however, was sufficient for him to work out any difficult words
that he met. Under individual instruction he has been advanced to
3 A in arithmetic and reading and has proved to be competent to
go on with third grade work.
In his arithmetic work it was noted that frequently he wrote
numbers backwards. He would also reverse digits. In writing 81,
he would put down 8 and then put one to the left of it.
His speech also was infantile. He had difficulty with tli, g and c.
This slight mutilation is readily corrected. The instruction given in
one lesson proved sufficent. Further practice will soon eliminate
this defect in articulation.
In appearance he has been neat and clean, in disposition agree-
able. His teacher found him easy to work with. The only thing of
which she could complain was his fluctuating attention and his lack
of motivation on certain days.
A conference between the mother and the Clinic teacher brought
out the fact that at home Howard is a disciplinary problem. It
takes two or three commands to enforce obedience of a simple order.
The mother confessed that with her he "gets away" with a great
N ON-CONFORM ABILITY 173
deal. When his father is at home he is an entirely different boy. It
is our judgment that part of the difficulty with this boy is his lack
?f proper home training. He needs discipline. His conduct in the
school room is of one piece with his conduct at home. He is respect-
ful and obedient to his father, disobedient and disrespectful to his
mother. This disobedience and disrespect has been transferred to his
school teacher. He is inattentive because he has not learned to at-
tend.
Another factor in his retardation has been his eyesight. Correc-
tion was made only recently. Some survivals of the difficulty this
boy had in learning to read and to do arithmetic have been noted
and correctional work instituted. A reversal of letters and digits
is a case in point.
A third factor is his motivation for school work. This is very
variable as already noted. Howard likes to be the center of interest
and will resort to very childish means to obtain such a position. To
turn this desire for prominence in the right direction and to give
him the sense of achievement in something worth while is the next
step in his orthogenic development.
The conclusion of the Clinic Teaching Department is that How-
ard is a boy whose conformation or intellectual quality is much
higher than his conformability. He is not producing what reason-
ably could be expected of him. His proficiency rating is therefore
below the median for boys of his age. His motivation for school
work will not be improved but will rather suffer as a result of
his continuance in the second grade with tasks that constitute no real
challenge to his abilities. Neither will his behavior in school improve
unless he has real work to do. In discipline he needs firmness coupled
with encouragement. His emotionalized inattentiveness may be
changed to emotionalized attention when the boy is properly moti-
vated, actively challenged and firmly disciplined. Howard, finally,
is an illustration of a familiar situation?that good intellectual
quality without the factors of attention, intention and purpose will
not carry one as far as a more moderate congenital endowment plus
the emotional drive of interest and the will to learn.
