III. Mary
==========

By Eleanor Milgram and Arthur Phillips, Clinic Teacher,
University of Pennsylvania
Mary is no isolated phenomenon; there are hundreds of Marys,
thousands of them?we see them washing our clothes, scrubbing our
office buildings, working in any factory that we may chance to
enter. They run elevators, and wheel baby-carriages for busy
mothers. In short, they all are members of a large group of con-
scientious and willing workers, who can be satisfactorily trained to
Perform efficiently a simple manual operation?but who are too dull
to desire or to retain a position requiring a higher degree of in-
tellectual organization. As a group, we ignore them?as long as
these menial tasks are performed we are content to remain oblivious
?f the human machines behind. We do not seek to analyze the
Personality makeup of our laundress?we are interested only in
freshly ironed linen.
However, when a single member is selected from such a group
??she becomes a source of interest and speculation. What has led
her to such a vocation ? Who are her family and friends and how
does she spend her leisure? Does she resent the ignominy of her
Position?is this a stepping-stone to something higher?or is she
completely adjusted and happy with her life ?
I have recently had the opportunity of studying a young girl
who must occupy eventually such a niche in society. This work is
not being forced on her: she has had adequate educational oppor-
tunity, her physical condition is quite normal and she has no
specific mental defect. Why then is she doomed?
Mary's family live in a poor hamlet where the inhabitants are
?f native American stock but so out-of-touch with modern culture
as to be analogous to the mountaineers of Kentucky and Tennessee.
Her father is a weaver in a local mill and a barber during his
spare time; her mother is a loquacious woman upon whose nerves
and health the bearing of seven children has left its impression.
Mary, who is now fifteen years and four months, is the oldest of
the brood. Her appearance is not one that creates a positive im-
pression. She is neither pretty nor ugly, thin nor fat, light nor
dark. She is just an ordinary looking girl more closely allied to
childhood than to maturity. Her clothing is neat and her manners
very polite and conformed.
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Mary was brought to the clinic by a visiting nurse and her
mother because of retardation in school. The child's school history
is fantastic in this day of scientific education. Since her sixth
year, she has been a pupil in a parochial school in the community
where she lives. Now she is completing the first year of the com-
mercial high school course, but it may be significant to know that
Mary's proficiency in reading at the time of the preliminary ex-
amination was 4th Grade, in spelling?5th B, and in arithmetic?
3rd B, except for a total incapacity in division. In spite of her
inability to grasp the subject matter and her utter lack of com-
prehension of what was happening about her?she received no indi-
vidual coaching and has never repeated a single grade. When I
asked her to clarify the miracle of her presence in high school, she
explained naively that there is a deadly competition between the
two parochial schools in the neighborhood so that, as an inducement
to newcomers, the pupils in her school are always promoted, re-
gardless of merit.
Mary's medical record was insignificant, except for poor vision
which has been corrected by glasses. At the time of her first visit
to the clinic, she was diagnosed as a probable physical weakling due
to a defective circulatory system, evidenced by her cold, blue,
clammy hands and splotchy complexion. It was also suggested
that she was anemic and perhaps tubercular. It is obvious now,
however, that her condition at that time was unusual and may have
been due to a temporary indisposition caused by nervousness. I
have observed her carefully for the past three months and have
never noticed the symptoms displayed on the first examination.
Her hands have been warm and she says that her hands and feet are
warm as a rule and her complexion is generally free from all blem-
ishes. By recommendation of the clinical examiner here, Mary was
given a thorough medical examination which produced a negative
report except for bad tonsils. Tonsillectomy was advised.
At the time of her first examination, several months ago, Mary
was given the usual battery of tests. With the Witmer Form-
board, the first trial was 39 seconds?placing her in a group of
90 per cent superior to 1 per cent, and inferior to 90 per cent of
girls at the Ten-year Level. In this test, her form discrimination
was good, but her motor discharge slow.
In the Witmer Cylinder Test, her first score was 250 seconds
and her second 80 seconds, both putting her in a group inferior to
90 per cent of ten-year-old girls. This test was completed only
MARY 65
through a trial and error method. There was no comprehension of
the problem involved and no discrimination between the height and
width of the various cylinders. Although Mary was past fourteen
years at the time, her scores were compared with ten-year norms
instead of fifteen-year standards because, as I mentioned before,
her orientation is more like that of a young child. Her auditory
forward memory span was 7 and on three trials, 8?a score placing
her in a group of 10 per cent superior to 80 per cent and inferior
to 10 per cent; her visual span was 7 so that here she is in a group
of 40 per cent superior to 40 per cent and inferior to 20 per cent;
but in that which is most significant, the reverse memory span,
Mary can score only 3, marking her in a class of 20 per cent in-
ferior to 80 per cent. In the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon
Test, the girl's I.Q. was 60 with a basal age of 7 and a mental age
of 9. We are beginning to see then why Mary's career is so irrevo-
cably planned out before her.
It was recommended that Mary come for clinic teaching to
permit some estimate to be made of her educability and personality.
How much of her school failure was due to faulty teaching ? How
far could she progress up the intellectual ladder? How can she
earn a living? These were my problems.
I began with arithmetic because it was in this subject that
Mary was most retarded. I soon discovered that she could add,
with occasional errors, and was familiar with the principles of sub-
traction and multiplication in a vague and unreliable sort of way.
Division, however, meant practically nothing to her. She was en-
tirely at sea with the tables beyond the fifth and uncertain with
the others. This girl was being taught algebra and bookkeeping
at school.
We started at once with the tables and I explained the meaning
and significance of multiplication. I thought that if she were made
to understand the purpose and the method of the operation, the
results would be better than those achieved by a process of pure
memory. I soon learned, however, that numbers, beyond addition,
are meaningless symbols for Mary. She can't conceive of a definite
relationship existing among them. For instance, she would tell me
correctly that 6 X 8 = 48. Then in the next breath, she would
say that 9 X 8 = 32. An incorrect answer might be just the result
of lack of study?but an irrational answer where the product of
large numbers is made less than the product of small numbers
shows an inherent defect in thought and reason. Persistent errors
66 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
of this nature, where the source was not carlessness but a true lack
of comprehension, were at first very discouraging. My pupil was
more than eager to learn. She put forth all the effort of which
she was apparently capable, and her attention was persistently
concentrated on the problem of the moment. Nevertheless it be-
came evident after weeks of teaching that Mary would learn arith-
metic only as a parrot might learn it?sheerly through imitation
and drill and repetition. Every session began with a review of
the tables?she wrote them on the board, she recited them aloud, I
asked her combinations at random. The visual, auditory and kin-
aesthetic sense avenues were all utilized in an effort to impress the
numbers in Mary's mind. We even played games with forfeits for
the number of errors. Mary also studied the tables at home and
I suggested every possible method to her. It was only at the last
session, after about twenty hours of teaching, that she got her
tables entirely correct. This time she answered with a readiness
and facility that I hope will not be shaken from her. During this
time, I also taught Mary long division, addition, subtraction and
multiplication of fractions, reduction to lowest terms, and other
work that would bring her up to about 5B in arithmetic. How-
ever, Mary would not be able to retain her place in a 5B classroom
in a public school. She does not proceed in her work from any
inner conviction of logic or truth?it is purely mechanical action
that has been drilled into her. For this reason, even if she has
learned the form of procedure of a certain type of problem, she
is constantly making ridiculous and irrational errors. She can
complete an example correctly only under constant supervision
and suggestion.
I also spent considerable time in drilling Mary in problems of
computing price and change. Since she must inevitably handle
money in shopping and traveling and since she is very eager to
secure a position?I regarded this as a very important phase of
her training. Mary's computations are very slow and inaccurate.
If the problem requires any thought or several operations, she is
helpless until I analyse several similar examples.
After the first few lessons, I thought it would be beneficial to
break the monotony of the arithmetic with a little reading. I was
anxious to see whether the mental processes involved in reading
were any more efficient than her tools for arithmetic. I found
that in spite of the comparatively poorer showing that Mary made
in the first examination, she could read quite creditably from a
MARY 67
Sixth Year Reader and that she could spell the words in the 6B
school proficiency list. But, although the reading was mechanically
correct, the thought content made very little impression on the
girl. When we completed the reading of a story, she was unable
to give even the sketchiest resume. There were simply no ideas
present. I concluded this failure was due to lack of interest in
the material, since the reader was prepared for children of about
eleven, and even though Mary does not have the normal intellect
of a girl of fifteen, she is no longer interested in fairies and elves.
I decided therefore to abandon the reader and substitute a news-
paper. This in itself I felt would have a strong motivating influ-
ence since it would act as a symbol of normalcy and adulthood.
Each day Mary selected her own article (but sometimes with dis-
crete advice on my part) and read it aloud, a paragraph at a time.
I soon learned of Mary's astonishing limitation of vocabulary and
common knowledge. For instance, we once read an article that
was dispatched from a Canadian newspaper describing the dis-
covery of a coal mine and the stampede that followed. How could
such a paragraph have any meaning when Mary had 110 idea what
or where Canada is, whether a mine is under or above ground, or
why such a discovery should cause excitement? It mentioned that
the would-be miners used horses, rafts, or shoe leather to rush to
the scene. Mary knew what a horse and a raft were, but shoe
leather she considered meaningless and rather ridiculous. What
would they do with shoe leather? After coming to the clinic alone
for three months, the girl could not tell me in what city the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania was located, what a canoe was used for,
what a dungeon, a canal, or ivory was. Mary laughed bewilderedly
at a journalistic reference to man's descent from the anthropoid?
the man must be crazy. This was Mary's comment despite the
fact that she claims that she "reads" the Philadelphia newspapers
and "jokes" every day. Our progress in reading then was neces-
sarily slow. I had to explain the meaning of every other word and
most frequently repeat the context in elementary language before
a glimmer of light would dawn in Mary's eyes. Then after a few
moments, she generally confused the meanings of the new words.
I frequently talked with Mary on subjects foreign to arith-
metic and reading and was rewarded with many glimpses of her
home life and personality. Her father is a poorly paid laborer
and the whole community functions at a low economic level. In-
cidental to the opportunities for work, I learned that no one in
68 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
the locality keeps a maid and that there are only two stores. The
girl's mother is frequently ill and since Mary is the eldest?the
care of the household devolves upon her. If Mary's reports are
creditable, it seems that this is her forte. She often told me the
menu she was planning for the following meal and once discussed
the relative merits of two cuts of beef. I confess that here I was
stepping on uncertain ground. As final proof of her culinary
talent, she once brought "teacher" a large slice of layer cake?
I was very agreeably surprised when I ventured to taste it. Mary
is also interested in sewing, but has had no experience outside of
darning and sewing buttons.
Although she is still attending the parochial school three days
a week, she says that she gets absolutely nothing out of her attend-
ance and is very anxious to leave. It is no marvel that even she
realizes the futility of her present education?the curriculum for
her grade consists of shorthand and typewriting, history, and re-
ligion.
As a result of my teaching, I feel convinced that Mary's re-
tardation is due not to any specific defect that can be overcome by
experimentation and a change of method, but to an inherently in-
ferior intellectual equipment. Her mental endowment was very
meager and she has very nearly reached the outer limits of her
educability. Her original examiner made a diagnosis of Middle
Grade Imbecile (Barr Classification) on the intellectual scale. I
think my teaching has verified this estimate. However, in spite
of Mary's intellectual rating, she can function as a perfectly normal
member of society?if we regard normality by the standards of self-
support and marriageability. There is no doubt that this girl can
earn a living if she is actuated by the same motivation that urged
her to learn the tables. Mary can be easily trained to perform any
simple routine duty and her politeness, conformed manner, and
eagerness to please will be great assets in her search for work. Of
course, there are definite limits to the vocational field for which
she is eligible?she cannot handle money or figures, she cannot do
independent thinking or take the initiative in an emergency?but
there are many efficient housemaids and factory girls who have no
more ability than she. It is to be hoped that there will always be
someone able to give Mary a decent home environment. In that
case, there is no indication that the girl will be unhappy with her
lot. She is already seeking part-time light housework in a nearby
community for the summer.
