The Health of The School Child
=================================

Book Reviews & Abstracts.

Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the
Board of Education for the Year 1927. H.M.
Stationery Office. Price l/6d. net.

With the space we have at our disposal it is
not possible to touch on more than one or two
aspects of the School Medical Service, a Pub-
lic Health Service which has rapidly expanded
during recent years. This is the 20th Annual
Report of the Chief Medical Officer and gives
a full account of the progress and results
achieved in medical treatment, inspection, in-
vestigation and research, etc.

With regard to Medical Inspection, the Re-
port states that " provision for medical in-
spection, which forms the basis of all other
activities is reasonably complete." During the
year under review, an increase of 5% is shown
on the number of school children examined?
a proof of the recognition amongst School
Medical Officers of the necessity both for early
treatment of disease and subsequent after-care.

A notable advance during the year has been
the extension of the provision for orthopaedic
treatment. New schemes have been developed
in 28 areas. Schemes for treatment by artificial
light were also approved in 26 areas.

Several additional proposals are now under
the consideration of the Board for the provision
of Day Open Air Schools for delicate children,
now established by 42 education authorities.

The number of mentally defective children as-
certained during the year by Local Education
Authorities wTas 33,000. Provision is available
for approximately half of these children in Day
and Residential Schools. There have been few
fresh developments in this branch of the work
during the past year. Two new Day Special
Schools have been opened at Sunderland and
Leyton and a Residential School for girls at
Clapham. The Report draws attention to the
amendment of Section 2 (2) of the Mental
Deficiency Act, 1913, by the 1927 Act and the
re-drafting of the Board of Education Regula-
tions for the notification of children.

Attention is drawn to the need for the Pro-
vision of Treatment for nervous, unstable
and " difficult " children, a problem which
has received much attention in medical and
educational circles in the United States. Men-
tion is made of the Child Guidance Clinic in
London which is to be established by the Child
Guidance Council in 1929 with the full co-
operation of the London County Council.

Sir George Newman concludes his Report
with a plea to both professional and voluntary
workers " to keep to the broad, straight, high
road of Preventive Medicine," avoiding the
tendency to over-specialisation or the placing
of false constructions on the findings of
Science which may tempt the community to
take short cuts and easy ways which are not
likely to prove an answer to the questions
which must be faced.

Mongolism. A study of the physical and men-
tal characteristics of Mongolian Imbeciles.
By Dr. Kate Brousseau. Bailliere, Tindall &
Cox. London, pp. viii. 210. 8vo.

The Author, who is Professor of Psychol-
ogy in Mills College, California, and who has
been assisted by Dr. Bramerd, Professor of
Neurology and Psychiatry in the University
of Southern California, etc., has brought to-
gether in this book the available information
on Mongolian Imbecility from the literature
of the subject, from case reports in medical
literature, from personal observations and ex-
perience with mental defectives of all kinds,
extending over more than ten years, and from
replies to a questionnaire submitted to work-
ers in institutions and to physicians who have
made clinical observations on Mongols.

After an introductory chapter giving a re-
sume of the history of the subject and a general
idea of the nature of Mongolism, the frequency
of its occurrence and its geographical distribu-
tion, a chapter is devoted to the various theories
of its etiology. Then follow chapters in which
pathological and physical characters of Mon-
golian Imbeciles, their nervous and mental
characteristics are very fully and carefully
described, and diagnosis, prognosis and treat-
ment are succinctly but carefully dealt with.
These chapters are well documented and
there is a very complete Bibliography.

Altogether, for statistical purposes, over a
thousand recorded cases have been brought
under review. Wherever the subject under dis-
cussion is susceptible of statistical treatment,
tables and charts based upon 400 or 500 cases
or more are given which serve to set out the
facts in a clear, convincing manner, and
several questions which have been the matte^
of debate and uncertainty m the pas <^
be regarded as settled, especially in
theories of causation.

The book is adequately illustrated.
Inevitably, much that the author las o'
us has been told before but rai cl> >1 c ?
such fulness and detail.

The question of diagnosis from ^ ^ '
Achondroplasia and Rachitis is veiy X^-iriv
cussed and the distinguishing fcat^fcs c^. (
tabulated, but for the most part chagnobis ^
not a difficulty when familiarity has once b
obtained with the characteristic featuie
condition. Indeed it may almost be sa '
there is hardly any condition in me
which is so readily diagnosible 01 so ,,
distinguishable as this. The group beuv ?
clearly marked off it should, one would sU
pose, be relatively easy to ascertain e
about it.

In spite of this, the causation of ^ 9?"
dition, which has long been the subjec ,
search and debate, still remains an uns ?
problem. The authors, after the most ex-
haustive collection of the available ev
and a judicial review of the various e? ?
that have been advanced, come to the co
sion that the etiology and pathology o -
condition remains almost as obscure as 1 \ ?
when attention was first called to this pecu
condition; and this took place in 1866.
There is a group of data, however, \\hich is
of special interest and on which much s re" ^
is laid by the author, namely, the occurren
of Mongolism in twin births, whether m one
only or in each of the twins. 1 hirty-tv* o cas '
of the former condition are cited and ve
the latter. As the writer points out, i
condition of the mother during pregnancy
were the essential cause of the disorc er, y?
should find it difficult to explain those ca.

where we find Mongolism in one of twins .
deed, the occurrence of Mongolism in on? -
of twins makes it difficult to accept any e.. 7
of an acquired origin during intra-uterine
and strengthens the claims of a germu
origin, and the explanation of Mongolism
both twins is quite simple on the geimina
theory if a one-egg pregnancy is suppose ?
Halbertsma is cited as saying 41 It Jvou c,,
difficult to imagine any disorder of the mo
acquired during pregnancy and sumcient y
grave so as to produce the many characteristic
traits of Mongolism that would affect one twin
and leave the other perfectly normal." The
conclusion is that Mongolism is germinal in its
origin and the author is disposed to accept this
view as it is on this ground that she throws
doubt on disease of the maternal reproductive
organs, or under-nourishment or overwork of
the mother during pregnancy, as a possible
cause.

This doubt would equally apply to any en-
docrine derangement in the mother, and yet
the author seems more disposed to accept such
an explanation; for the only theory which she
does not reject is that Mongolian imbecility is
possibly induced by some obscure disturbance
of the ductless glands. Such a factor must be
either inherent in the germ or transmitted to
the child during pregnancy as the result pf
maternal endocrine disorders. But this latter
explanation is ruled out by the inference from
the facts about twins. We, therefore, are
drawn back to the theory of the defects being
inherent in the germ plasm. An examination
of the facts has convinced the author that Mon-
golian imbecility is not due to neuropathic
heredity, nor to extremes of age in one or both
parents, nor to the order of birth, nor to the
number of children in the family; and the only
remaining theory put forward which is com-
patible with a germinal origin is some form of
reversion to a primitive Mongol type. This
theory she rejects " since the resemblance to
the Chinese or Japanese race is mainly super-
ficial and since the condition is a pathological
one." Seeing the impasse into which we are
led, one is impelled, to look more closely into
these objections. On doing so one finds that
the statement that Mongolism is truly a path-
ological condition is laid down as axiomatic,
that is, without any discussion of what such
a statement means. It is further assumed with-
out argument that a condition which is path-
ological cannot also be atavistic. Why then,
one asks, is this group of defectives so distinct
from other defectives of germinal origin ? Is
it not because it is something more than path-
ological ?

Moreover, to state that the condition cannot
be a reversion to a primitive type since the re-
semblance to the present day Mongol races is
mainly superficial is to deal with the question
in far too summary a manner. That may be so
but it does not dispose of the question.

Once more one is faced by the problem.
Why do the members of this particular group
have the striking family resemblance to each
other such as is not found in the members of
other groups of defectives of congenital origin ?
Whatever may be the solution of this prob-
lem, we are much indebted to the author for
the way in which the facts have been mar-
shalled and discussed. Perhaps further en-
quiry into the frequencj' of occurrence of the
type in different countries and communities
and its geograpical distribution, may throw
more light upon the question; at any rate the
author gives no explanation of the admitted
differences in these respects. Why should
Mongolian imbeciles constitute 20 per cent, of
the deficient children in an institution in
Russia while De Sanctis in Italy has only seen
20 cases in seven years, and Vogt estimates
that only 1 per cent, of the mentally deficient
are Mongols?

In a record containing so many observations
gathered together from many sources it would
be surprising if there were not some which do
not correspond fully with the experience of
other workers in the field, and differences may
reasonably be expected in regard to the sig-
nificance or value that may be attached to
some of the facts adduced.

Thus the authors seem to have been rather
unfortunate in the small number of higher
grade Mongols that have come within their
notice and correspondingly it would seem that
they are ready to regard it as a proposition of
too general validity that no attempt should be
made to teach the ordinary school branches
such as reading, writing and arithmetic to
Mongol children of the higher grades. One
can point to older Mongols, the delight of
whose life is reading, even sometimes history,
and writing either imaginative matter or copy-
ing lists, etc., but who are ill-equipped for
physical labour or for work requiring manual
dexterity. It is indeed unusual that Mongols
learn to play simple tunes on the piano, but
instances of this are known and the capacity
for learning dancing is more common than is
suggested by the authors. Similarly, the
authors seem to stress too much the likelihood
of early death when they say that " with few
exceptions they die young, few reaching adult
age." It is possible to point to a group of 16
Mongols in one institution all over 21 years of
age, three of whom are between 40 and 50, two
between 50 and 60 and one man aged 63.

Be this as it may, we owe a debt of gratitude
to the authors, seeing that in regard to every
aspect of the matter they have given us in this
work a most valuable store of information,
lucidly set out and discussed in a judicial
spirit. To those interested in mental deficiency
as a whole as well as in this special variety of
defect it will prove an invaluable work of
reference.

R. Langdon Down.
The Relation of the Skull and Brain to
Crime. Henderson Trust Lecture. By W.
Norwood East, M.D., Lond., M.R.C.P.
Lond. Medical Inspector of Prisons, etc.
Oliver & Boyd. Gd. net.

It is somewhat curious at the present day to
meet with a set of lectures endowed for the
advancement of Phrenology. Dr. Norwood
East praises the industry of the pioneers of
this pseudo-science, but deplores their haste in
proclaiming a new dawn. He sketches the
effort to correlate conduct with cranial physiog-
nomy from Gall (1758 to 1828) who has been
described as the founder of criminal anthrop-
ology, to Lombroso, and summarises the essen-
tial evidence which led to its final ruin at the
hands of Goring and others in this country.

While showing every recognition of the
genius of Gall and of the germ of truth in his
phrenological system he draws the useful
moral that enthusiasm and haste can fall into
just as much error again, particularly amongst
the welter of uncertain psychological specula-
tion current in our time.

It is interesting to read of how different
schools of thought have, with varying success,
offered their contributions towards solving the
crime problem, how the anthropological inves-
tigations of Lombroso paved the way for the
more scientific work of Goring, and how we
can to-day profit by the mistakes of workers in
the past whose originality of thought and
powers of observation must always be admired.
This Lecture will be read with interest by
all concerned with this problem.

John J. Landers.
Children's Branch of The Home Office.
Fourth Report of, H.M. Stationery Office,
1928. Price 1/-
The first three Reports of the Children's
Branch of the Home Office were published in
consecutive years from 1923. As the
object of these Reports is to present a ge
survey of the problem of juvenile dehnque y,
it was thought better to issue them Pe"?mcf *
when changes and new developments ca
for it. The Reports of the Departmental on
mittee on Sexual Offences against \oung e
sons, together with legislative changcs brougn
about by the Criminal Justice Act, Adop 1
of Children Act, the Guardianship of lntants
Act and the Legitimacy Act, have made
period since 1925 one of important deveop
ments in the treatment of the young offender
and in the protection of young people.

In a general account of Juvenile Courts it
is shown that the satisfactory decrease m e
number of cases brought before the Courts con-
tinues. As the Report states, the statistics on
this point must be accepted with some rcser\ e
owing to the variations in the number of cases
in which proceedings arc taken, the activities
of the police, etc., but allowing for these yarV^~
tions, there has been a steady decrease in t e
last few years, even during a period of Vkl^lC~
spread unemployment. For 1927 the numbei
of children under 16 brought before Juvcm e
Courts for offences was 25,478, which is 1^,0
less than the number in the year before the
war. (During the war it reached the highes
figure in 1917.)

The passing of the Criminal Justice Act in
1925 has brought about extensive develop-
ments in the Probation System. The mam ob-
jects of the Act were to ensure that every
Court was provided with a Probation Officer,
to secure better organisation of probation work
in the country districts and to improve the
position of Probation Officers. Every petty
sessional division is now a probation area anc
one or more Probation Officers must be ap-
pointed for each probation area. The Act also
gave recognition to Treasury grants in aid o
the expenditure incurred by local authorities
in connection with the probation service.
Part III gives an interesting account of the
progress of Home Office Schools. With regarc
to the position of mentally defective and re-
tarded children in these Schools the Repoi
states that " pains are being taken through-
out the schools to try and ensure that full con-
sideration is given to the cases of all children
whose mental condition is seriously retarde
or who are feeble-minded, so that any action
considered desirable may be taken."

House School, near Norwich, now admits a
certain number of boys of doubtful mentality
?not those certifiably feeble-minded?with
the main object of deciding if they are in need
of care and control under the Mental Defic-
iency Acts.

Other Sections of the Report deal with Farm
Training, the Protection of Children and
Young Persons, the Adoption of Children and
International Work.

Full and interesting statistics are given at
the end of the Report of the types of cases
dealt with, subsequent histories, etc. Con-
tinuity between this and previous Reports is
maintained by the publication of statistics for
the intervening years.

The Problem Child at Home. By Mary Buell
Sayles. The Commonwealth Fund. New
York. 1928.

This book is the latest of the Commonwealth
Fund publications dealing with the work of
Child Guidance Clinics, and is a fitting com-
panion to " The Problem Child at School."
It is primarily intended for the use of
parents, for, as stated in the preface, it is
written with the object of drawing from the ex-
perience of parents and children seen at Child
Guidance Clinics, helpful suggestions for other
parents faced with the same problems. A
glance at the cases quoted?or even at the titles
under which they are grouped?will show only
too plainly how common arc the problems
dealt with, while a careful study of the detailed
records given in the last part of the book,
should be of great help to all who have the
day-to-day handling of nervous and sensitive
children.

The first chapters deal with the emotional
needs of the normal healthy child, and with
the parental ideals and mode of life, most likely
to satisfy the natural demands of the growing
personality. Few will be found to quarrel with
the writer's list of things essential for normal,
happy childhood?viz., security and love?
freedom and opportunity for growth?and a
sense of companionship with parents. Em-
phasis is laid on the need for conscious ideal-
ism on the part of the parents as to what they
desire for their children and a deliberate work-
ing towards that ideal.

The second part of the book deals with cer-
tain mistaken ideas which influence parent-
child relationships, such as wrong ideas on dis-
ciplinc, sex, heredity, etc. Cases are quoted
with special reference to each specific subject,
and help to bring home to the reader the power
of ideas prevailing in the family circle, in in-
fluencing the child. The same cases are often
quoted to illustrate different subjects but as
this entails isolating particular incidents or
family situations from the entire picture, the
effect is sometimes confusing, and apt to leave
one with a feeling of incompleteness.

Part III?which makes up more than half
of the entire book?consists of a detailed des-
cription, in narrative form, of twelve cases,
selected from among those studied at Child
Guidance Clinics, in various cities of the
United States. The problems they present,
however, are not confined to any one country,
and will be familiar to every social worker
among children. The method of approach and
the solutions found, however, will be new to
many and will repay careful study. The root
of a child's difficulties and delinquencies are
sought, not in the material conditions of his
home, but in his own or his parents' emotional
life. That such exploration can only be under-
taken with the greatest care and delicacy and
with the active co-operation of all concerned,
will be manifest, and it is impossible not to be
impressed by the sympathetic and understand-
ing way each individual family was handled.

The social workers must know their families
intimately and well before all the factors res-
ponsible for the child's maladjustment can be
gauged, and of different members of the family
must of necessity be a long and almost imper-
ceptible process. That it is worth all the work
and effort involved, none who read this book
will doubt and it should be extraordinarily
helpful, not only to parents but to social
workers.

The quotations at the beginning of each
chapter are exceedingly well chosen and apt?
in several instances they help to stimulate the
reader to just the right frame of mind to
appreciate the subject matter which follows.

At the end of the book a short list of books for
parents is given.
St. C. Townsend.
