News and Notes
===============

136 MENTAL WELFARE
Birmingham Special Schools After-Care Sub-Committee.
The Annual Report of this Sub-Committee always contains some very
interesting statistics as to the type of employment, wages earned, and subse-
quent history of the children who have left Special Schools.
The actual numbers of defectives employed in remunerative work are
higher for this year?both for the males and females?than have ever been
recorded previously. The number of men in work has risen from 1,108 to
1,183, and ^ number of women from 587 to 634. The result of an enquiry
into the type of employment in which defectives are engaged bears out the
statements made in previous Reports as to the large number and variety of
occupations followed by them. As one would expect in a centre of industry
such as Birmingham, the largest numbers are employed in engineering, mostly
in unskilled or automatic labour.
The special investigation into the family histories of former Special School
pupils who were known to have married, has been continued. The enquiries
made during the past year show that 633 children have been born into 346
families. Slightly upwards of 100 defectives have married and have no family.
It is too early to give an accurate diagnosis of the mentality of the children of
diese defectives, but of the 219 children over 5 years of age, 171 are known to
be attending ordinary elementary schools, while 10 are reported to be mentally
or physically defective.
Men's Club at Darlington.
A very successful experiment in the way of a club for older male defect-
ives who are either temporarily unemployed or totally incapable of employment
has been started recently at Darlington. The Association for Mental Welfare
in Darlington, which began work there last May, recognised the particular
need for such a club, especially for men between twenty and thirty years of age.
It was felt that it would be best to have it run by men and the local group of
Toe H. undertook the responsibility for carrying out such a scheme. The
Talbot Club was therefore opened on the same premises as used for the Day
Occupation Centre and there is now an attendance of 27 men.
The words " mental deficiency " have purposely never been used in con-
nection with the Club. Even the undoubted help that a public appeal would
bring in was forgone so as to avoid the possibility of the members of the Club
finding out that the membership of the Club placed them in the category of
" defectives." From the occupational side, it is thought that the future of the
Club depends largely on the development of woodwork. A group of members
consisting of totally incapable men and those who are working all day? go to
the Club merely for recreation.
MENTAL WELFARE
J3 7
Extension to Great Barr Colony.
The extension to the Great Barr Colony, which was undertaken by a
Joint Committee of the Walsall and West Bromwich Boards of Guardians, was
opened formally by the Chairman of the Board of Control last September.
The extension includes an Assembly Hall to seat 400, with a cinemato-
graph room; two homes for 50 children each; two homes for 41 adults each;
two homes for 48 patients each; a nurses' home to accommodate 45 nurses; two
observation homes; a lodge and a house for the clerk of the works.
London Association for Mental Welfare.
Some very interesting figures are given below, taken from the Annual
Report of the L.A.M.W. for 1928.
Analysis of 2,157 cases under Statutory Supervision on October 31st, 1928,
showing the estimated position with regard to capacity for training and
occupation.
Total M. F.
I. In work (all ages over 16) ... ... ... 640 330 310
II. Judged to be capable of training and occupation: ?
Under 18 years
(a) at Occupation Centres (under 16) ... 337 172 165
(b) at Classes for elder girls and young
women (over 16) ... ... ... 102 ? 102
(c) at Craft Centres (boys 16-18) ... ... 74 74 ?
(d) from a Home Teacher ... ... 158 88 70
Over 18 years
(e) at Classes for girls and young women 205 ? 205
(f) at Industrial Centres (men) ... ... 180 180 ?
(g) from a Home Teacher ... ... 32 11
21
1,088 525 563
III. Judged to be incapable of training and
occupation (too young, too old, too invalid,
too low grade or other disability):
Under 18 ... ... ... ... ... 183 93 90
Over 18   246 93 153
429 186 243
2,157 1,041 1,116
138 MENTAL WELFARE
Mental Welfare Clinic, Stoke-on-Trent.
In the Annual Report for 1928 of the School Medical Officer for Stoke-
on-Trent, a very interesting account is given of a Mental Welfare Clinic which
is one of the four school clinics in that area. The clinic is a combined one.
It deals both with the ascertainment of the defective children in the area, and
with the guidance of the " problem " or " difficult " child.
Dr. Robert Hughes gives a brief account of the aims of the Child Guidance
Council?of Child Guidance work in the United States and of the staff nec-
essary for the efficient working of such a clinic. With regard to his own
attempt to establish such a clinic in Stoke-on-Trent, he says, " In addition to
the fact that the time I have expended upon Child Guidance work has, strictly
speaking, been " stolen " time, the fact that I have also been obliged to do the
work of two distinct types of people?that of an educational psychologist as
well as that of a psychiatrist?constitutes another reason why any further
development of this work is impossible in existing circumstances; while for
such social work that has been carried out at all, I have been dependent upon
members of the school nursing staff who, in their turn, have many other duties
to perform." The suggestion is made that the amended scheme of elementary
education will convince Local Education Authorities of the necessity for the
appointment of educational psychologists and at least part-time psychiatrists.
There are now 93 difficult children on the live register of the Mental
Welfare Clinic. 17 of these were classed as " delinquents "?the remaining
76 have been classified under the general heading "temperamentally unstable."
Proposed Institute of Medical Psychology.
The National Council for Mental Hygiene has formed, with die Tavis-
tock Square Clinic (London) a Joint Committee for the establishment of an
Institute of Medical Psychology for the early and preventive treatment of
nervous breakdown and minor mental disorders in adults and children.
The Committee hopes to extend the present buildings at the Tavistock
Clinic to form the locus of the future Institute; to provide a Hostel where
patients of very limited means can stay during the period of their treatment;
to establish several small homes for maladjusted children and to provide annual
Fellowships and Studentships for medical men and women who wish to do
research or to train in psycho-therapy.
The estimated cost of establishing the whole scheme amounts to ^300,000
and an Appeal (in the form of a pamphlet setting out the aims of the Joint
Committee) has been launched to raise the necessary sum. A Hostel has
already been opened at 12, Endsleigh Street, W.C.i, and it is hoped it will
shortly accommodate 14 patients. This Hostel is only of a temporary nature
until further accommodation can be acquired. The Institute does not intend
to deal with definitely mentally defective cases but more with the treatment
of minor mental disorders.
MENTAL WELFARE i39
Letter in " Times " of July 22nd, 1929, on Mental Deficiency
" CURE and Prevention "
Readers will remember that in the last issue of Mental Welfare, we
reported a letter from the Officers of this Association urging that a Royal Com-
mission or other suitable body should be appointed to make a full enquiry into
the causation and prevention of mental deficiency.
This letter appeared in the Times of July 22nd under a somewhat mis-
leading heading which was no part of the original letter and was obviously due
to a printer's error which was unfortunately overlooked in proof reading.
Thus " CARE and Prevention," became " CURE and Prevention," and the
C.A.M.W. have received numerous enquiries as to what measures are proposed
for the " cure " of mental deficiency. We wish therefore to correct any mis-
understanding which the misprint may have caused.
National Council for Mental Hygiene Conference
As we go to Press we have received the full programme of the above Con-
ference, which is to be held at the Central Hall, Westminster, from October
30th to November 2nd. The Inaugural Meeting will take place on Wednes-
day, October 30th, at 8.30 p.m., with the Rt. Hon. Viscount Brentford in the
Chair and Sir Maurice Craig, the Rev. Canon Pym, Dr. Letitia Fairfield, Sir
Frederick Willis and Lt.-Col. Fremantle, as speakers. Dr. Crichton-Miller is
to speak at a meeting on Sex Education; Sir Humphrey Rolleston and Dr. H.
P. Newsholme on " The Place of Mental Hygiene in Social and Public Health
Work Dr. Hadfield and Judge Clarke Hall are to speak at a Session on
Delinquency. We have only been able to mention one or two out of a very
interesting list of speakers, but full particulars may be obtained from The
Secretary, National Council for Mental Hygiene, Chandos House, Palmer
Street, S.W.i.
National Special Schools Union Conference, Leeds, October, 1929
(Contributed)
The 13th Biennial Conference of the National Special Schools Union was
one of the most interesting and stimulating that has been held for many years.
The Committee were fortunate in securing an attractive list of speakers,
notably Dr. E. O. Lewis, the Medical Investigator to the Joint Committee.
The Chairmen at the three sessions were Mr. J. G. Legge, late Director of
Education for Liverpool, Dr. H. B. Brackenbury, Past President of the Assoc-
iation of Education Committees and Alderman Dr. Hawkyard, Chairman of
the Leeds Mental Deficiency Act Committee.
Dr. Lewis spoke on " The Medical and Psychological Aspects of the
Report." His chief points briefly summarised were as follows: The investiga-
tion was carried out chiefly in order to ascertain the magnitude of the admin-
140 MENTAL WELFARE
istrative problems which had to be considered. One of the first difficulties was
that of standards. The standard adopted was that generally applied by the
more progressive education authorities who had made most provision for men-
tally defective children. Most of the children who were classed as feeble-
minded had mental ratios between 50 and 70 per cent. It was calculated that
there were 105,000 children in this country who, according to the present
standards, required the special education given in Special Schools. The actual
number in Special Schools in 1928 was 16,750. This meant that fourteen years
after the passing of the Education Act of 1914, only 16 per cent, of the feeble-
minded children were receiving the educational provision they need. The
lower and higher grade defectives presented very different problems scientific-
ally, socially and educationally. Imbecility and idiocy were mainly of a path-
ological character and the problems they presented were chiefly of scientific
interest only. Feeble-mindedness was a social problem of the greatest import-
ance, which made it imperative that the Special School system should be
developed as completely as possible.
The second paper was read by Dr. James Graham, Director of Education
for Leeds, and dealt with the administrative problems involved in the Report.
He felt there were still uncertainty and vagueness as to the standards of
ascertainment and that the Report was not so definite and clear in some of its
recommendations as could be desired. He foresaw difficulties of organisation
and an increase in expenditure. He estimated that in Leeds, .?400,000 will be
required for the building programme in consequence of the raising of the
school age, apart altogether from the question of the provision required for the
new " retarded group." In the discussion that followed it was pointed out
that the allocation of children to the retarded group at 11 + would be part of
a general re-distribution at that age and would be carried out in the main by
the teachers and inspectors. The psychologist and the doctor would need to
be referred to only in cases of dispute.
At the second session a most important paper was contributed by Miss
Evelyn Fox on " The Development of Community Control of Defectives in
the Light of the Report and the Local Government Act of 1929." According
to the latest estimates there were about 240,000 defectives for whom institu-
tional care was urgently needed. Could we but only rely on the support of
public opinion we should be able to deal effectively and humanly with these
defectives who needed all the care and protection we could give them. The
experience in recent years of this and of other countries had shown that it was
possible to secure at the same time happiness for the individual and safety for
the race.
The fourth paper was contributed by Mr. A. Waite, L.C.C., Inspector of
Special Schools. He spoke in a personal capacity and in no way committed
the L.C.C. In a closely reasoned and forward-looking paper he made a strong
plea for that group of dull and retarded children who were just outside the pale
of the Special School, compelled to wander in an uncongenial world faced
MENTAL WELFARE
141
with tasks they could not perform and deprived of the special educational
facilities they so badly needed. The barrier had been the certificate which the
best scientific opinion and experience now regarded as a useless survival, an
arbitrary hindrance and not a definite line of demarcation.
At the third session, Mr. W. Popplestone, Director of Education, made
an eloquent appeal for children with Multiple Defects and Miss E. R. Donald,
Headmistress of Drumpark Special School, Lanarkshire, described what could
be done in Open Air Schools for Defective Children. This extremely interest-
ing paper was illustrated by lantern slides and dealt with the advantages of
Fresh Air and Sunlight, Diet, Rest and Medical Treatment, Shower Baths, etc.
Board of Control Circulars
Circular 722 to County and County Borough Councils, dealt with certain
aspects of the Local Government Act as it affects the administration of the
Mental Deficiency Acts, and the ways in which unity of control of defectives
could now be secured. The Circular dealt also with the provision in the Act,
Section 102 (2), " requiring the Minister to make a scheme providing for the
payment of contributions by Local Authorities to Voluntary Associations which
undertake the duty of assisting or supervising defectives whilst not in institu-
tions." The Board urged Local Authorities to complete their ascertainment
of defectives in their area.
Circular 723. This Circular is of such importance and affects the ques-
tion of Grants to Local Associations so closely that it was thought advisable to
print it in its entirety.
CIRCULAR TO COUNTY AND COUNTY BOROUGH COUNCILS
The Board of Control,
Caxton House West,
Tothill Street,
Westminster, S.W.I
September, 1929
Sir,
1. Local Government Act, 1929
2. Mental Deficiency Acts, 1913-1927.
3. Grants to Voluntary Associations Assisting or Supervising Defectives whilst
not in Institutions.
1. I am directed by the Board of Control to refer to the penultimate paragraph of
Circular 722, which relates to grants to Voluntary Associations under the Mental Deficiency
Acts as affected by the Local Government Act, 1929.
2. The discontinued grants referred to in Section 85 (1) and the Second Schedule of the
Act of 1929 include grants paid to the Associations by Local Authorities, which have ranked
for fifty per cent. Exchequer grant, and direct grants paid to the Associations by the Board.
These discontinued grants will be included in the total losses on account of grants for the
standard year which form part of the new General Exchequer Contribution.
142 MENTAL WELFARE
3. Section 102 (2) of the Act requires the Minister of Health, before the beginning of
each fixed grant period, after consultation with the County and County Borough Councils
concerned, or with the associations representing those Councils, to make a scheme for the
payment by those Councils to the Voluntary Associations of such amounts as may be specified
in the scheme.
4. A list (lnclosure A) is forwarded in duplicate containing the name of the Voluntary
Association (or Associations) in the area of the Local Authority (Council or Joint Authority)
to whom grants were paid by the Local Authority or the Board, or by both, up to the 31st
March, 1929, and also the amount of the grant paid by the Board in respect of the standard
year. The list contains a column for the amounts, if any, of the contributions paid by the
Local Authority to these Associations in respect of that year, and this column should be
completed and one copy of the list returned to the Board.
5. With a view to the preparation of the Minister's scheme, Local Authorities are re-
quested to confer at an early date with the Voluntary Associations in their areas and, after
considering schemes of work and estimates for the first fixed grant period, i.e., the three
years ending on the 31st March, 1933, to forward to the Board the information indicated in
lnclosure B which is sent herewith (in duplicate).
The Board are of opinion that, save in exceptional circumstances, the amount of the
annual contribution to be specified in the Minister's scheme should be not less than the total
of the sums received by the Association in respect of the standard year from the Local
Authority (or Authorities) and the Board respectively. Attention is also drawn to the follow-
ing matters : ?
(a) If the Voluntary Association works in the area of more than one Local Authority,
the Local Authorities concerned should confer jointly with the Association, and the amount
of the contribution proposed to be paid annually by each Local Authority should be stated
in lnclosure B.
(b) The Minister's scheme will include contributions to Associations which, with the
approval of the Board and the Local Authority concerned, have undertaken duties since the
31st March, 1929. Particulars in these cases should accordingly be supplied in lnclosure B.
(c) In the absence of exceptional circumstances, provision for payment of contributions
would not be included in the Minister's scheme in cases in which, during the standard year,
a contribution was paid to an Association by a Local Authority, but no direct grant was paid
to the Association by the Board. The omission of such provision from the scheme would not
affect the power of the Local Authority to pay an equal or increased contribution to the
Association during the fixed grant period. If, however, the Local Authority and the Associa-
tion agree in requesting that provision should be made in the scheme, this should be stated
when lnclosure B is forwarded to the Board.
6. On receipt of lnclosure B, the Board, after considering the proposals contained there-
in, will make a recommendation to the Minister as to the amount to be provided in the
scheme.
7. It is contemplated that if, at the request of a Local Authority, an Association under-
takes increased or additional duties during the fixed grant period beyond those allowed for
in lnclosure B, the Local Authority may make an increased contribution to the Association
without reference to the Board or the Minister. Similarly, if, with the approval of a Local
Authority, a new Association undertaking duties approved by the Local Authority is formed
during that period, and the Local Authority decides, in agreement with the Association, to
make a contribution in respect of those services, such contribution may be paid without
reference to the Board or the Minister, except that the Board should be notified of the name
of the Association, the nature of the duties undertaken, and the amount of the annual
contribution.
8. During the standard year a direct grant of ?2,000 was paid by the Board to the Central
Association for Mental Welfare. This discontinued grant will be included in the total losses
on account of grants referred to in paragraph 2 above as though it were part of the discon-
tinued grants paid to Local Authorities for the standard year, and will be apportioned in
accordance with Section 88 (1) of the Act in proportion to the population of each area for the
determination of the losses of Counties and County Boroughs on account of rates and grants.
The Minister's scheme for the first fixed grant period will include provision for payment by
Local Authorities of an annual contribution of ?2,000 to the Central Association, the amount
payable by each Authority being the amount so apportioned.
MENTAL WELFARE
J43
In view of the inconvenience and trouble which would be caused to Local Authorities and
the Central Association by the payment and receipt of the numerous small individual con-
tributions involved, it is hoped that each Local Authority will avail itself of the power
conferred by Section 106 of the Act to request the Minister to make direct payment to the
Central Association of the amount payable under the scheme.
9. It is desired that Inclosure A should be returned to the Board as soon as possible,
and Inclosure B not later than the 31st October next.
10. Copies of this Circular and enclosures are forwarded for the information of the Local
Authority's medical and financial officers.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
L. G. BROCK,
Chairman.
The Clerk to the County Council.
The Town Clerk.
The Clerk to the Committee for the Care of the Mentally Defective.
