Child Guidance
================

98 MENTAL WELFARE
By W. MOODIE, M.D., M.R.C.P., D.P.M.
The term " child guidance " is comparatively new to this country but
there is nothing fundamentally new in the conception for which it stands. As
a term it is by no means perfect, since, on the one hand, it fails to convey
adequately the range of its subject, while on the other, it gives rise to
misconceptions as to its nature and scope. In many countries, however, it has
come to be accepted as meaning in a general sense the sum total of the activ-
ities directed towards the Mental Hygiene of the young and, in particular, the
name is applied to a certain type of clinic which has been devised as a centre
for these activities.
Many authors in the past have made studies of Child Development and
the literature of all countries contains notable examples of this type of work.
It was not, however, till near the end of the nineteenth century, when so many
advances were being made, especially on the continent of Europe in regard to
the normal and abnormal workings of the mind, that the observations of these
older writers began to claim their just share of attention, and attempts were
made to interpret their findings in the light of modern research.
It thus came to be recognised that all behaviour, from the simplest actions
of the very young infant to the intricate and apparently irrational conduct of
the insane, had a meaning and that, given the necessary data, all conduct
could be traced back to its source and its causal factors explained. It was
further observed that in the individual, as life goes on, the relation between
cause and effect in conduct becomes progressively more obscure and so that
relation is much more obvious in the young child than in the adult.
As a natural result of these observations, the study of the child gained an
impetus which was greatly increased by the statement made by Clouston in
1906, that in almost every case of adult mental disorder the beginnings of the
illness were present and could have been recognised during the childhood of
the individual if we had the necessary skill and knowledge to do so.
During the years that followed, much was done by individual workers
both in this country and abroad, in the study of child behaviour and simul-
taneously great advances were made in the knowledge of psychology and its
application to education, sociology and other sciences.
Then came the war, during which, though all everyday social problems
were apparently dropped for the time being, scientific thought was by no
means idle, and in the years of reconstruction which have followed, the accum-
ulated knowledge has been co-ordinated and the present day " child guidance
clinic " has come into being. England has been somewhat backward in
following the lead so ably given by the United States and Germany, and not
MENTAL WELFARE
99
unnaturally so, since the principles involved in these other countries, though
most excellently adapted to their own special needs, require a certain mod-
ification for use in this country, that they may suit the prevailing social con-
ditions.
Every individual is the resultant of two components, the mental equip-
ment with which he was provided at birth, and the changes subsequently
wrought upon it by environmental forces. The child is no exception to this
rule, and any study of the child must necessarily include the consideration of
both these factors. The possible variations in the mental equipment of a child
are obviously very great, but the ramifications of his environment and the
manner in which he reacts to it are even greater, so that the study of the in-
dividual case at once becomes a laborious matter, entailing exploration of many
sources of information.
Further, the aim of child guidance is usually to correct some abnormality
of behaviour resulting from a maladjustment between the child and his en-
vironment and here again a wide field for activity is presented.
The Child Guidance Clinic as at present constituted has, in the majority
of instances, assumed a definite form.
As has already been pointed out, the study of the child involves himself
on the one hand, and his environment on the other, and each of these lines
of investigation presents two aspects.
We may study the intellectual equipment and the educational attain-
ments at any given time and we may observe their development over a period,
but besides the gradual evolution which they undergo, sudden changes may
occur in their observed values. These changes may be due to such intrinsic
factors as emotional disturbances or physical causes. The two aspects of this
study then, fall under the scope of the psychologist, who can estimate the value
?f the intellectual equipment, both innate and acquired, also frequently in-
dicating the presence of disturbing factors, and the psychiatrist, who works
out the specific nature of these factors, be they emotional or physical.
The two aspects of the environment are the home and the school. Between
the ages of five and fourteen the child spends the major part of his waking
hours in school and there he expends most of his intellectual energy and en-
counters most of his difficulties. He has also to adapt himself to a standard
environment. In the home, on the other hand, he leads his emotional life,
and there circumstances tend to some extent to be modified to suit his particular
wishes. It is not surprising that there is frequently a certain antagonism be-
tween the school and the home, especially when it is remembered that the
relative strength of these social institutions is tending to become reversed. Here-
tofore, the home has been a stronger influence than the school, but it is doubt-
ful how long this predominance will endure.
100 MENTAL WELFARE
The environment then, must be investigated by the psychologist, who
should be thoroughly conversant with educational methods, and also by one
specially skilled in obtaining information about the emotional life in the home.
The modern Child Guidance Clinic has been evolved so that each of these
separate departments in case investigation shall be handled by an expert. In
other words, the " team " method is employed.
The usual team consists of a Psychiatrist, a Psychologist and a trained
Social Worker.
The Psychiatrist is " chief " of the team. He is in full charge of the case
and the other members of the team work under his direction.
The name Psychiatrist is a hard one to define. In days gone by it merely
meant one who was experienced in the care of the insane, and the diagnosis
of their ailments.
Those days are past, and psychiatry now embraces a much wider field,
including the maintenance of mental health as well as the study of mental
disease, and between these two extremes all degrees of variation from normal.
It is coming more and more to be recognised that, although there is much to
be learned from the study of definite mental disorders, there is infinitely more
profit in the observation of those very minor variations from normal which
occur in all of us from time to time.
The direct contribution which the psychiatrist makes towards the work
of the team is a report on the physical and the mental constitution of the
patient.
Many behaviour anomalies are found, on investigation, to arise from
physical disease or illness. A slight degree of deafness, which is not evident
in ordinary life, may cause a child to appear stupid, or the poisons being ab-
sorbed from an unhealthy digestive system may render him irritable.
The physical examination of the child is an easy task compared to his
mental examination, which demands the greatest care coupled with the utmost
skill.
It is essential that investigation of the child mind be carried out without
his being aware of it. Just as soon as the attention of the patient is directed
towards his own mental working, an incalculable amount of harm has been
done him?perhaps an irremediable harm. The work must be carried out
rapidly because repeated interviews are very apt to make the child feel that
he is the centre of the picture, and this is by no means helpful, especially in
those cases, and they are many, where the conduct difficulty which we have
been asked to treat, arises out of a frustrated desire for attention.
It is quite possible for the skilled observer to obtain all the information
he requires from one or two informal conversations with the child?without
ever asking a leading question or making a suggestion. Time spent in gain-
ing the child's confidence is not wasted, and after that point has been reached,
MENTAL WELFARE 101
it is only necessary to keep the conversation running as naturally as possible.
To the Psychologist falls the task of carrying out such mental and per-
formance tests as will render it possible to make an estimate of the child's
intellectual endowments and requirements. This can be done in the case
of small children by observation of the use they make of standardised play
materials, and in older children by the use of the well-known tests of Binet
and Simon, or modifications of these.
Much used to be heard of the " I. Q.," or Intelligence Quotient, and many
people seemed to think that if a number were affixed to the child, showing
how much per cent, he was above or below normal, no more was required.
Luckily, times have changed and an Intelligence Test now means more than
this to us. The skilled psychologist can deduce much more than a quotient
from the actual way in which the child tackles the various parts of the test and
these deductions give invaluable pointers in the summing up of the case.
Special aptitudes and specific learning disabilities can be recognised, and
the presence of emotional blockings detected.
The psychologist can also assist by interpreting school reports and gain-
ing information as to the behaviour of the child in the school environment.
The function of the social worker is to investigate the home environment.
The inclusion of specially trained social workers is probably the greatest
advance which has been made in the constitution of the clinic team.
Many psychiatrists still retain a preference for carrying out their own in-
vestigations into the environment of their patients. There are no doubt many
valid arguments for so doing, but those who have experienced the value of the
co-operation of really skilled workers are unanimous in saying that they
derive the greatest possible help from them.
There is a not unnatural suspicion also, in the lay mind in this country,
in regard to the employment of social workers in the investigation of cases.
There is a feeling that these workers will force their way into the homes of
patients and pry into their private affairs. This is far from the truth, and in
fact the properly trained worker pursues her investigations in such a way that
no such situation is created. Besides being specially trained, she is chosen for
her tact and suitability for the work. She approaches the home in such a way
as to inspire confidence and instil the feeling that she is desirous of rendering
all the help she can. She becomes the trusted friend of the family and once
she has attained to this position she can observe at first hand the circumstances
obtaining in the home.
There is no doubt that she can render a much truer account of the home
environmental factors than a psychiatrist can ever obtain from the parents over
his consulting-room table.
Parents are frequently quite unconscious of the reasons behind many of
their attitudes towards their children. This is quite natural, since these atti-
102 MENTAL WELFARE
tudes are often the result of distorted recollections of the treatment which they
themselves as children received from their parents. It is unlikely, therefore,
that they will be capable, however willing they are, of giving a dispassionate
account of their own parental attitudes. The trained social worker can, how-
ever, observe in the home what actually happens?this the psychiatrist, at
least the clinic psychiatrist, can never do.
As will be seen later, the social worker is also a very valuable adjunct in
treatment.
As soon as the three members of the " team " have made their observa-
tions, the psychiatrist calls a conference of the team, and their individual reports
are read and considered.
As a general rule, the conference is not limited to members of the actual
team, but other workers in the clinic and any interested professional person?
the physician or teacher or social worker who referred the case, may be invited
to attend. In this way all available help is concentrated on the case, and it
is viewed from every angle and in the light of all obtainable evidence.
The psychiatrist acts as " chairman," and upon him falls the duty of
summing up and deciding future policy in regard to the case.
In addition to their immediate function, case conferences may be very
useful educationally. If necessary, the case may be disguised, the patient's
identity being rendered unrecognisable by the alteration of identifying data,
and the conference given before large batches of students. It need hardly be
said that no actual child is ever shown, even at a private conference of the
team?to do so would be contrary to all the principles of Child Guidance.
The team method as above described, appears at first sight to be somewhat
complicated, but in actual practice it is not found to be unnecessarily so. The
whole team, of course, only collaborate when a full study of the case is
required. When it is obvious that the report of one member will suffice, that
report only is taken, but the usual custom is to examine the reports on every
case, even if only a partial study has been made, at a Case Conference.
When a case is under treatment, further conferences are held from time
to time as occasion arises, to report progress and regulate further treatment.
Treatment consists, as a rule, in modifying the environment rather than
in any attempt to influence directly the child's conduct by psychotherapy,
though the latter method must occasionally be employed in the case of older
children.
It should be clearly understood that no attempt is made to modify the
environment in such a way as to pander to the whims of the child patient.
Rather does one seek to produce only such modifications as will give him
situations of average difficulty to contend with and, especially, to provide him
with opportunities for developing any special aptitudes with which he may
be endowed. It is of supreme importance to foster and not to frustrate tend-
MENTAL WELFARE 103
cncies such as self-restraint and a feeling of personal responsibility, without
which no child can ever become a good citizen.
In this work of environmental modification, the psychologist and the
social worker each take a part. The psychologist, being in touch with the
educational situation, can discuss with the teacher the encouragement of special
aptitudes by alterations in the curriculum, or by giving extra facilities for
physical exercise. The social worker, in virtue of her standing in the home*
can suggest the adoption there of attitudes suitable to the special needs of the
case.
She can, moreover, observe the results of her suggestions, and modify
them as need may be.
The types of cases dealt with in a Child Guidance Clinic are many and
varied. As a rule the patients are of school age, but many clinics deal also
with pre-school children and adolescents.
The problems presented fall, broadly, into two groups. Firstly, there are
the problem children?those whose behaviour is in some respects obviously
abnormal, and secondly, there are those who, though their behaviour abnorm-
ality is not apparent in the ordinary way, are causing anxiety to their parents
or teachers by reason of some almost concealed nervousness, timidity, or what
not, which, it is feared, may be only a slight indication of some deeply hidden
emotional imbalance.
In actual practice it is found, as might be expected, that parents' attitudes
determine, much more than anything else, what the effect of the environment
will be, and those occupied in the work of Child Guidance are coming to see,
more and more, that parental education, given at the proper time and con-
ducted on proper lines, would go a long way in eradicating the problem child.
With the object of supplying this very necessary type of instruction, ante-
natal and mothercraft centres exist in connection with many Child Guidance
Clinics abroad, and are found to fill a very valuable role in the field of Mental
Hygiene.
The results obtained in Child Guidance Clinics where the intensive
" team method " is employed, have hitherto been very satisfactory. It has been
found that though the time and labour expended appear at first sight to be ex-
cessive, this expenditure is more than warranted by the increased efficiency
obtained.
There is no doubt that these Clinics, with their allied activities, will soon
be considered a necessary part of the Public Health organisation, and that, if
adequately staffed with trained workers, they will well justify their existence.
