The Organisation of Classes for Retarded
===========================================

Paper to be read on Friday afternoon, 26th April.

:Author: K. L. Marsden,

Inspectress, City of Nottingham Education Committee.
The Chief Medical Officer of the Board of Education in his
Annual Report published in 1927 makes the following statement: ?
" In my report last year, I discussed somewhat fully both the prin-
ciples and methods of dealing with children who are mentally retarded
or feeble-minded. It was shown that for practical purposes they fall
into three groups:?(a) those who are dull (mental impairment) or
backward (their normal development hindered by untoward circum-
stances); (b) the mentally defective who are in some measure educable;
and (c) the mentally defective who are ineducable or anti-social. The
changes in the educational outlook in regard to these three groups were
reviewed, and it was, I hope, made clear that the old hard and fast
lines of definition and treatment could not wisely be maintained, and
that in fact we must look to new ways of helping these children to the
forms of industry and citizenship of which they are capable. It is
obvious that these groups are not " water-tight." They overlap in
differentiation and treatment. Group (a) seems to need special consid-
eration in association with the ordinary education of the normal child;
group (b) needs special school treatment; and group (c) custodial care
and control under favourable conditions. All of them, whatever be
the primary provision made, need careful after-care and supervision,
it is true to say that very much the larger group is that of the Dull and
Backward, who constitute not less than 10 per cent, of all the children
of school age, as compared with about 1 per cent, of mentally defective
children. Further, it seems clear that the Dull and Backward group
provides one of our great social problems. It is from this group that
we get most of our neuropathies, delinquents, unemployables and
criminals. To reduce the group, or train it, is to turn off the tap of the
supply of incapable and non-contributory citizens."
Later the report discusses the formation of special classes as a
method of dealing with these children.

We are told that in one area the organisers of the classes began
by asking themselves three questions: ?
i. Where is the retarded child in its ordinary class, and what is
it doing?
-? What could it be doing if other methods of education were
tried ?
3- What changes are needed in educational methods to meet such
children ?
After enumerating some of the experiments which are being
carried out in various parts of the country, the report concludes by
saying:

"All these test and trial inquiries and the subsequent experiments
ln practical teaching methods are of great importance and it is hoped
will be copied in many other areas. They not only have an immediately
practical benefit to the children themselves, but they lead us to new
rnethods of ascertainment and differentiation of retarded and deficient
children of the highest value."

In this connection I am going to tell you how we are trying to
nacet the needs of the Dull and Backward children in Nottingham?
and first of all something of the history of the growth of the work.
In 1921 we realised that there was something very faulty in the
Cleans by which the Mentally Defective child was detected, for the
Special Schools were not full, and there were many mentally defective
children in the ordinary Elementary Schools.

In that year there were 8 special classes in the city, with approx-
imately 240 children on the rolls and three schools for Mentally
^etective children, with approximately 180 on the rolls; at the present
k tC ^ere are 34 sPecial classes with approximately 1,028 children on
e r?hs, while in the schools for Mentally Defective children there are
32o on the rolls, and the probability of a waiting list in the near future.
In 1922, as the result of many conferences between the various
officials of the Local Education Authority, a scheme was adopted by
the Education Committee by which every child on reaching 7 years
?r age is given a simple mental test, in order to classify him according
to his mental rather than his chronological age. Consequently, there
should be no child in the standards who has not had this preliminary
examination.

Class A. Normal or above.
Class B. Sub-normal.
Class C. Possible mental defectives.
Here are some of the statistics relating to the results of the testing
at 7 years of age : ?

No. of children No. of children classified
tested ABC

T925 3?5? ?593 358 99
T926 4443 3856 457 13?
1927 5256 4681 438 137

The names of all children placed in Classes B and C are sent to
the Senior Medical Officer as well as to the Inspector who is in charge
of the organisation of the classes. These children are tested in greater
detail by a specially trained assistant from the Medical Department
and on this second report the Senior Medical Officer decides whether
the child is suitable for a special class, and whether further examina-
tion for physical or mental weakness is necessary. In the latter case,
after a detailed report from the Head Teacher of the school at which
the child is in attendance, a very exhaustive physical or mental exam-
ination is made by the Senior Medical Officer, and the child is trans-
ferred to an Open-Air Recovery School or to a Special Class for a
period of probation if this is considered advisable, or direct to a Special
School for Mentally Defective children.

A child who through extreme nervousness, backwardness or ill-
health has failed to make any progress in a class of 60 children of
approximately the same age as himself, in many cases becomes a new
creature in a small special class in which the children are taught in-
dividually or in groups.

There is no fixed time for transferring children to and from there
classes, for at any date in the term a new admission may be found to
be backward or a child who has been excluded for illness may return
in a nervous condition. If these children are put into a normal class
of 50 or 60, for unfortunately classes of this size still exist, they may be
utterly lost. The work of the class is in no wise interfered with by these
transfers in and out of the class as all the work is conducted on indiv-
idual and group lines. The new entrant does not feel to be behind
hand, for his work is not constantly compared with that of others; he is
encouraged, not to do better than others, but to do his best. When a
child is considered to be ready for transfer to a normal class again, the
Inspector is notified and the child is examined and transferred as soon
as possible. It is found to be of little use to remove a child from the
Dull and Backward Class until he can read a Std. I or Std. II book
fairly easily. Marked improvement may result in some cases in trans-
ferment from the Special Class to the class to which the child should
belong by age, in other cases the child's mental age may be a year
below the average and he is then transferred to the class for which he
is best suited. From the Junior Dull and Backward Classes children
are usually transferred to Stds. I or II and occasionally to Std. III.
If the class is composed of children who come from outside schools
there are difficulties of transit to be met. Arrangements are made to
place each child at the nearest suitable school to his home, and if
necessary car fares are paid by the Local Authority. At the present
time the schools at which it is possible to form these Special Classes
are those in which the number on the roll is less than the accommoda-
tion of the school, as only in those buildings is it possible to give up a
large room for 30 children. In these circumstances some of the child-
ren have to come distances which can only be covered by car; this of
course is a very undesirable state of affairs. I hope we shall not feel satis-
hed until every large department has its Special Class in its own building.
That the number of " retarded " children is far in excess of the number
for which any provision has been made we know, and until these
children are taught as they should be, we are not only wasting their
yery limited mental power, but also the ability of the children who,
classified with them, could, if separated from them, progress at a
greater rate.

The special classes, which in Nottingham are called Practical
Masses, must not be confused with the Special Schools for mentally
defective children. The classes for Dull and Backward children are
as much a part of the school to which they belong as any other class in
that school. Some of these classes are attached to Infants' Schools, some
to Mixed Departments, and others to Boys' and Girls' Departments,
rhe classes, which are attended by children between 7 and 10 years of
age in the case of girls, and between 7 and 9 years of age in the case of
boys, are attached to Infants' Schools or Junior Departments.

It is advisable that the older girls and boys should attend a class
which is part of a Senior Department. In the playground they mix
with others of their own age, and in school work they can, if necessary
and desirable, be grouped with other classes for such subjects as sing-
ing, needlework and drawing. The other children can be taught to
look upon them as members of a small class not in any sense as being
members of a " silly " class, which is a term that is often attached to
children who attend a Special School. The attitude of the rest of the
school towards these children depends, as you will all realise, upon
the attitude of the staff towards it.

The parents of the children who are recommended to attend these
classes often object, on the ground that the class is for defectives. These
objections are overcome by explaining that the class is in an ordinary
elementary school, but that it is half the size of the other classes?about
30 on register?in order to give children who are backward in any
way much more individual help. A visit by the parent to the class sets
her mind (for it is usually the mother who calls about these matters)
completely at rest.

If the class is attached to a Senior Department, there is nothing
derogatory to an older child in being put into it. It is advisable that
the class should rank with the middle or Senior School Stds. IV or
Lower V, rather than with the Junior Department, as it will be com-
posed of children of 10 years of age and upwards.

The classes may be formed in two ways. They may be composed
entirely of children who are in attendance at the school at which the
class is held, or they may be composed largely of children who have
been in attendance at other schools in the neighbourhood.

In addition to the testing and examining which is taking place
throughout the year, an annual examination of all the children in the
practical classes is made by the Senior Medical Officer during June
and July, before the annual promotions take place, so that the children
who are to be transferred, may after the summer holidays, go to
normal classes, senior practical classes or special schools, as the case
may be.

It has been possible to arrange classes in neighbouring schools so
as to ensure the gradual promotion of the pupils as they grow older.
In one area there are 9 classes: ?
3 for pupils of from ... ... 7? 9 years.
1 for Junior Boys ... ... 8?10
1 for Junior Girls
2 for Inter. Girls
1 for Inter, and Senior Boys
1 for Senior Girls

The Classes are in Infants' Departments, Mixed Departments and
Senior Girls' and Boys' Departments, according to the age of the pupils
attending them.

A special report form asking for information is filled in by the
Head Teacher of the School at which the Dull and Backward pupil
is in attendance, and sent to the Head Teacher of the School in which
8?10
10?12
10?14
12?14
the practical class is held, and to which the pupil is transferred. This
information is of great value to the Head Teacher.
Twice a year a return which gives details of the testing is sent in
to the Office.

By using all these means the Dull and Backward pupil is dis-
covered at an early age, and placed as far as possible in a suitable class,
and kept under closer observation than would be possible had he
remained in a normal class containing 50 to 60 children.
A record of each child is kept from the time he is admitted to the
class. Particulars are forwarded on the special Report Form drawn
up for the purpose. This Form gives as accurately as possible the
number of attendances the child has made up to the time of his
admission to the Special Class, the number of schools he has been in,
and his mental and physical characteristics. The detailed progress
which the child makes in each subject, together with records of physical
and moral development, are also entered. Marked ability in any
direction is encouraged. At the present time a boy of 12 who will
probably remain in a Special Class until he leaves school is attending
the School of Art two afternoons a week, and not long ago one very
gifted boy attended the School of Art every afternoon.
The number of children who return to normal classes varies, it
may be about 10 per cent.; in some areas the percentage is much lower
than in others.

During 3 years. Example I.
In one Junior Class.
5 children have been transferred to normal classes.
27 ? ? ? ? ? Senior Practical Classes.
6 ? 5j ff ? ? Special Schools for Mental
Defectives.

During 1 year. Example 2.
In three classes, Junior, Intermediate and Senior Girls.
12 children have been transferred to normal classes.
20 ? ? ? ? ? Senior Practical Classes.
8 ? }) J5 ? Special Schools for Mental
Defectives.

2 ? )5 ^ i9 ? Open-Air Recovery Schools.
A child may be as short a time as three months in a Practical
Class, or he may remain in one until he leaves school. The following
are records of the time spent in some of these classes by different types
?f children,
No. of Time in
children Class
School A i 5 years 3 years absent through ringworm on
scalp. During the whole period
made 365 attendances.
1 ?>lA years A very dull boy.
1 3 years A very dull boy.
2 2l/2 years One, a very intelligent boy, but found
it most difficult to learn to read.
- 8 2 years
4 iy2 years
4 1 year
3 6 months
School B 7 1 year
12 2 years
2 2 y-2 years

It has been found that the children are much happier in these
classes than in those which are composed of children of their own
physical age, but whose mental attainments are normal. In these
classes children of from 7-10 years of age work together, thus avoiding
the necessity of placing them with children of their mental age who
may have reached their 6th or 7th year only. In a slum school this is
an important factor, as these backward children are often developed
in advance of their years in other directions.

By organising classes of this type the children associate with others
of their own age in a way in which it would be impossible for them to
do had they remained in a normal class. With skilful teaching they
are also able to get a longer time among senior scholars than they
would otherwise have done.

Previous to the formation of these classes it was not an unknown
occurrence for children in the slum districts to leave school never
having reached the 3rd standard, and being quite unable to read or
write with any facility. The work of these classes is in an experimental
stage. Specially trained teachers are required for them as much as
for work in the recognised Schools for Defectives.

The classes are helping to deal more satisfactorily with these
retarded children, but the problem will remain a large and difficult
one until it has been brought to bear upon the half-million children of
this type to which the Medical Officer of the Board of Education refers
in his report.
