Mental Deficiency
==================

:Type: Book Reviews CS2 Abstracts.
:Author: A. F. Tredgold,
M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.S.(EcL). London.
1929. Bailliere, Tindall, and Cox. Pp. xvi
and 535. Price, 25s. net.

This book was originally published in
1908, so that with the present, fifth edition, it
attains its majority. Much work has been
done, during these twenty-one years, on the
subject of mental deficiency, in this and other
countries. Since the publication of the fourth
edition, two notable events have occurred;
there has been the enactment of the amended
Mental Deficiency Act, 1927, and the publica-
tion of the results of Dr. E. O. Lewis's in-
vestigation. It is, therefore, not surprising
to learn that the book has been almost re-
written.

The book makes a three-fold appeal. To the
specialist in mental deficiency, whether he
works in an institution, or in some other pos-
ition under a local authority, " Tredgold "
has long been the standard book; and it has
fully deserved this position, whether from the
point of view of its precise definition, its
scholarly tone, or the wealth of its clinical des-
criptions. Similar remarks apply in the case
of the young graduate who is reading for a
diploma in psychological medicine; the present
edition will provide him with all that he re-
quires under the heading of mental deficiency.
The general practitioner meets, not infre-
quently, with cases of suspected mental de-
ficiency among his patients. He needs a guide
to the diagnosis of that condition, and the
advice which he should give when he has diag-
nosed it; he may be called upon to assist in the
certification of such a case. When he turns
to the present volume, he will not do so in
vain.

But the book has a third, a wider, a social
appeal. The whole question of mental defic-
iency is being much canvassed. The complex
problems which it presents are daily becoming
better recognized. The grievous lack of accom-
modation for defectives is pressing upon local
authorities, and even the urgent clamour for
economy is silenced in the presence of so real
a need. The situation is more serious than
was thought even a year ago. For Dr. E. O.
Lewis, in the investigation undertaken on be-
half of the Joint Mental Deficiency Committee,
has estimated the proportion of defectives in
this country as, at least, 8 per 1,000, an estim-
ate almost twice as large as that suggested by
the Royal Commission twenty years prev-
iously. Dr. Lewis's finding, as it becomes
better known, must occasion much searching
of heart and the question at once arises as to
whether the estimate indicates a real, or an
apparent increase in the incidence of mental
deficiency. Dr. Tredgold, who regards the
higher estimate as being on the conservative
side, believes that there has been a real in-
crease, and that the figures cannot be explain-
ed merely by increased accuracy in ascertain-
ment, or by more prolonged longevity among
defectives.

This being accepted, the question of treat-
ment becomes urgent. Dr. Tredgold advances
excellent reasons for regarding mental defici-
ency as, in the main, an inherited condition.
Prevention of propagation among known de-
fectives holds the first place in any ameliora-
tive measures. Some prominence has recently
been given to a demand for sterilization. Dr.
Tredgold, in common with most authorities,
rejects this plan, holding that its adoption
would, ultimately, be productive of more
harm than good; and he maintains that segre-
gation is the true remedy. The direct cost of
this will be large; but the expense will be more
than saved in the diminution of the present
heavy indirect burden which the defective
class occasions to the community. When we
look at the photograph, given in the book, of
some twenty mentally defective "girl guides,"
most of whom appear to be physically attract-
ive, we see the dangers to which such girls,
with their lessened inhibitory powers, would
be exposed were they allowed to be at large.
There is another, and a most important con-
sideration. It is true that a mentally defective
mother may produce normal children. But
she has to manage those children; and the
physical and mental damage which may be
caused to children by such a mother is simply
appalling.

The class of " dull and backward " child-
ren receives consideration. In large towns
such children are provided for, with fair ade-
quacy, by the institution of Special Schools.
But in rural districts these children present a
problem which has not, as yet, been solved.
Many readers will turn with interest to the
able discussion of the moral defective, that be-
ing the term now applied to our old friend the
' moral imbecile." It is, of course, well
known that Dr. Tredgold believes in the ex-
istence of this much controverted condition,
but he considers it to be relatively rare.

On one somewhat important point we ven-
ture to differ from Dr. Tredgold, and that is
as regards the number of criminal aments. He
believes that the proportion of criminals who
are mental defectives lies between 10 and 20
Per cent. Most workers in this particular
field would regard this estimate as decidedly
too high. Dr. Tredgold considers that the ex-
tension of scientific facilities for the psycho-
logical investigation of offenders would be
attended by a decrease in the number of crim-
inals and the amount of crime. We fear that
such extension would have but little effect,
unless it were accompanied by the provision
?f rational methods of dealing with offenders
after the investigation.

A much needed warning is given against
placing undue reliance upon a patient's " in-
telligence quotient." The description of
Healy's pictorial completion test (p. 402)
Would be improved if it were stated that the
subject, in making his selection for the purpose
?f filling the spaces, has the choice of forty
different objects and ten blank blocks. The
selection, by defectives, of the blank blocks is
?ften most illuminating.

M. Hamblin Smith.
Children's Behaviour and Teachers' Atti-
tudes. By E. K. Wickman (Institute for
Child Guidance, New York City). New
York. The Commonwealth Fund Division
of Publications.

The three previous publications of the Com-
monwealth Fund have directed our attention
to the individual child presenting difficulty in
the school and at home. In this experimental
study an attempt is made to answer the ques-
tion, " What constitutes a behaviour prob-
lem? " Xhe focus is shifted from the child
himself to the adults interpreting his be-
haviour.

The original purpose of the writer was to
discover the incidence of behaviour deviations
among school children, and to relate the prob-
ems of the children to their intellectual and
educational characteristics. As the study pro-
gressed, however, " it seemed that the atti-
tudes of teachers were fundamental to any
study of the behaviour disorders of their
pupils." Whereas in physical and mental dis-
orders interpretation only affects treatment;
" attitudes towards behaviour are an integral
part of behaviour disorders." A " problem "
in terms of behaviour is held to represent, not
a certain kind of conduct on the part of an in-
dividual, but a relationship in which this par-
ticular conduct is inconsistent with the pur-
poses of the group : it is, in fact, " the mal-
adjustment between the child and those who
seek to regularise his behaviour." Taking our
own illustration from a traditional example we
may suppose, on this contention, that the
young Spartan who did not steal effectively,
was to be regarded as a " problem child " in
a community where physical courage was
given a higher value than honesty.

In order to discover what disparity, if any,
exists between the response of the average
adult towards the behaviour of children, and
the considered estimate of those who are con-
cerned with his social adjustment, a compar-
ison is made, by means of questionnaire, be-
tween teachers' evaluation of behaviour diffi-
culties, and that of professional clinical
workers. The results show a striking contrast
which appears consistently over a representa-
tive number of schools in different commun-
ities. To the teacher the problem child is in
the main identified as one who is antagonistic
to those in authority, violating their standards
of social relationships, obstructing the process
of teaching, and generally frustrating the easy
expression of the grown-up person's desires.
On the other hand, to the Clinician, consider-
ing the healthy development of personality,
symptoms indicative of social isolation, re-
cessiveness and dependency are the more om-
inous. The teacher, concerned mainly, appar-
ently, with the orderliness of his class room,
if he does not overlook them entirely, rates
the symptoms of shyness, sensitiveness, de-
pendence and unhappiness relatively low in
his scale of importance.

If, with the author, we take the teacher as
representative of the average adult in a pos-
ition of authority over the child, responding
emotionally and the Clinician as representative
of the response of intelligence, then the im-
plications of these results are impressive
enough. They are developed by the author in
a striking, if somewhat over-simplified way.
In a schematic presentation of behaviour prob-
lems represented as " evasions of social re-
quirements," the individual is pictured as
faced with certain demands made upon him
by the various biological and social groups to
which he belongs. Two main methods of
evasion are open to him : the method of attack
and the method of withdrawal. Obviously, as
the writer points out, the types of evasion are
not mutually exclusive, but in the process of
experiential development the child " learns
to respond characteristically " in one of these
two ways. Attacking methods are evidenced
in children by temper tantrums, disobedience,
rejection of routine and delinquency; the
method of withdrawal, by fearfulness, shy-
ness, dependency on routine, and so forth.
While the first kind of evasion may develop
into " constructive attacks," from which the
stuff for exploration, industrial exploits and
political reform may be developed, from these
ranks also are drawn adults with " psycho-
pathic tendencies," obstructionists and crim-
inals. The withdrawing child is pictured, on
the other hand, as the potentially creative
worker who by means of regressive escapes
frequently develops into the neurotic, depend-
ent, or functionally insane.

The main thesis of the book is contained in
the corollary. If the .results of the experi-
ment are reliable, then in our responses to
children we are constantly demonstrating the
truth of the challenging statement, " Unto
him that hath shall be given, and from him
that hath not shall be taken away even that
which he hath." To the grown person the
withdrawing type of child is not disturbing;
his dependency is flattering, and is therefore
nurtured. Resistance, however, is frustrating
to our purposes and undermines our self-
respect; it is therefore met on its own level
with retaliation and the mode of response
becomes strengthened and stereotyped.

The author's deductions and interpretations
carry more weight than that somewhat ingen-
uous method questionnaire and written answer
justify, however refined is the technique em-
ployed. The value of the study lies in the en-
richment of the material from the wealth of
his own experience of human beings in general
and of teachers in particular. This is illus-
trated by his cautious handling of the sug-
gested programme for " Re-education in
Attitudes," where he acknowledges that " it
is at least as difficult a task to restrain the dis-
ciplinary behaviour of adults as it is to modify
children's conduct." Ideas cannot be effect-
ive in action until they have been assimilated
into the emotional life of the individual. The
young teacher should not only be given oppor-
tunities of working side by side with those
who are considering the behaviour of children
from the point of view of their mental health,
but should find help available for the solution
of their own personal difficulties in and
through the study of their pupils. In the
author's view the time has come for psychiatry
to invade the school through the medium of
the visiting teacher, the school psychologist,
and the physician.

Recent plays and books have been curiously
insistent in jogging our ideas on the subject
of schools. Extreme and even fantastic as
some of these pictures of school life are, their
very presence amongst us indicates a certain
consciousness of unfulfilled purposes. Since
this study was directed particularly to the
attitudes of teachers the reader is left a little
unsatisfied by the simplicity of the solution
offered. Can we solve the relationship between
pupil and child by any process of study,
though it were directed in such a skilful way
as to become " integrated into the emotional
life of the individual ? " It has been written :
" The teacher is he who, passing through the
scholastic Valley of Mara, makes it a well."*
It seems probable that much of the conflict
and unhealthiness in the relationship between
teacher and pupil is due to lack of real capacity
for the art of teaching, and that the psychia-
trist and psychologist might in their function
of vocational advisers be even more effective
than as educators.

S. Clement Brown.
*Ed\vard Yeomans. " Shackled Youth."
The Nursery Years. By Susan Isaacs, M.A.
Routledge Introductions to Modern Know-
ledge. No. 1. 6d. net.

This book deals with the mental develop-
ment of the child from birth until the age of
five years. In the first chapter the author
says, " We have begun by raising some of the
everyday practical problems of the everyday
parent and as far as the limits of space allow,
we shall try to answer them." This is the key
to the whole book.

It supplies a very real need of modern
mothers who have broken away from the trad-
ition that knowledge of training a child, men-
tally and physically, comes instinctively and
automatically with its birth, and who wish to
study the growth of the child mind with in-
telligence. It gives very clear and helpful ex-
planations of many problems that often perplex
the mothers of young children. Nursery years
are those when the foundations of a child's
character are laid, and wrong handling at this
stage may affect adversely his whole life; we
Welcome therefore this little book, a study of
which will save mothers many an anxious hour
and will throw light on many phases of child-
ren's mental development that are difficult to
understand by simple observation. Wise coun-
sel is contained in every one of the " Don'ts
for Parents "to be found at the end of the
book.

M. E. S.
Aptitude Testing. By Clark L. Hull. Lon-
don. Harrap & Co. 1929. 8/6.

The non-mathematician who is concerned
with the devising and use of psychological
tests will undoubtedly find this book of very
great value. Such a worker is almost certain
to be acquainted with the elements of statistic-
al theory and except for some very brief pre-
liminaries this book contains nothing that is
to be found in standard texts such as Yule's
Introduction. But much space (almost the
whole of Part II and Chapters V and VI in
"art I) is devoted to the application of statis-
tical methods to the problems of devising,
measuring and interpreting psychological
tests. This discussion cannot be too highly
Praised.

The matter is presented with such abund-
ance of simple examples and appropriate dia-
grams that much that has hitherto been in the
Province of the expert is now made accessible
to the novice or amateur.

Part II entitled " Methods " is devoted to
^ most complete account of everything that
he investigator must do from the moment of
deciding to apply a test to the time of finally
assifying the tested. Little of this is original
)^ork : everyone nowadays is familiar with the
S1* steps of test-battery construction "?
occupation analysis, choice of a preliminary
battery, testing this, choice of a criterion, com-
parison of test results with the criterion, and
weighting of the competent tests?but it is a
great advantage to have a detailed treatment
of all these steps set out in one place and pres-
ented with the clarity and thoroughness that
distinguishes Professor Hull's writing. More-
over, the matter is treated from a strictly
practical standpoint, what one may call the
" economics " of testing are gone into, almost
for the first time. The value of a test is judged
not on its intrinsic merit but on the relation of
its efficiency to its " real cost." The efficiency
of a test is its " forecasting value," the real
cost is the aggregate of such things as time and
trouble to the investigator, expense and del-
icacy of apparatus, and the degree of skill
required of the examiner. The cost of a test
is obviously greatly increased if only an expert
can give it.

The weighing up of all these factors is by
no means an easy task but Professor Hull
shows by many ingenious examples how much
help the appropriate use of statistics can give.
This insistence on the usefulness of statistics
as a means of solving methodological problems
is a most valuable feature of the book. The
statistical weapon is relatively new and few
people are aware of its range and its potency.
The only objection that could be brought
against Professor Hull here is that he does not
sufficiently warn the inexperienced of its deli-
cacy. Statistical manipulations take the in-
vestigator further and further from his actual
experimental results and the problem of inter-
pretation becomes more and more hazardous.
Those who do not understand the underlying
mathematical assumptions should still be chary
of undue elaboration of this technique.
The remainder of the book sets out to give
an account of the " fundamental issue involv-
ed in aptitude testing " but this part of the
book has less merit than the methodological
chapters. It consists of one chapter of theoret-
ical considerations and four introductory sur-
veys which suggest the compensations text
book. Most of these, though interesting in
themselves, will be over-familiar to the readers
of the statistical chapters. The central theory
is dealt with in Chapter VI " the basic con-
stitution of Aptitudes and Tests." Here again
much is introductory. Professor Spearman's
two-factor theory is restated before we meet
the author's own hypothesis?" a strict group
factor theory of aptitude determination." This
is somewhat obscurely presented and to it there
are a number of theoretical objections which
he ignores. Consequently, certain other parts
of the book which are based on it cannot be
taken as established (e.g., the normal distribu-
tion of trait differences, Chapter II; the guid-
ing principles in the final composition of test
batteries, Chapter VIII).

One survey that is of interest is the account
of the experimental examination of " anatom-
ical and other signs of aptitude." This in-
cludes indices, such as blood pressure, urine
composition and glandular secretion but atten-
tion is also given to claims made by phrenolo-
gists, graphologists, handreaders, and the like.
As might be expected, the conclusions arrived
at by such " sympathetic magic " are shown
to be groundless, though some investigation
shows the possibility of a connection between
certain physionomic traits and character.
But here, as elsewhere, uncertainty is in-
creased by absence of definition. The most
serious defect in the book is the failure to
define " aptitude " and the tendency to apply
it at one time to the person, at another to his
performance. The sophisticated reader will
find it slightly ingenuous to accept at their
face value such terms as " scholastic success,"
" refinement," " beauty," " vulgarity." He
will also, perhaps, refuse to agree that the
genius of Plato is shown by the fact that in
1918 the American Army adopted one of his
ideas ! But the merits of the book far outweigh
the defects that carping criticism can point
out. Not the least of these is Professor Hull's
enviable gift of exposition which gives his
work a lucidity rarely found in psychological
writings.

P. Holman.
The Child's Conception of the World. By
Jean Piaget, D.Sc. Kegan Paul, Trench,
Trubner & Co., Ltd. 1929. 12/6 net.

This volume, the third of Piaget's four
books on the mental life of the child, is the
result of an investigation into the ideas of
children, concerning the origin and nature of
the physical world and of thought, dreams and
the attributes of consciousness in general. Most
of the children studied are between the ages
of four and twelve years and the author has
elicited many interesting and, indeed, sur-
prising theories from them.

The first section of the book deals with the
child as a realist. The young child does not
distinguish between what is subjective and
what is objective and fails to comprehend the
internal nature of thought. Until the age of
about eleven, thinking is believed to occur
" with the mouth " or the ears and thought
is identified with voice. Thought is also con-
fused with the object of thought and is there-
fore both with the thinker and in the object.
One can touch thought if one thinks of real
things. In the same manner, names emanate
from and are fundamental parts of the things
they signify. Similar beliefs are also held with
regard to dreams.

The fact that the child does not make any
clear distinction between the self and the ex-
ternal world leads to a number of spontaneous
beliefs concerning participation between
thought and the object of thought, etc., and
results in various symbolic actions and mag-
ical practices designed to bring about or ward
off desired or undesired events. Many inter-
esting examples have been collected by the
author.

In the second section, the child's animistic
beliefs are discussed. He believes that man is
all-powerful and starts with the idea of uni-
versal consciousness as a primary assumption
which serves to explain the obedience of the
physical world. There is a widespread and
spontaneous belief that the sun and moon
follow us when we move and natural forces
are looked upon as big children who are good
or " naughty " according to their activities.
The child is, however, not completely anthrop-
omorphic, but endows natural objects with
only that degree of consciousness requisite for
carrying out their particular duties. For in-
stance, the sun would not feel a prick, but it
is aware of its own existence and knows that
it is moving.

The third section deals with artificialism,
i.e., the child's belief that natural objects are
created by human activity. In the early years,
when this belief is seen in its most complete
form, we find that the sun has been lit by a
match, the sky is made by men from " big
slabs of stone," night is made of black clouds
and the river beds were dug out by men. It is
interesting to note how explanations given to
the child are distorted by their fusion with
previous artificialist beliefs. Thus a child who
has been told the true nature of clouds, main-
tains that they are made of smoke from the
chimneys, and that they go down to the sea
and take up water, being aware of what they
are doing.

The child believes the universe to be gov-
erned by moral and social rather than by
physical laws and attributes to natural forces
" a moral nature rather than a psychology."
The sun, wind, rain, etc., regulate their activ-
ities so as to produce the greatest benefit for
man and are compelled thereto either by the
will of man or by their own sense of duty.
Piaget points out that the proportion of magic
and animism in the child's scheme of things
depends upon his egocentricity. Absolute
egocentricity implies participation and magic,
since the child considers the sun's movements
to depend entirely upon his own, whereas
animism results when the child considers the
sun to be voluntarily obedient, but as having
an independent existence and power of resist-
ing his will.

The author is fully aware of the numerous
difficulties and pitfalls attendant upon this in-
vestigation. He has taken considerable trouble
to avoid perseveration, questions containing
any suggestion of the answer expected and
those which provoke random replies. We are
glad to note that he insists on at least a year's
training in this technique before one can
assume any degree of validity for one's find-
ings. He is at pains to prevent an appearance
?f over-systematisation and, on the whole,
succeeds, though the four phases of artificial-
ism which he describes seem somewhat arbit-
rary and over-elaborated.

In spite of a certain amount of unnecessary
repetition, the book makes very interesting
reading and should prove of value to teachers,
Parents and others intimately associated with
children. Some may, however, be surprised
and pained to find how easily the teachings of
the adult can be mutilated beyond recognition,
how bizarre are the ultimate forms in which
they obtain acceptance and with what tenacity
the child maintains his own philosophy of life.
R. E. Lucas.
