Mental Deficiency under the Local Government Bill, 1928
========================================================

By S. WORMALD,
Executive Officer, Leeds Mental Deficiency Acts Committee.
No legislation considered by Parliament since the passing of the Education
Act, 1902, when the functions of School Boards were transferred to County and
County Borough Councils, has created more widespread interest than t e oca
Government Bill, 1928. In fact, for a generation there has been no Measure belore
Parliament which has raised so many fundamental issues in the system and pro-
cedure of local government. A Bill which contains proposals for the relief ot
industry and agriculture under a scheme of de-ratmg, abolishes Poor Law
Guardians, transfers their powers and duties to County and County Borough
Councils, and re-casts the financial relations between national and local taxation,
may be well described as omnibus legislation, and is a challenge to the tradition,
custom, and vested interest of local government. It is the application of the
principles of the Bill to sound and progressive methods of local government, and
to the financial burdens being equitably arranged between the State and the
County and County Borough Authorities, which will enable it to pass the judg-
ment bar of public opinion. The Bill is complicated and weighted by ^financial
and statistical tables and formulse which supply only the roughest estimates of
2 MENTAL WELFARE.
the incidence of State contributions to local expenditure. Local Authorities have
naturally been tempted to view it with suspicion, and as a device to relieve the
Treasury at their expense, especially with regard to the proposed method of paying
grants for health services.
If passed into Law, the Bill will have an important effect on the administra-
tion of mental deficiency in England and Wales. The Mental Deficiency Act,
1913, while creating a new authority for mental deficiency left existing Authorities
in statu quo. The proposed repeal of Section 30 proviso (ii.) of the 1913 Act,
removes the embargo on Local Authorities dealing with defectives who for the
time being are under the Poor Law, and is consequential on the passing of Clause
1 of the Bill transferring on the appointed day?namely, 1st April, 1930?the
functions of Poor Law Authorities to County and County Borough Councils.
Clause 3 also provides that the Councils shall within six months after the com-
mencement of the Act submit to the Minister a scheme of the administrative
arrangements proposed to be made for discharging the functions of the defunct
Poor Law Authorities, and Clause 4 further enacts that such administrative
Scheme may declare that any assistance which could be provided, may be provided
either by way of poor relief, or exclusively by virtue of appropriate Acts (specify-
ing the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, and other Acts.) The Councils will thus have
alternative powers to provide assistance for mentally deficient persons, either by
way of poor relief, or by virtue of the Mental Deficiency Acts, except that the
Bill does not diminish or affect the duty of a Council under the Poor Law Act,
1897, to provide relief for the poor.
Within recent years Parliament has imposed upon County and County
Borough Councils duties in connection with the care of the mentally deficient, the
blind, maternity and child welfare, tuberculosis, the guardianship of children,
which have been carried on side by side with similar work under the Poor Law.
Dual authority has resulted in overlapping of service, duplication of duties, and
avoidable and unnecessary expenditure. The opportunity is now presented to
unify them under one control. With respect to mental deficiency, it makes a
direct approach to the principle laid down in the Report of the Royal Commission
on the Care and Control of the Feebleminded that the Council of each County
and County Borough should be the Local Authority to make suitable and sufficient
provision for the care and control of the mentally defective, and that their mental
condition, and neither their poverty nor their crime, is the real ground of their
claim for help from the State. County and County Borough Councils will no
doubt be impressed with the principle of unit control, especially seeing that the
new Public Assistance Committees to be created, will be in the same position as
Poor Law Guardians, who are without statutory authority to provide care and
control for the mentally deficient except by way of poor relief. The insufficient
powers of Poor Law Guardians accounts for the practice of mentally defective
persons using the Workhouses for shelter and treatment and taking their dis-
charge at their will. On the other hand, Poor Law Guardians have had to resort
to certification of feebleminded persons and imbeciles under the Lunacy Acts,
to prevent them taking their discharge; or in the case of children, to adopt them
until the age of 18 years, and place them in Certified Institutions for defectives
as private cases under Section 3 of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913. The validity
of the Reception Orders in respect of adopted children, especially on attaining the
age of 18 years, is a matter of concern to the Managers of Institutions.
The whole question of detention of mental defectives under the Poor Law
and the provision of suitable training and classification can now be clarified and
placed on a satisfactory basis by County and County Borough Councils including
in their Schemes a recommendation to the Minister of Health that all mental
MENTAL WELFARE. 3
deficients in need of Institution treatment, or Guardianship, 01 Sivpei vi
become subject to be dealt with under the Mental Deficiency c s, '
The financial Clauses of the Local Government Bill
duced opposition by the Local Authorities. The Bill abolishes percentage grants
and substitutes therefor one consolidated grant payable o e , , , rant
to cover all grants which are now allocated by the Tieasury. financial
is to be estimated on the Local Authority's expendituie 01 e It is to be
year ending 31st March, 1929, designated the " Standard Year It. is tobe
known as the "General Exchequer Contribution and is compos
totalling forty-five million pounds, namely :
1. An amount equal to total losses on account of rates of all Count} and
?16,000,000
?5,000,000
An amount equal to total losses on account of rates ot an county uuu
County Boroughs   fcz4,uuu,uuu
2. An amount equal to the losses on account of all discontinued grants
An additional amount which for each year of the first quinquennial
period is fixed at
Grants 1 and 2 are permanent and fixed for all time, but the additional
grant under 3 will, for quinquennial periods after the first quinquennium, be detei-
mined by Parliament. The purpose of the additional grant is to make good any
loss which may arise on account of rates and grant-borne expendituie a^ec 01J
the standard year so as to raise the General Exchequer Contribution to a eas
25% of the whole.
The Minister of Health has expressed his willingness to make final con-
cessions to objections taken by various Associations of Local Authorities by
fixing for the first two quinquennial periods, three years and four years
respectively, for determining the percentage of grants payable to Lc>cai Autnoi-
ities, which extends the period from 15 to 17 years befoie the full ormu a
operates, and with a guarantee of 75 per cent, of the estimated loss on account oi
rates and grants for the standard year and their share under the formula of the
balance of the Exchequer Contribution. After 1931 a census is to be taken at
quinquennial intervals, so that the distribution of grants would be based on census
figures of weighted population instead of on estimates.
It is submitted that the change in the system of grants proposed under this
Bill will be detrimental to the mental deficiency service of the country.
The care and control of the mentally deficient is more a national than a
local duty and to merge the exchequer grants for mental deficiency into one con-
solidated grant to be paid to the Local Authority based on a general formula tor
the area, will destroy the national character of the service and subordinate it to
a greater degree to the exigencies of local politics and finance. I he piogiess anc
development of the work will be impeded. The grants for the first quinquennium
are to be based on the expenditure of the present financial year, which is a mos
disadvantageous period, as many Local Authorities are committed in the couise
of the next year or two to large schemes of Colony extensions which w ill not be
allowed to qualify as grant-borne expenditure. I he abolition ot peicentage
grants will remove incentive to other Authorities to pioceed with new schemes.
Mental Deficiency is even now with a pound-for-pound local and national ex-
penditure an unattractive and unpopular form of municipal work, and Local
Authorities have substantial ground for complaint at a change which will opeiate
before they have had time to stabilize their financial position. Mi. Mclvenna, in
introducing the Mental Deficiency Bill in the House of Commons, gave Local
Authorities the following undertaking : ?
4 MENTAL WELFARE.
" So far as a duty is imposed on a Local Authority under this Bill, it is limited to the
" extent to which the cost of carrying out the duty is borne by the State as to one
" half of that amount. The Local Authority will have no duty imposed upon it except
" that in which the State bears one half the cost." (vide Hansard, Vol. 53, No. 45,
p. 215).
The Local Government Bill is a violation of that pledge. Mental Deficiency-
expenditure falls into an exceptional category and is incomparable with any other
form of public assistance. It is a recurring and increasing liability in the pro-
vision of lifelong care and maintenance, which, ipso facto, prolongs the lives of
its subjects, and its incidence varies in districts without regard to class or creed.
To standardise it either with the ordinary expenditure in its own area or with the
expenditure of another area is uneconomical and inequitable. The principle to be
followed is that recommended by the Royal Commission that the liability of the
State and the Local Authority should be borne equally. If a block grant is to be
substituted for the percentage grant, it should at least be supplemented by a main-
tenance or deficiency grant per head of the number of defectives provided with
Institution treatment or Guardianship or Supervision.
It is hoped that the Bill in its financial Clauses will be amended to exclude
the Mental Deficiency Acts from the operation of the consolidated grants, and
to ensure that the Local Authority receives in Exchequer Contributions at least
50 per cent, of the cost of maintenance.
The Local Government Bill repeals Section 48 of the Mental Deficiency
Act, 1913, which is the authority for the payment of grants to Voluntary Associa-
tions assisting defectives. The existence of Local Voluntary Associations is,
however, safeguarded, as under Clause 84 (2) the Minister of Health is required,
before the beginning of each quinquennium, to make a Scheme providing for the
payment of contributions by Councils of County and County Boroughs to Volun-
tary Associations undertaking the duty of assisting or supervising defectives
whilst not in Institutions. No such provision appears in the Bill for financial
assistance to a Central body such as the Central Association for Mental Welfare.
It is essential to the success of the administration that both the Central and the
Local Voluntary Associations should receive substantial moral and financial
support to enable them to continue their excellent work on behalf of statutory
defectives under supervision in their own homes, and of voluntary and " border-
line " cases of defect who but for their existence would not be dealt with by any
other organized means.
If this Bill passes in its present form, on the most favourable prognosis
there will be a considerable reduction in State grants in support of the mental
deficiency service. The Minister of Health, whose interest in this fateful national
problem is unquestionable, should be seriously urged to keep this developing
branch of humanitarian work off the block.
