Paper to be Read on Friday Afternoon, 26th April
=================================================

MENTAL WELFARE / 59

Experiments in the Edhlaction and
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO SOME OF
THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE
By THOMAS A. NEWSOME,
Administrator, Besford Court.
The title of this paper may give rise to the erroneous impression
that Besford Court deals only with the educationally retarded and not
with the mentally defective child. Although the Report of the Joint
Committee rightly declares the unity of the educational problems of
these two classes of children, the mere fact that the majority of the
Cental ratios or intelligence quotients of patients at Besford Court falls
within the range of from 50 to 70 indicates that it deals primarily with
the genuine mental defective and not merely with the educationally
retarded child.
A small institution for mental defectives should not be conducted
?n the " menagerie principle." If it is to do efficient work, it must
limit itself to receiving patients whose mental defect falls within a
certain definite range. Consequently, the small institution must have
a policy?a policy of inclusion, and still more of exclusion. The ex-
perience of those connected with such an institution is therefore limited.
Moreover, experience at Besford Court is restricted entirely to boys.
The notes that follow are based upon a number of years' experience
at that institution, and, though our work extends over a period of
twelve years, much of that time has been taken up by a process of
development, with the result that the present organisation bears very
small resemblance to the organisation, methods and aims in the early
days. Consequently, there is nothing in this paper in the nature of a
generalisation, and whatever is said is said in order to invite the critic-
ism of those who have a knowledge of the intricacies and difficulties of
the work gathered from experiences of greater value and extent.
The writer proposes to give an account of three experiments which
have been tried at Besford Court, beginning with the first?our adop-
tion some four years ago of the Montessori method of educating young
mental defectives in the three Rs.
60 MENTAL WELFARE
In previous days one was inclined to ask whether the teaching of
the three R's to children obviously unfitted by nature for these educa-
tional accomplishments was a worth whilework. Inthemiddleages,men
and women without any academic learning whatever, managed to earn
good livelihoods, married, maintained homes and brought up children.
Even to-day, as most of us know from older men and women whom
we have met, illiteracy does not mean social and industrial inefficiency.
The three R's are therefore not essential elements of education or of
culture. It is possible for a man to be highly cultured and highly
efficient without being able to read or write, or even to calculate except
in the simple way of savages.
It is doubtful, therefore, whether education in the three R's, given
with the ordinary school routine, is really helpful to the child whose
intelligence quotient hovers roundabout or is lower than fifty, and
whether the substitution of extended manual training and the use of
cinematograph films, story telling, the radio, with varied and pleasant
occupations would not be far more beneficial. The happy child is the
developing child.
Since our policy at Besford Court is to get a defective back sooner
or later into the community as a stable and more or less self-supporting
person, the question of the value of elementary scholastic education
calls for an unhesitating and affirmative answer. In the first place, the
average I.Q. of children who can be trained in this way (given the
intensive and unbroken training of a residential institution) is much
higher than that of the other class who must be looked after for life
either in their own homes or in some colony or custodial home. At the
best, trained defectives who rejoin ordinary social life have the life-
long disadvantage of their mental defect, and in whatever way they
endeavour to earn a living, a lack of any educational accomplishments
will add very serious handicaps. In a semi-skilled operation a work-
man must be able to measure and to make a simple calculation If
he cannot read, he must depend entirely upon verbal instructions. His
memory, which is generally unreliable, must be called upon to do work
which the normal person is relieved of by making notes. By the in-
ability to read, a means of continuous and progressive education en-
joyed by others is entirely lost.
But even with higher grade mentally defective children, whom it
is hoped later to place in the community, it was found that the process
of education in the three R's, relieved by school manual work and
possibly some very sketchy manual training, required all the boy's
available time until he reached the age of sixteen. It seemed essential
that real training in vocational manual work should begin if possible
MENTAL WELFARE 61
at thirteen, at the latest at fourteen, and that in order to do this some
short cut was necessary which would enable the total time spent in
scholastic work to be shortened. The Montessori method of education
seemed to offer the solution, with the added advantage that it required
very little ancillary manual work such as raffia work, etc., as by con-
stantly handling the various pieces of apparatus the same result is
obtained.
The difficulty, therefore, is this. In the case of the lower grade
children who will remain for life in a colony, education in the three
R's is labour and money thrown away. In the case of higher grade
children to whom it is proposed to teach a useful trade and return them
to the community, the teaching of the three R's absorbs most of the
time essentially required for the teaching of a trade. The Report of
the Joint Committee very wisely states: ?
Below what mental age it is waste of time teaching children to read and write
is a debateable question. Many children are taught writing far more for the pleasure
it gives their parents to receive a copied letter from them than for any
use they will ever make of it themselves, and there is little doubt that even yet far
too much time is wasted at this. Hardly a single child who has a mental age below
seven when he leaves school learns enough reading to make any use of it after-
wards."
The answer to the question may possibly be found in the dis-
tinction already given.
Four years ago, with much hesitation and a perfectly open mind,
the Junior Department in which boys from seven to twelve years of
age are being educated, was transformed into a Montessori school. A
corresponding transformation at once became apparent in the spirit
of the Department. The note of enthusiasm and cheery optimism
became dominant. The children became animated by a real zeal for
work. They resented long holidays, inasmuch as they interfered with
the interesting games they were playing in school. School work had
become a recreation to them. Their powers of concentration grew
rapidly. These are only statements, though of facts, but the success
of the experiment can now be shown scientifically. The mental ratios
(or I.Q.'s) and other ratios of each boy in the Junior Department are
determined with very great care and, since in many cases the results
have been checked and confirmed by independent visiting psycho-
logists, our figures may be taken as accurate.
Thanks to the courtesy of Professor Cyril Burt, who kindly
supplied us with figures relating to London Special Schools in which
the Montessori method is not used, the following graph has been com-
piled which illustrates the superiority of the Montessori system over
others. A notable feature is the straightening out of the dotted line
relating to Besford cases after the introduction of this system, thus in-
dicating approximately equal proficiency in all educational subjects.
Graph comparingtheprogress made by6ochildrenatthe Junior
Department of the Besford Court Mental Welfare Hospital
for Children after the introduction of the Montessori System
with that made by 93 children of the London Special Schools
in which the Montessori System is not used.
Besford Court results are shown by the dotted lines, London ones by
the solid lines.
The London figures have been kindly supplied by Prof. Cyril Burt.
It should be noted that these ratios indicate rates of progression and are almost
independent of natural age. The reading ratio (e.g.)
reading age ascertained by standardized test x 100
natural age.
For the purpose of ascertaining the mental ratios, Professor Burt's Revision of the
Binet-Simon tests was used in all cases. The range of natural ages of the two sets
of children is approximately the same, viz.. 8?13 years.
It will be noted that London children in their second year at the Special School
show results that are distinctly superior to those shown by Besford children when
tested in May, 1925, i.e., before the introduction of the Montessori System. On the
other hand, after the introduction at Besford of the Montessori System, final results
at .Besford arc vastly superior to those obtained in London. Moreover, the top dotted
line is almost a straight one indicating that the Besford children are being trained
equally well in all subjects.
It will be noted that London children in their second year at the Special School
show results that are distinctly superior to those shown by Besford children when
tested in May, 1925, i.e., before the introduction of the Montessori System. On the
other hand, after the introduction at Besford of the Montessori System, final results
at .Besford are vastly superior to those obtained in London. Moreover, the top dotted
line is almost a straight one indicating that the Besford children are being trained
equally well in all subjects.
Graph showing the progress made by 60 children at the Junior
Department of the Besford Court Mental Welfare Hospital for
Children, since the opening of that Department.
The Reading, Arithmetic and other Ratios in the above graph are obtained by
multiplying the Reading Age, Arithmetical Age, Mental Age and other ages, ascer-
tained by "the application of Standardized Educational and Mental Tests indicated in
the headings, by 100 and dividing by the Chronological Age.
The Achievement Ratio, i.e. the percentage of Actual Attainments indicated by
Educational Age compared with inborn capacity, as indicated by the Mental Age, is
obtained by calculating the percentage ratio:
Educational Age x 100
Mental Age
64 MENTAL WELFARE
Two important modifications of the original Montessori system
have been made at Besford Court, but in these respects we seem to have
anticipated the mind of Dr. Montessori herself. These modifications
relate to the training of " group consciousness " and the relative, not
absolute, principle of " free choice of subjects." While Dr. Montessori
practically ignored group work in her earlier publications, in the last
course she held in London in 1927, she laid considerable stress on the
importance of it. The following is an illustration of its advantages: ?
Before the introduction of group work in reading, the average
reading ration of children of the Montessori department at Besford
Court was 59 per cent. This ration rose, after its introduction, to as
high as 65 per cent. Again, free choice of subjects must be confined to
things the child knows. The child may choose any subject to work at,
but he must take his own "stage" of the subject, not "pick at random."
This insures that every child is " working at his own pace " and at a
" stage " that he understands and in which he, consequently, will be
interested.
The general effects of special school training are to raise the
educational ratio until it approaches closely to the mental ratio, and
to raise the latter slightly?in other words, to raise what modern
American psychologists have termed the Achievement Ratio,
Educational Age x 100
Mental Age
until it approximates to 100 per cent. The appended graph shows
that the employment, at Besford Court, of the Montessori system has
raised the average Achievement Ratio of boys of the Montessori Depart-
ment from 79 (seventy-nine) to as high as 98 per cent. That is to say,
their actual educational attainment reaches as high as 98 per cent, of
native ability.
While fully appreciating the importance of devising special
methods, such as the Montessori, for training those who arc capable of
being trained in reading, writing and simple arithmetic who arc in-
capable of being so trained by ordinary elementary school methods, the
writer is of opinion that there is a marked tendency to regard such
training as the beginning and end of the education of the mentally
defective child. It seems to him that, consciously or unconsciously,
this fallacy appears to be the basis of many of the remarks contained in
the Joint Report on the subject of the school leaving age of special
schools.* The salient feature of the Besford Court system is that such
:!:The residential special school is the child of the day special school just as the
day special school was the child of the elementary day school. The family resem-
blance is strongly marked. May we not all be suffering in varying degrees from
the elementary school complex?
MENTAL WELFARE 65
training is held to form merely the foundation?although a very
essential foundation?for the real training of the higher grade men-
tally defective child. It must be remembered that, however proficient
he may have been rendered by one or other of these special methods in
ordinary school subjects, he is still as mentally defective, in the true
sense of the word, as he was before; and, if he is to compete successfully
in the labour market with his normal fellows, his mental defect must
be compensated for by intensive training in some special form of craft.
For this purpose the elementary general manual training commonly
given in special schools is quite inadequate.
The Residential Special School should have an aim totally differ-
ent from that of the Custodial Home. In the latter case, economy of
working is a matter of first importance. In the former, the education
and training of the patients to become self-supporting members of the
outside community is the primary object to which even finance must
be subservient. This costs money, and if the cost cannot be afforded,
the attempt should not be made.
In a Custodial Home, one expects to find the shoe-makers' shop
Wlth its master shoe-maker and M.D. assistants, and the tailors' shop
and the gardening department run on similar lines. The principle is
that every member of this little community must be made the utmost
use of in the measure of his gifts, his health, and happiness. But the
Report of the Joint Committee speaks of these occupations as being
suitable for training defectives to earn their living later in ordinary life
in these trades.
The writer has grave doubts regarding the wisdom of two of these
recommendations. To-day most shoes are factory made. There are
niany wholesale firms engaged in boot repairs. The ordinary jobbing
shoe-maker has, as a rule, not a growing trade and if there is, in town
or country, any shadow of a demand for the assistance of mental
defectives, it will be on the ground that sweated labour assists a dvins
industry.
The mentally defective boy is not, physiologically, a healthy boy.
His organs may be sound but he is notoriously liable to sepsis from the
slightest cut. This indicates that his co-efficient of immunity against
disease is far lower than that of the average normal. Tailoring is an
unhealthy trade. The warm and often foetid atmosphere of the work-
room and the posture assumed are well-known predisposing causes of
pulmonary tuberculosis, to which statistics show tailors are especially
liable.
Obviously, the Joint Committee has recommended these trades,
not on reasoned gounds, but because they have been impressed by
66 MENTAL WELFARE
their almost universal occurrence in Residential Special Schools. But
this is not because they are a suitable training for ordinary life, but
because they keep the maintenance costs down.
It is remarked in the same paragraph of the Joint Report (page 56)
of the mentally defective boy that "if the necessary facilities for training
obtain, other trades may be open to him, such as brick-laying, metal
work, or even painting." When the writer visited Waverley,U.S.A.,Dr.
Fernald pointed out to him that, after most of the boys had been
allocated to trades, the residue were put into the painting class,
where they generally did well. The Joint Report would seem
to have the trades in the reverse order. It should read?" Painting,
metal work, and even brick-laying and carpentry." That is our ex-
perience at Besford.
Doubtless, many will think that it is quite impossible to train
mentally defective boys to be as proficient at any form of craft as the
normal workman. While perfectly prepared for failure it was deter-
mined, at Besford Court, to make the attempt. This was our second
experiment. The results obtained have been as surprising as they
have been gratifying. Not only have the boys of the Senior, vocational,
department of Besford Court entirely by themselves (although under
the supervision of specially picked instructors), built a brick bungalow,
now inhabited, and the new Domestic Block, and restored and ex-
tended buildings on the estate, but they are at the present time engaged
in building their own Manual Training School, to the entire satisfaction
of the architect. The following tabular statement indicates the average
mental ratio (or intelligence quotient) of boys of the various vocational
classes: ?*
Average mental
Nature of Vocational Class ratio of class
Skilled Carpentry ... ... ... ... 65
Bricklayers ... ... ... ... ... 63
Plumbers ... ... ... ... ... 60
Gardeners ... ... ... ... ... 56
Rural Handicrafters, excluding "trial cases" ... 53
*Painters ... ... ... ... ... 51
*These trades have been ranked in order of their difficulty by the Chief Manual
Instructor, who did not know the Mental Ratio of any of the boys until several
months afterwards.
*It required much tact and diplomacy to explain to the Instructor in Painting
why boys with the lowest I.Q.'s were sent to his class,
MENTAL WELFARE 67
It may be noted that all of these vocational classes are connected
with the building trade and have been carefully chosen as affording
the means of gaining a livelihood, whether the boy resides, after dis-
charge from the institution, in town or country.
The term " rural handicrafters " requires some explanation. Boys
in this class are taught rough carpentry, such as the making of gates,
fences and wheelbarrows, rough bricklaying, ordinary painting and
the preparing of sash cords, glazing windows and the replacing
?f tiles on a roof. Thus, in addition to forming a training
suited to those whose grade of intelligence is insufficient to render
them capable of being trained in the more highly skilled forms of
craft, it constitutes a " trial class " in which the form of craft for
which those of higher grades of intelligence are found to possess special
aptitude may be determined. These constitute the " trial cases "
alluded to above.
As a final preparation for these vocational classes, boys of the
Montessori department spend their final term learning to calculate with-
out the aid of any form of apparatus. Up to the age of sixteen, boys in
the Senior Department spend half their time in school perfecting their
ordinary education and half their time in one or other of the special
vocational classes. From the age of sixteen until such time as they are
fit for discharge as competent workmen?usually about the age of
twenty to twenty-one?the whole of their time is spent in vocational
training.
The supreme danger in a Mental Welfare Hospital or Residential
Special School is that the individual is apt, unless special precautions
are taken, to become lost in the group. The Residential Special School
rnust not be an educational tank in which all sorts of cases are let loose
until the time arrives, at the age of sixteen, for individuals to be fished
out and returned to their parents. Each patient is sent there for special
study and special treatment, simply because each patient has special
needs. Just as there is no uniform hospital treatment for physical dis-
orders so, in the same way, there is no general educational treatment
for psychological defects. Normal individuals vary in their mental and
emotional make-up. Mental defectives vary enormously and treatment
must vary with the needs of the patient. To take a simple example?a
special faculty may become exhausted so far as capacity for its develop-
ment is concerned. Under a general formula of education, such a
patient would be wasting time, building up an inferiority complex and
suffering from prolonged irritation by attempting what nature has
decided to be impossible. To attempt to teach such a child that par-
ticular subject would be as useful as trying to teach a giraffe to climb
68 MENTAL WELFARE
a tree. Again, a faculty which, up to the moment, has been larval,
may suddenly begin to develop?for instance, at the age of puberty.
Under group treatment this fact would be unknown.
It must also be remembered that, in nearly every mental defective,
there are certain character defects and certain character disorders. These
defects in some are innate?in others they are acquired. The treat-
ment of the two classes of defect is very different. The origin of the
defect must be discovered before treatment can be given scientifically.
Take, for instance, the simple example of a boy who suffers from
outbreaks of bad conduct. These are symptoms, and mere treatment
of symptoms is not only useless, but is liable to cause intensification and
fixation of the cause, and may lead later to a complete breakdown of
the character.
The causes of the same kind of misconduct may be many. The
bad conduct of a boy may arise from Narcissism?a boy is self-centred
and morbidly self-interested and is therefore determined, at any cost, to
focus attention on himself: or his bad conduct may be the result of a
strong inferiority complex compensating itself intermittently, by various
outbreaks and thus adjusting the balance of self-pride: or it may be an
anti-social grudge expressing itself from time to time: or it may be
caused by the sudden release of an accumulation of energy too great
for the boy's power of self-control: or it may be a reaction against too
strong routine or an environment which is pressing too harshly:
or it may have a physical basis?it may be due to a vitamin or a fat
deficiency.
Now in a Residential Special School these outbursts will not be noted
down on the discredit side of the boy's character report, but welcomed
as indications that something is wrong somewhere and must be dis-
covered, and, if possible, put right. The boy will be regarded as a
patient and not as a culprit.
The work of a Child Guidance Clinic and that of a Residential
Special School are consequently closely connected, yet quite different
in their scope. The former works under very great difficulties. Even
when full and accurate reports of the doctor, the teacher, the social
worker and the psychologist are laid before the psychiatrist, who has
already made his own study of the case, he is working at a great dis-
advantage. In the first place, he has studied the child under abnormal
circumstances. Even at the best only an accurate cross section study of
the case has been made. The treatment now presents difficulties. It
is rarely impossible to change entirely the environment which has been
at fault. Generally it can only be slightly modified. The real causa-
tion of the child's character defect, which has now become so grave as
MENTAL WELFARE 69
to call for treatment, may be in the parents themselves. It can rarely
be possible to re-educate parents in a clinic. This calls for humility
and intelligence on their part, both of which will often be conspicuously
lacking.
All these unfavourable circumstances vanish when we consider
the Residential Special School. The child is no longer injured by its en-
vironment, because the environment here has been scientifically created
to meet the needs of the child. He is no longer mishandled by those
responsible for his care and home life because he is in the charge of
teachers and nurses who are specially trained for the work. He is no
longer the object of a brief intensive study. He can now be studied
for weeks and months under all possible circumstances, in all his moods
and from every angle. In addition, not only can a more complete and
possibly more accurate cross section study be obtained, but also, what
is of deeper importance, a longitudinal study can be made.
Thus, the Residential Special School is to the Child Guidance Clinic
as the well-conducted hospital is to the specialist's consulting room.
The mental welfare doctor should, tiierefore, know with certainty
when he recommends the case to be sent to the Residential Special
School that all his findings will be verified or corrected by those com-
petent to do so, and that his advice, if his diagnosis proves to be correct,
will be scientifically carried out.
It follows, therefore, that Residential Special Schools have com-
mitted to their care a very large number of cases of extraordinary
interest; and as it is only in such places that these cases can adequately
be studied, in every Residential Special School research work should
be carried out and the results placed at the disposal of all those who are
concerned in this work.
In order to achieve this, two things are necessary: ?
(1) A very full and detailed dossier or case book should carefully
be built up for each patient, and among other things which will
be mentioned later, this case book should contain regular and
fairly frequent reports on the child from every department.
(2) From time to time, in rotation, or at once in a case of emer-
gency, these reports should be studied at staff conferences, fully
discussed and the decisions recorded on which action is to be taken.
It may, perhaps, be helpful to describe the present routine at
Besford Court. At the beginning of each term (there being three terms
to the year), the alphabetical list is divided up between the weeks, and
all departments are warned of the dates when reports will be required
70 MENTAL WELFARE
from them. First of all, there is the medical routine examination.
The stripped boy is first examined by the medical officer who has before
him at the same time the boy's medical card and a complete medical
history of the case, together with any queries that arise. Weight graphs,
based upon the monthly weighings are also among the exhibits. Reports
are made of any special treatment, orthopaedic, ultra violet, medicinal
or dietetic, which may have been indicated; and the observed results
are also given. If there have been any reports of anti-social behaviour,
or the like, these are also offered for consideration. The supervisor of
remedial exercises and the nurses are present throughout these exam-
inations. As only eight boys are examined during two hours, the
medical examination is exhaustive and thorough. A shorthand
writer takes down from the medical officer his observations and
remarks. Physical defects are scrutinised with special care, progress
or the reverse noted from measurements, and finally instructions given
if a boy is to be referred to one of the honorary specialists. The
nutrition formula, as devised by Professor Pirquet, and introduced to
Besford by Dr. Auden, is determined.
The medical examination having been completed, the reports
from the other departments are handed in. A new questionnaire is
given to each department each term. These reports come in from the
Prefect of Studies, the Prefect of Discipline, the Chief Manual Instruct-
or, the Refectory Master, the Bursar, the Senior Scout Master, and the
Nurse.
Before the case is ready for the conference much work has to be
done. Each report must be considered in connection with all other
current reports; and in connection with all its predecessors from the
same department. From all these materials, a thesis on the boy is con-
structed. Special attention is paid to the contradictions which often
exist between one report and another and such conflicting observations
(which are really different aspects of the boy reacting differently to
different external stimuli), generally prove to be the means by which
a deeper knowledge of the boy is obtained. The object of the thesis
is to " get the boy on paper," and to provide a theory as to his emotional
and psychical make-up. It should explain all the facts that have been
recorded. The thesis is purposely given a dogmatic tone in order that
it may provoke, if necessary, contradictions from members of the staff.
As a rule, the discussion on a case lasts about half an hour, though
some have been known to last two and even more hours, and cases have
been even adjourned in order that they may be presented to our hon-
orary psychiatrist, Dr. Auden. The thesis and the ensuing decisions
are added to the boy's dossier.
MENTAL WELFARE 71
Two general remarks may now be made. The first is that we
have found it almost invariably to be the rule that where boys suffer
from conduct disorders, the first gleams of hope and indications of im-
provements in character are to be found in the report of the Chief
Manual Instructor. This points to the close association of conduct dis-
order with the inferiority complex. In the vocational trade the boy is
doing something with real success; and at the end of his work can look
at something concrete which he knows to be of use and which he him-
ir 1 1
selr has produced. On page 64 of the Report of the Joint Committee
an important observation will be found : ?
A very large proportion of the school work is manual work and if there is one
principle which is never lost sight of, at all events in the best institutions, it is
that all work must be for a definite object. No one realises more quickly than a
defective child the folly of being asked to do work which will be of no use when it
ls finished. Most teachers have realised that it is essential that all the manual
work shall be either for use in the school or institution, or for sale. Practice work
ls waste work, and has a bad moral effect on the children."
The second fact which we have observed and which impresses us
more and more with its importance is that bad behaviour is also closely
associated with physical ill health. There may be no organic defect,
but the boy is obviously not at his best. For this difficulty we have
groped for a solution, fairly frequently with happy results. In some
cases the plan has been adopted of sleeping the boy in the open air
throughout the whole year. Our mercury vapour lamps have helped
us considerably in other cases, in spite of what has been said by the
Medical Research Council. But there are a number of cases which still
present us with problems, and these we are offering for the considera-
tion and advice of our honorary endocrinologist, Dr. Geikie Cobb. It
seems highly probable that the solution of these problems is connected
with the imbalance of the secretions of the ductless glands.
