An Introduction to Individual Psychology
=========================================

144 MENTAL WELFARE
Book Reviews & Abstracts
. By Alice Raven. W. Heffer & Sons,
Ltd., Cambridge. (London Agents : Simp-
kin Marshall, Ltd.). 1929. 3/6 net.
" An Introduction to Individual Psycho-
logy" is an interesting contribution to popular
scientific literature, in which Alice Raven aims
at analysing the human mind from the
dynamic standpoint, and at examining those
processes of the mind by which human energy
becomes tied up and rendered unavailable for
the constructive purposes of life or the achieve-
ment of success. While the author gives a
brief presentation of some of Professor
McDougall's work on instinct, she states that
the instinct of curiosity is directed towards the
improvement of life as well as towards its
preservation, and she finds it impossible to
consider the sex instinct, the parental instinct,
self-assertion and subjection, and the herd or-
ganisation, without relating them and the im-
provement of life.
M. M. M.
Public Health. Annual Report of the Lon-
don County Council. Vol. III. 1928. P. S.
King & Son. 2/6 net.
Some interesting research work has been
done by Dr. Carleton Williams on the analysis
of the mentality and antecedents of 92 cases
dealt with at Police Courts. A full account of
the results is given in this Report. These 92
cases " had been reported as certifiable under
the Mental Deficiency Act by the medical
officers of prisons; although sometimes the
report was qualified by the remark that the case
approached the border-line and should be
further investigated by the London County
Council Medical Officer. Out of the 92 cases,
11 were deemed by the medical officers of the
London County Council to be not feeble-
minded, but were found to be defective, but
of such violent and dangerous tendencies as to
be fit only for the State Institution at Rampton
.... The number of these prison cases shows
an increase, in part due to the fact that all
young men under 21 are subjected to a mental
examination at Wandsworth Boys' Prison and
in part to the fact that the Mental Deficiency
Act, 1927, modified the Clauses of the 1913
Act, which limited action to persons deficient
from birth or an early age In particular
this has brought in those whose mental con-
dition has been affected by encephalitis leth-
argica occurring after early childhood. There
are 7 examples in this series. The antecedents
of 81 cases as regards education are given. The
large number of cases from the lowest classes
of elementary schools is consistent with the
fact that it is not so much the obviously men-
tally deficient as the backward and unstable
who become delinquents."
The arrangement by which, in 1925, the
Metropolitan Asylums' Board provided special
accommodation for children between the ages
of three and sixteen years who were suffering
from the after effects of encephalitis lethargica,
has been continued. During 1928, 30 children
were admitted (including 12 re-admissions)
and 32 were discharged.
The London Association for Mental Welfare
has organised 8 Occupation Centres and
arrangements have been made with the L.C.C.
for the medical inspection of the children
under 16 attending these Centres. The figures
giving the percentage of these children in need
of treatment appear to show that parental care
is exercised and that the children are as well
looked after as normal children.
The Report gives a brief but very clear
account (p. 56) of the changes in the defini-
tions in the Mental Deficiency Act, 1927, the
changes in the duties of local authorities and
in the method of procedure in presenting a
petition.
Fifteenth Annual Report of the Board of
Control for the Year 1929. H.M. Sta-
tionery Office. Part I, 1/9; Part II, 9/-.
PART I. The passing of the Local Govern-
ment Act, 1929, and the publication of the
Report of the Joint Committee of the Board of
Education and Board of Control on Mental
Deficiency (described for brevity's sake as the
" Wood Report ") are two important events
which have taken place since the publication
of the last Report of the Board, and this year's
Report naturally deals at length with the
effects these are likely to have on the adminis-
tration of the Mental Deficiency Acts and on
the care of defectives in general. An exceed-
ingly clear and concise account is given (see
p. 42) of the various sections in the Local
Government Act as they affect Mental Defic-
MENTAL WELFARE
r45
lency and we would strongly urge all mental
welfare workers to buy a copy of this Report
for that reason alone.
On the Local Government Act in general the
Board say: '' The main and fundamental alter-
ation is the transfer of the functions of the
Poor Law Guardians to the Councils. This,
coupled with the repeal of the latter half of
proviso (ii) of Section 30 of the M. D. Act,
1913, brings the responsibility for the care and
control of all mentally defective persons under
one Local Authority, i.e., the County 01*
County Borough Council Each Local
Authority is now in a position to find out the
number, classes and requirements of all defect-
ives within its area without excluding those
who have hitherto been dealt with under the
Poor Law." Up to now Guardians could main-
tain defectives in Institutions but they could
not obtain orders under the Mental Deficiency
Act for their detention; " in consequence,
many defectives who both in their own inter-
ests and in the interest of the community,
should have remained in institutions, have
taken their discharge or have been withdrawn
by relatives. By the repeal of the latter part
of proviso (ii) of Section 30, it has now become
the duty of Local Authorities who can obtain
the necessary orders for detention to do so in
all
cases where detention is necessary." The
Board particularly direct the attention of the
Councils to the advisability of bringing all
Provision for defectives under one Committee
?the Mental Deficiency Committee.
With regard to the " Wood Report," the
Board comments only on Part IV, the Invest-
igation carried out by Dr. Lewis. As there is
an article in this issue of Mental Welfare by
Lewis himself and a general review of the
Report appeared in the last issue, we shall with-
hold the summary of Dr. Lewis' Investigations
given in the Board's Report, but again we
Would draw the attention of all readers to the
undoubted help they would find this summary
as a review of the whole problem of the ascer-
tainment of defectives, of the special educa-
tional facilities and institutional accommo-
dation they require.
Some progress has been made during the
year to meet the shortage of accommodation
for mental defectives referred to in the last
Annual Report. Five new Institutions were
opened during the year, the most important
being the Colonies established by the Hamp-
shire County Council and by the West Riding
Council. With the introduction of the Local
Government Bill, Local Authorities naturally
felt some uncertainty as to the future, but it is
hoped that now it has become law it will re-
lease a considerable amount of accommodation
which could be adapted for the reception of
older and less active defectives. During the
year under review 625 new beds in Institutions
have been provided by Local Authorities.
Although this falls short of urgent require-
ments, it is nearly double that provided during
the preceding year and a large number of Local
Authorities are now taking steps in the face of
many difficulties to fulfil their statutory obliga-
tions. The variation in the accommodation
provided by individual Local Authorities can
be seen from the figures given on page 62. In
35 areas the proportion of cases in institutions
in January, 1929, was 0.50 or more per
thousand of population, the highest being
Oxford with 1.24 per thousand. On the
other hand, 39 Local Authorities had a
ratio of 0.25 only or under, per 1,000 of the
population, some of the lowest being Carlisle,
0.09; Merthyr Tydfil, 0.06; Great Yarmouth,
0.05; and Swansea, 0.01. A similar variation
is noticeable also in the figures for ascertain-
ment, which vary from 5.62 per thousand (in
the case of Cardigan), to 0.24 per thousand in
South Shields. We give here a few figures
taken from page 65 which show this variation
clearly. Rutland, 4.82 per thousand; Devon,
4.38; Oxford, 3.80; Leeds, 2.09; Dewsbury,
2.02; Swansea, 0.48; Tynemouth, 0.39; Hunt-
ingdon, 0.32; South Shields, 0.24.
The duty imposed upon Local Authorities
under Section 30 (cc) of the Mental Deficiency
Act, 1927, has given, as might have been ex-
pected, an impetus to the provision of Occupa-
tion Centres and to the organisation of Home
Training. Fourteen Authorities propose to
start among them 21 Occupation Centres and
5 new Industrial Centres; seven have put for-
ward schemes for Home Training; four have
schemes still under consideration. The total
number of Centres now established is 121.
The Board urges Voluntary Associations and
Local Authorities " to keep clearly before
them the aims of training to be provided for
low grade defectives and, too, that the Centres
are staffed with Supervisors who have practical
knowledge and have been given opportunities
for learning how to carry out these aims." It
146 MENTAL WELFARE
is impossible, with the space at our disposal,
to deal with all the aspects of the work men-
tioned in this Report?Guardianship, Dis-
charge and Licence, the work of the
C.A.M.W., etc.
So much publicity has been given in the
Press to the comments of the Board on the
question of the marriage of defectives and
sterilization that we quote here the main part
of the Board's remarks (pp. 62-64).
The growing demand in the Press and elsewhere
for the sterilization of mental defectives compels us
to return to a subject which we have already dis-
cussed in previous Reports, although we are still of
opinion that sufficient data are not yet available on
which to base any definite recommendations. Such
statistics as have been collected have been in the
main compiled with the object of establishing a
proposition the validity of which has been assumed
on merely d. priori grounds. That there is a case for
further scientific research we readily admit; but,
until reliable data are available, we are not prepared
to make any recommendations in regard to these
proposals. It is, however, important to remove cer-
tain misapprehensions as to the possible financial
savings which would result. It cannot be too em-
phatically stated that sterilization will not obviate
the need for colony or other institutional treatment
for large numbers of mental defectives. So far as
the low grade cases, idiots and imbeciles, are con-
cerned, the need for institutional treatment is too
obvious to need any argument. But in the case of
the feeble-minded, who form approximately three-
quarters of the whole number of mental defectives,
it is not sufficiently understood that the great major-
ity require care, supervision and control, because
they are incapable of managing themselves. As the
Wood Committee have pointed out, the criterion of
mental defect is social adaptability. The majority
of defectives cannot support themselves, many can-
not resist criminal impulses, and others, though not
actively dangerous, are a menace to the community,
because they have no idea of truth or social obliga-
tion. . . Anti-social tendencies and habits of this kind
are riot to be cured or even lessened by sterilization.
As the provision of institutional beds is far below
even the most conservative estimate of present
needs, we hope that no Local Authority will relax
their efforts because of any fallacious promise of
what sterilization might achieve. . . Roughly speak-
ing, out of 300,000 mental defectives in England and
Wales, one-third will require institutional provision
and two-thirds some form of community care, that
is, care outside an institution. It is in the case of
the latter that the risk of procreation arises, and the
case for sterilization, if such a case exists at all, is
strongest. It can hardly be denied that the 200,000
defectives who must remain in the community are
wholly unfitted for parenthood. . . . But it does not
seem to us necessarily to follow that the probability
of parenthood, so obviously undesirable in such
cases, can only be obviated by sterilization. We
believe that much could be done by perfecting the pro-
tection afforded by supervision and guardianship. . ?
In our view it would be a valuable safeguard if the
marriage of defectives, whether under order or under
supervision, could be prohibited by law. It is
astonishing that on grounds of so-called morality
well-meaning persons are found to countenance and
even to encourage the marriage of defectives who are
not only obviously unfit to undertake the responsib-
ility of parenthood, but are incapable of assuming
the responsibilities of the relationship into which
they propose to enter. A definite prohibition of the
marriage of defectives would prevent unions which
are socially disastrous and would make it much
easier to secure the protection of young defectives
under supervision or guardianship or on licence by
bringing home to the public conscience the anti-
social character of any overtures towards persons
definitely stamped as incapable of valid marriage.
