Mefatal Deficiency as a Community Problem
==========================================

126 \ MENTAL WELFARE
ADDRESS ON

\| Given by DR. E. O. LEWIS, M.A., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.,
at the Annual Meeting of the London Association for Mental Welfare,
held on Thursday, June 20th, 1929.
(Printed by kind permission of the London Association for Mental Welfare.)
I feel that it is necessary at the outset to explain why most of my remarks
this afternoon refer to the more general and theoretical aspects of my
subject. We had hoped that Part III of the Report of the Joint Committee
on Mental Deficiency would have been published by this time. In this part
of the Report the Committee deal fairly thoroughly with the subject of mental
deficiency as a community problem, but, as this is not yet published, it is
obviously impossible for me to discuss the specific recommendations of the
Committee this afternoon; and therefore I shall confine my remarks to the
more academic and theoretical features of my subject.
We shall deal more especially with the problem of the care of the mentally
defective living in the general community. In doing so, we do not forget the
importance of the other form of care, namely, the institutional care of defect-
ives. The cleavage between these two forms of care has been too marked in
the past. This has been due to the fact that most of the institutional cases have
required permanent care. Owing to the scarcity of accommodation, only the
lower grade cases and the more urgent of the feeble-minded have been ad-
mitted to our institutions. As the accommodation increases a much larger pro-
portion of higher grade cases will be admitted and a certain proportion of these
will, after a few years' training, return to the general community. Dr.
Douglas Turner has expressed this most aptly when he said?" Institutions
in the past have been stagnant pools?in the future they will be running lakes."
It will thus become one of the chief aims of our institutions to give defectives
the type of training that will best fit them to take their place in the ordinary
industrial and social world; and the success with which we shall be able to
care for the mentally defective thus rehabilitated will depend largely upon the
early training they receive in the institutions.
The first question we have to decide is the magnitude of the problem of
the community care. There are about 300,000 mental defectives in England
and Wales. It is estimated that about 120,000 require institutional care of some
kind and about 200,000 remain in the general community. Of these, 84,000
are children of school age and are therefore within the jurisdiction of the Local
Education Authority. This leaves about 100,000 adult defectives, lower grade
children and young feeble-minded children in the general community, that is,
approximately 3 per thousand of the population; and most of these will require
some form of supervision, statutory or voluntary.
MENTAL WELFARE
I27
These figures naturally lead us to ask whether the incidence of mental
deficiency is increasing, but I do not intend to discuss this somewhat conten-
tious subject this afternoon. We shall all agree, however, that mental defici-
ency as a manifest problem is increasing. It will always be difficult to make
a complete ascertainment of the number of persons who are mentally defective
in the most strictly scientific and clinical sense of the word; but it is a much
easier task to ascertain the number of mental defectives who, on account of
their social inefficiency, require some form of care by the community: and
it is this figure that indicates the manifest magnitude of the problem. There
can be but little doubt that the proportion of the population of this country
comprised in the group of persons recognised to be mentally defective because
of their economic and social failure is increasing.
The causes of this increase of manifest mental deficiency form an in-
teresting subject for discussion and investigation. From one standpoint, this
increase need cause no alarm. In fact, it may be regarded as an indication of
national progress. The higher the type of organism, the greater the differ-
entiation of its parts; and the more civilised a nation becomes, the more con-
spicuous become the variations in the mental endowments of its members.
This is exemplified by our educational system. We now recognise that about
10 per cent, of the children in our schools are dull or backward and from i to
2 per cent, are mentally defective. If a psychologist had made such a state-
ment 60 years ago, before the days of General Elementary Education, he would
have been suspected of trying to bolster up some theological doctrine of election
or pre-destination; but our school system has now made manifest that there
is a much greater variation of mental endowments than we had hitherto
thought to be the case.
A parallel sifting process is being applied to adults. The modern trend
of events in industry is gradually increasing the handicaps of the section of
workers most lowly endowed with intelligence, and thereby increasing the
manifest numbers of those economically inefficient. Such Acts as those in-
stituting minimum wages, trades union rates of pay, workmen's compensation
and employers' liability?all designed to safeguard the interests of the main
group of workers?seem to militate against the assimilation of the mentally
defective into the industrial system, and gradually result in a more definite
ostracism of this group. One example of this is the application of a minimum
wage to agricultural labourers. With the general principle of a minimum
wage we are not concerned at present and naturally express no opinion. As
you all know, the farmers can secure exemption from paying minimum wages
to mentally defective employees. We saw in the course of our investigation a
large number of defectives in respect of whom such exemption had been
granted. They were practically all persons of the imbecile grade. These ex-
emptions applied to comparatively few men of the feeble-minded grade; and
yet farmers recognised that the large majority of this latter group were so
inefficient that their services were not worth the minimum wage, with the
128 MENTAL WELFARE
result that they were seldom employed permanently and had to depend upon
casual labour. Their economic position was thus often worse than that of the
lower grade defectives. There is a great gap between the type of mentally
defective person to whom committees will apply the exemption and the person
who is really worth the minimum wage. Into this gap fall many thousands of
feeble-minded workmen. In one way or another these "become financial bur-
dens to the community and their numbers increase considerably the manifest
magnitude of the problem of mental deficiency.
Another factor which we will only mention that tends to eliminate larger
numbers of persons of poor endowment from our industrial system is the
application of scientific methods, especially in the selection of workers.
What are we to do with this increasing manifest problem P Some people
can always dismiss a problem with a dictum. That applied to our present
problem is one we have all heard many times?"After all, there must be hewers
of wood and drawers of water." My only comment on this is that it is a
dictum which belongs to a past age and civilisation, and it would have been
well if the dictum had been lost with that civilisation.
After reading the Annual Report of this Association, and after hearing
Miss Wallas's speech this afternoon, I feel I should have come here to listen
and not to talk. The activities of this Association show that a great deal can
be done to socialise the mentally defective. To read what has already been
done for them fills us with admiration for the work of your Association.
The Annual Report shows that 80 per cent, of the group of mental defectives
investigated by this Association were last year usefully employed in the in-
dustrial system. These are most remarkable figures, especially in these days
of much unemployment. I cannot help contrasting them with some of my
estimates for the areas we investigated; and it should be borne in mind that
the local authorities and voluntary associations in some of the districts were
progressive and very active. These areas were probably fairly representative
of the country as a whole in this respect. We concluded that of every 100
defectives living in the general community, only 20 were regularly employed.
It must be admitted that these figures and those for the London area are, in
some respects, not comparable, but the disparity is significant.
Miss Wallas said there is a considerable variation from one district
to another in regard to the numbers of defectives that can be employed
in industry; and the data of our investigation confirm this. We found that in
districts where there is a great deal of group work, the mental defectives fare
better than in those where the only work available is that which necessitates
their working independently. For instance, in the mills of the North-country
industrial areas large numbers of mental defectives are employed in group
work and are able to earn some kind of living. This feature of industrial
cohesiveness is an important factor in the socialisation of defectives, because
it enables them to be buoyed up industrially. In other districts we found
MENTAL WELFARE 129
very different conditions. Previous to this investigation, I shared the idea
which is by no means uncommon, that defectives fared much better
economically in the rural than in the urban areas. My recent experience, how-
ever, has convinced me that this is not the case; and this I attribute chiefly to
the fact that there is comparatively little group work on the farm. The defect-
ives require much supervision in their work and many farmers said that they
could not give time to supervise them and therefore had to dismiss them. For
the same reason, mentally defective girls do badly in domestic service. The
proportion of girls receiving remuneration in domestic service, as shown in the
last Report of this Association, is only one-seventh of the whole group.
So far I have dealt with the industrial aspect of the problem, but there is
another aspect, namely, the supervision of the defectives in their homes and
during their leisure hours. Here again the question of social cohesiveness is
an important one. In certain communities defectives do much better than in
others. In this respect the country districts probably provide the more favour-
able conditions. In large towns there is little social cohesiveness, with the
result that families of low mental endowments tend to precipitate out of the
general life of the community and live in slums. Our conception of chronic
slumdom is that of a community of feeble-minded persons exploited by the
morally defective. When we find a family with two or more feeble-minded
persons which usually has a poor home environment, the problem of com-
munity care of the defectives resolves itself into the supervision of the whole
family. There is much discussion of the eugenic aspect of this family problem,
but very little is said concerning the way it affects the question of the com-
munity care of the defective.
This brings me to my last point. One fact brought home very forcibly
to my colleagues and myself in the course of our investigation was that, how-
ever serious die problem of mental deficiency may be, a still more serious
problem is the marginal problem of mental inefficiency. When we visited many
of the homes, we found that possibly two or three of the children were definitely
feeble-minded, but four or five others were certainly dull, though not suffic-
iently low grade to be certified as mentally defective. The mentality of one or
both of the parents was also sub-normal, but again not low enough to be re-
garded as mentally deficient. It is in such families we have a concentration of
most of our chronic social problems, such as chronic pauperism and slumdom,
habitual crime, high infantile mortality, illegitimacy and mental disorders of
all kinds. In the past some writers have endeavoured to convince us that mental
deficiency is the parent of all these other conditions, but it would be truer to
say that it is one of the children. The true parents are (a) the condition of poor
mental endowment, scarcely low enough to be regarded as mental deficiency,
and (b) unfavourable environmental conditions. These form a vicious circle.
One of the great problems of the present day is that presented by this group of
social inefficients which comprises about 10 per cent, of the population. Mental
inefficiency in its broad social sense, and not mental deficiency in the narrow
130 MENTAL WELFARE
legal interpretation of this term, is the important and urgent national problem.
The service which workers and students in the field of mental deficiency are
rendering is the emphasis they place upon the fact that most of the chronic
social problems are essentially associated with a condition of low intelligence,
and that whatever solutions are proposed, the quality of the human beings
forming this subnormal group of the community should always be borne in
mind.
Many political and social reformers recognise this fact, but they add that
their first duty is to legislate for the 90 per cent, normal and not for the 10 per
cent, sub-normal persons. Our reply to this is that many of the social reforms
designed for the general improvement of the community will not be fruitful
until we have dealt with the special problems of the sub-normal group. The
doctor in his treatment of a case clears the deck for action by first removing
all the septic foci. A similar maxim seems applicable to our national health.
Mental deficiency is one of the septic foci, and it calls for treatment at the out-
set of any attempt to deal comprehensively with the chronic social evils of the
community.
