The Education of Children Suffering from Defects of Speech
============================================================

MENTAL WELFARE.
By J. H. VAN THAL.
In an article on the International Society for LogoP0edia which appeared
in the Journal for Mental Welfare in 1928, I discussed, amongst other matters,
the desirability of special schools for children suffering from defects of speech.
Readers of this Journal may therefore be interested in an account of the
Speech Schools at Hamburg, which I had an opportunity of visiting recen y.
recapitulate: . _ T A. 0
The first conference of the International Society for Logopse la (, .
Remedial Speech Training) passed a resolution to the effect that it was considered
desirable to establish schools at which children suffering from disorders of speech
could receive their ordinary education as well as speech training. e con ei
ence condemned limited courses of lessons, especially for stammerers.
In a number of towns in England and Wales we have speech classes under
the auspices of the Board of Education. These, however, confine themselves to
the treatment of stammering: other defects of speech have to rely on hospital
clinics for their cure. In Lancashire there are some classes where children receive
a certain amount of speech training at the beginning of each day and their other-
lessons from the same teacher. But we have no special school for the treatment
of all speech defects, such as I am about to describe, and which the International
Society for Logopsedia continues to recommend.
THE HAMBURG SPEECH SCHOOLS.
The history of the establishment of the Speech Schools in Hamburg is
roughly as follows : ?
In 1888 a charitable association undertook to provide speech lessons for
stammerers in elementary schools. By 1900, support for this undertaking was
lacking, but the State (we must remember that Hamburg is one of the mdependen
Hansa " cities), which had realized the benefit that stammering children
derived from the speech classes, and had for some time granted them a subsidy,
came to the rescue, and the Education Authorities undertook the maintenance
of the speech lessons.
Finding, however, that the percentage of cures was low, and that there
were many relapses, as well as much that impeded the progress of the pupil,
owing to the lack of co-operation of teacher of speech and class teacher, a group
of experts began to urge the necessity of establishing special classes, where the
stammerer would receive his speech lessons and his general education from e
same teachers. In this way the strain of taking extra lessons, and interterence
with school attendance in consequence would be eliminated. The scheme at hrs
met with much antagonism but finally, in 1912, the first class was established.
The need for more was soon evident, besides which it was realized that 1 was
not enough to provide for stammerers only, since even an organic defect or speech
interferes with the pupils' progress, and functional defects such as delayed speech,
word deafness, and neurotic lisping needed special treatment as urgently as any
other. Hence the number of classes for children suffering from defects of speech
has grown steadily, especially since 1920, until there are at the present day, two
speech schools, with the full curriculum of the " Volkschule with 10 and 13
classes respectively, attended by about 400 pupils.
6 MENTAL WELFARE.
At the beginning of each scholastic year a questionnaire is sent round to the
heads of all elementary schools, asking for particulars of new pupils, or any that
have been overlooked in previous years, who appear to speak defectively. Such
children are then sent to the speech schools, which are conveniently situated to
serve the most populous districts of Hamburg. Where there is any doubt, the
child is kept under observation for a while, and finally recommended for the type
of school most suitable for its case.
It is interesting to note that at first there was some prejudice on the part
of parents and employers against these schools. The former opposed the ad-
missions of their children, the latter refused to employ them on leaving. This
idea was soon lived down, however, and the difficulty now is to find room for
all who apply for admission.
The classes at the school in the Stiftstrasse, are distributed in the following
manner : ?
8th Form ...
7th Form ...
6th Form ...
5th Form ...
4th Form ...
3rd Form ...
2nd Form ...
1st Form ...
N.B. The 8th Form
2 classes
2 classes
2 classes
1 class
1 class
2 classes
2 classes
1 class
the lowest standard.
The following table gives the proportion of the principal types of defect
throughout the school over a period of three years : ?
Form Stammering Lalling Others
8 24% 67% 9%
7 37% 54% 8%
6 53% 36% 10%
5 65% 23% 11%
4 72% 19% 8%
3 77% 14% 8%
2 85% 5% 9%
1 86% 5% 8%
From these two tables we learn that the largest proportion of pupils are
in the lowest and highest forms, and that the proportion of stammering greatly
increases in the higher standards, lalling decreasing to a negligible quantity.
The commoner kind of articulatory defect soon yields to treatment and
the children consequently return to the ordinary school in a year or two. Stam-
mering at an early age also responds to treatment more readily, and therefore
there are only sufficient pupils for one class of the 4th and 5th Forms. Then we
get an influx of new stammerers, hence the next two forms are duplicated again.
Serious articulatory defect is soon recognized and the child immediately sent to
the special school. Stammering in its early stages is often overlooked, besides
which the standard of intelligence of the stammerer is on the whole higher than
that of the other cases, therefore, though the normal school is glad to be rid of the
others, they frequently retain the stammerer until his speech actually begins to
interfere with his schooling. Furthermore, the stammer often does not manifest
itself until after a child has reached school age, while the trouble intensifies
MENTAL WELFARE. 7
during adolescence. This accounts for the increase both in the number of pupils
and the proportion of stammerers in the higher standards.
Here is another table giving a typical class :
6th Form.
Number of Pupils, 20. Boys 14, Girls 6.
Q
Stammerers ...   ?
Stammering and lisping ... ~
Stammering and phonasthenia ... 1
Lisping   *
Lalling   6
Cleft palates   ^
Word deafness   *
Aphasia ... ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? J
Chronic hoarseness ... ??? *
The work is carried out with the object of deriving the maximum benefit
for the pupil with the minimum of interference with his general education.
Classes are small, the number of pupils in each being restricted to 20; which,
however, is still too high. There is a supernumerary staff, so that there are
always some teachers available for individual speech lessons. Children are with-
drawn from their class, singly or in groups of 3 and given 15 minutes intensive
speech training daily. Furthermore, the class teacher will take aside some of
his pupils for special speech work during a writing lesson or some such time.
It is also permissible to curtail a lesson in order to do voice practice m c ass.
Ihis last, however, is not considered as beneficial as individual tuition.
A great feature of the school is its parents' evenings, where Parents and
guardians of the children are encouraged to come and seek advice as to the home
treatment of their children and discuss their progress with their teachers.
Most speech specialists consider that it is best to keep stammerers aPar
from other cases, both on account of the different treatment required and tor
the sake of the other children, for it will be observed that it is possible to have
a case of stammering coupled with other functional or even with organic defects,
and where there is already some abnormal speech the possibility of developing
a stammer by " imitation " is enhanced. I noted, however, that at this school
the opportunity of having a division of stammerers and a second of other cases,
where there were two divisions of a form, was not utilized. This is probably due
to the fact that, since individual speech lessons are given, the mental capacity
of the pupils rather than their speech types influenced the grouping. Although
the school is essentially one for children suffering from defects of speech, but o
a normal standard of intelligence, there are many children in the lower ^forms
who are decidedly backward, and even low grade mental deficients. The "
schule," which is the right place for these children, refuses to admit them until
their speech is fairlv intelligible, whereas in the Speech School they are a hind-
rance to the other pupils, and do not receive all the attention they require them-
selves.
The solution would be to establish a class for mental defectives who have
also some disorder of speech, a common enough occurrence, with a teacher who
has triple qualifications, in order to cope with them. A member of the staff in-
formed me that they hoped to attain this shortly.
There are 16 teachers on the staff of the school with its 13 classes. This
includes the " leader " (as the headmaster is now termed) who has, of course,
8 MENTAL WELFARE.
many duties besides teaching; such as, for instance, the interviewing of parents,
sending round the questionnaire referred to overleaf, but he also gives a number
of special speech lessons. The rest of the staff share the class teaching between
them in such a way, that all in turn are available to give speech lessons at times,
or in order that some may be free for research work, or, that those who are not
yet fully qualified may pursue their studies. All are qualified teachers, which
means that they have had University education, but since there is no recognized
training centre for teachers of speech, the school has in part to serve this purpose.
When the first special speech classes opened there were teachers with many
years experience of both sides of the work available. The qualifications required
of them, as teachers of speech were : " General remedial training, a knowledge
of the physiology of speech, phonetics, the diagnosis of central and peripheral
defects of speech, especially of stammering and lalling, the technique of hygienic
breathing."
Continuing on these lines and although no special syllabus has been
arranged for them, teachers attend lectures at the University and have their
practical experience at the school. Their studies include experimental phonetics,
speech hygiene, psychology and psycho-pathology, etc.
There are several speech schools in Germany and many more groups of
speech classes, but there is no recognized examination or training. This some-
what haphazard method is looked upon with disfavour by the Association of
Teachers of Remedial Speech Training in Germany, and is one which most
certainly requires attention, for not all towns have even such a good University
course at their disposal as Hamburg has. Though it is a disadvantage to have
partially qualified teachers on the staff, as is the case in Hamburg, the custom
in other parts of Germany is even less satisfactory. The teacher is given three
months leave of absence, during which he takes intensive training on the treat-
ment of defects of speech; a method that can never be adequate.
This situation with regard to the training of teachers is odd, considering
the excellence of the provision for the pupils. It is to be hoped that some im-
provement will soon be made.
THE USEFULNESS OF SPECIAL SPEECH SCHOOLS.
There can be no doubt of the excellent results achieved by the special
speech schools : cures are more thorough, and in those cases that were apt to
relapse, more lasting than those usually obtained by giving occasional speech
lessons only. The pupils are saved from much unhappiness and a feeling of
inferiority which often goes coupled with defects of speech, so that there is not
only the actual improvement to the speech, but one that manifests itself in the
whole being of those that have attended these schools.
Such establishments are useful in all cases, and absolutely necessary in
some. The latter are often the rarer defects of speech, and alas, they will not
receive adequate attention until they can do so in company with the more usual
types.
An illustration from my personal experience may serve. A child at present
attending the Speech Clinic at St. Thomas' Hospital, to be treated for word deaf-
ness, proved a great educational problem. The word-deaf have as a rule, perfect
hearing, but owing to a defect in the speech centre are unable to understand the
spoken word, and in consequence make very little effort to speak themselves.
Intelligence tests which were founded on the development of speech have
fortunately been abandoned, but the hasty are still apt to deem a child as mentally
defective, who does not understand simple questions or commands.
MENTAL WELFARE. 9
The case I am quoting was further complicated by actually being some-
what hard of hearing too. At first, her school teachers, finding her unfit for
ordinary education, it was suggested that a school for retarded children was the
right place for her. The mother was unwilling for her to attend such a school,
and at the speech clinic it was also deemed that in other respects the child was
normally intelligent. A hard hearing school proved useless to her, and at present
a compromise has been made, the girl attending a school for the deaf for her
general education, and the speech clinic for her special defect.
Here is an obvious case for a special speech school, where a special plan
of educating such a child would be practicable.
I should like to take this opportunity of again pointing out the danger of
trying to judge of a child's mental development by its speech. There are several
central defects of speech, which at first give such a child the appearance of
being mentally defective, where in other respects their mental age is up to
standard.
As an example I quote a boy of 11, who was able to keep up with his class
in all lessons, and was indeed in many things one of the " bright " boys. His
eacners, friends and relatives had in the course of years got to understand him,
j a curious form of lalling, being able to articulate no consonant but "t"
th .CV which makes a very bad impression on strangers, who usually dismiss
he child as " silly " or a " poor thing." He has at last started speech lessons,
lorn which, it is hoped, he will derive great benefit.
Speech is our chief means of communication with our fellow men, and
w here there is any interference with that communication, the whole of our lives
aie affected. Statistics taken in one London district proved that there were nearly
two per cent, of speech defectives amongst school children. Surely they have
some claim on society; no opportunity to re-establish their means of communica-
tion should be neglected.
" As 1^ pointed out in my previous article, a defect of speech may seriously
interfere with the progress of a normal child. With the retarded, that very fact
orten makes speech defective as well.
lhus schools for those suffering from defects of speech, for both types, are
?,ur ^eal. But not only the schools, but a doubly and trebly qualified staff. If
ie thing is worth doing, it is worth doing well. Let us learn by the experience
I ?thers, and not put the cart before the horse. Facilities for the training of
eacners exist: let them be utilized from every point of view, whenever we get
as ai as establishing speech schools in this country. Meanwhile, let it be our
aim to perfect the existing facilities for the remedy of disorders of speech.
