Portrait of Jane
=================

66 MENTAL HEALTH

By HER MOTHER
It wasn't until Jane was nearly eight years old
that we knew definitely that she was not merely
very stupid, but that her stupidity was such that
she could never take her place alone in the
world. "Half-wit", "dim-wit", "dumb-
bell ", all the names which we had teasingly
called her normal elder sister, suddenly had a
hideous reality when we used them for Jane, and
we quickly stopped.
Looking back I realize that I had had many
hints that Jane was sub-normal. She learned to
walk and to talk rather later than other children,
but that did not worry me at all. She was
healthy, large, cheerful, and in my eyes very
pretty, and I never wanted a daughter of
startling brilliant brains, I wanted daughters
that were strong, and happy, and affectionate.
The first moment I remember feeling a wave of
panic was when Jane was about six. That was in
the war, and we had evacuated to Scotland.
There was a parents' day at the village school,
and all the proud mothers went up to watch a
play and some prize-giving. Mid-morning there
was a break, and the children were handed
bottles of milk and straws. I noticed that Jane
was having trouble removing the top off the
bottle, and managing the straws. Looking
around I saw that children much younger than
Jane were having no difficulty at all.
At that instant I glimpsed the truth, and felt
faint. I spoke to the schoolmaster, and he told
me that she was undoubtedly rather clumsy and
stupid, but that there was no need to worry?she
would grow out of it.
We Learnt the Truth
The next eighteen months the situation
deteriorated. We moved about Scotland follow-
ing Jane's soldier father, and Jane went to several
schools. The reports grew more serious. If a
child cannot read at five or six, it is not important.
If she cannot read at seven and a half, something
is very wrong. At last we went to a famous
child specialist in Edinburgh and were bluntly
told the truth ; Jane was just over the border-
line, she simply did not have enough intelligence
to take her place in the normal world.
A nightmare feeling enveloped us?this could
not happen to us. There was no other case in
our family ; we had, in fact, unconsciously
considered ourselves a clever family ; if not
brilliant ourselves, we lived in the reflected glory
* of uncles and grandfathers who had done well
in the professions. We saw four more specialists
in London, asking and asking " what can be
done ? " It took us a year to realize that at the
present time, in Jane's type of case, the medical
profession has no solution. There was nothing
to be done.
I think, at this period, while we were always
acting to help the child, we were actually thinking
almost entirely about ourselves. There is a very
strong instinct in all parents to be proud of their
children. Quite modest people will bore you
with tales of the miraculous progress of their
young, in which they see themselves reflected.
When you find your child is a " half-wit
you feel very ashamed at first, and later you feel very
humble. You certainly feel very sorry for
yourself.
We learned a great deal about backward
children. We visited " special " schools and
read many books. As our friends learned of
our problems we found that we were not alone
in having a backward child, and we learned of
many cases quite close to us that we had not
known existed. People do not go about talking
of relations who are a bit " queer ", but as soon
as they find that you have the same problem,
they are anxious to pour out their hearts.
The official reports told us that three to four
per cent, of the school population are placed in
the mental deficient class. These depressing
statistics were an enormous comfort to us ?'
slowly our problem fell into perspective. There
was no more reason for us to be ashamed of a
backward child than there was to be obnoxiously
proud of a clever child?children just fell into
different groups, and you just naturally loved
and protected them however they turned out.
We were lucky to place Jane in a boarding
school for " special " children, in the country-
Here her days were filled with a busy routine of
classes that she could follow, and she was much
happier than she had been in the normal school,
bewildered by lessons that were gibberish to her;
she learned to read, to knit, to dance, to sing-
to make her bed and to wash dishes. We were
* Reprinted by permission, from Everywoman, January, 1950. "People in the Making, No. 17. The Backward
Child"
1
MENTAL HEALTH 67
delighted in her progress and took pride in what
she could do, and we stopped worrying that she
Probably would never learn to write properly,
and that the chances of her ever learning to
add or subtract were remote.
She came home for holidays and, now that her
Problem was generally known among our friends,
we found a great number of people who shared
the burden of looking after her. She is of a
sunny cheerful nature and friends would take her
for a half day, and she would help with their
shopping or house-work. A responsible person
must always be with her, which would be a great
strain if the task was not shared. Ninety-nine
Per cent, of the time she behaves quite satis-
factorily, but you cannot be sure.
Her Sister Understood
There was a morning when I sent her out to get
a newspaper from a shop quite close by, and she
came back with the newspaper and a volume of
children's stories, which she said she had
brought home to read. The fact that she had
shoplifted " the book had no meaning for her.
% heart leapt, and for a moment I thought I
heard a policeman's steps approaching the
house ! I dashed to the shop, and my heart
~1(3 not stop pumping until I had paid for the
hook ! Since that day I have not let her go
shopping alone.
The war ended when Jane was eleven, and her
cider sister, who had been evacuated to America
tor five years, returned. I worried a great deal
ab?ut her sister's reaction and imagined she
Would be as ashamed and embarrassed as I had
been. How wonderfully wrong I was ! She is
?ur years older than Jane and has a tremendous
Protective feeling towards her and, with the
Vltality of youth, is often much better able to
c?pe with Jane than I am.
. I have learned since that older brothers and
sisters of backward children usually handle the
Sltuation with love and gentleness, and under-
standing. When Jane did surprising things like
Sjnging to herself on buses, her sister thought it
Was very funny, gave her a poke and told her
to be quiet ; while if I were tired, and Jane made
herself conspicuous, I tended to feel embarrassed
and miserable.
What of the Future ?
Of course, like all parents, we think of the
future, and wonder what will become of Jane
when we are dead. We haven't much money to
leave her and we do not wish her to be a burden
to her sister, who will, no doubt, have her own
family and its problems before many years. We
would hate to think that she might be put into
a public institution among some really bad
cases.
We hope that she will end, as other backward
children have ended, in some simple supervised
job that she can manage. We have heard of
girls who have worked on farms under some
kindly farmer's wife, or who have worked
domestically in the country. We have found
people everywhere so kindly disposed, and
Jane herself so good-natured and adaptable, that
we dare hope that she may find her niche and
become as useful, in her way, as the normal
child. If Jane had been born a hundred years
ago of a village family, and had never been
expected to read and write, to add and subtract
and cope with ration books and petrol coupons,
she would probably have passed as normal,
though eccentric.
Jane is now fifteen, and I have just come back
from a very happy weekend with her. I took
hei away from the school on Saturday to buy
some necessary clothes. Like all girls, she
took great interest in the purchases and in the
tea, with many cakes, that we consumed. I do
not think that anyone we passed in the shops
or in the street noticed anything abnormal, but
perhaps they did as, at Jane's suggestion,
I bought two balloons, and possibly a tall
girl of fifteen and her middle-aged mother
do look a little strange walking down the
main street with one large red and one
large yellow balloon waving in the wind
behind.
But I have at last reached the point when, if
Jane is happy, I am happy too, and quite
oblivious to what people think of our conduct.
Perhaps we have started a new fashion in
Worcestershire and perhaps, when I return next
month for another short visit I will find all adults
in the main street carrying balloons, and very
pretty it will look.
The Editor regrets that it has not been possible to include in this issue, the fourth article on " Maintenance
of Mental Health The series will, however, be resumed with the next issue.
