Morale and Mental Health in Modern Society
===========================================

:Author: R. F. TREDGOLD, M.A., M.D., D.P.M.
Paper read at the Annual General Meeting of the National Association for Mental Health, January 6th, 1950.
I feel that the title chosen by your Council
for this Annual Address is one which is parti-
cularly important to us all at the moment, and
Particularly appropriate for this Association to
discuss. We had hoped to have Sir George
Schuster to speak ; but most unfortunately he
"ad to refuse, and as I had gone a little way to
Put before my fellow members of the Council
the importance of the subject, I was in a very
awkward position when they suggested I should
fake his place as victim for to-day's Roman
holiday. I could, of course?and did?plead
my own inadequacies, and need not repeat that
again as they will be only too obvious in a
foment ; but the answer to my plea, as far as I
remember, was that such inadequacy would only
Provoke a really intelligent audience like this to
jUore constructive thought ; and indeed it is
true that there are few greater stimuli to one's
own activity than to see another's clumsy
Iumblings (witness our impatience when we
watch a friend trying a key in a lock) so that
Perhaps it is fair to hope that my few remarks
o-day will provoke you into tackling the matter
yourselves. My final defence that it was
Appropriate to invite me ever to speak here
^?ce all could read my views in the editorials of
Cental Health, was countered, as far as I
remember, by a delicate hint that no one ever
read the editorial anyhow !
besides being important, the subject is, of
course, most extensive, and naturally Sir George
?uld have given you a wider and rather different
levv ; but as we are deprived of that, I shall
to limit to-day's discussion to the way in
mch members of this Association, and others of
eir profession, can deal with the subject. I
Propose, therefore, to ask several questions in
ach field, and hope that my attempts to answer
em, will, as I say, provoke you to a more
oniplete exposition. These questions are :

1. What is meant by morale and mental
health ?
2. What is our responsibility ?
3. What methods are we to use ?
4. What tools and skills have we ?
5. What parts of the field are most profitable
to work in ?
Firstly, what are " Morale " and " Mental
Health " ? Both are phrases we hear a lot of,
and both are often very loosely used. Mental
health in indeed, in some circles?I fear some-
times including the ministerial?used as a
synonym for mental illness ; we hear of
mental health statistics which are nothing but
questionnaires on the facts of illness ; and
though I am naturally in favour of thinking in
terms of health, instead of in terms of illness,
this will not happen by the mere substitution
of one word for the other. The production of
mental health is more than the avoidance of
frank mental illness ; it is a positive effort for
the complete well being of every mental function
of the individual, and must, therefore, include
the full expression of the individual's personality
and the full development of his powers?
intellectual and emotional.

Morale is interlinked with mental health and
contributes to it ; is it the same thing ?
Group morale, however, is another matter,
and it is in the sense of the group that " morale "
is generally used ; high morale implies a group
bound closely together by common aims,
experience and stresses?supporting each other.
It is noteworthy that in groups of high morale
the members suffer less from individual
symptoms than those where morale is low ;
and this perhaps is a commonplace. Disinteg-
rating behaviour is unlikely.

Our Responsibility
------------------

The next question is, what part is to be played
by ourselves, who are students of mental health
with various kinds of training ? We all know
that on this point we often become involved in a
most bitter controversy in which (in polite
circles) we are sooner or later accused of trying
to usurp the functions of the Almighty or (in
less polite ones) of being emissaries of the Evil
One?and carefully chosen and trained emissaries
at that ! I feel though, that this needs clarifica-
tion. It is first essential to keep a discussion on
ethics separate from a discussion of the
mechanics of behaviour. Of course, as citizens
we are all entitled to express our views on right
and wrong?and life would be dull if we did not
do so?but I do not claim that a psychiatrist has
any special title to speak on ethics, but only on
the psychological mechanisms of behaviour.

The same, I take it, applies to you as members
of the National Association of Mental Health.
We are exactly the same case as the surgeon
whose job it is to heal his patient's broken arm,
and whose interest lies in its return to full use,
and not in whether that use is for good or evil
purposes.. This at least seems to me to be the
logical conclusion, for I can see nothing in the
training of the surgeon or psychiatrist which
gives either the right to be regarded (by others or
himself) as an authority on ethics. If we agree
here, we must still admit that the difficulty in
practice is that dividing lines are not so easy
to draw in psychiatry as in surgery and that the
psychiatrist seems always on the verge of ethical
problems ; for the reason that ill use of the
mind seems to him to be itself a symptom of
ill health ; that is, it is difficult to distinguish
bad behaviour in the sense of evil behaviour,
from bad behaviour in the sense of sick
behaviour. There are perhaps several causes
for this ; in the first place, ideally healthy
mental behaviour comes in most of our minds
to be equated with ideally good mental
behaviour ; it is indeed hard to define either and
thus difficult to distinguish their opposites.
Secondly, even those who find it possible to
make a clear distinction in the abstract between
these two, still sometimes find it difficult to
decide in which category they should place a
given example.

With these difficulties at the onset, it is
obvious that practical difficulties follow. The
study of disease leads naturally to a desire to
study methods of prevention ; and mental
illness is no exception. So the psychiatrist is
inclined to feel that he must prevent sick
behaviour, and study the factors which affect
mental health. This is reasonable enough.
But it is very easy for him to be led into feeling
that he should also prevent bad behaviour and
study the factors which affect good. This claim
inevitably leads to conflict with politicians,
judges, policemen, soldiers, managing directors
and all concerned in maintaining discipline or
accustomed to protecting society and is respon-
sible for some of the criticisms already quoted.
On the other hand one can sympathize only too
readily with the psychiatrist's enthusiasm and
public spirit.

Can we make this claim by comparing it again
with surgery ? We agreed that the surgeon's
aim was to cure the arm ; but what if that
arm were known to him to be going to be used
for an illegal purpose?to wield a gangster's
gun ? Should he still cure it ? It seems to me
that as a surgeon his duty is still to do so ;
though, of course, when the arm is well, as a
citizen he may have the duty of trying to prevent
it getting a gun. To take another example, a
prisoner-of-war camp?should a surgeon prisoner
take an opportunity of maltreating his captor,
to serve the interests of his own country ? It is
possible that this has occurred, and been praised ;
but it is, of course, on the assumption that it will
not occur, and that the surgeon will always
put his professional standards above his national
interest, that an international agreement, the
Geneva convention, is based. It is on such
international agreements that the world, as well
as to the nations concerned, depends for
increasing co-operation, and any loss is thus
deplorable.

If this is true of the surgeon, it must apply too
to the psychiatrist or to any other social worker,
who must stick to his own field and resist the
desire to take his authority outside ; he has no
more right to pontificate on ethics than any
other citizen?(perhaps I should also add, no
less right either ; but, if and when he acts as a
citizen he must make it clear that he is doing so,
and that he has shed his mantle of psychiatric
authority?not an easy task).

If I have unduly laboured this point, I hope
you will forgive me ; but I believe it to be
fundamental and even if it is accepted by you
to-day as obvious, it is not so obvious to many
who are less educated. Indeed we constantly
meet two misconceptions, the opposite of each
other. One is the belief that psychiatrists and
their allies are anxious to take over the respon-
sibilities of the control of human behaviour,
national and international ; this belief fills
them with horror ; the other?perhaps even
more embarrassing to us?is the desire for us to
do so. One might indeed compare the attitude
of the average man to the psychiatrist with that
of the owner of a djinn rising unexpectedly
out of a brass bottle : first, he exhibits very
considerable awe : second, the awe decreases
but much suspicion persists ; and third,
as the djinn proves his usefulness, his amiability,
and as his resemblance to a human being,
increases, he is met with familiarity and
sometimes a pet name. Finally the owner's
increasing demands for miracles or magic drive
the djinn to desperation, or perhaps to seek
refuge in his bottle. I fully realize that the need
for better national and international relations is
1
MENTAL HEALTH 61
urgent, perhaps as never before, and I believe
this is a reason for us all to exert the greatest
influence we can. But surely the way to do this
ls by using our talents and training in the field
for which they are best fitted, and not by fritter-
lng them away in other projects for which we
have no skill. This counsel (to dig only in our
own fields) is perhaps disappointing?but if any
find it so, he can console himself with the fact
that we have in our own territory enough work
to keep us occupied for a generation.
. Next, we must discuss which part of this work
ls likely to be the most profitable, what methods
We should pursue, and what tools we have at our
disposal. This meeting, composed as it is of
representatives of various branches of the social
sciences, is, I feel, a particularly appropriate
?ne for such questions to be asked.

Methods
--------

If then we are claiming to play a part as
scientists, we must do so in the ways laid down
t?r other sciences ; we must follow a threefold
Path.

This is described emphatically in a series of
rn?st telling adjectives by L. J. Henderson,
whose words (quoted by Elton Mayo)* were
an intimate, habitual, intuitive familiarity "
Wlth the subject ; a " systematic knowledge " ;
and " an effective way of thinking ". To obtain
these he had recommended " hard, persistent
responsible, unremitting labour "?" accurate
observation of things and events ; selection,
guided by judgment, born of familiarity and
experience, of the salient and recurrent pheno-
mena, and their classification " ; finally, " the
judicious construction of a theory, a modest
Pedestrian affair ".

This is the path which all the natural sciences
nave trodden ; it is the path which we must
tread too. There are no short cuts, and the
keynote is patience and persistence and
Pedestrianism.

T?oIs and Skills
If we consider next our tools, we must admit
that they are often inadequate or even impercep-
.le, and our skill primitive. The natural
sciences have long passed the days when they
Were developing their earliest tools and skills,
out if We can think how much they owe to the
jnicroscope or the telescope, we can realize
now early we are in the development of our
tools. Our lack 6f skill has been roundly
c?ndemned by Mayo, who has compared us
unfavourably with all the natural sciences. I
think this is a little hard. Mayo's suggestion
was that we should acquire the skill of com-
munication. His words are worth quoting.
" I believe that social study should begin with
what may be described as communication ;
that is, the capacity of an individual to communi-
cate his feelings and ideas to another, the capacity
of groups to communicate effectively and inti-
mately with each other. This problem is beyond
all reasonable doubt, the outstanding defect that
civilization is facing to-day." He could not be
more emphatic.

With this I think we should all agree, but I
think too that we can claim to be beginning at
least two methods to this end?though I should
be the first to admit they both need a great deal
of development.

Firstly, there is the art of obtaining informa-
tion, in which, no doubt, the technique of
listening plays a large part. This is of benefit
in at least one side of communication ; and
most of us have perforce developed this to some
extent in our profession. By contrast we do not
seem to have been so successful in developing
our skill in the other side of communication?
that is imparting new ideas.

Secondly, there is the skill of interpretation?
that is the unravelling of the underlying influence
of behaviour. This must be practised by the
psychiatrist and to an extent by his allies.
Although no doubt various analytic techniques
provide an understanding of deeper matters,
I do not think it is right to say that understand-
ing can only come by analytic methods, and I
feel sure that many of you (who have not had the
privilege of analytic training) will agree that
you do in fact obtain some understanding of
many pieces of individual and group behaviour
without it. Again in parenthesis, it is interesting
and rather sad to find that those whose skill is
great in interpretation?in the sense of under-
standing?are not necessarily as expert in
interpretation in the sense of explaining what
they understand to others.

Subjects
--------

The next question is, on what subjects can
our methods and skill rightly be used ? We
must readily admit that there is no lack of these,
even within our prescribed scope, so that we
need, after all, waste no sympathy on those who
are anxious to work.

The fields in which we can work are many and
varied ; each no doubt attracts different people ;
Mayo, E. {1946). The Social Problems of an Industrial Civilization. Harvard University Press.
industry, the structure of Society and of the
family, education, vocational guidance and
selection ; in all these relations between
individuals and groups are at the root. May we
consider a few examples ?

In industry the urge is for more and yet more
productivity ; we are assured that on this
depends our national survival. Many factors
influencing productivity are, no doubt, material ;
many others are psychological. In the midst
of this struggle we find the most glaringly
illogical behaviour?strikes which gain nothing
but disrepute for their leaders, managers whose
" efficiency " produces go-slow, men with
excellent technical skill promoted to positions
where social not technical skill is required.
Illogical behaviour of this kind in an individual
would indicate study of emotional roots of
his actions. Can we doubt that this needs a
similar approach ? Besides these examples,
there are also in industry, many tensions between
the different levels of the hierarchy, and of course
between management and the workers, which
would surprise the- simple-minded doctor used
to working as one of a team.

The relationships which exist in Society,
national and international, are as much deserv-
ing of study ; illogical behaviour is equally
common, and tensions so obvious as to need no
emphasis. Again there would seem a strong
case for the work of scientists trained in
interpreting unconscious motivation. Another
point was made by Mayo ; co-operation
between individuals and groups is woefully
inadequate and inefficient. We simply do not
know enough about the reasons that lead two
individuals or groups to collaboration, or to
combat. Here again, study and patient observa-
tion is wanted.

In other fields, such as education and voca-
tional guidance, we may find frequent examples
of behaviour directed by unconscious complexes,
and of group tension ; and it is perhaps an
interesting reflection of the latter that those
engaged in teaching are almost the only people
left who are recognized to need one-third of
their year as holiday?that is away from the
site of tension. But here perhaps this is not the
major problem of psychology ; more important
is the application of tests for aptitudes and for
intelligence, to the training for the professions
and trades. Again, what are the factors which
influence the transfer of ideas from one person
to another ? Is the result of research on this
applied to teaching generally ?

It seems to me that each of these fields would
benefit from the appreciation of these points.
Trained scientists would gradually acquire
familiarity with the observed facts of each,
and then a systematic knowledge ; later, an
effective way of thinking, if developed, would
provide a new approach to the problems I
have already mentioned as examples of illogical
behaviour and tension. There is no suggestion,
that the work and experience of those already in
the field would be lost or superseded?only that
it might be amplified. After all, the illustra-
tions I have taken, have not, so far, been satis-
factorily dealt with by existing methods.
This is perhaps enough to indicate the width
of the field of mental health, seen from various
angles from which study may occur. I do not
of course in any way deny the value of the
established medical method?learning about
health from illness ; and there is no doubt
that much of value can come from this. But
by far the greater part of our resources of money
and workers are already directed on to the
study of the sick, and my purpose to-day has,
therefore been to stress the other side. The
estimates for expenditure on treatment and on
research are sometimes in the neighbourhood
of 20 : 1, so that we have a long way to go to
adjust this balance.

May I finish by summarizing very briefly the
points I have tried to make :
1. The study of the mental health of Society
is one which is urgent to-day.
2. The social scientists whose branches
are represented here to-day can play a great
part in this study.
3. Their approach must follow the path
of any other science, and consist of three steps,
the unremitting labour of ascertaining facts and
so gaining familiarity with the subject, the
classification of the subject, and the judicious
construction of theories. May I repeat again?
these must be " modest pedestrian affairs,
that is they must not go too fast and they must
expect to be frequently knocked down ". Unless
this path is followed, we must lay aside all
claims to authority as scientists, and have no
more (but no less) than any other citizen.
4. We have certain skills to work with?
the techniques of eliciting facts and of inter-
pretation, which we must and can develop.
5. There are many parts of one field, which
could bear the application of these methods.
These are all of fundamental importance to our
everyday life, and to the future of our
civilization.
