The Biology of Mental Defect
=============================

:Author: Lionel S.
Penrose, M.D. Sidgwick & Jackson. 21s.

Many people hold very definite views which they
do not hesitate to propound on this subject. For
example a leading dignitary of the church recently
advocated wholesale sterilization of mental defectives in an article published in a daily newspaper.
Those who are interested in the social problem of
mental inferiority would do well to study this new
book on the subject by Professor Penrose. By so
doing they will gain an insight into the extreme
complexity of the problem and realize that it is one
which cannot be solved by any single piece of
dictatorial legislation. On the contrary, mental
defect is an inevitable part of our social structure
as it stands to-day. This is not to say that the
dimensions of the problem may not be much
reduced and the lot of particular individuals
(whether patients or their relatives) much eased by
proper social provision. Penrose quotes Arkansas,
Arizona and Nevada as states in which no provision
is made for mental defectives and shows that in those
states there is an equivalent rise in the number of
persons admitted to prison and he notes that in
general it costs more to keep a citizen in prison
than it does in an institution for mental defectives.
Throughout his book Penrose brings to bear an
accumulation of scientific erudition in contrast to
the moralising tone which permeates the older
text-books of mental deficiency. He shows that
modern psychiatry has little use for the legal concept
of moral defect and points out that in general mental
defectives are not less but more receptive in point of
character training than ordinary individuals. He
suggests that the origin of faulty habits which highgrade defectives may acquire, lies not so much in any
innate propensity for wickedness as in a faulty social
environment, and points out that the purpose of
institutional care of such cases is re-equipment for a
useful life in the community. In general he does not
favour the mixing of high-grade delinquents and
"psychopathic personalities" with well-behaved
patients of a lower level. He shows that the result
may be bad for both groups inasmuch as the bad
behaviour of the delinquents may serve as a model
for their less gifted fellows whilst the more intelligent
patient who is committed to an institution from
court or prison is contemptuous of the imbeciles
with whom he is confined and so prejudiced against
any advice and instruction which he may be offered.
Penrose also deals admirably with the alleged
threat to the national intelligence which arises in
popular imagination from the alleged fertility of
mental defectives. He explains that idiots and most
imbeciles are sterile (though in fact some American
states have been to some pains to reduplicate nature's
work by sterilising many thousands of such patients).
Apart from this the feeble-minded are also less
fertile than the average, and it is among the dull and
backward group who are not legally recognized as
mental defectives that a really high reproductive rate
is found. He gives grounds for believing that this
phenomenon may not be so undesirable as is
generally believed. He suggests that just as most
defectives are the children of ordinary people, so too
those who have made great contributions to civilization may come from parents in no way specially
gifted apart from their ability to endow their
children with special characters.

As to what constitutes mental defect Penrose
explains that there is no such thing as " intelligence "
in the abstract and that what the defective suffers
from is a lack of various abilities which are more or
less reliably assessed by standardized intelligence
tests. He shows that in the main these tests were
devised by those whose prime need was for verbal
ability and that they do not necessarily give a reliable
estimate of the practical ability of the subject.
By the same token, he quotes with approval the
opinion that formal education should be incidental
to the training of the imbecile rather than its prime
purpose. He does not adhere to the view that the
intelligence of a child is fixed and unalterable
throughout his life and views with the suspicion
which it deserves, any estimate of intelligence
formed before the age of five. On the basis of
observations made on adopted children together
with other facts he puts forward the tentative
hypothesis that nature and nurture are of approximately equal importance in determining the
intelligence level of an individual. Elsewhere he
points out that whereas the share of " nature "
is largely predetermined, the share of " nurture "
is socially determined and therefore readily
influenced so that the ultimate level of performance
and social usefulness of the defective is profoundly
affected by his upbringing.

In discussing the causation of mental defect,
Penrose mentions a number of factors which have
already attracted medical attention and some of
which it may be possible to modify, by suitable
measures of personal and social hygiene. These
include the effect of German measles, mumps and
other infectious fevers during pregnancy, incompatibility of parental blood groups, hitherto
little studied errors of body chemistry which give
rise to gargoylism and phenylketonuria. He
mentions a number of interesting possibilities for
research which include the effect on certain mental
defectives of various pituitary hormones.
Professor Penrose's book is essential reading for
all of those who have to deal with mental defect
(a term which can be extended to cover at least
1 per cent, of humanity). The mathematical
sections may be skipped by those whose talents do
not lie in that direction, with little detriment to the
main argument. It is to be hoped that a second
edition will see an amplification of the clinical
presentation for those unversed in the subject.
B.H.K.
