The Social Adaptation of Institution Childern
==============================================

This was the subject of a research undertaken
by a team appointed by the National Association
for Mental Health, and generously financed by
the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust.

The team consisted of Dr. Frank Bodman
(Director), Miss Margaret Mackinlay (Educa-
tional Psychologist) and Miss Kathleen Sykes
(Psychiatric Social Worker). The Report, as it
stands, is not being published, but a summary of
it has appeared in the Lancet (28.1.50), and it is
hoped that other sections may be printed else-
where. A few points of general interest are
noted here.

During the research, fifty-one children
(nineteen girls and thirty-two boys) who had
spent three years or more in institutions
were studied together with a control
group of fifty-two school children living in their
own homes. Two of the institutions were
modern " grouped " cottage homes ; the
remainder were Homes of various types. In
addition it was hoped to make a comparable
study of a similar sized group of children
brought up in foster-homes but great
difficulty was experienced for various reasons,
in obtaining access to these, and only twenty-
three could be studied, not all of them fully.
The project, as planned, provided for a
follow-up of every child seen in a Home, six to
twelve months after leaving and to visit them
again twelve to eighteen months after the original
enquiry. It was not, in practice, found possible
to adhere rigidly to this timetable, though the
general aim of seeing every child again after the
first visit as well as the people with whom he was
then living, was, in the main, satisfactorily
achieved. The children in the other groups
were followed up after an interval of about a
year.

To ascertain social capacity, Doll's Vineland
Social Maturity test was used in every case in
addition to the Revised Stanford-Binet Test and
others given by the psychologist.
The report contains a description of the
various types of Homes used for the investiga-
tion and discusses the points of difference
between them. Differences in " atmosphere "
are interestingly recorded by the social worker ;
dealing with the social attitude of the " Homes "
child to strangers, she writes :
" The children's experience clearly varied,
but it was only the exceptional Home which
had achieved anything like a natural
attitude. One's reception varied from the
competent and friendly way in which one
might be met at the station and entertained
with considerable poise and general con-
versation while waiting for a local bus, to
the suspicious and reluctant attitude shown
by a child commanded to come to the
" office " for an interview of whose object
he had no inkling. Quite apart from the
lack of preparation in the latter case, such
an attitude to a new situation must be based
on general experience and reflects some-
thing about the child's upbringing which
is of great importance to him in his personal
relationships in the world later."
Follow-up visits to Homes revealed the
children's longing for someone who would take
a continuous personal interest in them, as despite
the arrangements made by many Homes for
keeping in touch after leaving for work, this
did not fully meet the need.

" It was one of the hardest things about this
investigation from the point of view of the
social worker, that we should be debarred
from giving active help or encouraging the
permanence of one personal link."

It was frequently recognized by many of the
people consulted that much more attention
should be given to devising a good After-Care
scheme, ensuring close co-operation between all
who had been or were now concerned with the
child.

The psychologist's section of the Report
describes and discusses the tests given to the
Homes children, and to the children in the
control group. It further discusses the sub-
sequent interviews which sought to elicit
information from the children about the type
of work they wanted to do on leaving school,
and to find out what was their attitude to
school. As a general rule a more friendly one was
found in the control group and there appeared
to be good staff-pupil relationships in all the
four control schools visited.

With regard to the Homes children, the
psychologist notes that the schools to which
they went :

" Tended to regard them as inevitably
problems, inevitably educationally back-
ward, and frequently also intellectually
dull. (This impression has been streng-
thened by more recent school visiting in
connection with later work.) While
admitting the very considerable possi-
bility of the children being all these
things, it is felt that in some cases the
school's reaction has been excessive and has
tended only to exacerbate the problem."
The general conclusions reached as a result of
this investigation are summarized by Dr.
?odman as follows :

1. The children brought up in institutions were
less mature socially than those in the control
group, as measured by the Vineland Social
Maturity Test.

2. This relative lack of maturity is shown in
fewer contacts with the community, and with the
outside world, whether by organized social
Activities, the radio or press. Less advantage is
taken of the opportunity to explore the neigh-
bourhood or to travel any distance from home.
Less initiative is shown in taking responsibility
IP1" himself or making practical plans for his
future.

3- A little more than a third of the difference in
j^aturity can be attributed to lack of oppor-
tunity and the restrictions associated with
lr?stitutional life.

4. Thirty per cent, of institution children had
n? contact with any relatives.

5. Less than 6 per cent, of institution children
uad no friends while in the institution, but over
.0 per cent, were friendless after leaving the
xnstitution.

y. While less than a quarter of institution
children belonged to some kind of youth
Organization compared with more than half
the control group; on leaving the institution
Another 20 per cent, joined organized social
activities, while of the control group more than
a quarter abandoned youth organizations.
7. Nearly five times as many girls in the
??ntrol group compared with the institution
SJrls, admitted an interest in boys. There was
not much marked difference amongst the boys,
^ne boy in eight institution boys and one boy
in five of the control group showed an interest
in girls.

8. Only 40 per cent, of institution children
were successful in obtaining the occupation of
their choice, compared with nearly 60 per cent,
of the controls.

9. Yet only 22 per cent, had changed their
jobs compared with over 35 per cent, of the
control group.

10. Rather more than one in seven institution
children failed in their first job. Except for
one boy they were all of a dull, if not very dull
intelligence.

11. A greater proportion (over a third) of
institution children expressed themselves as
looking forward to further promotion or
acquiring further skill; less than a quarter of the
controls showed this ambition. This ambition
appeared to be associated with at least average
intelligence.

12. A very striking discrepancy appears in the
family histories of the two groups of children.
Amongst the institution children 17-6 per cent,
had relatives in mental hospitals, another 17-6
in mental deficiency institutions and 37-2 per
cent relatives who had been reported to have
committed anti-social behaviour. Amongst the
control group, there were no relatives suffering
from mental illness or guilty of anti-social
behaviour : 11*5 per cent, of the control
group had mentally defective sibs and nearly a
quarter had neurotic relatives.

13. The very high proportion of children with
relatives of proved defect, disease or instability
of mind (72-4 per cent.) suggests that contribut-
ing causes to their relative social immaturity are
inherited constitutional factors.

14. Indeed when all the children, institution
and controls, are regrouped according to
parentage, whether of sound mental stock, or of
unstable parentage, it is found that the differences
in social maturity are exactly the same as when
they are grouped according to the environment
in which they have been raised.

15. This finding suggests that constitutional
factors are at least as important as environ-
mental factors in the subsequent social
maturation.
