These our Children
===================

:Author: Arthur Collis and Vera E.
Poole. Gollancz. 8s. 6d.

It will be remembered that the Curtis Committee
drew attention to the fact that it was precluded
from dealing with children suffering from neglect
in their homes, and that subsequently this question
was raised in Parliament.

No one is better equipped to deal with it?in so
far as it is concerned with poverty and slum condi-
tions?than members of Family Service Units whose
former book, Problem Families presented such an
unforgettable picture of the surroundings and lives
of people written off in despair by other social
agencies as unhelpable.

In this new publication, emanating from the same
source, the problem is dealt with from the standpoint
of the slum child?in relation to the home in which
he lives, the streets in which he finds his diversion,
the play centre, club and play ground which he
frequents, and the school which seeks to educate
him. A final chapter, "What of the Future?"
discusses possible lines of action, stressing the
following recommendations :

(1) That the Government should institute an
investigation to ascertain the extent of the
problem and to provide a full-scale picture
of its exact nature. Such a survey should
include suggestions as to methods which
might be adopted for the re-education of
parents accused of neglect.

(2) That a new Child and Family Welfare Service
should be set up, empowered to deal with all
children (whether of school age or under)
and acting as a clearing centre for cases of
ill-treatment, neglect, behaviour difficulties
and delinquency. The Service should be
staffed by specially trained and experienced
field workers in direct contact with the
parents and children concerned.

The number of children living at slum level in
whose lives this book seeks to arouse interest, is
happily small if expressed in terms of a percentage
of the whole child population, but it presents a
problem which has eluded all the lines of approach
so far tried and which?despite the increasing
number of social workers and Local Authority
officials who are continually in and out of slum
homes and who have a real desire to help, is still no
nearer solution.

Only a resolute attack on a wide front can deal
with it effectively, and it is urgent that such an attack
should be planned soon. For as long as these
conditions exist they involve :

" the stunting and thwarting of young lives,
heartbreak and tragedy for many, and a
denial to children of all that is best in life."
In the solution of the problem, the contribution of
the psychiatrist the psychologist and the mental
health social worker, is needed equally with that of
trained personnel from other fields, and only by
united action will a solution be found.

To the complacent optimist who?comparing the
amenities of the welfare state with the horrors of
child labour in the days of the industrial revolution-
congratulates himself that such things can no longer
happen here, this book may come as an unwelcome
shock ; to the social worker baffled by his inability
to rescue children from physical, mental and spiritual
squalor, it will come as a challenge and an incentive.
By all responsible citizens it should be read and
discussed, and if a stimulus to thought and action is
needed, no more effective awakener of the social
conscience can be prescribed. A.L.H.
