Psycho-Analysis
================

MENTAL HEALTH 21
Reviews
 A Handbook for Medical Practi-
tioners and Students of Comparative Psychology.
2nd Edition. 
:Author: Edward Glover, M.D.
Staples Press. 15s.

Psycho-Analysis To-day. Edited by Sandor Lorand,
M.D. George Allen & Unwin. 25s.

All who desire to acquire a basic knowledge of the
fundamental theories and tenets of psycho-analysis
will welcome the appearance of these two books,
each completing the other. Dr. Glover sought in
re-writing his handbook for its second edition, to
re-state the basic theories of psycho-analysis which
the student can then see in their applied form in the
volume of essays edited by Dr. Lorand, where issues
wider than the purely clinical ones are more fully
discussed. Through these two books a full apprecia-
tion of the extent of the contribution of psycho-
analysis to human knowledge, both in depth and
range, can be easily obtained.

Of the two, Dr. Glover's book is the most difficult
and is even, at times, very difficult. The difficulty
lies in the dryness of his style, the concentrated and
often metaphysical nature of his thought, so that the
reader can never afford to relax his attention.
Or. Glover is not helped by the type in which the
book is set which is too close, dazzles and fatigues
the eye. But the mastery of Dr. Glover's exposition
a rewarding experience and enables the reader to
acquire a very thorough and sound grounding in
Psycho-analysis not only in its theoretical aspects
put also in its clinical applications. One of the
"Tiportant attractions of this book is that after the
theoreticai exposition, Dr. Glover relates theory to
clinical material and gives a clear account of the
Psycho-analytic interpretation of psychiatric dis-
orders. A psycho-analytic textbook of psychiatry
(as Muncie attempted for the Meyerian point of
yiew) is long overdue, and Dr. Glover in this section
?f the book has most usefully shown the way.
Dr. Glover's book has three sections, the first
dealing with theory, the second with clinical psych-
latry, and the third with problems relating to
treatment. On the theoretical side the basic
three-fold approach of psycho-analysis to any
niental event is stressed and is then discussed in
subsequent chapters in relation to the various phases
?f ego and mental development. Thus, in the first
Place every mental event has a " topographical "
basis involving the various component parts of the
^ind; this approach is based on the concept of the
?und as an apparatus with a definite structure.
Then " mental activity is a response to disturbances
?f equilibrium " and this is the second or dynamic
Approach which is further discussed in terms of
Instinct-tension. Thirdly, there is the economic
aPproach which is " governed by a general tendency
?f the psychic apparatus to master such instinctual
e*citation as cannot be immediately discharged and
in consequence threatens a variety of discomforts,
one of the most compelling of which is described as
anxiety An important point is then made that
unconscious mental mechanisms are means whereby
the mind achieves it's aim of reducing instinctual
stimulation to an optimum level. Dr. Glover,
therefore, is able to stress that normality " is
essentially a pragmatic standard indicating that the
individual has achieved a working balance between
the claims of his own instincts and the standards
of behaviour laid down by himself and by the
community in which he lives The point is that
these standards not only vary from community to
community and from culture to culture, but more
important still, vary in the particular aspects of
behaviour emphasized by them.

In the clinical section, these three approaches, the
topographical, the dynamic and the economic
become basic conceptual instruments for the
analysis of symptom formation and mental ill-health.
This section has many excellent chapters, particu-
larly the one dealing with psychosomatic disorders,
the discussion of which is very important in view of
the increased interest taken by physicians in these
conditions. Dr. Glover establishes a two-fold
distinction between the psycho-neuroses and the
psychosomatic illnesses. The psycho-neuroses have
in the first place " psychic content and meaning and
secondly follow a standardized pattern in the process
of symptom formation ". On the other hand, the
psychosomatic disorders " although influenced by
psychic reaction at some point or other in their
progress, have in themselves no psychic content and
consequently do not present stereotyped patterns
of conflict. Should they develop psychic meaning,
it may be assumed that a psycho-neurotic process
has been superimposed on a psychosomatic founda-
tion."
In the other clinical chapters there are many
valuable points. Thus the drug addictions are
linked to the manic depressive disorders, and Dr.
Glover argues that the drug addict is not a true
psychopath since he seeks to solve his conflicts by
the alteration of the forces within himself and not
through the alteration of his environment to suit
his unconscious drives. Although the chapter on
the psycho-analysis of children is all too short (the
omission of any reference to Mrs. Klein's work is
most noticeable and reveals the author's personal
bias), it contains the important point that " owing
partly to the immaturity of mental organization and
partly to the rapid vicissitudes of early mental
development, the clinical manifestations of mental
disorders during the first five years are extremely
' fluid '. Symptom formations begin to manifest
a classic outline only during the latency period."
There is also a chapter on " social difficulties
a descriptive term used to embrace conditions where
" the effect on social relations is a primary criterion
and the disorder of the ego is relegated to second
place This concept is an important one and
raises a vital question which the clinician in reaching
his diagnosis must seek to answer.

The final section of the book contains practical
notes on the nature of psycho-analytic treatment,
its duration and cost, the choice of analyst and the
results of treatment. At various times throughout
the book, Dr. Glover allows his personal prejudices
to distort his thinking, a point well illustrated by
the following remarks on group therapy. " Group
therapy in general has acquired considerable
popularity recently, partly because of a passing
craze for group methods, partly because of the need
for a rapid turnover of cases, but mostly because it
offers an escape for the arduous and conflict inducing
labours of psycho-analysis proper " !

Psycho-Analysis To-day consists of 31 articles by
29 psychiatrists and psycho-analysts, all of whom
have made important contributions to present-day
psycho-analytic knowledge. The quality of these
articles varies greatly. The main value of the book
lies in the variety of the problems it raises, and shows
how psycho-analysis can effectively contribute to
their solution. These articles cover theoretical
problems, as in Mrs. Klein's outline of her views on
the early developments of the conscience of the
child, clinical conditions with chapters on the
psycho-neuroses and the psychoses, as well as
articles on broader subjects such as the psychology of
religion, and the contribution that psycho-analysis
can make to sociology, anthropology, literature and
art. The book as a whole successfully shows the
extent to which psycho-analysis continues to uncover
new aspects of mental life, and how the psycho-
analytic method is successful not only in giving a
deeper understanding of the clinical problems
discussed by Dr. Glover, but also of the wide range
of human endeavours, religious, artistic and
cultural. P.N.T.
