British Medical Bulletin
========================

:Type: Reviews

Vol. 6, No. 1-2, 1949,
Mental Health. The British Council, Medical
Department, 3 Hanover Street, London, W.l.
10s.

This issue of the British Medical Bulletin, as the
introduction points, out, was intended for publica-
tion in connection with the International Congress
on Mental Health, held in London in August, 1948.
It is a comprehensive symposium on the latest
discoveries in the field of mental health from contri-
butors who are eminent in their own particular
branch of this field. Dr. J. R. Rees, a member of
the Council of the N.A.M.H. contributes the first
article on the International Congress. The other
contributors are : Sir Frederick Bartlett, Sir Cyril
Burt, Sir Norwood East, Dr. Eysenck, Dr. Michael
Fordham, Dr. Edward Glover, Dr. Denis Hill,
Dr. Emanuel Miller, Mr. Cyril Penton, Dr. Felix
Post, Dr. Derek Richter, Dr. W. Clifford Scott
and Dr. P. E. Vernon. This list indicates the
authoritative nature of the contributions.
It is a rare thing to have both the right wing and the
left wing viewpoints in mental health presented in one
volume. '' Ideas originally derived from the psycho-
therapy of the individual, have recently been applied
to the psychology of groups, with implications for
the management of human relations in their most
general form." This sentence from Dr. Eliot
Slater's introduction indicates a viewpoint which
would appeal to readers of this Journal.
The application of mental health principles to the
behaviour disorders of children are described well
by Dr. Emanuel Miller. All other age groups are
also covered and an interesting article is contributed
by Dr. Felix Post on the mental aspects of
senescence.

The different schools of psychoanalysis are
explained by Dr. Edward Glover and Dr. Clifford
Scott. The article on juvenile delinquency is very
informative and indicates how much more has to be
studied under this heading.

Mr. Cyril F. Penton contributes an article on the
law relating to temporary treatment in mental
hospitals. He states that the " existing provisions
for temporary treatment contained in Section 5 of the
1930 Act, have been found so complicated and
difficult of operation, that they have had a deterrent
effect upon those who contemplated availing them-
selves of them." He goes on to suggest certain
changes in the 1930 Act.

It is understood that another volume covering the
Mental Health Services is shortly to be published,
and this we await with interest.
A.T.
