Mentally Handicapped Persons
=============================

News and Notes

It may be remembered that last year an Advisory
Council was set up by the Minister of Health on the
arrangements to be made under Section 29 of the
National Assistance Act for the welfare of " persons
substantially and permanently handicapped by
illness, injury or congenital deformity or such other
disabilities as may be prescribed by the Minister".
In the definitions given in the Act, it is stated that
" disability " includes mental as well as physical
handicap but the first Committees to be appointed
by the Advisory Council dealt only with various
categories of persons who were physically disabled.
We are now glad to be able to report the setting up
of a Committee on the mentally handicapped (other
than those coming within the provisions of Section
28 and Part V of the National Health Service Act).
On the Committee, the National Association for
Mental Health has been invited to appoint a
representative and Dr. Alfred Torrie is serving in
this capacity. Its final recommendations will be
received with wide interest and should be of help
in defining the needs of that group of persons who
are neither certifiable as defectives not requiring
mental treatment, but whose social efficiency
prevents them from standing unaided on their own
feet. .

Mental Defectives and their Savings
-----------------------------------
As is well known to those who are responsible for
hostels for defectives employed whilst on licence
from institutions, the savings accumulated by
patients are often considerable, and the Ministry of
Health has recently issued to Regional Hospital
Boards and Hospital Management Committees, a
circular on this subject.

It is stated that the Postmaster General has called
attention to difficulties which have arisen because
of the inability of some defectives to understand
how to operate their Post Office Savings accounts.
The suggestion is therefore made that in future such
accounts should only be opened on behalf of patients
who are fully capable of dealing with them. In
other cases, the Hospital Management Committee
should themselves make arrangements for the
opening of an account under the name of
" Patients' Savings Account"?to be operated by
their nominated officers on behalf of the patient
concerned. If the account reaches ?200, the matter
would be reported to the Court of Protection.
The responsibility for making these arrangements
should devolve on the Chief Financial Officer.

Mental Health in Eire
---------------------
To mark the Fourth Centenary of the death of its
founder, the Hospitaller Order of St. John of God
held in April, a three-day Psychiatric Congress at its
Mental Hospital, Stillorgan, near Dublin. Psychiatrists from Britain were invited to take part in the
celebrations, and the President of the Republic,
with members of the Government and the Lord
Mayor of Dublin attended the opening High Mass in
the Hospital chapel. The preacher, the Rev.
Professor E. F. O'Doherty (University College,
Dublin) stressed the relation between religion and
psychology each of which was concerned with man's
soul. The psychiatrist, he pointed out, was
continually being confronted with the religious
convictions and moral principles of his patients
whilst psychology played an integral part in the
curriculum of every seminary and university in their
training of students for the priesthood.
Lectures given during the Conference included
" The Individual's Responsibility for Mental
Health " by Dr. Alfred Torrie, " Mental Deficiency "
by Dr. L. T. Hilliard, " Special Education for the
Mentally Handicapped" by Mr. D. Kennedy-Fraser,
and "Re-development of Mental Health Work in
Connection with existing Social Services" by Professor Simey (University of Liverpool).

Eire has as yet no mental deficiency legislation
and the only residential provision for defectives in
the country is that made by the Brothers of St.
John of God (in three Houses), the Sisters of St.
Vincent de Paul at Cabra, and the Stewart Hospital ,
(Protestant). As a result of the Conference, a
stimulus should be given to the Republican Government in their project for a mental health service
embodying the state's full acceptance of responsibility for its mentally handicapped citizens.

Working the New Mental Health Service
--------------------------------------
At the Annual Conference of the Association of
Mental Health Workers held in Scarborough at the
beginning of May, Mr. J. Castelow, psychiatric social
worker, Leeds Mental Health Service, described the
use which his Authority is making of their new
powers under Section 28 of the National Health
Service Act, for instituting a systematic After-Care
scheme.

In June, 1949, a Psychiatric Social Centre was
opened, staffed by a psychiatric social worker, two
mental health workers, a handicraft instructor and a
clerical assistant. The Rehabilitation Workshop
has, since January, been on a full-time basis, and
provides instruction for twelve patients at a time.
It is intended primarily for ex-mental hospital
patients who need a period of occupation therapy
before resuming normal employment, but a problem
is being created by the number of chronic psychopaths and mentally handicapped individuals who
tend to fill vacancies, and for whom more permanent provision is needed.

The other main activity of the Centre is a
Therapeutic Social Club, meeting once a week,
/nis js intended for patients who have completed
^dividual psychiatric treatment, and invitations to
J?m it are given by the psychiatrist and the social
porker, though in addition members are referred
by the Department of Psychiatry of the University.
Preventive work is being developed through
discussions, exhibitions, meetings, etc., and six
jnonths ago a Consultation Service was inaugurated
to enable general practitioners to refer patients
JJKh social or socio-medical problems. Up to date,
Jnirty-six cases had been referred. Emphasis is
Jid on co-operation with other social agencies in
ttle City with a view to facilitating earlier diagnosis
and treatment of mental illness, and when adequate
staff is available, further expansions of the preventive
service are planned.

In a paper given at the same session, Miss F. S.
Rogers,?former Secretary of the Cambridgeshire
Mental Welfare Association which is employed by
the Local Authority both for carrying out certain
statutory duties under the Mental Deficiency Acts and
"community" care under Section 28, of the
Rational Health Service Act?referred to a similar
Advisory Service available both to general
Practitioners and to social agencies in the area, set
J|P eight months ago during which period, 106 cases
have been referred. Here also, the problem of the
Patient who is socially inefficient by reason of dull
intelligence and instability, is being confronted,
howing the need for the provision of residential
nd non-residential training and employment of a
yPe which does not yet exist.

People
In a circular issued to Local Authorities by the
^unistry of Health last January, dealing with welfare
ervices for old people as provided for under the
. ational Assistance Act, stress is laid on the
importance of co-operation between local authorities
nd local voluntary organizations.

All Local Authorities " it is stated, " should
do everything in their power to encourage
further voluntary efforts to meet the needs of old
People, especially those living in their own
homes, and there should be close and continuous
collaboration between all the statutory and
voluntary agencies working for their welfare."
, Two circulars have recently been issued by the
juiistry to Regional Hospital Boards, on this same
doject, one on April 1st under the title "Care of the
ged Suffering from Mental Infirmity " and the
ner on May 15th, on the "Treatment of the
lderly Chronic Sick".

fhe purpose of the former circular is to guide
egional Boards in planning their arrangements for
ne care of persons suffering from mental infirmity
ismg from old age, which should include provision
(a) short-stay psychiatric units and (b) long-stay
in nexes- The short-stay unit should be established
o a general hospital in the Region for the purpose
diagnosis and classification to determine which
patients can, after treatment, return home, which
may need mental hospital care, and for how many
other types of accommodation are required. The
long-stay annexes may be associated with mental
hospitals if more convenient, but they should have
distinctive names and should be reserved for patients
without marked behaviour disturbances who suffer
" from mental infirmity due to old age and who do
not require detention." Provision of this type is
not only desirable in the interests of the patients
concerned, but would, of course, release urgently
needed beds in mental hospitals.

The May circular deals with arrangements for the
care of old persons suffering from chronic illness
of a physical nature, and makes suggestions for the
establishment of a hospital geriatric service including
convalescent and long-stay annexes, as well as for
domiciliary services.

A further indication of the growing recognition
of the special needs of old people, is the holding in
Liege from July 10th to 12th, of the First International Gerontological Conference. It is to be
noted, however, that no psychiatrist is listed amongst
the speakers on the printed programme and that the
aspects of the subject to be dealt with, appear to be
limited to physical conditions.

Lasker Award for Mental Hygiene
-------------------------------
This is an Award presented every year for an
outstanding contribution on some field of mental
hygiene, and those in this country who were active
in the early days of the Child Guidance movement,
then financed so largely by the Commonwealth
Fund of N.Y. City, will be interested to hear that the
recipient for 1949 is Miss Mildred Scoville,
Executive Associate of the Fund. The presentation was made by a former recipient, Dr. J. R. Rees,
Director of the World Federation for Mental
Health who paid a tribute to Miss Scoville's contribution to the mental health movement in England
as well as to that in the United States. In her
acceptance of the award, Miss Scoville stressed the
widening concept of the function of psychology and
psychiatry, whose subject matter has to do with
the " living together of people " and is therefore
closely related with the social sciences.
On the same occasion, another Lasker Award was
made?one for " Public Information leading to
Public Action in Mental Health This was given
to Mr. Albert Deutsch who has for ten years devoted
himself to assembling and publicizing facts regarding
the needs of the mentally ill, and whose book,
The Mentally III in America, revised in 1949, is still in
great demand.

Parents of Backward Children
----------------------------
A convention of members of Associations of
Parents and similar groups, held at the Fountain
Hospital, London, in May, has resulted in the
formation of a national body made up of the various
pioneer associations which have sprung into being
during the last few years, including the well-known
one organized by Mrs. Fryd of Harpenden, and the
" Friends of the Fountains

The Conference, attended by 122 parents, some of
whom had travelled through the night was welcomed
by Dr. L. T. Hilliard, Physician Superintendent of
the Fountain Hospital, and the chair was taken by
Mr. J. C. Davies, chairman of the " Friends
The decision to amalgamate was reached in an
atmosphere of general good will, and the objects
of the new Association were defined as follows :
'1. To promote the material, mental and spiritual
welfare of backward children.

2. To foster mutual help and support among the
parents and relatives of such children.
3. To promote closer co-operation and understanding between parents and others responsible for their welfare.

4. To encourage more research into causes and
treatment of mental handicap.

Various officers were elected, each to have charge
of one department of activity. There are two Joint
Secretaries?Mr. H. D. F. Hutchings and Mrs. Fryd
?and Mr. Hutchings is also acting as Organizer.
Enquiries about the Association should be addressed
to him at 3 Willowhaye Gardens, Worcester Park,
Surrey.

In the United States this movement is developing
with equal vigour and speed, and in The Training
School (Vineland) Bulletin of February, 1950, we
read that attention was drawn to it by the authoress,
Pearl Buck. In a gathering assembled to pay
tribute to Mrs. Alice Nash on her retirement from a
life of active service to the Training School, Mrs.
Buck said :

" Many of you are parents, and to you I would
like to say that I think it is extraordinary and an
important thing that parents are coming together
in mutual aid and co-operation. The parents'
groups now forming in many areas need help
and guidance, but they will do much to
encourage each other and help their handicapped children. There are wonderful and
hopeful signs of a new attitude toward the
mentally deficient. The attitude of society
is being slowly changed. Parents can do more
to change it than any other group by facing
their situation with courage for themselves and
hopefulness for their children. It is no longer
enough merely to get a retarded child into an
institution. The child has the right to all
the fruits of research and education so that he
may fulfil his potentialities and so find happiness."

World Federation for Mental Health
At the Third Annual Meeting of the Federation
to be held in Paris at the Cite Universitaire, from
August 31st to September 7th, there will be four
main topics for discussion :

1. Mental Health in Education.
2. Occupational and Industrial Mental Health.
3. Mental Health of Transplanted and Homeless Persons.
4. Leadership and Authority in Local Communities.

Registrations have so far been received from the
following countries : Argentine, Brazil, Canada,
Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, Great Britain,
Greece, Holland, India, Israel, Mexico, New Zealand
Sweden, Switzerland and the United States.
The April issue of the Bulletin includes an
interesting article by Dr. J. R. Rees, on " Work for
Mental Health in Germany in which he notes that
during a short visit there last December, the main
topic which he was asked to discuss with the
psychiatrists, social scientists and other professional
men and women whom he met, was that of training
for child guidance work. This, he points out, was
only to be expected in view of the fact that
Germany's most urgent problem is that of how to
help children and young people " while they are
still helpable."

The Bulletin may be obtained from the
Federation at 19 Manchester Street, W.l, at an
annual subscription of 5s.

" The Patient is Human "
In this broadsheet published by " PEP"
(Political and Economic Planning) in Planning
for February 13th, 1950,* we have our attention drawn to human relations in hospitals. Such
subjects as " Out-patients " Inside the Wards
" Relations and Friends " and " The Right Staff"
are discussed, and emphasis is laid throughout on
the importance of establishing good patient-nursedoctor-visitor relationships.

Reference is made to the controversial question of
visits in children's wards and to the different points
of view about their frequency and desirability, and
in general, the need for a more sympathetic handling
of visitors by nursing staff is stressed.

"Too often " it is stated, " there is nobody who
seems capable of telling relatives how the patient
is doing. . . . Nurses are often forbidden to
express any opinion, ward sisters are noncommital, and the wretched relations go away
puzzled, bewildered and anxious."

All these matters have a direct bearing on mental
health?both of patients and those who belong to
them?and PEP is to be congratulated on giving
them publicity.

* Obtainable from PEP, 16 Queen Anne's Gate, S.W.I 2s.
