The Colony and the Young High-Grade Mental Defective
=====================================================

MENTAL HEALTH 87

By H. C. GUNZBURG, B.A., D.Phil.
Education and Training Officer, Monyhull Hall, Birmingham.
The population of a colony for mental
defectives harbours such a variety of different
types that an ordinary observer begins to
Wonder how it is possible to classify them all
under the same heading. At one extreme we
find the helpless, speechless and thoughtless
idiot, who is evidently in need of constant
Assistance and at the other extreme a well-
niannered and normal looking individual who
expresses himself with ease and skill and who
aPpears to score highly above many uncouth
labourers outside the colony. His behaviour
and appearance are, however, deceiving and he
very likely turns out to be an illiterate and to
have in the vast majority of cases subnormal
niental capacity. However, neither his illiteracy
nor his low mental efficiency would justify his
detention in an institution were it not for his
apparent inability to look after himself and to
keep out of trouble. Thus, not intellectual
lnferiority by itself but only its combination with
social inefficiency, lead to the internment of high-
&rade mental defectives, who might, but for their
Cental instability, be useful members of society.
It is still not quite clear why one feebleminded
Person should succeed in society and be no
trouble to social agencies, whilst the other has
to be kept constantly behind institution walls.
However, it has increasingly been recognized
ln recent years that emotional maladjustment
Plays a great, if not decisive part in the feeble-
minded person's failure in society and that
intellectual inferiority should be considered only
?n aggravating factor in many cases. Whilst
1ntellectual inferiority is held to be irremediable,
Maladjustment is definitely often accessible to
treatment, though success or failure may largely
depend on the intellectual factor.
Considering, therefore, the problem of the
young high-grade defective as one of treatment
?f maladjustment rather than one of custodial
care, new avenues of research and therapy open
UP- If we are able to treat that maladjustment
successfully, the " turnover " of patients in a
colony may be considerably increased above the
Present level, because we shall then achieve
earlier and more lasting successes, and the
colony will then approximate more nearly to
the function of a " mental hospital " aiming
at rehabilitation of the patient than is the case
at present.
The question arises how far the average present-
day colony can assist in the first exploratory
steps and whether the " colony idea" is
capable of such organizational alterations as
may prove necessary for a specially designed
therapeutic programme for only a limited
proportion of the institution population. There
is little doubt that a colony which has originally
been conceived as an autonomous and funda-
mentally stable community for patients whose
mental condition is unalterable, is not able to
assist actively in the treatment of problems
presented by a potentially fluid population,
unless some drastic changes in attitude and
practical issues take place. Some points relating
to this problem complex are indicated in the
following, but it is obvious that the approach
is incomplete and largely determined by the
present writer's particular sphere of work. The
practical execution of a broad therapeutic pro-
gramme will necessitate the close collaboration
of all workers in this field, particularly of
psychiatrist, clinical psychologist and psychiatric
social worker.
The Adolescent and the Colony
The colony for mental defectives is, besides
serving as a shelter for the low-grade permanent
population, also a place of detention where
troublesome high-grade feebleminded persons
are segregated from the community in the hope
that they will learn there the lesson which will
permit their return to society. The " rehabilita-
tion policy " pursued in the colony is essentially
neutral because the colony provides only the
framework of a regulated organization in which
the prospective licensee may hibernate and
"cool off", passing the troubled years of
adolescence until he has gained a more mature
and settled attitude to life. Whether and to
what degree institutionalization is instrumental
in bringing about final success is difficult to
determine at present, nor do we know the
particular set of circumstances which could be
made responsible for failure. It is, however,
MENTAL HEALTH
obvious that the needs of emotional maladjust-
ment have not been recognized by the organiza-
tion of the colony nor in training of institution
staff, and life in the institution is, therefore,
adjusted to the requirements of intellectual
subnormality only. It is difficult to imagine
the present type of institution life contributing
substantially to a lasting emotional stabilization
of a high-grade defective.
Many of the high-grade defectives had worked
and enjoyed themselves with and like the rest of
the adolescent normal population, until the
" crucial event " happened which made their
institutionalization necessary. For these
youngsters the enforced stay in the colony
means serving a sentence in a special type of
prison. An ordinary prison sentence has,
however, a time limit and the prisoner knows
exactly when he will be free again. The defective
does not know how long his "sentence" will last
and he realizes too that good behaviour alone
does not necessarily secure release since he sees
old and well-behaved patients spending their
lives in institutions. The long drawn-out and
therefore not justifiable punishment seems to
him to be out of proportion to the incidents
which caused his internment, and leads of
necessity to resentment, hostility and opposition.
A youngster, who has previously spent his life
with normal and congenial friends and con-
temporaries is now suddenly thrown into the
society of low-grade morons, imbeciles and
idiots with whom he has nothing in common,
who are " silly " and repulsive in his eyes.
The young high-grade defective has now to
live in a world determined by the needs of the
low-grade patient. Demands and work,
institution routine and rules are designed to
assist this majority. The power and right
of decision is taken away from him, he shoulders
no responsibility and the continuous super-
vision by trained and uniformed nurses makes
it quite clear that no initiative is expected from
him. Very quickly he conforms to this situation
which asks for less energy, less foresight, less
initiative, and offers a very comfortable existence.
It need not be pointed out particularly that this
kind of " training " near the " cabbage-stage "
does not represent a desirable preparation for
subsequent success in life.
Of course, attempts are continually made to
give selected patients extra responsibility and
special work, but the frequent failures seem to
justify the pessimism and reluctance of those in
charge. It is then scarcely considered how the
discouraging, stale atmosphere of the colony
must affect and nullify these attempts which may :
not only fail to contribute towards the final aim,
but may even reinforce the discouraged and
insecure attitude of many patients.
Though the colony provides work for the
patients, partly of a maintenance character and
partly of an arts and crafts type, it offers little
opportunity for interesting and absorbing work,
which the adolescent defective can appreciate.
Much of the work is of a very simple character
or far removed from the reality of practical life
as it is known to the high-grade. Rewards or
"wages " are ridiculously small in comparison to
what the defective is probably used to obtaining
" outside " and other incentives may appear
very childish. But for sudden dashes for
freedom as shown by absconding, the defective
displays, usually, little " drive " and he sees
little need to function efficiently and to the full
extent of his capabilities in such an " easy "
environment. Whilst he may to all outward
appearance become stabilized or rather
" institutionalized " he really becomes more
and more estranged from the life to which we
wish to return him one day.
Already this short description of the position
of the young high-grade defective in a colony
designed for low-grade defectives, should make
it clear that this climate of resentment and
apathy cannot be overcome merely by providing
more and better workshops, better staffing,
more testing and " psychological " treatment.
As long as the colony is unable to treat the
emotional maladjustment, as long as the colony
is only considered a better kind of prison with an
indeterminate sentence, and as long as the
colony is an organism detached from reality,
there is little hope to achieve more than a mere
chance " cure
The following outline of a three point
programme, as seen from the educational and
vocational angle in its widest meaning, indicates
a possible development of colony organization
for the benefit of that group of patients who
may thereby be rehabilitated with better chances
for success than the present system offers.
Satisfaction of Emotional Needs
Maladjustment is most frequently the out-
come of the extremely unhappy family
upbringing which forms almost invariably the
background story of most cases. The limited
mental resources of the subnormal are not
capable of dealing with the resulting problem
situations, and their thwarted desires and urges
attempt to find substitute satisfactions in other
MENTAL HEALTH 89
directions. Their immediate environment offers
often easy opportunity for gratification and
smce the family has been unable to implant in
the children a framework of socially acceptable
responses, a career of delinquency or other
Maladjustment frequently follows. Though
institutionalization interrupts further a social
deterioration by simply withdrawing oppor-
tunities to fail in society, this in itself does not
necessarily initiate a change for the better. The
youngster submits only too often to the influence
of his former surroundings and drifts back into
the old grooves, when later on he is given a
chance to prove himself outside the colony.
The impersonal handling of these adolescents
?y an all male or all female nursing staff, does
n?t create that atmosphere where rules and a
code of behaviour are felt and absorbed and not
merely learnt and known. Though it is nowa-
days attempted to bring up children who have
to be separated from their own families, in
families " with substitute parents in lieu of
the real ones, this has not been found necessary
tor the adolescents. With this an opportunity
uas been missed to let grow within a " family
circle" that pattern of socially acceptable
responses which will facilitate adjustment to
society. It is necessary to do away with the
board and lodging " aspect of the institution
y the provision of a decent home-like back-
ground of a small group with emotional ties
to those in charge. Despite their age these
adolescents need their " mother " and " father "
and domestic warmth, as much as the younger
a?e groups.
A " family a unit by affective ties as well as
by working relations, is far better suited to
e*ercise a forming influence by social approval
fnd disapproval, by the liking taken to
mother " and to the fairness of " father
tnan the present conglomeration in an over-
crowded institution home run by overworked
officers and nurses whose foremost task it is to
insist on the observance of institution rules,
"sychological treatment has a better chance to be
Accepted and to become effective in the family
climate " where the individual handling of a
case is neither interfered by nor itself interferes
^th institution administration and where the
family " is an adjustable and easily regulated
setting for therapeutic work. If there is any
nope to counteract the effects of early maladjust-
ment by individual treatment, then it is certain
that a " home " background and a small group
are unavoidable preliminaries. . *
Neither the " home "?nor the small group
atmosphere will, however, have any effect unless
" parents " are able to give the youngsters that
feeling of security and trust which will make
attachment to their new " home " possible.
And here we seem to arrive again at the old
conclusion which ascribes all success to the
personality of individual trainers irrespective
of the material conditions ; nevertheless there
is little doubt that many potentially successful
personalities have not the slightest chance to
make themselves felt at present in a large
institution organization which makes them?
?in the eyes of the adolescents?mere represen-
tatives of restraining authority and where the
" institution-pattern " prohibits and discourages
unavoidably unorthodox handling of an indivi-
dual situation.
" Detention " or " Training "
The adolescent high-grade defective recognizes
very grudgingly the need for detention in the
institution. He resists his unlimited sentence
which deprives him of the possibility to earn
wages, to help his people and to lead an
independent life. It needs practical explanations
to make him see that his detention in the colony
is not only justified, but for his own benefit.
Such a practical explanation is for instance a
real training in trades, which he could receive
in the colony and which may assist him later
on outside the colony. Many youngsters come
to the colony quite willingly under the impression
that they had been sent there to " learn a trade ".
The necessity to learn " something" before
one can expect to earn reasonable wages is a fact
easily understood by the feebleminded youth,
and the attendance at a " Training School " is,
if suitably explained, certainly a more acceptable
necessity than the detention in a colony for
mental defectives.
Such manual training must, however, not be
mere camouflage but must become real prepara-
tion for the work which the feebleminded youth
can be expected to do outside. His training
has to be specially planned since he has limited
powers of adaptation, sometimes poor manual
control, very often little foresight, little persever-
ance and a small capacity of learning. Non-
recognition of this poor personality endowment
in his colony-training will make adjustment to
the fast moving life outside, very often extremely
difficult and will lead frequently to friction and
subsequent breakdowns. An unsympathetic
employer, a teasing workmate, an uncongenial
job may spoil the subnormal's chances for
good. Unfortunately less consideration is
90 MENTAL HEALTH
usually shown to a subnormal than to a
" normal " youth.
Thus it is a necessary precaution to make the
mentally defective youth already in the pre-
employment stage, acquainted with his future
work, with the tools, their usage and care, with
factory ways and the prevention of accidents.
During his training he must learn how to
maintain steady output and accurate workman-
ship. He must be employed on and taught a full-
size job and should be engaged on the production
of useful and saleable goods. Arts and crafts
should be included in the syllabus only in so far
as these skills contribute directly to the learning
of a trade. Some of the crafts, like embroidery
and jewellery-making, for prospective discharges
of the male sex, should be discontinued, and the
" institutionalized trades " of rug, basket and
brush-making should be limited to the permanent
institution population. Tradesmen with a gift
for teaching ought to be fully employed in
teaching, and not primarily as maintenance staff
of the colony. Machinery should be used,
suitably guarded according to modern factory
regulations, and not be kept away from the
youngsters, who are otherwise faced with an
unfamiliar situation when sent out on licence.
The girls should receive domestic science
training according to modern principles which
will make them familiar with the small house-
hold where they may obtain their first situations.
The practical work should be augmented by
relevant talks and demonstrations. In short,
the principles of modern practical training of
apprentices of either sex should be applicable
to the feebleminded adolescent's training as well.
The usual type of " occupational training "
or " occupational therapy " concentrating on
arts and crafts and achieving little more than
skill in making nice looking odds and ends, is
completely inadequate for our purposes. The
training must be reality centred, directed towards
agricultural skills if subsequent employment is
likeliest in farming, towards factory skills if
employment will be found in industry, towards
" service " skills for the girls who will take
domestic positions. It is a real waste of
valuable training time if promising high-grades
are merely occupied with producing articles of
perspex, embroidery, jewellery, etc., or are
engaged in assisting maintenance workers by
passing the tools and fetching tea. All " train-
ing " which they receive thereby is merely
incidental and often not relevant to their future
career and is in no proportion to the time
taken.
Ignorance of reading, writing and arithmetic
represents for many high-grades a constant
source of irritation and inferiority feelings,
besides being a handicap in the working life
outside the colony. They will seize eagerly the
opportunity to improve, to maintain or to
acquire knowledge if special tuition is provided.
New methods for teaching these high-grade
adolescents have to be developed since many of
them lack confidence and are easily disappointed.
Academic work given as part of the trade train-
ing appears now in a new light and of new
importance.
Working on this basis, a new sense of purpose-
fulness and reality will enter the atmosphere
around the subnormal youth. He may now
recognize the value of the training, and its
interesting and direct relationship to real life,
and may become more reconciled with his fate
and more open to the character-forming
influences of the " home". Training on
" real " machinery, producing " real " things,
doing a " man's " job, is certainly more likely
to produce efficiency in conformity with the
youngster's capacity than working at mono-
tonous and unreal jobs like rug or mat-making.
" The Training School" offers also the
opportunity to do the vocational guidance work
for feebleminded adolescents which has been
neglected in the past. Many semi and fully-
skilled jobs can be executed successfully by the
feebleminded whilst certain other unskilled jobs
may be unsuitable for them. We know at
present next to nothing about the factors
affecting their work output, their efficiency,
their fatiguability, their persistency, their prone-
ness to accidents, etc. Vocational guidance
for the feebleminded will also have to
estimate the capacity of the labour market in the
vicinity of the colony and will have to advise as
to the particular lines of training. In due
course it should contribute considerably to the
shortening of training and to increasing success
by eliminating the initially unavoidable trial
and error system.
Integration with Life
There is, however, more to the task of
rehabilitation of the defective than the mere
provision of modern workshop equipment and
practice. Neither manual nor mental training
even in conjunction with the "home life"
described in the first section, is of course able to
give that atmosphere of necessity, of direction
and of reality, which pervades the open com-
munity. Since demands in the colony are
T
MENTAL HEALTH 91
lowered to be within reach of most of the patients
and since for the same reason, life and expression
ls regulated from above, it is inevitable, as has
been pointed out before, that the level of the
high-grade defective is gradually adjusted to
that of the low-grade. With the lack of stimula-
tion and incentives, all need and all desire for
developing efficiency disappears or is canalized
lr*to the asocial patterns of how to get round
regulations and how to cheat the staff. The
Unnatural but nevertheless very real climate of
the institution cut off from reality, creates a new
Pattern of institution responses and a mistaken
conception of life arises.
To overcome this major difficulty within the
framework of the present colony is an impos-
sibility, because it would mean the creation of an
autonomous organization within the boundaries
of an old-fashioned institution organization,
^he obvious solution of the problem is the
creation of a unit geographically removed from
the colony, where special regulations and
conditions can be applied without danger of
their interfering with the regulated framework
found necessary for the custodial care of the
Majority of patients. There conditions can be
created, which are similar and nearly identical
y^th real life situations. Incentives consisting
ln wages according to ability, steadiness and
Perseverance in work, can be introduced, and
F'ore freedom and responsibility can be given
lri. order to make the potential leaver familiar
^ith his future life and to bring out the best of
^hich he is capable.
The present trend to create bigger colonies
exceeding 1,000 beds, defensible as it is from the
administrative point of view and securing thereby
Material advantages for health and entertainment
of the patients is, it must be realized, at the same
time jeopardizing our hopes to solve at least
Partly the social problem of feeblemindedness
Though it is true that smaller places are generally
rUn less efficiently and provide less material
c?mfort for their patients, it is nevertheless the
small place which offers far more opportunity
the individual treatment within a group than
the large place with so many uncontrollable
and unaccountable factors interfering. Even
11 a new administrative regulation were to
^gregate hundreds of promising adolescent
^gh-grade from low-grade defectives into a
sPecial large colony, it would be an entirely
artificial organism unable to induce the growth
that attitude which contributes towards
socialization. If part of the trouble is to be
?und in the defective's lacking " super-ego "
development which had no chance to mature in
the appalling conditions of his childhood, then
only the small place with individual attention by
selected staff is able to remedy the maladjust-
ment. If, on the other hand, inability to adjust
to the requirements of society has other roots,
we can be sure that the small place will give us a
better opportunity to study causes and effects
and that it will enable us to modify our thera-
peutic approaches as necessary.
There is, of course, the danger, that such a
place will deteriorate into a small self-contained
community where a little band of devoted people
fight an unceasing and unrewarded battle for
the patients against the consequences of incon-
spicuous isolation. It is therefore of extreme
importance that the staff as well as the patients
know what they are doing, what they have
achieved and by what means.
Modern psychometric and projective testing
has given us the means for a better understanding
of the make-up and the capabilities of our
individual trainees and this knowledge must be
integrated into the training programme. Finally
we must know how prognosis, theory and
practical method stand up to the test of life.
We must know how actual working conditions
affect the defective and must attempt to remedy
on the basis of this knowledge the faults in our
training techniques. This obvious procedure
utilized by every car manufacturer, engineer,
builder, etc., has been very much neglected,
making it impossible to say where exactly our
treatment of the high-grade defective ceases in
fact to be " treatment ".
There are obviously many ways to investigate
our problem in its emotional and social aspects
and it would need at least another article to
outline other possibilities. One way of creating
the necessary framework for exploration would
for example consist in enlarging the " Training
School " by combining it with a hostel for those
adolescents who have been considered fit for
work under ordinary conditions. Whilst giving
thereby the more reliable elements better
opportunity to show their metal, this " Training-
School Hostel " offers also a chance to study
closely the effects of the impact of reality and to
give " first aid" when the youngster finds
adjustment difficult. The instructors and staff
who have in the preceding years established
close contact with the adolescent should now at
this crucial point be able to assist in the problem
of adjustment. At the same time, the presence
of youngsters who actually go out to work and
are in their last stage of institution confinement,
92 MENTAL HEALTH
should act as a continuous incentive to others
still in training. The experiences of their work-
mates are fed back into the " Training School "
and, if properly supervised and integrated into
the practical teaching of the school, should assist
considerably in forming a new conception of
life.
There exists probably in every colony for
defectives only a fairly small proportion of
high-grade adolescents of either sex who would
benefit by a training programme like the one
outlined above. To make special provision for
them in the colony is very often impracticable,
uneconomical and in the long run unsatisfactory.
Nevertheless it would be unjustified to sacrifice
the needs of a group of potential licensees to
the requirements of the permanent institution
population. Hence, a small and specialized
institution, a " Training School" for the
rehabilitation of the adolescent high-grade
defective seems to be the most satisfactory
solution.
