Home Conditions and Employment of Mental Defectives
======================================================

:Author: J. SQUIRE HOYLE

Executive Officer, City of Leeds Mental Health Services.
I am indebted to Dr. I. G. Davies, Medical
Officer of Health and Professor of Public Health,
University of Leeds, for his permission to
publish the following article dealing with facts
relating to social conditions of mentally handicapped persons in the City.

A recent survey of the occupations and home
conditions of mentally defective persons in an
industrial area of roughly half a million population is of interest firstly from the point of view
of the changing nature of housing accommodation, secondly from the enlightened attitude of
employers of labour to the employment of the
mentally handicapped and, thirdly, from the
advantage to the community of the Mental
Deficiency Act of 1927 which empowered Local
Authorities to establish Industry and Occupation
Centres. The Survey represents a comparison
between conditions in the year 1929 and the
year, 1949.

Home Conditions
----------------
Returns published in 1939 revealed that of
772 male and female defectives living under
supervision pursuant to Section 30 of the Mental
Deficiency Act, 12 per cent, were living under
good home conditions, 79 per cent, under fair
conditions where the standard of comfort and
accommodation was reasonably satisfactory,
and 9 per cent, were regarded as decidedly poor.
The rehousing of families on new estates has had
a pronounced beneficial effect and accepting the
same criterion of assessment of social standards
the figures in 1949 show 66 per cent, under
good home care, 31 per cent, in the fair or
average category and only 3 per cent, living
under bad home care. The homes have been
analysed according to the degree of care, comfort
and cleanliness that exist, eliminating as far as
possible, such factors as overcrowding, over
which parents have, at present, little or no
control.

Employments or Occupations
-------------------------
Occupation of the mentally defective whether
in Institution or under supervision in their own
homes is essential to their happiness and wellbeing, and it is satisfactory to note that in the
area under review very few defectives were
unoccupied or unemployed. The 1929 returns
show that 12 per cent, of those over 16 years of
age were self supporting, 39 per cent, partially
self supporting, 12 per cent, were regarded as
useful at home and 29 per cent, were unemployable, 8 per cent were out of work. The figures
extracted for 1949 reveal that 44 per cent, were
self-supporting, 20 per cent, partially selfsupporting, 9 per cent, useful at home, 26 per
cent, were regarded as unemployable and
1 per cent, although employable, out of work.
Of the total number over 16 years of age,
32 males and 24 female defectives are in daily
attendance at Centres engaged in laundry
work, tailoring, rug making, joinery and plastic
work. Children under 16 attending the Occupation Centres are excluded from the employability
returns.

It is a generally accepted fact that during a
slump mental defectives are the last to be
employed and the first to be discharged. During
the War, however, the number of patients of all
grades engaged in remunerative work was most
?marked. This was accounted for by the
temporary shortage of man-power in industry
and at a time when every available man or
woman was required to pull his or her weight
in the War effort. The practice of sending them
out to employment was to be commended,
provided that the occupation was beneficial
and the task could be carried out without mental
deterioration. A number of youths and girls
were found to have vastly improved, both
physically and mentally, by their added responsibility.

The higher grade employable defective is still
able to find employment without much difficulty
*n this area as the recruitment of labour in
industry is at present not competitive in the way
rt Was in the years prior to the War when there
Were large numbers in the ranks of the unemployed.

The co-operation established during the War
has since proved most useful and has been
eemented by the growing practice of factories
and shops employing Welfare Officers who
Work in conjunction with the Local Authority's
Cental Health Workers. This area has, too, the
advantage of being largely industrial and many
tasks are available in mills, tailoring factories,
"rush works, glass works and bake-houses,
e,;c- Such jobs as doffers, baisters, " knockers
?ff soap and sweet packers, and messenger
and porter work are very popular. Wages
aQd labour conditions are now so controlled that
conditions are good and " sweating " is rare.
defective who is at all capable of any effort
need be unemployed and is generally found work
0r occupation at the Industry Centre and paid
a small remuneration. A large percentage of
of the cases under supervision have attended
Schools for Educationallv Subnormal children
and the power of supervision afforded by the
Statute by this form of " after-care ", and the
advantage of the Disabled Persons Act, enables
Vlsiting officers to advise parents and defectives
as to the proper choice of a vocation. Local
Employment Exchanges, too, have proved
^valuable in co-operating with the Mental
|^ealth Staff and it is usual for certain officials of
lne Ministry to be earmarked for dealing with
Abnormal persons and instead of queueing
a* a counter arrangements have been made for
them to be interviewed and advised privately
by trained staff. Parents are now appreciating
jne assistance and help that is available and this
j*as done much to undermine the suspicion which
fas hitherto been directed in some degree against
lne Mental Health Department.

Another factor which reduced the number of
defectives unemployed and unoccupied is the
ndustry Centre for adult males and females.
he Centres operating in this area provide
, ? youths with training and occupation in
rUshmaking, firewood bundling, joinery and
Cabinet work, rugmaking, toy and puppet
faking, etc. The premises are subject to the
? actory Act. 30 girls and women are engaged
111 laundry work and housecraft. Most of them
are included in the " partially self supporting "
group.

The following Table shows the employment or
occupation of all defectives under statutory
or voluntary supervision :
Males
Females I Total
Self supporting
Partially self supporting ..
Employable, but out of
work .. .. .. I
Attending Occupation
Centre
Attending Industry Centres
Useful at home
Too low grade for employment
152
42
71
53
18
72
412
112
19
70
30
34
101
368
264
61
141
83
52
173
780

It is unfortunate that amongst the group
" Partially Self Supporting " the increased
contributions under the National Health Insurance Scheme are proving something of a hardship
to employer and employee alike. Another
anomalous position arises under the new Statute,
i.e., that of the mentally defective person who is
not capable of employment. There appears
to be no machinery for exemption of such
defectives except by the cumbersome procedure
of completing Forms C.F.6 and C.F.10 in every
case. Neither the defective nor parent are
aware of the procedure and no steps have been
taken by the Department to obtain exemption
for either statutory or voluntary cases as it is
considered to be too heavy a task and especially
seeing that any exception granted is only valid
for twelve months, after which an application
must be made for renewal.

I proffer the suggestion that exemption might
be granted on the certificate of the Medical
Officer of Health, or other approved Medical
Officer, stating that the man or woman is a
mentally defective person provided with supervision pursuant to Section 30 of the Act and is
unemployable by reason of mental disability.
Such an exception might debar the patient from
normal benefits, but little hardship would be
likely to result as the defective could be provided
for both socially and financially by virtue of the
Mental Deficiency Act and the National
Assistance Act.

It will doubtless be remembered that during
the War mental defectives were excepted from
certain statutory rules and orders by similar
certificates, and they are now excepted in similar
fashion from registration for Military service by
completion of the Form N.R.68.
