Freud and Christianity
======================

:Author: R. S. Lee, Vicar of University Church, Oxford. James Clarke & Co.
1949. 204 pp. 8s. 6d.

Dr Lee has attempted (as others have done before
him) to effect an accommodation between Freudian
theory and Christian doctrine. The task is formidable enough to daunt all but the most sanguine
apologist ; and it would be as idle to pretend that
Dr Lee succeeds, as to deny that much of what he
has written ought to be read, by Christians and
Freudians alike.

The author seeks to mediate : but a mediator
" is not a mediator of one ". And virtually all
the concessions required to establish the concordat
are, it seems, to come from the Christian side. We
are invited to accept, without cavil, comment or
hesitation, the most orthodox Freudian dogma,
presented here with praiseworthy lucidity though of
course in summary form. It is by the test of this
" ur-Freudian " corpus that Christianity is to be
judged, and by this test is found wanting. Even
the chronology of the Bible is at fault if, and because,
it does not follow the master-pattern. The modifications of traditional Christian teaching which are
needed to make it " square " with psychological
truth are so radical and far-reaching that they
amount to a major operation : indeed, the result
would be a religion lacking many of the authentic
marks of Christianity. The darker side of life,
and its theological corollaries, do not appeal to
Dr Lee. The way of " obedience " (along which
so many neurotics have passed to new life and
health) is dismissed as " super-ego religion
God is a " friendly " person, revealed in a very
human " natural " and " friendly " Jesus?
a Christ who, it is safe to assert, could not possibly
have spoken more than (say) half of what is attributed to Him in the Gospels. To do justice to
Dr Lee, he would very likely agree that He could
not have done so.

Whatever may be said about Freudian theory and
Practice, it is clear (and this book adds to the
evidence) that they cannot be easily turned into
an. instrument for the criticism and reform of
religion. If Dr Lee had not claimed, in his preface,
^ demonstrate " how psycho-analysis can cleanse
Christianity of non-Christian elements ", it would
have been easier for the sort of reader for whom his
"??k is presumably intended to weigh his other
Assertion, that it can also " give deeper insights
Jnto the true qualities of human life ". For in this
(though the terms of reference are so widely and
boldly drawn) he is more successful, and some of
his obiter dicta are forceful and to the point.
G.L.R.
