Mental Health and Education
===========================

:Author: WILLIAM LINE, Ph.D. Professor of Psychology, University of Toronto. President Elect, 1950-51, World Federation for Mental Health.

It seems to me that there are three fairly
obvious statements that might be made on
mental health and education. One is that there
is a growing body of literature in that particular
field which endeavours to tease out principles
of healthy mental development and healthy
mental practises in schools. Secondly, there is a
growing amount of apparatus for use in examining
and disseminating some of the principles?
apparatus such as films, film strips, radio discs
and so forth. Thirdly, there is a growing
tendency (and I think this is very important
right now) towards group methods in this field
instead of lecture affirmations and dogmatism.
There is a definite attempt to be permissive in
our teaching and persistent in our group work.

All these three trends can be seen in the field
of mental health to-day. The tendency is to
move away from dogmatic affirmations about
the nature of the child in the abstract and to
come down very much towards the realization
that the child is terribly dependent upon and
interdependent with his whole social medium.
I think there is a great gain in this general trend?
that we should have no longer mere abstractions
but an application of the mental health principle
to everyday affairs and to the ordinary inter-
course of adults or children with their fellows.

That is a great thing.
At the same time I see in it one systematic
danger. It is simply this?that the material
around which we focus our discussions and our
observations may to some extent become too
much tied to the local accident of the particular
cultural crystallization in which the observation
is made. Let me give an example. In our
Canadian work you may have seen one or two
films we have produced. One is the life story
of an adult woman, portrayed through
childhood and school ; she had been living in
the overprotected sort of environment. We
showed that film in Newfoundland, which has
lately done us the honour of joining us in
Canada. It was not a success. It was thought
of by the people who saw it as a picture of some
funny people in a funny place called Toronto.
It was divorced from its localized and cultural
reference, and therefore it did not prove to be
a good medium even for another part of our own
country.

I sometimes think, too, that when we stress
such principles as the importance of personality
for teachers, as we rightly do, there may be a
danger that we have too much in mind the
discipline, the curriculum, the method, the set-
up as we call it, that we have evolved in our own
sphere, and thus we may be hindered from look-
ing more deeply. Even in our methods of
discussions and working I think that too often
we fail to realize that we ourselves have evolved

.. :admonition:: Note
  Address given at a meeting in London organized by British Standing Committee, World Federation for Mental Health, February  17th, 1950.

as a culture in a very normal and very useful
Way but that our attention to method may be
less deep and penetrating than it should be if
We simply accept it at the level of the culture in
which we happen to be working.

All this adds up to the only point I would like
to make, that we do demand of all workers in
this field something more. We need constantly
^ be seeking the principles which, despite the
great differences in culture, can have some
Universal validity. We may, I know, have many
Principles, but if we can affirm any one principle
ln the field of mental health which can have
Universal cultural reference as well as its own
scientific backing, then I think we are in duty
bound to accept and exalt that principle if we
are going to make this movement really an active
Practical movement in the world.
Let me give just one illustration. Anyone
who reads present-day literature in political
science, in economics, sociology, anthropology,
Psychology, psychiatry, industrial relations,
pannot help but be impressed by the very
unportant fact that whereas we used to be passing
each other by in our various stages in these
disciplines, now we are finding a common
ground in them all. I believe at this stage of our
development we are responsible not merely for
statements of principles which would have
Universal validity, but as far as possible we
should bring them to bear upon practical
lssues.

One thing we have to bear in mind is the
emergence of the authoritarian figure, not only
ju other countries but in our midst every day.
1qo many children in our Western civilization
grow up with the feeling that the way to evaluate
themselves is to feel subservient to someone who
ls above them and to be rightly arrogant to
someone who is below. If you examine the
hterature of psychiatry and psychology or any
?\ the disciplines that have tried to come to
gnps with this whole matter of personal relation-
Sffi S' w^at affirmations do you find ? The
atnrmation of submission to authority on the
0lle hand and the assumption of authority on the
other. In the disciplines which are supposed
0 be studying the personal relationship, that is a
deplorable situation. There is therefore all the
jUore urgency that this movement which stands
?r something satisfying in inter-personal
Relationship, should affirm these principles in
heir bearing on everyday practice.

I should like to give you an illustration of
what I mean. I believe it is true in every
culture?and it is worth noting?that every
child is born younger than his society. Take
the teacher in the classroom. The teacher has a
right to be an authority on subject-matter, on
teaching technique, but beyond that he has no
right whatever to impose authoritarianism on
the children. If we accept the simple statement
I have just made, that the child is always born
younger than his society, it may give us the
right as older people to assist the child, but how
we are going to assist him on matters of universal
morality is the sum and substance of the mental
health movement. There are many corollaries
to that. If you take that statement seriously
then it is rather important that a teacher should
be in a position to define the two different roles
that are employed there. The teacher is an
authority on subject-matter in which he has
been trained but he is not authoritarian in
matters of inter-personal morality. These roles,
of course, have had to be applied both in the
home and in the school in one person, but
that teacher is a great teacher if he can limit the
term ' authority ' to that on which he is supposed
to be an authority, namely, that for which he was
trained, and be very wise in the way he deals
with the inter-personal moralities, remembering
that the next generation must always take a
step forward.

It is the corollary that in our Councils' work
in mental health we should give more attention
than we have done in the past to the ways in
which the growing child must learn to hold
himself towards those older and younger than
he, as well as to his contemporaries. All other
differences of sex or race or what not, are
secondary in this connotation, and by paying
too much attention to the secondary ones we are
in danger of losing sight of the primary.

I do not want to elaborate this. I have just
given you that one point?that we consciously
seek the basic principles backed by all the
scientific evidence we can obtain and the
scientific observations we make, that will serve
us because they are founded upon valid
principles. I feel that there is a challenge here to
the World Federation for Mental Health that
by its techniques and through its discussion
groups and Commissions and so forth all over
the world, it may find a means of implementing
the principles it has set forth.
