Why Tommy Won't Eat
====================

82 MENTAL HEALTH
Film Reviews
. 16 mm. Sound. 20 mins.
National Film Board of Canada, Sackville
House, 40 Piccadilly, W.l.
This film, which is in colour, deals with the
principal reasons for healthy, normal development
in children, and seeks to explain how to avoid
feeding difficulties rather than how to cope with them
once they have arisen. It stresses the well-known
ideas of being elastic with regard to routine, allowing
babies to experiment with their food even at the
cost of some messiness, etc.
The story deals with one particular child who
would not eat, and it explains that in that case the
mother was at fault, as on the one hand she was too
rigid and anxious, while, on the other, she was
lacking in friendliness and understanding.
On the whole, the film is well balanced and
pleasantly photographed. It gives a good sound
basis of approach to this matter without going into
great detail. It would be very useful as a basis for
discussion amongst nursery school teachers, parent-
teacher organizations, 'health visitors, and other
similar groups.
E.H.R.
The Rocking Horse Winner. (Featuring John
Howard Davies, John Mills, Valerie Hobson
and Ronald Squire.) 90 mins.
The appearance of a doctor and the death of a
patient from extreme mental strain would seem the
reason for a review of this film in Mental Health, but
its interest for readers probably lies more in other
details of the film that would not generally be
labelled " psychological ".
The story, taken from one of D. H. Lawrence,
is of a sensitive child, worried about his beautiful,
idle and extravagant mother and her apparent need
for money, who finds that by riding his rocking
horse in a frenzy he can sometimes spot the winner
in a race, but at great cost to himself. What I
can spot as winning is a real growth in psychological
understanding of ordinary characters ; but the
ignorant and sensational treatment of mental
abnormality must be counted as loss so far as
popular psychological education is concerned,
though it achieves its purpose of rousing tremendous
excitement.
Not many years ago the mother would have been
just bad and beautiful, idle and extravagant and
selfish (as she is) ; neglectful, unkind and unfeeling,
(which, on the whole, she isn't). She is under-
standable, likeable even, and, although her faults
are the indirect cause of her son's death, the audience
can pity her throughout the story, without demand-
ing, as just retribution, a sense of overwhelming
ing remorse at the end. The uncle, too, is a credible
mixture of strength and weakness : the pillar of his
sister's unstable household, genuinely fond of his
nephew, a gambler through and through, he lets
Paul go on with his dangerous game, as a character
formed of these component parts certainly would.
The innocence of Paul and the unreasonableness of
his worry is high drama : " We've won ?300 ! "
he tells his uncle ; " 300 pennies, you mean ",
says that astonished gentleman. Paul is puzzled
and uncertain. " I thought it was pounds ", he
says, but is not sure of the difference. As the house
whispers in gathering crescendo, " must have
money ", Paul casts his haunted face round the
room, seeing, but without understanding, the
luxurious furnishings and priceless ornaments on
which his eyes fall.
Perhaps it is paying too high a compliment to
psychology to give it all the credit for the subtlety
of the character drawing in D. H. Lawrence's
story and the presentation of this film, but it can
claim, I think, that it has taught people that human
personality is infinitely variable, and weaned them
from satisfaction in the wholly good and wholly
bad. It can certainly claim that it has increased
their interest in the minds and behaviour of children.
There remains, however, the death from over-
strain of the brain, accompanied by deafening
orchestral music. It seems as though the cinema
has learned that the mind is sensitive and delicate
and liable to behave strangely under strain ;
perhaps the time is coming when the other half of the
truth will be told, that the mind is also tough,
adaptable and resilient?but that, of course, is less
dramatic. P.E.W.
A Psychoneurosis with Compulsive Trends in the
Making. 16 mm. 40 mins. Dr. R. MacKeith,
Department of Child Health, Guy's Hospital,
London., S.E.I.
This is an interesting study of obsessional trends
in a child of a highly obsessional mother, The
mother was under psychiatric treatment throughout
the child's early life, and the film is intended to show
how this resulted in a modification of some of the
child's own trends. It shows an extraordinarily
interesting perfectionist drive towards physical skills
on the part of a very young child who performed
amazing feats in the first two years, but tended to
deteriorate later and developed considerable anxiety.
The photography in this film is not particularly
good, and is therefore trying to watch. The film,
which is essentially documentary with no particular
story, needs a great deal of explanation. In the
opinion of the reviewer, it would be somewhat
unconvincing to people who are not already con-
verted to the psychological approach, and really
it is suitable only for specialist groups.
C.H-S.
