The Psychiatrist's Dilemma
===========================

:Author: J. H. WALLIS
Hon. Secretary, Windsor Mental Health Association.

When the author of the following article recently went to see '''"The Cocktail Party''''* a slip of paper
was pressed into his hand by an unknown lady. It was a printed invitation for all visitors to hear
a sermon on the " spiritual imprecations " of the play. On his way out he decided that a short
article on the psychological implications might also be opportune.
A visit to Mr. T. S. Eliot's Cocktail Party at
the New Theatre or in the pages of the book,*
m some ways resembles a visit to any other
cocktail party. One finds in .it what one is
Prepared to find; one is a little uneasy at the
nonsense that goes on at the beginning; one
slowly succumbs to the spirit of the thing and
comes away acknowledging that it was very
much worth while, but not quite knowing in
what respects. The difference is that in this
case the after-effects are stimulating and the
Play is well worth thinking about afterwards.
In the days of Health Service psychiatry,
when consultants have waiting lists eight weeks
long and can give but few of their patients more
than a twenty-minute session, the spectacle of
?ne of their number visiting a cocktail party
Uninvited in order to deal with the breaking
Carriage of one of his patients strikes one as
somewhat unreal. So does his interest in a
society girl whose first love-affair (with a married
man) leaves her feeling unfulfilled?an interest
so intense that he treats her in his private nursing
home free of charge.

Mr. Eliot's psychiatrist is odd in other ways.
Theatrical in manner, pithy and paradoxical?
almost Shavian?in dialogue, mysterious as a
variety-show conjurer, claiming supersensory
Powers in diagnosis and staging consulting-room
denouements, this central figure smacks of the
magazine and the party-conversation attitude to
Psychiatry. While apparently at the top of his
Profession, he nevertheless employs the services
?f two dubious assistants to spy upon his
Patients as they swim about in the social goldfish
howl of those we used to know as the idle
rich. One is a meddlesome old socialite to be
Seen at any hunt ball in a glossy periodical, the
other an ambiguous cosmopolitan man-about-
t?Wn who seems to be adept at every activity
e*cept earning a livelihood in any useful way.
Nevertheless the play raises fundamental
issues and should be regarded primarily as a
work of art. Perhaps it would be better without
the tricks and absurdities, but fewer people
would see it.

At least, the psychiatrist is not the possessor
of uncanny power over his patients' minds that
the screen sometimes depicts and popular belief
still often supposes. In spite of his lofty
self-assurance, his role is the humbler and
(paradoxically) much more significant one of
agent through whom the patient recovers his
freedom to follow his intrinsic destiny. He says
to one of them, " It is just because you are not
free that you have come to me. It is for me to
give you that?your freedom."

The play is mainly concerned with three
patients, a childless married couple and a bright
young thing. They are none of them, in any
ordinary sense of the word, ill. And yet the
doctor refuses to send the couple to his sana-
torium on the grounds that they are both too ill,
whereas the girl qualifies for admission because
of one essential symptom, an honest mind.
What does this mean ?

The married couple are in difficulties because
they do not understand themselves or each other.
The task of the psychiatrist is to enable them to
do both sufficiently for a solution of the marital
relationship to become possible for them. They
must gain enough insight to enable them to
adapt themselves to their reality situation.
A purist might regard this as a superficial
business, more the task of a social worker than
of a psychiatrist.. And yet, in fact, is it not
happening every day ? Seen from the point of
view of society, it is perhaps the major contribu-
tion of a psychiatric service to the needs of a
confused generation. It is not, of course, the
only contribution. Treatment of the mentally
ill does not arise in this play. Instead, the other
* Faber & Faber, 10s. 6d.

patient provides a totally different kind of
problem, hardly a clinical one at all, but con-
taining the essential interest of the theme.
Art, having more freedom than science, has
a perfect right to postulate a patient for whom
adaptation to the needs of her situation is
insufficient, not because she is too ill, but
because she has within her the authentic seed
of heroism which will not be smothered. Is it
possible that there can arise a patient whose
difficulties are not symptoms of weakness but
signs of a spiritual strength, as yet unrealized ?
All things are possible in art, even those which
science must explain away. We are by now
familiar with the idea of psychiatry joining
hands with related disciplines; and mutual
overtures are not uncommon between psychiatry
and the established Church. But what can the
artist contribute to the united disciplines that
seek to rescue human relations and establish
emotional health ? Mr. Eliot illustrates the
point with his debutante: she is the vision of an
artist claiming his rightful sphere of human
relations and the impact of psychiatry upon
them. She is not a figure from a professional
case sheet, nor a creation of pseudo-clinical
journalism. She is a contemporary St. Joan.
For all its tomfoolery of inner doors and back
stairs and electric buttons, the consulting-room
scene presents the psychiatric dilemma vividly
and with real insight. First, the married couple
are brought face to face in a way that might chill
the most intrepid Marriage Counsellor, not, one
hastens to add, to generate a spontaneous
reconciliation, but to set in motion the painful
process of mutual insight. Confident that they
will, in the fullness of time, cure themselves and
each other, the consultant dismisses them with a
ceremonious injunction to go in peace which,
in the circumstances, seems ironically com-
placent.

His approach to the problem of the young lady
is diffident and attentive in contrast to the
brusque assurance of his manner with the
husband and wife. As she sits at his side,
looking very charming in profile, one begins to
fear that we are once more about to witness an
emotional overthrow: but that is not the fault
of the author, and the dialogue soon reassures
us. The girl is hesitant because she has little
to offer by way of symptoms, is fully aware
that she is not really ill, and is not very clear
why she has come for professional advice.
The fact is, of course, that she has come for
the reason most people would give for consulting
a doctor?to be made better. She does not
realize the implications, but the doctor does.
" You suffer from a sense of sin, Miss Cople-
stone ? This is most unusual."

It is not, she explains, the feeling of anything
she has done, but rather a feeling of emptiness
or failure to someone or something outside
herself. " I want to be cured of a craving for
something I cannot find and of the shame of
never finding it."

The psychiatrist now reaches the fundamental
dilemma: should he reconcile his patient to the
demands of her situation, to which she cannot
at present make a fully satisfying response, or
should he release her potentialities for greatness ?
Even though he is no more than agent in either
process and even though the choice must be hers
quite as much as his, he must come to a decision
because of the type of treatment he is to recom-
mend?superficial analysis and advice, or in-
patient treatment at his mysterious private
sanatorium for the potentially immortal.
What has a layman, a poet, to do with such
clinical considerations ? Is it not a case for
the faculty, a question of accurate diagnosis
over-simplified into unreal alternatives ? Why
should it be supposed that spiritual fulfilment
need be irreconcilable with satisfactory relation-
ships in ordinary social living ? To suppose
that they are irreconcilable?is not that often a
subterfuge of a neurotic personality ?
These questions are best answered by another:
does psychiatry recognize the germ of spiritual
fulfilment that may lie behind the inability of a
patient to adapt to the exigencies of daily life
and its varied relationships ? To some, perhaps,
this question is itself suspect and for them the
play can have no meaning. The point is that
Mr. Eliot's young lady has no difficulty at all in
adapting herself to the demands of her life: but
she is not content, because her life does not
demand enough. The psychiatrist presents her
with the alternatives, because the choice must
be hers also". " I cannot choose for you," he
says. " I can reconcile you to the human
condition, the condition to which some who have
gone as far as you, have succeeded in returning."
The married couple have, of course, already been
set upon this path of reconciliation, " two people
who know they do not understand each other "
but who nevertheless can be " contented with
the morning that separates and with the evening
that brings together for casual talk before the
fire ". His patient is not satisfied: "Is that the
best life ? " she asks him. The reply is impor-
tant for a proper understanding of the play. " It
is a good life. Though you will not know how
good till you come to the end. But you will
Want nothing else, and the other life will be only
like a book you have read once, and lost. In a
world of lunacy, violence, stupidity, greed . . .
it is a good life."

She cannot accept the way towards the
hearth, of " casual talk before the fire though
she acknowledges that she ought to be able to
accept it. What is the alternative ? " The
destination cannot be described . . . you will
journey blind. But the way leads towards
Possession of what you have sought for in the
Wrong place. . . . Both ways avoid the final
desolation of solitude in the phantasmal world
?f imagination, shuffling memories and desires."
She chooses, and is admitted to the sanatorium
without charge and without the necessity of
taking so much as a tooth brush. She has
rejected the hearth and accepted the journey
whose destination cannot be known. One of
the psychiatrist's accomplices says of her that
she will journey " like a child sent on an errand,
eagerness and patience. Yet she must
suffer ". The fulfilment of this forecast belongs
to the story. What concerns us here is the
Jrnplication of the choice and the part of the
Psychiatrist in giving the patient freedom to
make it.

It can be said, it probably has been said by
now, that Mr. Eliot's doctor is usurping the role
of priest in his treatment of the traveller, that it is
the business of psychiatry to reconcile patients
to the hearth or, for that matter, the office desk,
the group or the sink; that spiritual issues are
outside its province. This objection may be
made from either aspect. The implication of
the play is plainly the reverse. Spiritual
creativeness is no more poured in from the
outside than is marital reconciliation: yet the
door upon either alternative can only be opened
when the patient has first achieved his freedom
of choice. The cloth or label of the one who
helps him to achieve it matters little so long as
the treatment which follows is correct.
Mr. Eliot speaks for the laity and he speaks
with the eloquence of his art. If his implications
gain acceptance, psychiatry may come to be
looked to not only for the cure of sick minds
and distressed hearts but as a means by which
the spirit of man may come to fulfilment when
the frustrations of its larval stage, well known to
psychiatry, have been shaken off. Certainly
there is something of the priest about such a role,
but not more than is required for the ability to
divine spiritual issues which may occasionally
lie behind temporal discontent.

Some will see in this prospect a redemption of
psychiatry from the charges of carrying equali-
tarianism to its ultimate, of failure to distinguish
creativeness from neurotic misfitting; of social,
political and economic time-serving that converts
the non-conformer into a standard servile unit
of productivity or a good party man. Others
will be appalled at the suggestion that a scientific
technique should fill a role akin to that of artist,
philosopher and priest combined. Will psych-
iatry itself choose between the hearth of recon-
ciliation and the journey whose destination
cannot be known ??that is the dilemma. Like
most dilemmas and the play itself, it is an
over-simplification inasmuch as it takes into
account only the two extremes. Yet even
inexactitude may serve to present something
vital of the truth.
