Die Psychohygiene
==================

:Author: P. Federn and H. Meng,
edited by Dr. Maria Phster-Ammende. Verlag
Huber, Bern, 1949, 423 pages.

This volume was planned to mark the fortieth
anniversary of the " mental hygiene " movement
and the sixtieth birthday of Dr. Heinrich Meng to
whom it owes so much. The editor acknowledges
also the stimulating influence by the International
Congress held in London in 1948.

The majority of the forty-three contributions
deals with problems of social psychology and
psychiatry; and the rest (in fact the two introduc-
tory sections) discuss a few selected problems of
psycho-analysis and medicine. In this latter cate-
gory, Dr. L. Szondi's brief report on his original
research in heredity will stimulate readers to peruse
his elaborate publications on the latent carriers of
psychopathological factors; these conductors (as he
calls them) can be very gifted, and their occupational
preference is an unconscious sublimation of the
corresponding abnormal propensity.

Dr. W. Hulse presents an informative account of
the beginnings and present stage of Group-therapies,
originally devised for the management of the
organically ill, and only subsequently applied to the
neurotic and psychotic patients. European readers
may learn much from this article whose author has
been living for years in the U.S.A.

Professor H. Fischer's article on the prevention of
drug addiction is written in the typical, accurate and
massive manner of the best traditions of German
medicine; it contains, almost with superfluity,
wellnigh everything worth knowing about the subject.
Dr. R. Konig writes on the Over-organization
of the Family. Under this original and thought-
provoking title, the role of traditional concepts,
loyalties and ties are discussed in causing but harm
where the proper atmosphere of family has ceased
to exist.

Dr. Theodor Bovet's contribution must fill with
warmth the hearts of all actual and prospective
patients of the psychotherapist. In his view, the
moral standard of such a professional man must
be exceedingly high if he is to be of use to his
fellow men. Not only must his personal relation-
ship to work and recreation, to family and sex, and
so on, be near to perfection, but he should be also
a person who discusses all his problems with his
G?d.

Dr. E. Kaufman and Dr. E. Follender write with
intelligence on the Psycho-analysis of Jew-hatred.
With some misgiving do we commence the reading
of an article by Dr. F. Alexander, because of his
title: "The Psychiatric Prophylaxis of War"-
The content of this writing is, however, much better
than its title. Apart from presenting some sensible
views, and results of American research workers in
anthropology, the author says clearly that war-
prevention must start with the final conclusion: that
wars must be considered by all men as insanity-
He does not overlook the practical difficulties of
such a universal change in outlook.

Pleasant and profitable reading is provided by the
contribution by Dr. S. Frank, who presents a feW
illustrative cases where it was possible to help in
broken marriages, and in improving people with
criminal tendencies.

In the section " Contemporary Problems"?
accounts of research in prison camps and refugee
camps are presented. Among the several good
articles, those written by Dr. Pfister-Ammende seem
especially to reveal the experienced practical expert.
The last section contains a number of reports on
the general state of mental hygiene in different
countries; on the teaching this science within
universities; and an historical appreciation of
Adolf Meyer, his work in psychiatry and his influence
on the mental hygiene movement.

Each article has a clear abstract in French and
English. The original German is in most cases
heavy going, verbose, and full of definitions?-just
as most readers of this volume would expect it-
It is, however, nowhere confused, owing to the
comparative intact traditions of the Swiss German
literature. The value of the volume is indubitable-
S.L.
