Mental Hygiene as an Academic Discipline at the University of Basle
====================================================================

:Author: C. M. SENN-DORCK, Baste
From the Seminar on Mental Hygiene, University of Basle.
I
Through the efforts of Dr. Fritz Hauser, the
chairman of the board of education, and the
?ity council of Basle, a chair of Mental Hygiene
Was established at the University of Basle in the
sPring of 1937, and Heinrich Meng, M.D., was
aPP0inted to fill it. From 1928-35 Dr. Meng
served as an instructor at the psychoanalytic
^stitute connected with the University of
Frankfurt-am-Main and together with Dr. Karl
Landauer had been co-director of the policlinic
for mental diseases at that institution. In 1933,
Meng moved to Basle where he taught
Psychology and education in the University
extension department from 1933-37. From
*933 on, Dr. Meng has been a member of the
Institute for Modern Methods of Education "
at Basle. The chair of Mental Hygiene at
Basle University was converted into an extra-
ordinary professorship in 1945.

It was decided that Mental Hygiene should be
laught at the University in the following manner :
?ne hour a week was devoted to lectures to
numbers of all faculties. A second hour was
held especially for members of the medical, law,
and other faculties according to the direction
which interest in the subject developed.
(See section VI.)

As time went on, a demand for a special
seminar arose. Students as well as young
Physicians, lawyers, social workers, theologians
a?d others, wanted to discuss special topics in
connection with mental hygiene. With the
aid of private funds, a library (now containing
0ver two thousand publications) and seminar
r??m was established in 1943.
II

It was neither surprising nor unexpected that
Rental Hygiene as a new discipline?like every-
thing that is new?would encounter resistance,
jit is only about forty years since the American
W. Beers and the Swiss living in America,
Adolph Meyer founded it as a branch of
medicine.) The question of whether Mental
Hygiene was really a science had been enough to
make its introduction into the University
classroom difficult.1 In addition there were
objections to psychoanalysis which Dr. Meng
considered the psychological basis of Mental
Hygiene. A comment of Freud's sums up the
situation :

" It is a matter of general knowledge how
often in the history of scientific research,
new discoveries which later turned out to
be valuable and significant were at first met
with intensive and stubborn resistance. "*
While the controversies regarding the subject
were debated and still continue to be discussed,
Dr. Meng proceeded to build up his new field.
He was at once optimistic and critical as was
Freud in his time about psychoanalysis :
" It sticks to its field of endeavour, seeks to
solve the latest problems of its observation ;
enriched by experience, it advances always
unfinished, always prepared to withdraw or
change its theories. Just as Physics or
Chemistry, it is ready to admit that its
highest concepts are unclear, its principles
only adaptations to present knowledge,
and it awaits the results of future research
for a clearer understanding." f
III
Some of the subjects treated in the lectures
and seminars were : " Prophylaxis of Neurosis
and Crime " Question of Training as condi-
tioned by Inheritance and Environment",
" Problem Children and Delinquency",
" Mental Hygiene at Various Ages Mental
Hygiene in the Everyday Life and Crises of the
Individual" The Sociology and Mental
Hygiene of Marriage " Mental Hygiene and
Prophylaxis of Diseases " The Significance
of Mental Hygiene for Sociology and Mass
Psychology Special attention was devoted
to questions of the prophylaxis of war. Several
semesters of lectures during and after the second
world war were devoted to this subject.
* Die Widerstande Gegen die Psychoanalyse, Gesammelte Werke, Vol. xi, p. 225.
t Psychoanalyse und Libidotheorie, Gesammelte Werke, Vol. xi, p. 29.
64 MENTAL HEALTH
The instructor had no model to go on in
teaching Mental Hygiene, and Basle can
therefore be considered the first experiment
in this field. Three questions arose out of this :
1. Can Mental Hygiene, as a subject, be
taught ?
2. Is there enough interest to make
teaching it worthwhile ?
3. Can other disciplines draw any advan-
tages from Mental Hygiene ?
The experience of twenty-three semesters of
lecturing on this subject shows that all three
questions can be answered in the affirmative.
It is not only possible, but now more than ever
necessary to handle psychosomatic diseases,
maladjustment and crime prevention?and
particularly the problems of mass psychology
and the prevention of war?from the standpoint
of medicine and especially from that of
psychiatry, psychology and sociology. An
extract from a lecture given in the winter
semester of 1946-47 about the prevention of war,
is an example of the method of teaching Mental
Hygiene.2 A few sentences from another lecture
portray the tone of instruction in Mental
Hygiene :
" This means pulling together for the build-
ing of the future, especially a productive
future without war. For this, people with
a sense of personal and social responsi-
bility are needed in addition to a sound
economy, social justice, and a truly ethical
procedure.?Work and the possibilities of
satisfying the mental, economic, and social
needs of every individual are not goals, but
requirements for a real order and freedom.
One of the most urgent tasks of all peoples
is to fulfill these requirements."
We should like to add that the creation of the
best " milieu " and the training of young people
to accept the responsibility for the development
and preservation of humanity in its political,
cultural, social and economic activities are
phases of the evolution of Mental Hygiene.
IV
The personal view-point of the instructor to
these problems of a new social order is of great
importance. The student, consciously and
unconsciously, examines critically the instructor's
view-point, convictions and personality and
uses it as a means of identification or resistance
in his own maturing personality. We should
like to show, as far as it is possible, how the
position taken by the instructor influences the
teaching of Mental Hygiene. He is of the
opinion that despite many regressions into
barbarism, and despite numerous standstills, it is
historically possible to show that humani-
tarianism is on the rise.
This very moment?enriched by our experi-
ences of the pre-war world, two world wars, and
the resulting chaos?is the time to learn what
caused the collapse of that world and what
should be done to prevent it. The "old world"
was unable to satisfy the mental and physical
needs of the great masses. War was one of its
most effective integrators. The experience of
war and crisis worked against a productive
peace by destroying faith and co-operation.
Productive peace needs solidarity without war or
the necessity for war. Mental Hygiene attacks
the problem from the mental side and strives
to inform the people in key positions (such as
physicians, sociologists, lawyers, statesmen,
and teachers) of its findings. It is not sufficient
merely to describe the ills of society, but to
found a scientific discipline which shall be able to
correct them. In other words, scientific
abstraction coupled with resolution can further
the cause of humanity despite chaos, regression,
and obstruction. This will not follow auto-
matically, but will succeed through the efforts
of individually and socially responsible persons.
V
Let us compare our instruction in Mental
Hygiene with the requirements set forth by
others in this field. Von Gonzenbach, in his
contribution Mental Hygiene as Taught at
Technical Universities considered Mental
Hygiene as an educational rather than an
academic subject. This line of thought has
been followed at Basle University. In addition,
it has been one of the instructor's chief tasks to
point out the wide ramifications of Mental
Hygiene, how it affects all of science as well as
everyday living. It is shown how Mental
Hygiene occupies a key position between
scientific research and practical life. Without
losing contact with medicine in general and
particularly with psychiatry and psychoanalysis
which are vital for Mental Hygiene, the attempt
has been made to put the forces of the mind and
the discoveries of science to work in order to
create the right kind of living and working
conditions?in short, the best " milieu " of
which we have previously spoken. Here we see
the close relationship between Mental Hygiene
and Sociology which has been emphasized in the
courses.
i
MENTAL HEALTH 65
Stokvis's work in medical psychology showing
mental-physical interplay has also been brought
out in the lectures. Through statistics and
pictures, the process of " somatization " was
made clear and understandable. The findings of
Psychosomatic medicine are of particular signifi-
cance for Mental Hygiene. Films?for instance
those showing the phenomena and legal standing
of?hypnotism have also been employed as a
means of instruction.
VI
Since 1937 the interest of the students in Mental
Hygiene has increased in a very encouraging
Way, considering that no examinations in this
field are given as yet. The first time the course
Was given (summer semester, 1937), thirty-seven
People took part in it?one-third students and
the other two-thirds, listeners?and through the
twenty-three semesters that the course has been
?lven, thirty has been the average number of
students per semester. The majority of them
Were from the natural science and philological
tacuity. The average number of listeners is
forty. That medical students are so sparsely
^presented at the lectures can be explained
through their particularly heavy schedule as well
the fact that Professor J. E. Stachelin includes
Mental Hygiene in their psychiatric instruction.
Three main classes compose a study group :
1. Class composed of students and listeners
who are admitted for one or both of the
regular study groups each semester.
2. Class consisting of students and listeners
who through many semesters, experience
in the lectures and study groups, are well
acquainted with the work. They meet,
according to the need, to deal with
scientific or practical problems of Mental
Hygiene without being limited by regular
semester schedules. This group concerns
itself with preparation for congresses in
Mental Hygiene or related fields, with
translations of articles in foreign langu-
ages, with cataloguing and making
scientific extracts from books and
periodicals, and with participation in or
planning future courses and lectures. In
addition to the scientific publications
of the instructor and his associates?
as for instance in the collection :
Psychohygiene, Wissenschaft und Praxis3
?there are also collaborative releases to
periodicals.4 In common with the Swiss
National Committee for Mental Hygiene
we have tried to keep as many teachers,
social workers, and parents, as possible
in touch with our work.
3. Group made up of " corresponding "
members.
Since 1943, experts in related fields or in
Mental Hygiene itself have from time to time
given lectures for study groups. Work in
theory is considered the basis for practical work
in Mental Hygiene. The varied contributions of
the corresponding members ensure that the
danger of the study groups degenerating into
pure theorizing is avoided. Moreover, visits
to educational establishments, orphanages and
mental hospitals?in other word to those places
in which Mental Hygiene is of practical use
?serve the same purpose.
The prerequisites of Mental Hygiene are
continually to test and re-define its limits and
possibilities. Mental Hygiene is only one link
in the chain of human endeavour. As it exists
in Basle, it seeks within its limited means?
scientific research and practical experiment?
to help in the construction of a new society
without war or social crises.
references
Heinrich Meng Gibt es eine Psychische Hygiene als Wissenschaft. Schweiz. Medizinisches Jahrbuch, 1939
Verlag Benno Schwabe, Basel.
Fritz Kaufman. Vorschlage zur Psychohygiene der Kriegsprophylaxe. Gesundheit und Wohlfahrt, Zurich,
Februar, 1948, Heft 2.
Heinrich Meng. Zur Prophylaxe des Krieges. Gesundheit und Wohlfahrt, Zurich, Februar, 1948. Heft 2.
The scientific work of Meng at Basle in the collected papers Psychohygiene-Wissenschaft und Praxis of which nine
volumes have already appeared. Schwabe, Basel.
Collaborative work of the Study Group for Mental Hygiene at the University of Basle appeared in Gesundheit und
Wohlfahrt, Orell, Fiissli, Zurich ; Pro Infirmis, Zurich ; Schweiz. Frauenblatt ; Eltcrnzeitschrift fur pflege
und Erziehung des Kindes (Orell, Fiisslie, Zurich).
