Varieties of Delinquent Youth
==============================

:Author: William HSheldon, Ph.D., M.D., with the collaboration oi
Emil M. Hartl, Ph. D., and Eugene McDermott,
M.A. Harper & Bros., New York, 1949. $8.

Those who have read Dr Sheldon's earlier works,
Varieties of Human Physique and Varieties of Human
Temperament, will be acquainted with his general
approach to psychological problems. He aims at
discovering correlations between physical characteristics and psychological qualities?a sort of neoKretschmerism, but with the addition of a rating
scale which makes it possible to describe that
majority of us who are neither this, or that, or the
other, but are, in various degrees, all three at once.
The present volume applies these ideas to a juvenile
delinquency investigation. Two hundred boys
from the Hayden Goodwill Inn, a Boston rehabilitation home for young offenders, were studied over a
period of eight years. They were photographed,
and their physical characteristics analysed according
to Sheldon's scheme. A standardized biography
of each boy, including his medical and mental
history, a description of his temperament, some
sketchy details of his earlier history, as well as an
account of the vicissitudes through which he passed
in the eight years of study, was added.
This data constitutes the greater part of the
work, and if it were all, the book would be a useful
reference volume for future students of delinquency,
but would be too innocuous to bring forth much
comment. It would be entirely uncontroversialIn fact, far from avoiding controversy, Dr Sheldon
revels in it. He has a picturesque vocabulary and a
hobby horse, and rants, arms waving, after many a
wild-goose in this book. He succeeds in slaying
very little !

His basic premise is that " Behaviour is a function
of structure", and to him, structure means physical
structure. So he endeavours to relate delinquency to
his physical types, and finally concludes that
delinquency is connected with an incompatible
mixture of types. He claims to have identified such
" dysplasias " in most of his 200 cases.

Although he pays lip-service to the principle that
the existence of physical factors of this sort must not
eliminate from consideration the precipitating
environmental factors, there is throughout the book
a clear presumption that the only really significant
considerations are the hereditary ones. MedicaJ
students of delinquency have often tended
towards this sort of explanation, developing neat
little diagnostic compartments labelled "constitutional inferior" or "constitutional psychopath" etc.
In recent years there seems to have been a return to
Lombrosian ideas even among more sociologically
oriented investigators. The Glueck's latest book
is a case in point. Yet the reasoning on which such
conclusions are based is often most unscientificSheldon in the present volume seems to espouse
theories in the crudest Lamarckian tradition. Thus he
speaks of the "burgeoned" figure being deliberately
fought in America, and being fostered by over
leeding . . . and then being passed on by inheritance?just like that ! And if there had been any
study at all of the precipitating factors, it might
have appeared that the problem was not always one
?f the inherently maladjusted person, but often of a
maladjustment in the relationship between a type of
Person and a type of social setting.

But perhaps it is unfair to criticize the book at
jhis level. Sheldon offers it as an essay in psychological biography, and outside the biographies and
some excellent preliminary summaries of Sheldon's
earlier books setting out his general ideas on the
elation between physique and temperament, it is
mainly polemical. The Freudians are attacked
with great eclat, especially psycho-analytically
oriented social workers. For example, one of the
factors observed to be present in some of the 200
cases was the A.M.I.?the " appeal to the maternal
instinct In exchange for their social workers'
protection, the boys with a high A.M.I, had learned
to satisfy the need to " mother something " felt by
social workers, who " most of them are frustrated
women or near women And in the light of
discoveries by constitutional psychiatrists, the
family is quite out-moded. " The basic change will
no doubt rest on recognition of reproduction as a
kind of licenced and subsidized specialty instead of a
laissez-faire competition."
H.J.
