The  School Years
=================

94 MENTAL HEALTH
Maintenance of Mental Health
4
By KATHARINE TAYLOR, M.A.*
Formerly Director, Teacher Training Course, Shady Hills School, Cambridge, Mass.
Teachers, all too often, know too little about
the children with whom they work. There are
many reasons for this. Their classes are often
too large for them to feel really acquainted with
each child. They are under pressure to prepare
their students for the next class, for the next
examination, and they feel that their own
advancement depends in large measure on their
success in doing this. Their training has
emphasized subject matter, and method in
presenting subject matter. This subject matter
is organized by authorities who often themselves
know too little about children and about
how they learn. Yet the teacher must meet its
requirements and must try to get the children
to meet them.
Teachers live too much alone with their classes,
their papers, their co-workers. They have
little opportunity, or they fail to make oppor-
tunity, to become acquainted with others who
know their own children, such as the children's
parents, doctors and social workers, or to have
a real life of their own outside of school.
Thus, because of all these omissions and
pressures, teachers continue in the custom of
teaching at children instead of living with them
and helping them to learn.
How do children learn ? Children are con-
stantly learning. They learn through every
experience, significant or trivial, in the classroom
or outside it. They learn from what they make
of each experience, what meaning they find in it.
They learn from doing, experimenting, trying
things out. They learn through mastering
facts, through reasoning, through meeting
requirements, through overcoming difficulties,
through fun and free play, and through taking
a part in home life, school life, group life,
community life. They learn from all their
relationships with other people, young and old,
good or bad. They learn through their bodies
and their emotions as well as their minds. And
all the time that they are learning, they are
growing up as persons in the world.
A teacher describes a child as " dull unable
to learn. It is true that some children are born
with very little capacity for learning, and these
children need a special kind of care. But
there are many others who are labelled " dull "
who are not dull. John may be a person who
matures more slowly than his classmates. All
he needs is more time, and more confidence .
from his teachers and his parents so that, at his
own pace, he will learn well and grow up well?
When he is forced along with the others he
becomes confused and discouraged and after a
while gives up trying to learn. Mary, who seems
" bright ", is failing in her school work and the
teacher punishes her for being " lazy ". But
Mary's father has lost his job and her mother is
ill from overwork and worry. Her father and i
mother, driven by anxiety, must each blame
something or someone for their poverty and
their trouble, and they blame each other, and
there is much friction and unhappiness at home-
Mary lives in the midst of this, wonders whether
the family is breaking up, and is so burdened
with this inner anxiety that she is unable to
free her good mind for her school work. Peter,
from his earliest childhood on, has been expected
by a stern ambitious father to meet standards
that are much too " grown up " for him, and
for every failure on his part he is punished. He
tries, and fails, and tries, and fails. At last
* After Miss Taylor's retirement from teaching, in 1949, she went to Germany as Chairman of the Education and Child
Care Institute conducted by the American Unitarian Service Committee in collaboration with the German Social Work
Organization, Arbeiter Wohlfahrt. The Report on this venture, compiled by her, may be borrowed from the N.A.M.H-
Library, 39 Queen Anne Street, London, W.l.?Editor.
r
MENTAL HEALTH 95
he becomes convinced that he is no good?a
failure. This overwhelming sense that "I am
a failure " prostrates him in school. In school,
to.o, are standards and requirements. He has
within him the capacity to meet school standards,
hut, because of his father's attitude, because he
feels that no matter how hard he tries he cannot
Please his father, he gives up trying. But he
has to try his powers somewhere. He has to feel
that he can succeed somewhere. So he bullies
and fights younger boys outside of school, and
though he is punished for it, he nevertheless
feels a bit of pride in conquering.
In each of these three cases neither the parents
??r the teachers are aware of what is going on
lnside the child. If they care about children they
are troubled about John, Mary and Peter, but
they have not realized that these three children
need something they are not getting. They are
struggling alone with their problems, trying to
solve them, in the only ways they know, and
Naturally are often going down the wrong road,
a road that may lead them only into more
Problems, more confusion, as they grow older.
They need understanding from adults. They
need love and trust in them, no matter what they
or what they fail to do. They need to be
helped to face their experiences in ways that
wiU bring them confidence and hope. They
need to be believed in as human beings.
These are only three typical instances. Any
one who works with children can think of many
jnore. Lying, cheating, stealing, destroying
things, setting fires, breaking rules habitually,
hurting others?all these kinds of behaviour
often are due to inner fears, inner conflicts of
feeling, beyond the child's conscious power to
control or understand.
The very quiet child, anxiously conscientious,
lonely and withdrawn among others, may be
called " good " and " easy " by a teacher.
*fet such children at times are troubled children,
children with fears and inner insecurity, trying
alone to solve their problems in ways that limit
their growth or that hurt their chances of becom-
lng free and well-balanced persons. It has been
said that " a problem child is really a child
trying, in the only ways he can, to solve a problem.
In the last twenty years or more, much has
been learned about what goes on inside children,
and about the emotional causes of failure in
?earning or of troublesome behaviour. Children
must learn to live by the laws of family life, of
school life, and of the community life. They
jnust experience discipline when they behave
ln Ways that hurt the society in which they live.
This is essential to their growing up as persons
and citizens. But rules and discipline must be
thought of in relation to what children at each
age from infancy on are able to live up to, and to
begin to understand. The children must be
helped to learn that rules are there because they
help people to learn to live together, and
that the important thing is to learn how
to live and how to develop one's own
inner powers and resources, and how to
live together in a good society, whether that
society is the family, the playground, the school,
the nation, or the world of mankind. Rules
and learning and discipline thus become the
servants of this purpose and not ends in them-
selves.
This truth children can grow to understand,
with help and interpretation from adults. And
as children grow in these ways, with this kind
of understanding and with experiences which
help to clarify it, they develop within them
capacities for self-discipline and self-direction,
and a sense of active membership in society.
We can learn so much from children them-
selves ! They love to explore things, facts,
ideas, for themselves. They love to plan some-
thing together, to put the plan into action, to
discover why it worked or did not work, to take
a fresh start on an improved plan or a new plan.
They try out leadership, competition,
co-operation. This zest, enjoyment in living,
self-motivation, and active group relationship
out of which they learn for themselves, needs
to be brought into the whole education process,
along with wise guidance from adults, steadying
and freeing influence from adults, and under-
standing of the significance of the emotions
(feelings) in each child's life.
It is along such ways that the young can be
enabled to grow up in real mental health and
empowered to give their best to society. How
can we help ?
Could teachers, parents, doctors, and social
workers?all who are concerned with children?
sit down together more often in small groups,
sharing what they know about children, sharing
their unanswered questions about them, bringing
in persons wherever they can be found who
can help them to understand children better ?
Could there be discussions in such groups of
what obstructs good human relations at any age,
and of what frees people for good human
relations ? And could such learning be put
into practice wherever such people live and work,
in school teaching staffs, social welfare organiza-
tions, families, community life ?
96 MENTAL HEALTH
Do teachers realize that sometimes their own
personal difficulties, anxieties, unsolved problems
?no matter how they may try to conceal them?
affect harmfully the learning, the behaviour,
the inner security of the children with whom they
work. In other words, that the teachers' own
mental health plays a very important part in that
of the children under their care. How can
teachers help themselves and be helped in
this ?
How could more of what is known about
children's growth and development, about the
emotional backgrounds of their behaviour and
their learning, be brought into the education of
teachers ? For in this way a teacher comes to
realize that he is teaching primarily not subjects,
but children, and that the subject matter is only
one of the ways through which children may be
helped to develop.
And what of the other ways ? How can a
school be made into a living community, where
each child and each teacher is an active, interested
member, where there is a will to make a good
life together, and mutual respect and friendship
and confidence ?
In what ways can the individual teacher come
to know his own children better and thus to help
them better ? Through becoming better
acquainted with their parents ? Through
realizing that there is much to learn about what
lies beneath a child's behaviour, and trying to
learn for himself some of these basic facts about
growth and development and possible causes
underlying certain kinds of behaviout' ? Through
creating a simple, warm relationship with
children which makes them feel that the teacher
is not merely an instructor and an agent of the
law, but also a friend to whom one may talk as
person to person now and then, who will not
condemn or brush aside one's clumsy efforts
or one's confused behaviour, but who stands by
ready to help one as best he can ?
