Institutions for Defectives
============================

Editorial

The problem of providing institutional care
for mental defectives becomes steadily more
important for the health of society and everyone
should consider its implications. The responsibility for ascertaining a defective in the community, is of course, that of the local health
authority ; for finding beds the regional
hospital board is responsible. Inquiry of the
latter shows that most heartrending appeals
from desperate parents are constantly being
received, and that pressure is daily being
exerted on those responsible for allocating
the existing beds. But the answer can only be
that there is already an enormous waiting list
and that no hope of a definite date of admission
can be given.

The tragic results which may follow on the
presence of a low-grade defective in a home are
obvious enough, and sympathy for the unfortunate parents is readily forthcoming from their
friends, general practitioners and neighbours.
The mental strain on the mother, the interference
to the father's work, the harm to other children
and the effect on family life lived in close
quarters are also easy to imagine. They
provoke frequent questions and appeals to
members of parliament, and ministers. But
the making of appeals, and the offering of
sympathy in response to them, are not
enough.

The introduction of the National Health
Service did not of course produce any more beds
or any more nurses for the work. Nor can it
have produced more defectives, though there is
some evidence to show that there has been an
increase in the number ascertained?due perhaps
to the tendency to overuse anything new and to
the idea prevalent in some quarters that all one's
burdens can now be cast on the National Health
Scheme.

It seems on inquiry that the position in the
various Regional Hospital Boards varies but
that the numbers of defectives on their waitinglists ranges from 200 to 500 which probably
gives a rough total of some 5,000. A high
proportion of these are young children. Plans
have, of course, been already made in most
regions for more accommodation and for a
greater establishment of medical and nursing
staff. Unfortunately these plans cannot be put
into effect without a very considerable amount
of expenditure and without a very considerable
increase of nurses for this work.

In the long run, therefore, the problem is
twofold. It is that of those who control the
treasury who must decide whether the care of
defectives is more urgent than, say, the care of
the tuberculous, the provision of new operating
theatres or the supply of false teeth. Secondly,
it is that of the community which is faced with
the choice either of nursing its defectives at
home or of supplying a large enough body of its
sons and daughters to train for the work of
caring for them in institutions.

The idiot, in earlier times alternately despised as an outcast or venerated, now is seen as an integral part
of the human race in its struggle for evolution and survival, unwittingly yielding information of the greatest
value in the progressive understanding of the biological structure of the whole group. High-grade and
borderline mental defect are phenomena which have come into prominence only since human life has
become urbanized and industrialized. Civilized communities must learn to tolerate, to absorb and to
employ the scholastically retarded and to pay more attention to their welfare. Subcultural mentality must
inevitably result from normal genetical variation and the genes carried by the fertile scholastically retarded
may be just as valuable to the human race, in the long run, as those carried by people of high intellectual
capacity.
L. S. Penrose, The Biology of Mental Defect.
