Astonished Heart
=================

Film Reviews

 (<Starring Noel Coward,
Celia Johnson, Margaret Leighton.) 89 mins.
? *he Astonished Heart or Pride Goes Before a Fall.
. et aH psychiatrists take a warning that the cinema
eaches them, that the greater their knowledge of the
^uman heart and mind, the greater will be the
faster of their own personal lives, and there is
Fave doubt whether there can be any other end
r them but suicide. Dr. Milne in Mine Own
^ xecutioner did just avoid that, but the approved
j e^h?d, used by the brain specialist (James Mason)
(N Upturned Glass and again by the psychiatrist
0el Coward) in The Astonished Heart is a spectacar fall from a height, doubtless psychologically
symbolic.

Unt e W^? are not *n danger, however, may see
D tyj0ubled some of the greatest acting and finest
^ eduction on the screen to-day. It is difficult
Ds ?kVer-praise t'ie actin8 Celia Johnson, the
0rH iatrist's unglamorous wife, who makes of the
ainary, something sublime. It was, perhaps, a
y to set the scene in two such extravagant luxury
ne Htrnents, f?r the quality of the acting did not
s ec| any extraneous material effects, but that is a
ne r Refect to set against the finish?almost the
Ejection?of every movement and word,
ar c *s t^le assumPtions about psychology that
ah6 ? interest now, and it is difficult to feel content
^ ?ut the assumptions made in this film. Here,
on! tragedy the psychiatrist's personal life is not
th y '?he popular theme of authority dethroned,
ir^u8h that is a strong element. The dramatic
of th t^le conversations in the consulting room,
tin doctor's lecture, and of his clinical observacanr t0 woman who, he knows, is intending to
th? ate him, all this is part of the now familiar
^nie of the pompous and omniscient psychiatrist
?Se fall, at any rate, resembles Lucifer's. But it is
not only that the doctor was too clever, that his
knowledge of the workings of his heart and mind
were not matched by his power to control those
workings ; running through the film there seems
to be an identification of psychological knowledge
with the fruits of the Tree of the knowledge of
Good and Evil, forbidden, on divine authority, to
men. To those who transgress, there is death and
damnation. The search for a Bible in the flat, and
the finding of one in the possession of the cook (who
seems the only happy person in the story)?the
quotation from Deuteronomy, " The Lord shall
smite thee with madness and blindness and astonishment of heart ", as the psychiatrist sees Leonora?
his complete enslavement to passion with death as
the only solution?these, together with a good deal
of uncertainty about the value of his treatment to his
patients, make a story, the moral of which must be
unacceptable to readers of Mental Health.
P.E.W.

Round Pegs. 16 mm. 15 mins. Central Film
Library.

This is a shortened version of two films previously
made on personnel selection in the Army. It is a
factual document, coherent and intelligent, based
on data derived from different methods of psychological investigation used in the Army to determine
a man's aptitude for a particular job, his likelihood
of resisting a breakdown and his general adaptability
to other people. The commentary, which is clear
and well spoken, ends by suggesting that a similar
method might be applied in civilian life with regard
to vocational guidance, the details of which, however,
have still got to be worked out.

This is a well-made film, easily understandable
and useful for anyone interested in psychological
testing and personnel selection. E.H.R.

Should Parents Tell ?
This film, which is sponsored jointly by the British
Social Hygiene Council, and the National Baby
Welfare Council, might have been really good, had
it gone just a little further in some respects, and not
so far in others.

The story is interesting and the standard of acting
higher than in many films of this type. It shows
two girls in a middle class American family, both
of whose lives are spoiled by the lack of adequate
sex instruction. The older girl marries, but runs
away on her honeymoon. (One imagines because
she cannot face the sexual side of marriage.) She
eventually returns to her husband, but makes life
so unbearable for him that he takes to drink,
consorts with a prostitute, and infects his wife with
V.D. which causes the death of their child. The
younger girl has a love affair at 16, becomes pregnant
and being unable to confide in her parents has an
illegal operation.

Having seen this film, one is tempted to ask
" what is it that parents should tell ? " Is it about
the sexual side of marriage, the dangers of
promiscuous intercourse, the horrors of illegal
operation, or how a baby is created ? Although the
film places on parents the responsibility for instructing their children it does not say how this should
be done, or at what age.

The diagrams showing the process of fertilization
and growth of the foetus are excellent but the effect
is spoiled by what one must assume to be a cut at
the end, as the actual birth is not shown.

It would seem that a film of this kind, to be of any
constructive value, should deal with the positive
aspects of sex as well as the negative and destructive
side. One would have appreciated some indication
as to the value of giving sex instruction as well as the
dire results of not doing so. C.H.S.
Good Mothers. 16 mm. 11 mins. Central Film
Library.

This is a Danish film on a Danish national
organization called Mother's Help. It is a lively
film, stimulating, well photographed, sympathetic,
honest, not over-stating the facts but arousing one's
keen admiration for this set-up in Denmark. The
Mother's Help is an organization which sets out tc
help mothers of all classes, particularly unmarried
mothers, to make provision for their children and
for themselves during a period before and after the
birth. It is a thoroughly enjoyable film which
should be particularly helpful for social workers,
health visitors, moral welfare workers and organizations dealing with mothers and in particular wit*1
unmarried mothers.
E.H.R. |
