Supplement to "Mental Health"
==============================

VOL. IX. NO. 3.
Eighth Inter-clinic Child Guidance
Conference
London, Saturday, December 3rd, 1949
ABBREVIATED REPORT
Chairman : Dr. Alfred Torrie
(Medical Director, National Association for Mental Health)
MORNING SESSION
THE PRESENT POSITION OF CHILD GUIDANCE
Dr. Alan Maberly
{Consulting Psychiatrist, Kent and Essex Child Guidance Services : Chairman, Clinical Services Committees,
National Association for Mental Health)
I want, very briefly, to outline what we have been
trying to do at the National Association for Mental
Health to solve the problems that have arisen in
Child Guidance largely as a result of the National
Health Service Act. In 1944, when the Education
A-ct went through, we felt that a very large part of
our work had been done : Child Guidance was on
the map ; it was an obligation of the Local Educa-
tion Authority to organize Child Guidance Clinics,
and we turned our efforts to increasing training
facilities in order to meet the shortage of suitably
Qualified staff. There matters stood, until the
National Health Service Act laid upon Health
authorities the obligation of providing everyone
With medical and, therefore, psychiatric treatment.
For guidance, the Ministry of Education, in
August, 1948, published Circular 179, which is
headed, The School Health Service and Handicapped
pupils : Effect of the Establishment of the National
Health Service. The general principle is that the
Regional Hospital Boards will, in agreement with the
Local Education Authorities, assume administrative
and financial responsibility for all arrangements.
? ? . In addition, where Authorities require the
services of a specialist for the discharge of the
?unctions which fall to them, e.g. for the ascertain-
ment and subsequent examination and supervision
of handicapped pupils . . . the Regional Hospital
Board may in some instances, if desired, be able
to make available the part-time services of a whole-
tune specialist in the Board's service.
But : 44 Local Education Authorities, however,
will be in no way precluded from directly providing
: ? ? any specialist service for school children which
it appears to them desirable to provide notwith-
standing the facilities otherwise available."
Those two clauses give powers either to the
Regional Board or to the Local Authority to provide
these services under which Child Guidance falls,
but the Local Education Authority will, however,
" remain responsible for meeting the cost of
arrangements for the medical inspection of the
pupils, including the specialist examination
and supervision required in respect of the
physical and mental disabilities of handicapped
pupils in special schools."
Now follows the heading Child Guidance.
" Child Guidance work of the type at present
undertaken by Local Education Authorities
is in the main an educational service closely
linked with the school and home. Thus the
needs of most of the children who are mal-
adjusted, whether to a degree which calls for
their ascertainment as handicapped pupils or to
a lesser degree, can be met by social and educa-
tional adjustments. Much of the work is
carried out at the schools in co-operation with
the parents and teachers by the educational
psychologists and specially qualified social
workers appointed by Authorities. The educa-
tional, physical and psychiatric aspects of the
work are, however, inseparable and at the
Child Guidance Centres established by local
Authorities the team of workers includes a
psychiatrist and also, as a rule, a paediatrician."
Now we come to the sentence which has caused us
all a lot of difficulty.
" Some of the children may be found to need
psychiatric treatment ; the Minister, in
agreement with the Minister of Health, considers
that these children should normally be referred
by the authority to the clinics which will be
provided in due course by the Regional Hospital
MENTAL HEALTH
Boards and which in some instances are already
available ; similarly, these clinics will refer
appropriate cases to the Child Guidance
Centres."
In this proposal, the term " Child Guidance
Centres " refers to any clinic, as we understand it,
which is run by a Local Education Authority.
The Child Psychiatric Clinic, on the other hand, is
any clinic which is run by a Regional Hospital
Board. That is a purely administrative distinction.
The same team may staff both. One is a Centre,
the other a Clinic. We felt that this particular
paragraph was confusing. It states that the
psychiatric aspect of the work of a Centre is essential:
psychiatrists must be on the staff: yet it seems to
imply that the psychiatrist's work must be limited
to diagnosis, that if treatment is required, the child
and parent must be referred to another Clinic
where all the work is carried out again. We did not
feel this to be a desirable position.
The only other clauses which concern us are
two :
" It will be open to Authorities to arrange, as
and when practicable, for the specialist service
required at their Centres to be provided by the
Hospital and Specialist Services if they are of the
opinion that the work of their Centres can be
suitably organized on this basis."
and
"A part of the work at the Child Guidance
Centres established by the Authorities is,
however, concerned with the ascertainment
of maladjusted pupils under Section 34 of the
Education Act, 1944, and the Authorities will
be financially and administratively responsible
for the specialist service required for this
purpose."
It is obvious, therefore, that the Child Guidance
Service presented the Authorities, as it has so often
done before, with an administrative problem.
Whatever they did, the Local Education Authority
remained responsible for supplying a specialist
service in relation to ascertainment and, as far as
Centres were concerned, they could supply the
specialist themselves or ask the Regional Hospital
Board to do it. The Regional Hospital Board could
accept the invitation or it could decline ; but it
remained the obligation of the Local Education
Authority to supply the local Child Guidance
Service if no one else did it. At this point I think
it is imperative that we all remember that financial
considerations, in the last resort, will govern what
Regional Boards do. Some Boards will supply
the service and some will not, and it cannot be said
with any certainty that the Child Psychiatric
Clinics which, according to this circular, will soon
be available, will necessarily soon be available in any
area at all.
Then, very briefly, I want to read you a quotation
from a letter (drafted by Dr. Soddy, then Medical
Director), which we sent in to the Authorities
expressing our disquiet at this situation. We said
that we felt that the proposal of this dichotomy
in the Service " would involve the running of a service
for ascertainment of maladjustment and for educa-
tional treatment by one authority alongside a separate
therapeutic service by another authority. Such a
proposal has serious drawbacks, not the least being
the use of two separate organizations to do what
could be done more efficiently by a single body."
The drawbacks we suggested were many :
1. The ascertainment of emotional disorders in
the schools would become the lone responsi-
bility of educational psychologists, many
of whom are now without clinical experience
and who, with the continuation of such a
system, would tend more and more to lack
this essential experience.
2. To absolve the psychiatrist from responsi-
bility for intimate contact with the source of
his clinical material and for ascertainment
of illness is a retrograde step contrary to
modern trends in preventive mental
hygiene.
3. To divorce the responsibility for diagnosis
from that of providing treatment is widely
condemned in medical practice as tending
to irresponsibility on the part of the
diagnostician and to unreality in the
therapist.
4. Experience has shown that the work of the
educational psychologist away from a
clinical setting may become sterile and lose
its distinctive contribution to mental health.
This Association agrees with the view held
by the Committee of Professional
Psychologists (Mental Health) that any
administrative measure tending to divorce
psychologists either in work or training
from clinical experience is to be deplored.
We are agreed that clinical practice is an
essential part of the work of psychologists in
both the educational and therapeutic aspects
of child guidance if the latter is to develop
realistically. A proposal to establish parallel
organizations cannot fail to accentuate a
tendency (already regrettably apparent) to
regard the training of psychologists for this
work as something apart from that of the
other members of the team.
5. A proposal which must necessarily split the
team by sending one member out into the
field and withdrawing another into a more
clinical or hospital setting must be con-
demned as fundamentally disruptive to a
movement which owes its distinctive con-
tribution to the combination of psychiatric,
psychological and sociological approaches
in as close a connection with the community
it serves as possible.
MENTAL HEALTH iii
Lastly, we said :
"This Association urges strongly that the
lesson of experience is that all workers must be
based on the clinic team, must owe allegiance
to the team as a unit and must carry on their
respective functions in day-to-day collabora-
tion with other team members."
. That is part of a memorandum which we sent
jn after the issue of Circular 179. We were assured,
both officially and unofficially, that there had been
n? intention on the part of the authorities at either
?f the Ministries to separate diagnosis from treat-
ment. They failed to understand how we could
have read such an intention into the document,
^hey gave us an assurance that any recommendation
t? refer to the Hospital Clinic would be made
?y the Child Guidance Centre and no child should
Pe referred from the Centre to the Hospital Clinic
rf the psychiatrist at the Centre considered that he
could treat the child properly at the Centre. This
?s important, because, although it is not intended by
either Ministry that any idea of separation should
arise from Circular 179, it is our experience, and I
arn quite certain it is your experience, that many
Local Authorities are interpreting it in precisely
that way.
Now, what has happened in the last eighteen
jnonths ? In effect, some of the old organizations
have gone on more or less unaffected ; in other
cases there have been very considerable changes.
Under the Regional Boards, we have established
clinics such as the Tavistock Clinic and the Training
Centre and the Hill End Clinic in Hertfordshire.
There are Clinics connected with small voluntary
hospitals, which now come under Regional Boards ;
niany of them have full teams, exactly equivalent to
Child Guidance Centres under Education
Authorities, but they are Child Psychiatric Clinics.
There are what we know as Child Guidance Clinics,
fun in association with mental hospitals, or with
children's hospitals, again with a full team, and
known as Child Psychiatric Clinics. There are,
here and there, Child Psychiatric Clinics set up
oy Regional Boards from scratch, usually beginning
^th a psychiatrist alone, and sometimes ending
there. Then there are the Child Guidance Clinics
,n Association with Teaching Hospitals, independent
Regional Hospital Boards, independent of
Local Education Authorities, many of which have
tull teams. There are the Local Education
Authority Clinics still going on, as at Manchester ;
about that you will hear from Dr. Burbury to-day.
Lastly, there are proposals for a combined clinic
and centre which we feel might meet our point of
yiew better than any other : that is a situation
where the Local Education Authority continues to
organize the clinic and to provide the Educational
psychologist and Psychiatric Social Worker, while
the Regional Hospital Board appoints, in co-opera-
tion with the Local Authority, the Psychiatrist
and seconds him, as it were, for service in the Child
Guidance Centre. I call it " Child Guidance
Centre " because we have to do that, as it is
organized by the Local Education Authority, but
it serves both functions. It serves the purpose of a
Child Psychiatric Clinic in so far as it unquestionably
carries out all treatment, serves the whole area, and
takes every child, irrespective of the type of school
they attend. It is also a Child Guidance Centre
and, therefore, it has one team and there is no
question of a child, after full examination and
diagnosis, being referred for treatment elsewhere.
I might just say here that this separation of
function is probably worse for our patients than it is
for us. We can doubtless all think of examples of
separation of responsibility, and it is a state of
affairs to be avoided in our field.
DISCUSSION
Dr. W. J. T. Kimber (Medical Director, Hert-
fordshire Child Guidance Service). The Child
Guidance Service was started in Hertfordshire
fifteen years ago (1934) with one clinic at St. Albans.
It had three sessions every week, and was staffed
by a full clinic team. To-day there are five clinics,
which hold, in all, over the years, forty-eight
sessions weekly. The main change has been in the
relationship between the community and the clinic ;
this change has brought in its train certain problems
which may be met with elsewhere in due course.
At first, only the seriously maladjusted or neurotic
children were referred to us, whereas to-day, in
addition, we get a large number of less severe
behaviour problems and other cases.
As an administrator I have sought to protect the
clinic team from this heterogeneous crowd.
It is possible in most cases, from a brief history
of the case, to divide the children into three groups
and allocate them for appropriate action.
1. Disturbed, maladjusted or neurotic
children.
These require full-team help and are
legitimate Child Guidance Clinic cases.
2. Children reacting (possibly normally)
but also exasperatingly to their environment,
approaching the " beyond control " category.
A full history by a psychiatric social
worker should "reveal these, and an
approach to the mother, and visits to the
home may be all that is necessary. The
psychiatric social worker will be working
in consultation with the psychiatrist, with
whom, for such cases, she will have a weekly
individual session.
Patients may, if necessary, be referred
for full treatment by the psychiatrist.
3. Children failing in school, generally or
in specific ways, with or without disturbing
conduct patterns.
iv MENTAL HEALTH
Such are essentially educational and not
psychiatric or sociological problems. They
should be seen by an educational psycho-
logist.
When the individual problem has been elucidated
and the special needs of the child are understood,
suitable provision can or should, under this statute,
be made for such children.
In my view, unless such means of accurately
determining the needs of a child who is failing at
school are provided, a child guidance service which
has gained the confidence of its public will be
forced to deal with a large number of such children
to the detriment of its own proper work. This is a
waste of skilled and scarce psychiatric time, and a
waste of public money.
Administratively, this provision can be made by
the Local Education Authorities in a number of
ways. I hold no brief for any particular one,
but in my view, as a matter of practical, clinical
importance, any scheme should ensure that the
educational psychologist works both in the schools,
doing purely educational assessments, and in the
Child Guidance Clinic, as a normal member of the
team. In Hertfordshire this has always been the
case, the psychologist being employed by the Clinic
authority (National Health Service), but by arrange-
ment spending days in the schools and working there
independently. I am concerned at proposal that
this school work may be curtailed or discontinued.
I believe that failure in school, particularly
failure to read fluently?the cause of which is not
always readily understood?is not infrequently a
factor in causing serious maladjustment.
Recurring failure conditions children against
school and so against authority. It is a door to
delinquency and, although it is true that other
influences may be sufficient to prevent a child from
passing through this door, it is far better that they
should never be brought there.
Dr. W. Mary Burbury (Medical Director, City of
Manchester Education Committee Child Guidance
Clinic). As Director of the City of Manchester
Child Guidance Clinic, a psychiatrist on the staff
of the Children's Hospital, and a member of the
Psychiatric Sub-Committee formed by the
Manchester Regional Board, I have, as it were, a
foot in various camps. Further, the Manchester
City Child Guidance Clinic extends its work far
beyond the scope of Manchester City and covers
many of the surrounding districts in the Counties
of Cheshire and Lancashire.
I have now been twelve years in Manchester and I
can truly say that the Local Authority have given
us a very good deal. We have a complete staff of
fully qualified people ; our quarters are good ;
and no objection is ever raised to providing us with
the material for which we ask.
The qualification for attendance at the Manchester
Child Guidance Clinic within the City of Manchester
is that you should live in the City of Manchester.
It does not matter how you come ; you can come
from the Local Authority, from the School, from a
private doctor?there is no limitation.
So far, so good. We have been very satisfied
and we have been very happy, but there are diffi-
culties. It seems, for example, to be tacitly assumed
that if you are under a Local Education Authority
you have absolutely free access to their schools, and
in Manchester we have found that not to be the
case ; we can go into the schools, yes ; but,
except where we go in about our own cases, we are
not very welcome?I refer not to the schools
themselves, but to the Authority behind the schools.
We are trying, gradually, to build up a different
attitude about that.
Also, we are a teaching Clinic now, and the
attitude of the Authority to teaching work is far
from satisfactory. They accept it on sufferance,
if they are persuaded that, in fact, they get a lot of
work done for nothing. The other point about the
teaching position is that, because we are a Local
Authority Clinic, we are very much cut off" from the
rest of the medical teaching work. In the University
of Manchester the Professor of Psychiatry and the
Professor of Child Health are very anxious to have
our co-operation, but it is a friendly relationship
and carries no official recognition.
Then?and this is something that people in
London probably find it extraordinarily difficult to
realize?the work in the Local Authority set-up is
very much cut off from the rest of the medical
personnel and particularly from the rest of the
psychiatric personnel in the area. Since there has
been so much meeting together since the Health
Act, I have begun to realize how little I know of my
psychiatric colleagues in the area.
And lastly, one of the drawbacks?a very
important one in a Clinic of this considerable size?
is that when I say to the Local Authority, " We
should like to do this or that in the way of
research ", the answer I invariably get is, " There is
not any time for research as long as your waiting
lists are as they stand at present." That seems to
me one of the most deplorable things in this attitude
of the Local Authority.
Now, though I must be brief, I want to turn to
the other side of the picture?the Clinic at the
Manchester Children's Hospital. It is a one-man
Clinic. I run it entirely myself, except when I get
any kind of voluntary help, or when the extremely
over-worked Almoner sends me a report on a case
that has to be seen. I have to do my own testing.
I have to spend a great deal of time with the parents
of the children, because there is no psychiatric social
worker to take the history for me. So there it is?
no staff. If there is anything worse than that, it is
the premises. The premises are truly awful,
ordinary clinic rooms with tiled floors and walls and
medical apparatus all over the place. The redeem-
ing feature of this appalling situation is that it gives
MENTAL HEALTH
me the opportunity to come into contact with all
the specialists in children's work on the physical side
?n the City ; it gives me the opportunity of contact
with those cases which are on the borderline between
the physical and the psychological ; and, as I have
realized increasingly recently, since the Health Act
came into full operation, since the hospitals adopted
the plan of appointments and sending cards to the
doctors to fill in for appointments, it has given me an
'nsight into the needs and demands of the general
Practitioner which I never had before. The cards
came into operation in this hospital at the beginning
of June. At the end of April the waiting list for that
Clinic was three weeks. It is now nine months, and
11 is quite impossible to keep pace with it. I spent
some time, a day or two ago, looking through the
hst because I felt sure that some of the doctors
must be finding a quick way round the mental
deficiency problem, but I only eliminated about
ten and sent them back as educationally sub-normal
or uneducable and needing to be referred to the
Local Authority for testing on those grounds.
. I think perhaps this illustration of having a foot
ln both camps does emphasize the enormous impor-
tance of what the chairman called " Combined
Operations ". In the first place there is a shocking
jyaste. I find from time to time that cases have
been referred to me which either have been seen
already in other Clinics in the area or which I
have already seen in my own Clinic. Secondly,
there is a tendency to play off" one against the other ;
and if we have something combined, while it may be
Perfectly true that one kind of case is more suited
to one kind of doctor, it will be a matter of choice
jn co-operation and not, as it sometimes appears
to be, in opposition. Thirdly, if we can have a
combined kind of work, it will mean a saving of
staff.
I hope you agree that some co-operation is
necessary, perhaps on Dr. Kimber's lines, perhaps?
'P I hope in my own area?by setting up a Joint
Committee of the heads of the Local Authorities and
the Regional Board for the organization of Child
Guidance work throughout the Region.
GROUP DISCUSSIONS
For lack of space, the findings of the eleven groups
cannot be printed in full. The point, however,
Jyhich stands out above all others is the concern
tett at the proposal of dichotomy in the Service,
as embodied in Circular 179. One group,
unanirnous in condemnation of the division,
suggested that " the best administrative compromise
was to have the Clinic under dual or multiple
control of a Local Committee where Health,
Education, and the Regional Hospital Boards were
represented ; and, on balance, it was felt that the
smaller the area to administer the needs of a parti-
cular Clinic, the betterAnother group
emphasized the need for finding a way of working
harmoniously under the two Authorities, because
the Service extended into both fields.
There was considerable resistance to the new
terminology (Child Guidance Centre and Child
Psychiatric Clinic) and it was clear that the familiar
term " Child Guidance Clinic " would be long in
vogue.
Other points put forward were :
1. There was a fear of recommendations of the
Centre being ignored and intake being
restricted to educational problem cases in
Centres run purely by the Local Education
Authority. It was felt that, as a general
rule, applications should not be sieved by
School Medical Officers, nor should initial
referrals have to be made to them or to their
Departments.
2. Difficulties were often encountered in
connection with referrals of children of pre-
school age, children who had left school
and children who attended private schools.
3. The new Health Act had made little differ-
ence, so far, to the way in which Centres
were run. They showed great diversity of
method. The quality of local relationships
was more important than the " set-up ",
and the onus would continue to rest on the
Clinic team, whatever the final form of the
Service.
4. Working under Regional Hospital Boards
would involve more difficulty in getting
into the schools than working under Local
Education Authorities.
5. There was wide-spread awareness of the
dangers of specializing solely on work
with children.
6. It should be the responsibility of the educa-
tional psychologist, with his particular
knowledge, to ascertain educational sub-
normality. The disposal of the educationally
sub-normal should not be made without a
full-team investigation.
Dr. Jacobs (St. George's Hospital) and Dr. Creak
(Great Ormond Street Hospital) spoke by invitation
of the Chairman at the end of the morning session.
vi MENTAL HEALTH
AFTERNOON SESSION
SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE POLICY
Dr. R. F. Barbour
Medical Director, Bristol Child Guidance Clinic ; Vice-Chairman Clinical Services Committee, National
Association for Mental Health
In the past we have been?and I gather from this
morning's Conference we still are?what I might
term a professional anomaly. We apparently were
in the past, and we still are, an administrative
nuisance. One Director of education said, in a
rather unguarded moment, "You make problems."
With a blush, he quickly amended that to, " You
discover them for us." I think that the first phrase
was more from his heart, and I feel that at present
there is a risk that we may find ourselves, not
consciously but possibly subconsciously, tending
to serve the administrator rather than help the
child. While we are on this subject we might?
most of us?be thinking of means of improving our
techniques in our relationships with officials.
This leads to my second point the importance
of preserving this principle of the team. The
basic assumption of child guidance is that
behaviour problems in childhood arise from a
variety of causes and as a result will demand a
variety of techniques for their solution. Most of us
say perfectly frankly that we are in favour of a
team. On the other hand there are people who feel
that abbreviated teams have a really useful function
to perform. We all know that at the present
moment Clinics have to work short-staffed, and
obviously we may have to accept this as?but only
as?an emergency measure, like rationing. Neverthe-
less I should like to see those Clinics which have
not the full team, keeping the fact in the eyes of the
public, listing their establishment at the top of their
letter-paper : psychiatrist, with the name opposite ;
psychologist, with the name opposite ; psychiatric
social worker, with the name opposite ; and against
any of those positions that they are unable to fill
for the time being, the word " vacant " should be
put. It is all too easy for our administrators to
become accustomed to our working short-staffed.
Some of us have had to work short staffed for two or
three years and possibly longer. They may even
get the idea that a psychiatric social worker is not
essential, or even that a psychiatrist is something
of a luxury and that a School Medical Officer really
can do the work just as well.
Let me repeat, we are an anomaly, and I think
we have got to face that fact and take the respon-
sibility for our policy based on that fact. We do
not fit nicely into any of the administrative compart-
ments. We serve two Local Authorities, the
Education Authority and the Health Authority ;
we serve the Regional Hospital Board, and in
certain cases, in University towns, we serve the
Hospital Board of Governors. In theory, this
should present no difficulties, as the "joint user "
principle is stressed time and time again in the
National Health Act, but in practice it tends to be
cumbersome. The question, I think, is whether
we are capable, whether we are good enough
psychologists, good enough psychiatrists, good
enough psychiatric social workers, to handle these
people, whether we can get all these authorities to
come to an agreement. It is a hard task, but I
am certain it is no harder than our work with a
large number of parents, or even teachers or
general practitioners, and I think that at times we
have tended to fold our hands and, so to speak,
cross them off the treatment list.
If, however, we do succeed, there is practically
nothing that cannot be done under the National
Health Act or under the Education Act. Almost
every clause starts with the phrase " has the power
to . . . " but it is permissive and not compulsory.
On the matters of referrals, around which there
was considerable discussion earlier to-day, I cannot
resist saying that I should like to see open referrals
made the general rule that it is in Bristol?open
referrals by parents, by teachers, by School Medical
Officers, by social agencies. I do not see why
certain parents should have to tell other Authorities
or someone who may not be understanding, before
they can arrange for a child to have treatment.
I am looking forward to the developments of the
next fifteen years in Child Guidance. The last
twenty years have seen many advances, chiefly,
however, on the educational side, and I hope that
we are going to see equal progress on what I would
call the medical side. The broad interpretation of
" maladjustment" makes it possible for us to
finance the treatment of the maladjusted child fairly
easily ; and I think it is time, as Dr. Creak was
saying this morning, that we should now woo the
paediatrician as enthusiastically, and let us hope as
successfully, as we have courted the teacher. Much
research is needed on the whole question of the
development of the central nervous system and the
influence of the endocrine glands on behaviour. I
think that in about ten years' time, provided we can
get adequate staff and adequate interpreters, the
electro-encephalogram will probably be found as
part of the routine set-up of every Child Guidance
MENTAL HEALTH vii
Clinic. Here again let me stress that it is team-work.
In Bristol the psychologists are asking for certain
children to have E.E.G.s. Why ? Because they
are beginning to see that certain types of dys-
rhythmics, when they reproduce the Terman-
Merrill designs, tend to make specific errors. It is
team work again.
It is only too difficult, as you know, to obtain
foster homes, and our schools for handicapped
children are woefully inadequate as far as mal-
adjustment is concerned. It is my opinion that
?ther forms of homes are necessary for residential
treatment. Staffing may be difficult and financing
J]ay be difficult, but at any rate under the National
Health Act they have got as far as planning them and
I think the staff and the finance will be forthcoming.
Let us look for a moment at the composition of
the team, and the question of standards of training.
We do not know how long it is going to be possible
tor the N.A.M.H. to make arrangements for
training Fellows. Are we going to say that any
Person who has the Diploma of Psychological
Medicine is automatically capable of running a Child
Guidance Clinic ? One of the big differences, as you
know is that at the present moment there is no
selection for the Diploma of Psychological Medicine.
It is a matter of finding the time and the money.
On the other hand, for the Fellowships, every
Potential Fellow was seen by psychiatrists and quite
a fair percentage were in fact rejected. Can we
accept this position in the future as satisfactory ?
^Jso, there is a danger in one or two places of the
Psychiatrists themselves becoming administrators,
?r at best diagnosticians, rather than therapists,
the real therapy being left to play-therapists,
Psychologists and other selected people.
. Psychologists seem to be in better supply than
either 0f the other two members of the team and
this often means that it falls to them to double
jor the other members, regardless of whether this is
the best use of their ability and training.
My biggest problem, as a Clinic Director, is the
shortage of psychiatric social workers. Pre-war, as
s?nie of you may remember, the ratio was one
Psychiatric social worker to a half-psychiatrist and a
naif-psychologist. The ratio in many clinics now is
almost the reverse, and this has meant rather
serious changes. Outside contacts have had to be
cut to a minimum. It has severely limited the
ume the psychiatric worker can spend in meet-
and discussing Child Guidance problems
Wlth other social agencies, and I am thinking, in
Particular, of people like Children's Officers,
robation Officers, and the like. Do not forget that
^hild Guidance started originally and chiefly as a
??rnrnunity service, and although treatment of the
individual is important, there are certain problems
Wiich are best tackled at the social level. In some
^-hnics the home visit, which used to be more or less
routine, is now regarded almost as a luxury.
It seems to me that two sections of our work
which will present easier organization under the
National Health Act are : (1) the whole question
of treatment of parents ; and (2)?a big problem
at present?treatment for the boy of about fifteen to
nineteen, who has left school : treatment for such
cases should be possible in a Child Guidance Clinic,
but at present, in general, that need is not met.
My final point is that we must make a drive on
this whole question of training, and if we believe
that the team approach is not only desirable but
practically essential for us, it is very important
that the teaching staffs of these various disciplines
should work in close co-operation.
DISCUSSION
Professor D. R. McCalman (Department of
Psychiatry, University of Leeds). There have been
times when I have wondered whether we were tend-
ing to lose sight of the real object of Child Guidance?
the problem child. Too many of us spend too much
time on administration and organization, but this
afternoon Dr. Barbour has brought us back to our
proper place in the clinical field.
Although there has been a great increase in the
number of clinics we must, as Dr. Barbour has
indicated, make every attempt to increase our
potential for training. In many areas there is a need
and a demand for Child Guidance which cannot be
fulfilled because adequately trained staff cannot be
obtained. Such a situation always increases the
danger of untrained personnel being employed by
Authorities whose enthusiasm outstrips their good
sense. We know how many Authorities have for
years been eager to employ psychiatric social workers
and who, despairing of ever attracting a fully-trained
worker, are now contemplating appointing the
next best thing. The same is true of psychiatrists:
We should resist the assumption made by some
authorities that a psychiatrist is qualified to work in a
Child Guidance Clinic, as a consultant, merely
because he has obtained a D.P.M. There is, there-
fore, a great need for the number of training centres
to be increased. So long as the standard is main-
tained, there is no reason why a number of Regions
should not undertake, in conjunction with the
appropriate University Departments, the training
of psychiatrists, psychologists and psychiatric social
workers, until the present need is met.
The second question I should like to raise, concerns
the use which is being made of existing clinics. The
orthodox Child Guidance team is an expensive
instrument which must be used to the best advantage.
I have always felt that it should be used in a con-
sultant capacity, and called in to help in the diagnosis
and treatment of unusual and difficult cases. In
the process of dealing with such cases the clinic
should, indirectly, educate a number of persons
and agencies in the community, and they, in turn,
should be better able to deal with less pathological
cases along the same lines. Methods should
viii MENTAL HEALTH
gradually be evolved whereby the clinic could safely
act as a consultant agency to probation officers,
teachers, doctors, health visitors, parents, etc.,
who might in time be regarded as the general
practitioners in the field of mental hygiene. This, in
turn, would free the clinic to tackle the very type of
caste for which it was originally designed. I was
glad to hear from Dr. Kimber that develop-
ments along these lines are already taking place.
Thirdly, are we, as a Child Guidance movement,
making the determined effort which is necessary to
tackle some of the more pressing problems in the
broader aspects of mental hygiene. Often, when
investigating a case of delinquency, we find environ-
mental conditions so conducive to asocial behaviour
that we wonder whether it is worth while instituting
individual treatment. Do we then move outside
the bounds of medicine and education in an attempt
to modify these wider social and cultural problems ?
Any such attempt pre-supposes that we know how to
educate and whom to educate in the general
principles of mental hygiene. It is not sufficient
for us to provide the community with a method of
dealing with children after they begin to show
psychopathological symptoms; we must also try to
prevent such maladjustments by encouraging
positively beneficial influences upon early develop-
ment.
Have we learned from our study of pathological
conditions enough about mental hygiene to be able
to carry out this type of educational propaganda ?
How many statistically evaluated facts do we know
about child development ? What figures have our
clinics produced ? If it can be shown that 34 per
cent of mothers in an unselected group of delinquents
went out to full-time work, and 8 per cent went out
to do part-time work, that statement is more con-
vincing to a lay person than any story, no matter
how pathetic, about one delinquent whose mother
went out to work.
Again, is there anyone following up the earliest
cases to attend Child Guidance Clinics in this
country ? There must now be men and women in
their twenties or thirties, perhaps parents them-
selves, and, if so, how are their children faring ?
Only facts of this type can justify the value of our
methods and our claims that Child Guidance
provides a method whereby problem children can
be successfully treated.
Dr. Mary Capes (Medical Director, Southampton
Child Guidance Clinic). I, too, feel that I must refer
to the rather wide ignorance among school teachers,
for example, and on Local Authority Committees,
as to what Child Guidance sets out to do ; Regional
Hospital Boards are also ignorant. For example,
recently we found that it had been thought a nice idea
to switch us from the excellent premises of the Local
Authority, into the Regional Hospital building where
there literally was not a room for us to work in.
Nobody had considered that as a practical detail,
and the Regional Hospital Board did not appear to
realize that there was an educational problem at all
or how much work was being done in the schools.
In my own area, the Education Officer and 1
are the best of friends, but he makes it clear quite
often that he would like the Clinic to be run from ao
educational and not from a medical standpoint.
We have a system, under the Local Authority,
however, which seems to be working happily, and by
which the educational psychologist works half-time
in the Clinic, and half-time in the schools, apart from
the Clinic. During the past year, in her work in
the schools she has tested and interviewed 349
children, and from that number she has only
referred 15 to the Clinic, that is 4-3 per cent.
Children may be referred by anyone and the number
seen at the Clinic itself last year was 221. It is my
policy to ask the psychiatric social worker and the
educational psychologist to see them first. (I do not
work full-time ; they do.) Of the 221 who have
been referred, 200 have been sent on to me, which
means that about 90 per cent, of the Clinic children
are psychiatric problems.
I feel that if the Education Authorities could
realize what scope an educational psychologist
has in the schools, when in the team set-up, they
would feel less anxious altogether and they would not
say, as they have in the past, " Keep out the
psychiatrist
This leads me on to mention that we must beware
of our own ignorance as well as of the ignorance of
people who cannot know altogether what we
are attempting, and I feel that we must know
what training a member of the team should have
had. I speak as one who has suffered as an un-
trained child psychiatrist ; I entirely endorse
what was said of those who have taken the Diploma
in Psychological Medicine and studied adult
psychiatry, but not child psychiatry. I am apalled
by what I have done myself, starting work with
inadequate training, and I think it is up to us all to
see that we are trained to the extent that the National
Association has set down.
I would like to add this controversial note :
that we have to remember that we probably all
experience a struggle in the urge for power. The
Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education
may be happy together : I do not know ; but in
the Local Authorities very often one meets, in
the Counties or the Boroughs, struggles between the
educational side and the medical side, and in the
Clinics, often, we also should take ourselves off to a
quiet spot and consider whether we, as psychiatrists,
are perhaps abusing the power that we have ;
perhaps our psychologist friends should also
do the same if they are running the Clinic. In fact
I think that the happiest Clinic is probably one in
which the psychiatrist deals with the psychiatric
aspects, the educational psychologist with the
educational aspects, and the psychiatric social
worker, besides all the other work she does, runs
the Clinic !
MENTAL HEALTH ix
GROUP DISCUSSIONS
There was, unfortunately, only time for seven
?f the eleven groups to report their findings. Briefly
t"e main points arising were :
1. The urgent need for facilities for training
Child Guidance Staff, and the responsibility
of the Universities in this connection.
2. Some of the training must take place in the
Clinics where the practical problems arise.
If, however, a Clinic has a teaching function,
the responsibility for teaching must be
recognized in the form of extra staff or extra
time.
3. The status of the psychiatric social worker
must be improved.
4. Disposal facilities caused considerable
anxiety.
5. Various suggestions were made for avoiding the
splitting of the Service, for example, that the
Local Education Authority should employ
the lay members and provide the premises,
while the Regional Hospital Board supplied
the psychiatrist. Another group suggested
Joint Committees at all levels.
6. The Service should concern itself with
validating and justifying its work and
selecting its cases, while avoiding " over-
selling ".
7. In the present state of affairs, waiting lists
seemed irreducible.
8. More guidance from the Clinics was needed
in regard to schools for the maladjusted.
9. Inter-Clinic Conferences were regarded as
very valuable for the sifting and exchanging
of views.
SUMMING UP
Miss Lucy Fildes, Ph.D. (Chief Psychologist,
?ndon Child Guidance Training Centre). Perhaps
useful way of summing up would be for me to
tress one or two points that have developed.
Hiis morning the problem, as it appears at present,
CVi PUt before us very precisely. It is clear that
nild Guidance is on the map. I have been
?rking in it since the start, and it is very satisfactory
0 see it on the map. Clearly, however, with the
ajriv.a\ ?f the National Health Act, difficulties in
^ministration and organization must arise, and
lose difficulties were clearly presented to us.
The Education Authority is ultimately responsible
ofir^ld guidance, as stated in the Education Act
, 1944. If that Authority finds that the work is not
eing done by anyone else, it is obliged to do some-
lng about it. In other words, it cannot shelve its
uancial responsibility.
The Health Authority is free to develop any
medical treatment which it considers desirable,
but it is under no compulsion to develop it in the
form of Child Guidance as we know it. It can
develop Child Guidance as a preventive service ;
it can develop it as a therapeutic service, and quite
certainly is doing so ; but the final legal respon-
sibility rests with the Education Authority.
It was very interesting to hear from later speakers
this morning that in general, Clinics are functioning
in much the same way as they were before the
Health Act. All the same, we must face the fact
that problems will make themselves felt when the
Regional Hospital Boards have had time fully to
familiarize themselves with the nature and intricacies
of the Service which has been presented to them.
Will they, or will they not, advocate team service ?
It is up to us to decide what we think of team-work
and whether we are going to press for it. If we
consider that team work is essential, we should have
some clear idea of the responsibilities of the different
members of the team in relation to the whole
general Service, both preventive and therapeutic.
What the nature of that Service should be has
been revealed in the discussions : the idea, for
instance, that the psychologist should serve the
schools as well as the Clinic : that the psychiatrist
should in no sense become merely a diagnostician
in a Child Guidance Centre?and I notice that
nobody here has used that word, except from the
platform : that the danger of this dichotomy
between an education service and a service under the
Health Authority must in some way be met, and
that we should have a definite general policy as to the
best way of meeting what is undoubtedly likely
to become an increasing danger to Child Guidance
work as we know it.
We have heard much about what is essential
for the general future of Child Guidance : the
need for extension of training ; for variety of
experience ; for co-operation ; for research ;
and the importance of making known the real
function of Child Guidance work, without " over-
selling " the Service. If our services are?and can
be shown to be?of value, the question of finance
will cease to haunt us. It will not be as easy to show
the results of Child Guidance, as it is to prove the
effectiveness of much physical treatment, but it will
be incumbent on us to present our facts.
On the question of general policy, can we make
up our minds, for instance, that it would be the best
policy for Child Guidance services to be run by the
Authority which is obliged to run them, if nobody
else will, while co-operating with the Health
Authority by having psychiatrists seconded from
that Authority ? If so, let us say so.
A suggestion was made which carried this
intention of avoiding the dichotomy yet further :
the establishment of Joint Committees responsible
for Child Guidance. I assure you it is not easy to
be governed by a Committee which has under its
aegis the general hospital, the foot clinic, the Child
MENTAL HEALTH
Guidance Service, and a variety of other depart-
ments. But surely it would be much more helpful
to try to work towards prevention of this dichotomy
on the lines of encouraging co-operation between
the various Authorities which are capable of
arranging the finance and administering the Service.
All I can say, therefore, is that from this meeting
some expression of opinion should be given as to
what we consider are the essential things we want.
Do we want to continue the team work ? Do we
stress this question of the need for training in
co-operation, at any rate, with Universities ?
Do we deplore the possibility of squabbling due to
dichotomy of control, through different Authorities
setting up opposing Clinics ? Indications of mental
ill health on the part of the people controlling the
whole matter cannot produce mental health.
The Chairman then asked for a show of hands,
as follows : Those who are against the idea of going
forward on the basis of the present team.
(No hands raised.)
Those who are against the idea of further training
in conjunction with the Universities.
(No hands raised.)
Those who are against the idea of Joint
Committees at all levels.
(One.)
The Chairman thanked the members for their
attendance, saying that next year it was hoped to
hold another Conference on the much more happy
topic of " The Child
i
MENTAL HEALTH xi
SOME PERSONAL SECOND THOUGHTS ON THE INTER-CLINIC CONFERENCE
BY ALAN MABERLY, M.B., B.Ch., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
The ouststanding impression that remains after
the Inter-Clinic Conference is that of the remarkable
degree of unanimity of opinion on all issues of
?eal importance, and in particular on the value of
jull team work, and on the dangers of any adminis-
trative set-up which would split the functions of a
team, or of any of its members.
It may not have been realized by all those who
^tended how much encouragement and support
ls given by these conferences to those at headquarters
of the National Association for Mental Health, in
their endeavours to maintain the standards in
^-hild Guidance work.
Group discussion, even in the short time available,
)vas singularly successful in presenting and summar-
the views of so large a meeting, and it seems
Probable that no other method could have indicated
?? clearly the sum total of individual viewpoints.
*his, as with most other aspects of the meeting,
^uld have failed in its object had it not been for the
ejjiciency of organization by the office staff, and we
ah owe a debt of gratitude to those who put in so
tfiuch work behind the scenes.
While we would all agree with Professor
^cCalman that our main concern is the problem
?hild, we are not all of us as fortunate as he is, in the
justness of his University, to be able to control
.he administrative set-up in which he works.
~nless we remain alert, we may find ourselves faced
s ki c'rcumstances which make difficult or impos-
ible the implementation of the recommendations
relation to the patients we see. It may seem
^trly innocuous when it is suggested that " General
^ministrative Responsibility " should lie with the
chooi Medical Officer or with the Divisional
Rector of Education, but very real difficulties will
MUickly arise unless the limitations of this adminis-
responsibility, together with the boundaries
' clinical direction " in the hands of the team,
*very clearly defined. Only recently, one team
ith which I am associated was faced with the
eernand that Form 1 H.P. should be completed
very time Form 2 H.P. was used to recommend
Provision of special education. This was designed
0 ensure that if, when a vacancy arose at a suitable
*>01, there should be no delay in over-riding any
Ejections the parents might then raise. This was
?twithstanding the relevant clauses in the Educa-
?n Act prescribing that the form should not be
. sed as a routine matter, and ignoring entirely the
t. aPPropriate nature of such a regulation in connec-
on with mal-adjusted children. On the other hand,
ls both wise and right that clinicians should be
relieved of the responsibility for dealing with
window cleaners and gas accounts.
Those of us who have been long in Child Guidance
work are familiar with the irritation that the team
set-up has caused to many administrators because
it has not fallen neatly into any single departmental
category. The only new factor that has arisen
is that the rivalry between Directors of Education
and Medical Officers of Health has now been
extended to ministerial level. One hopes that, at
this level, integration will prove an easier and more
practicable proposition.
In Dr. Alexander's regrettable but unavoidable
absence owing to an engagement overseas, his one-
man campaign for the introduction of the Scottish
form of Child Guidance set-up to England (to
which he alludes as the " British pattern which had
its beginnings in the work undertaken at Glasgow
under Dr. William Boyd ") received perhaps less
attention than it deserved. Members of the
Conference who are not readers of Education would
be well advised to look up the issues of October
28th, 1948, January 14th, 1949 and November 11th,
1949. It will be noted that Dr. Alexander makes
no reference to the earlier work of Professor Sir
Cyril Burt, nor to that of Dr. Hamilton Pearson or
other pioneers in this country.
We should all heed the warning against over-
selling our speciality, although at this time the
danger might seem to be greater in the field of adult
psychiatry in general than in Child Guidance.
Furthermore, it is the quality of the salesmanship
rather than its quantity which requires attention.
We can all of us be modest in our claims, without
losing confidence in our methods. We can avoid
obscurity of language, but need be none too ready
to produce the figures that are often demanded of
us, because much of the value of Child Guidance
work cannot be assessed in numerical terms at all,
any more than can that of the School Health Service,
which is predominantly preventive. With the
human material with which we deal, it is only rarely
possible to produce controlled experiments, and
these should be conducted by research workers
rather than clinicians. Even if the claim of the
Scottish workers that they cure 100 per cent, were
true, there is no means of proving that these cases
would not have been cured 100 per cent, with-
out any treatment at all. We should not play
into the hands of those who regard human
personality as capable of being weighed, counted
and measured by accepting their premises without
question.
