Memorandum Issued
==================

Juvenile Delinquency

BY THE ROYAL MEDICO-PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION
The Royal Medico-Psychological Association was recently invited to prepare a memorandum for tfr
London County Council Committee on Juvenile Delinquency. The Sub-committee entrusted with the
preparation of this memorandum considered that they would most profitably?
(a) formulate the principles governing normal social development as generally accepted by th?
psychiatrist;

(b) discuss the relationship between psychiatric ill health and delinquency;
(c) outline the part played by Child Guidance and Psychiatric Clinics in treating Juvenile Delinquency!
(d) suggest how the problem may be most usefully met.
In view of the topical importance of the subject and the frequency with which the psychiatrical!)
informed are invited to elucidate these questions to interested lay bodies, it has been thought useful to
publish these observations.

In the child of normal endowment and
potentiality the mature pattern of social behaviour depends upon the pattern of behaviour
established in early family relationships.
Normal behaviour presupposes that the child
in the home should have met firstly with stable
and secure affection. This is a biological need
without which he cannot develop normally. In
its absence, relative or, rarely, complete, he will
be liable to a wide variety of neurotic disturbances. For his social development the most
important of these is that, lacking affection in
his early years, his capacity to return affection is
atrophied, stunted or distorted. Yet it is only
through the child's affection that he can rightly
be influenced to conform to parental standards.
In the early years the child's motive is to retain
the approval of the mother and father who give
him love and security and whom he loves in turn.
As he grows older it is from those in the home
and outside whom he loves, admires and desires
to emulate that he forms the standards that will
later govern his own life.

These truisms to the psychiatrically minded
are sometimes disputed or underestimated by
those who, coming from a normal home themselves, usually deal with normal children.
Affection for a child in his own or a substitute
home is fortunately so general that its immense
biological role in development may be overlooked, much as the need for oxygen might be
overlooked by the uninformed who had never
seen or experienced suffocation. Rebuke or
punishment does not of itself provide a motive
for the child. It only underlines withdrawal of
approval. The strict but loveless home may
produce a severe delinquent.

This primary need of the child cannot well be
overemphasized. The moral aspect is als?.
implicit in that the child will adopt the values oi
those whom it loves, admires and desires tf
emulate, and rebel against the code of those
who owe but deny it affection. Thus a chiW
may be emotionally stable and well adapted t?
parents who are themselves antisocial in outlook
and so become a delinquent.

The second biological need of the child and
youth is stimulus and outlet appropriate to it5
maturing need for physical activity, to
imaginative and creative ability, and to its
intellectual capacity. Educationists are famili^
with these needs. They are denied by ovef'
crowded homes, lack of play facilities, faulty
educational methods, failure to provide social!)
acceptable outlets for the instincts of youth, and
by ignorance and lack of understanding
imagination in adults. These needs are met i*1
the home with space for play inside and outsidein modern adequately staffed nurseries, nurseO'
schools and schools, and by the agencies tha1
provide for the play, social activity and educflf
tion of youth in all its aspects. Without sud1
provision it is useless to condemn the substitute
outlets that children and youth find for them'
selves. Undoubtedly privation in this sphefe
is of itself conducive to antisocial behaviour $
those who are otherwise well and in no need
psychiatric treatment.

The third need of the normal child is that i*
should meet with stable and reasonable authority
in the home and school and, where appropriate'
outside. While in turn this need is appreciated
by those who are concerned primarily witjj
normal children from a healthy background,jt
may be disputed at least by implication by some
Psychiatrists and educationists. Concerned
Primarily as they are with deprived and restricted
children who have experienced or brought upon
themselves an excess of authority, the psychiatrically minded may be too liable to disapprove of
all authority. This spreads alarm and despondency among parents and teachers and brings
discredit on psychiatric opinions. Yet reasonable authority plays an important role in normal
development.

While the three needs outlined are common to
all children, they are interrelated and treatment
?f an individual disturbance must be based on
accurate diagnosis.

The deprived, over-restricted and neurotic
child needs uncritical affection and tolerance of
his disturbed behaviour. Only then will he
become capable of complying with normal
standards. On the other hand, the robust
child of doting and indulgent parents may need
control and authority, but unless this is applied
by someone whom he may eventually like and
admire, and unless his need for normal outlets
ls met, rebellion may be the only outcome.
While it is not suggested that a child who
behaves antisocially is of necessity neurotic or
m need of psychiatric treatment, it is nevertheless
the case that deprivation in one or more of the
three primary needs outlined may result either
ln a healthy child who behaves antisocially, a
neurotic child, or a child who is both antisocial
and neurotic. Delinquency may, therefore, be
but the incidental and occasional expression of a
wide range of emotional disturbances and
behaviour disorders. It is a legal definition
applicable where the symptom is antisocial
conduct that, on discovery, leads to a charge.
*t is profitless to attack the problem of delinquency without considering the individual
delinquent child, or to deal with the delinquent
child and ignore the emotionally sick and the
antisocial of which he happens to be but one
example. We must make provision for meeting
the whole field of emotional and neurotic
disturbance in childhood. This of necessity
must involve also taking into account the homes
and backgrounds of these children, the social
hmitations, the ignorance and the unhappiness
that lead to these disturbances. For this we
need adequate psychiatric and child guidance
facilities. We need, too, increased investigation
jn this field. Scientific social investigation is
but in its infancy and should be facilitated and
encouraged. The knowledge already possessed
should be disseminated and measures and
powers recognized as effective by health authorities, educationists and social agencies should be
fully implemented.

For clarity there has so far been considered
the child of normal endowment whose delinquency reflects faults in home or school environment. Provision must also be made for those
children who are handicapped by heredity,
illness or eccentricity, which isolates them from
their fellows. Such children are peculiarly
prone to react adversely to unfavourable
conditions. Physical handicaps even of a minor
degree may interfere with the child's relatioaships in home or school, deprive it of legitimate
outlet and lead to compensatory phantasy that
may end in delinquency. Unrecognized intellectual handicapping may deprive the child of
approval in the home where he irritates or the
school where he meets with rebuke, and only by
antisocial conduct can he then acquire compensatory prestige. The intellectually superior
may find himself placed among those who are
intellectually his equal but physically his superior
and so he, too, may suffer and rebel. Furthermore, children may be unequally endowed
emotionally, in character and in temperament.
The stable, secure personality may meet equably
the stresses that lead to neurotic and behaviour
disturbance in those of less stable personality.
Finally, certain illnesses such as epilepsy or
encephalitis may limit in some cases the child's
capacity to respond to normal influences and
render him more prone to delinquent behaviour.
The particular function of the psychiatric or
child guidance clinic is to investigate the
physical state, the emotional conditions, the
intellectual and the educational level and the
social background of a disturbed child, to
diagnose the condition and prescribe the remedial
measures indicated. In undertaking treatment
the clinic usually deals with the child and the
home, but must work in co-operation with health
and educational authorities and with social
agencies. In varying degree the staff of a clinic
contribute to the dissemination of knowledge of
the needs of the normal child. Psychiatric and
child guidance clinics are inadequate in number
and in personnel. Successful treatment should
signify the stabilization of the child in his own
home. Where this is found finally to be
impossible, the maladjusted child may require
placement in a suitable hostel or school. The
shortage of such schools allows many children
to drift into delinquency when they may require
to be dealt with by the Courts.
February 1950
