A Colony for Maladjusted Children
==================================

:Author: E. WELLISCH, M.D., D.P.M.
Medical Director, Crayford Child Guidance Clinic, Woodside Road, Bexley Heath, Kent.
Introduction

The authorities in charge of Mental Health
Services are becoming increasingly aware of the
very great importance of the establishment of
more and better Residential Homes for maladjusted children. These Homes are not only
necessary for the segregation of children from
their home surroundings and the diagnosis of
difficulties by close and constant observation,
but they offer, above all, unique opportunities
for an intense treatment such as cannot be
provided by other means. If adequately equipped and directed they can be the most powerful
means of combating psychological illness in
children and therefore deserve the greatest
possible consideration.

In spite of many defects, the existing type of
Homes render very valuable services, and it is
only to be desired that there should be more of
them available. Useful as they are, it must,
however, be pointed out that the Homes as they
exist at present are only a first step towards the
type which will be necessary in order to solve
the immense problems which lie ahead in the
future.

Most of the existing Residential Homes are
situated mainly in one large building?previously a large dwelling house such as a mansion,
rectory, etc. This principle has great economic
advantages. It means, however, that the children lead there a life of an " institutional "
character, which often has an unfavourable
influence on certain children who miss the
atmosphere of real home life. The close and
continued living together with many other
disturbed children is also not good. Furthermore, the stay of children in these Homes can
usually only be a short-time provision which is
often not sufficient to achieve a cure. The
residential staff consists in most cases of a
superintendent with his assistant helpers. These
workers are generally lay persons. Their
salaries are on the whole very low. They care
and cater for the children's well-being but are
only rarely qualified to give actual psychotherapy. The visiting psychiatrists and psychotherapists are too few and cannot devote the
time needed if greater numbers of children are
to be deeply influenced.

Because of these reasons it is suggested that
Residential Homes for maladjusted children
should in future be established according to the
following principles?they should be colonies,
laid out as a village and should use the system
of family care and certain economic measures
which will be described later.

The Organization of the Colony
------------------------------
The problems of mental suffering of children
and the prevention of mental illness in later
adult life are assuming such dimensions that
bold plans for treatment are needed. The idea
of creating colonies for the long-term treatment
of psychological disorders is not a new one.
It was, for instance, considered by the Neuroses
Sub-committee of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association. Its Honorary Secretary,
Dr. Aubrey Lewis, published a memorandum (1)
on this subject in The Lancet of July 29th, 1944.
Another article (2) in the same number of The
Lancet referred to the memorandum. The
colonies as suggested by the Lewis report were
in the first place meant for adult neurotics but
should also have provisions for the patient's
family. The patient's children should, if maladjusted, receive psychiatric treatment.
A move towards the direction of colonies are
also the so-called " Cottage Homes " for
maladjusted children which exist in some places.
There the children are housed in cottages and a
central kitchen provides for all. The management of these Homes follows the usual lines of
other Residential Homes.

The Lay-out of a Health Village
--------------------------------
The Colony should have the lay-out of a
little village. " Health Villages " are already
in existence for the treatment of various diseases,
for instance of epilepsy at Chalfont in Buckinghamshire or Lingfield in Surrey and in the
treatment of tuberculosis at Papworth in
Cambridgeshire. The idea of accommodating
patients in a " Hospital Village " has been
advocated by the Medical Faculty of Leeds
general Infirmary (3). This Health Village
should consist of a hospital and possess its own
Workshops, school, cinema, farm, etc.
The Colony for Maladjusted Children should
e such a Health Village. The difficulties in
establishing one at present are great. The idea,
however, is not a medical Utopia. The time
come, and let us hope soon, when its
realization will become possible. In the meanllrie smaller plans than the ideal one which will
n?w be described could also fulfil the main
Purpose.

The grounds of the Colony should be rela1Vely large in order to enable the patients to
ftiove within a wide area without coming into
c?ntact with the outside world. A village
c?uld be specially designed for the colony, but
Perhaps better still an existing small village
c?uld be adjusted for the purpose.

.The village should have a village green where
h,e main administrative and cultural buildings
ot the colony would be situated such as a
school, a meeting hall and a guest house for
visitorS.

Around the village green should lie the
fesidential district. The village should have
^ccupational centres and workshops, playing
role in the economic life of the Colony. The
ol?ny should also have a farm and playgrounds.
Possible, an area of the Colony should be
uncultivated country.

, A separate area should be covered by a small
ospital. It should possess an admission and
In nervation ward, a treatment centre for the
odily treatment of psychiatric illnesses, an
institute f?r physical therapy, sick wards and a
laboratory.

The System of Family Care
-------------------------
The Colony should be based on family units
s the natural social cells of a healthy community life. It should use the system of family
care.

Family care of psychological disturbances
ready plays a considerable role in mental
Raiment. It is widely used in schemes for
yarding out maladjusted children in suitable
J10mes- An interesting pamphlet on
family Care of the Mentally 111 " (4) was
Published by the New York State Committee
n Mental Hygiene. The most important
optical example of family care is the colony
Gheel in Belgium (5, 6). In this town mental
j^hents live and dwell with families which take
re of them.

A feature of the Colony for Maladjusted
Children should be the presence of a considerable number of foster parents in the Health
Village. Each foster family should take on only
a small number of children, usually not more
than four. The foster parents may have
children of their own, and the number of
maladjusted children whom they should take on
would be in accordance with the number of their
own children.

To be a foster parent should be a permanent
job. A suggestion how this could be accomplished will be made in the next paragraph.

Economic Problems

The economic problems of such a Colony
would be great but not insuperable.
The already mentioned Lewis Report contained the suggestion that a colony of (adult)
neurotics should be a self-supporting " Occupational Colony It should offer training and
remunerative work. The report suggested that
in accordance with Section 15 of the Disabled
Persons Employment Act, 1944 (7), the Minister
may contribute towards expenses incurred by
companies or local authorities which provide
facilities for patients. This Act would in the
case of a Colony for maladjusted children only
apply to, perhaps, some of the older adolescent
patients. The idea of an occupational selfsupporting community, however, can also be
used for a children's Colony if the following
suggestions are considered.

Small industries should be created within the
colony which should mainly be worked by the
foster parents. This might not only help
considerably to secure the economic existence
of the Colony but would also solve the problem
as to how the foster parents could find a satisfactory living. Healthy adult persons who are
interested in the aim of the Colony but do not
wish to be foster parents should also be allowed
to work and live in the village. Some of the
children's parents who will be found to be in need
of long-term psychological treatment should also
live and work in the Colony.

As far as possible the Colony should produce
its own foodstuffs, and again, the farm workers
should be recruited from the foster parents or
other healthy adults living in the village, or from
the children's own parents.

Treatment at the Colony
----------------------
The Patients
According to the purpose of the Colony,
special age groups of children, or children of a
certain grade of intelligence or suffering from a
special kind of disturbance, will be accepted.
Larger Colonies, however, could accept most,
or all, categories of maladjusted children.
They could, if required, be separated within the
Colony in different groups of houses.

In addition to the children, some of their
parents also should be admitted to the Colony
if in need of treatment. In some cases the whole
family of the patient should be allocated a
house of their own in the village. This would
have the unique advantage of observing and
influencing them in their natural setting. In
other cases it would be advisable to place the
parents and their children in separate Homes.
The Reception Centre and Plan of Treatment
Every new patient should be admitted to the
Reception Centre which would be part of the
hospital. There, mental and physical examinations will be carried out. Then a plan of
treatment will be worked out. The patient will
be either placed into a suitable foster home or
transferred to a hospital ward for bodily
treatment.

I
Psychotherapy
Analytical Psychotherapy should be available
to all patients who need it. It would be given
by analysts who should preferably live in the
Colony.

" Situational Psychotherapy." The Colony
would in addition to analytical treatment, also
use the various situations as they arise during
the patient's everyday life at the village, for the
therapeutic aim. In the same way as education
has to be more than classroom teaching, art
more than exhibitions in galleries, and religion
has to extend beyond the ritual of the Church
service, so psychotherapy has to go beyond the
boundaries of the consulting room. It has to
extend to the practice of life and has to use all
aspects of life as far as it is possible to do so
for the purpose of treatment. In this respect
the assistance of the foster parents would be
of great help.

Minor Psychotherapy. The therapeutic role of
the foster parents in the Colony would be
considerable. The fact that a great number
of foster parents would be concentrated there
would give them an opportunity of special
training. They would be carefully selected, and
courses and continuous instruction would be
given to them by the Colony's professional staff.
In this way the foster parents could become, in
time, lay-therapists entrusted with many important tasks of minor psychotherapy. Indeed,
a new group of mental nurses could be formed
in this way which could be affiliated to the official
organization of Mental Nurses, as " Professional
Foster Parents for Maladjusted Children
They would, as was mentioned before, also be
employed by the Colony in its workshops and
farms.

Educational Treatment
-----------------------
The bigger Colonies should possess a school
building. The teaching staff should be residential. Remedial teaching should be provided by
experts in this branch of the work.

If required, children should be sent to schools
in the neighbourhood. The teachers of these
schools should be associates of the Colony.
It was formerly said that education has to be
more than classroom teaching. It should be 1
given inconspicuously throughout the child's
everyday life. Physical training, art, music,
drama, and above all religious education should
play an essential part in the character educationPhysical Treatment

The physical side of the problems of maladjusted children should receive full attention.
Physiotherapy. As was pointed out in another
article (8), maladjusted children frequently
benefit from a simultaneous bodily treatment.
The agents of physiotherapy, the use of mechanical force, warmth and its carrier water, light and
electricity, are particularly suitable as a bodily
approach. Lack of energy, listlessness, depression, faulty bodily mechanics, vascular instability, various psychosomatic and neurological
disorders are examples of the many indications
for physiotherapy in maladjusted children.
The physical training grounds of the Colony
should be used for this purpose. The Hospital
of the Colony should be equipped with afl
Institute for Physical Therapy with rooms for
mechano-, hydro- and light treatment. The
Institute could also serve outpatients of the
neighbourhood of the Colony.

Psychosomatic Treatment. Special consideration should be given to the treatment of psychosomatic disorders both with psychotherapy and
paediatric measures. Asthma, some skin diseases, epilepsies, or colitis may be mentioned as
examples of the more common psychosomatic
disorders of maladjusted children. The paediatric side of the treatment should be carried out
with the help of the hospital.

Physical Treatment of Psychotic Tendencies of
children should be given at the hospital.

Social Treatment
----------------
Family Life. It is within the life of the family
^'here the foundations of our character are laid.
^ careful study should be made of the individual
needs of each child as regards his family life
and the type of foster home which would be best
Suited to meet these needs. The influencing
the children within the family life of the
*?ster parents would be of great importance.
Community Life. By taking part in the
c?nimunity life of the Colony the social sense
behaviour of the child would be developed,
^he natural setting of the village with its school,
Meeting house, playgrounds, etc., would give
"Opportunities for a social life as it is led in the
outside world, and as neither a Residential
-4ome for maladjusted children of the usual
%le with one main building nor an ordinary
bearding school can provide.

Zone of Collaboration.'''' Although a certain amount of isolation of the children within
Colony would be needed, especially in the
lnitial stages of treatment, complete isolation
^'?uld not be desirable. The ultimate therapeutic aim should consist in teaching the patient
0 face and master the outside world. This
c?uld be greatly facilitated by gaining the
sympathy and collaboration of the population
wing around the Colony. Such a " zone of
Elaboration " would be a therapeutic buffer
area between the Colony and the outside world.
tare the Colony should own houses and
Premises which would serve as outposts and
flaying centres.

Group Morale. The most important aspect
the social treatment and of the treatment at
Colony as a whole should be the development
?* group morale.

Can psychotherapists be objective about their
Patients' morale ? Every psychotherapist, as
eyery man, is bound to have a moral attitude
towards the problems of psychological suffering
and healing, whatever his scientific creed may be
and whatever his attitude towards morale and
religion is. Therefore H. Crichton-Miller
wrote (9) that it is impossible to attain an
objectivity upon matters of moral opinion
during psychotherapy. As this is so, the
question arises on which moral code psychotherapy should be based. I believe that it
should be based on the love of our neighbour
as it is taught in the Bible.

An Appeal
---------
The realization of a Colony for Maladjusted
Children on the suggested principles will depend
in the first place on the interest of persons in
these ideas, and on their idealism and collaboration.

Workers of many professions will be needed:
psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers,
nurses, teachers, artists, clergymen, economists,
etc.

Will those who are interested in these plans,
please communicate with the writer ?

REFERENCES
------------
(1) Colonies for Neurotics. The Lancet, 29.6.1944.
(2) A Place for the Mentally 111. The Lancet, 29.6.1944.
(3) A Hospital Village. The Lancet, 8.12.1945.
(4) Crutcher, Helen B. (1948) An American Experience of Family Care. Mental Health, Vol. viii,
No. 1.
(5) Henderson, D. K., and Gillespie, R. D. (1944).
Textbook of Psychiatry. Sixth Edition. Oxford
University Press.
(6) Rademaeker, A. (1948). The Colony of Gheel.
Mental Health, Vol. viii, No. 1.
(7) The Disabled Persons (Employment) Act, 1944,
Section 15.
(8) Wellisch, E. (1949). Occupational- and PhysioTherapy as Adjuncts to Child Guidance. Mental
Health, Vol. ix, No. 2.
(9) Crichton-Miller, H. (1937). The Frontiers of
Psychotherapy. British Journal of Medical Psychology, Vol. xvi, Parts 3 and 4.

It is our responsibility to see that the current blaze of popular enthusiasm over the
problems of mental illness does not blind psychiatrists to the more prosaic problems of
mental deficiency, many of which are fundamental to a comprehensive understanding
of human behaviour.
Leslie R. Angus, M.D.
