The Church and Mental Health
=============================

Editorial

Many readers will have been present at the
opening session of the Annual Conference when
the Archbishop of Canterbury spoke of the need
for closer co-operation between church and
medicine.

It is a sad indication of the gulf between the
church and medicine that some surprise had
originally been expressed at the " novel"
suggestion of inviting the Primate to open the
Conference ; and it may be of value to reflect
on how this gulf has been caused, and what can
be done from our side to follow the Archbishop's
lead in trying to fill it.

Some of the earliest records of medicine
described Hippocrates' practice as being carried
out in a temple, appearing to the patients as a
representative of a god, if not a god himself ;
ideas about psychological medicine have no
doubt changed a great deal since then, but so
have ideas about religion. In the early middle
ages the church's representatives were foremost
in providing medical services, and some of the
greatest of our modern medical institutions trace
a direct descent from these. But there was a
period in the late middle-ages when independent
scientific enquiry was frowned upon by the
church as subversive of discipline and sometimes
blasphemous, and leading scientists were severely
persecuted. There has also been a tendency
among physicians and particularly those in their
younger days, to limit themselves to the material-
istic side of their work, and to disregard the
intangible and invisible ; so much so that even
now much of psychological medicine is either
disregarded in this way or only grudgingly
accepted ; consequently an attitude of suspicion
and sometimes hostility has grown up between
doctors who regard the clergy as unpractical
visionaries, and clergy who regard doctors as
atheistic materialists.

If mental health workers, whatever their
discipline, are prepared to admit that it is what
the patient thinks that influences his behaviour
and health, they can scarcely deny that his
beliefs are of some professional interest to
themselves and that those who are also profes-
sionally interested in these beliefs are, or should
be, their colleagues. On paper it is possible to
separate the mind from the spirit, but probably
nowhere else. Collaboration is therefore
essential between the clergy and all concerned in
mental health.

Doctors also are often hindered by their own
variety of faith from helping a patient who lacks
it, but they are all the same reluctant to seek
the aid of the clergy. On the other hand they
would not hesitate to condemn the shortsighted-
ness of clergy who try to treat psychiatric
problems unaided.

It is possible that doctors and clergy often
disagree because they are too much alike in their
tendency to dogmatic utterance; and expect
their hearers to acquiesce without question
in ritual phrases from pulpit or bedside.
It would do neither any harm to have to justify
their views in answer to questions from congrega-
tion or patient. The Archbishop warned us of
the danger of loose thinking and loose phrases,
and this must be applied to our assessment of
our own work, and our views on that of others.
Elsewhere we have stressed the need to restrict
our claims of authority to the extent allowed
by our training and this must still be
remembered. But it also behoves us to under-
stand what our colleagues' training consists
of, and for what they are best fitted, and in what
part of our work they can best help us. We must
be prepared to set aside our prejudices, and so
soften theirs. We must make allowances for the
legacy of suspicion from the past.
