W.H.O. and Mental Health
=========================

News and Notes

A report on the First Session of the World
Health Organization's Expert Committee on Mental
Health was published in September.

The Chairman of the Committee is Dr. William C.
Menninger (U.S.A.), and its other five members
come from China, Czechoslovakia, the United
Kingdom, Brazil and India.

In dealing with priorities in mental health work,
special attention is called to the wide divergence in
level and scope of the development of treatment
facilities in the various countries. Thus:
" The United States, with approximately
160,000,000 people, has over 5,000 psychiatrists and about 700,000 psychiatric beds.
India with a population of 350,000,000 has at the
most 80 psychiatrists and 20,000 beds, including
accommodation of all types, and China with a
population of 450,000,000 has probably not
more than 10 psychiatrists and less than 2,000
psychiatric beds."

The most important single long-term principle for
work in the world mental health field is therefore
considered to be
" the encouragement of the incorporation into
public health work, of the responsibility for
promoting the mental health of the community
as well as its physical health

The Report goes on to cover a wide area, including
such subjects as medical and nursing education,
research, alcoholism, maternity and child welfare,
venereal disease, delinquency, homeless children.
On each of these, recommendations are made.
With the World Federation for Mental Health,
the Committee recommends close co-operation,
particularly in its use as a channel for obtaining
information needed on specific subjects.
The Report in English may be obtained through
H.M. Stationery Office or direct from W.H.O.,
Palais des Nations, Geneva, Switzerland, price
2s. 3d.

British Epilepsy Association. Tylor Fox Memorial
The British Epilepsy Association came into being
in July, 1950, when an inaugural meeting was held.
This was attended by about 80 people representative
of social agencies, government bodies, local authorities and the medical profession. The speakers
included: Dr. Macdonald Critchley, President of
the International League against Epilepsy; Dr.
Russell Brain, President of the Royal College of
Physicians, and representing Maida Vale Hospital
for Nervous Diseases; Dr. Fairfield, Chairman of
the Sub-Committee for Epileptics, National
Association for Mental Health; and Dr. Denis
Williams, Secretary of the British Branch of the
International League against Epilepsy. The proposal to form such an association was very warmly
received, not only by those present, but by a number
of people who were unable to be there; and offers
of assistance, particularly with regard to the formation of local units, were received from many areas,
including Scotland and the North of England.
The first Council Meeting was held on September
5th, 1950, and the Provisional Council formed at the
inaugural meeting appointed Lady Cynthia Colville
Chairman, Miss Sybil Campbell Vice-Chairman, and
Miss Gairdner Hon. Secretary for the time being.
It is hoped that the Executive Committee of the
National Association for Mental Health will
continue to allow their address to be used until the
new Association has been able to raise some funds.
It was agreed that the main objects of the Association should be:

(1) to educate the public as to the social
acceptability of the epileptic in the
community;

(2) to co-operate with other bodies to promote
the welfare of the epileptic in education
and industry so as to permit him to take a
normal place in society;

(3) to encourage the formation of local units.
The immediate programme is designed to carry out
these objects and will include the setting up of an
advisory and information bureau and the holding
of a school for workers. Plans for a financial
appeal are in hand and an attempt will be made at
an early date by every means available to bring
before the public the true facts regarding epilepsy
and its effect on the individual.

Enquiries for further information should be
addressed to Miss Gairdner, at 39 Queen Anne
Street, W.l.
Racial Discrimination?a Bugbear
UNESCO has recently published a pronouncement summarizing the most recent findings on
" race" reached by an international panel of
scientists, including psychologists, sociologists and
anthropologists.

These findings should effectively cut the ground
from the feet of those who profess to base their
ideas of racial inferiority on scientific data, for
they demonstrate categorically that:
(a) There is no proof that races differ in
intelligence, temperament or other innate
mental characteristics.

(b) The social results of race mixtures are caused
by social factors alone, and there is no
biological justification for prohibiting
inter-marriage between persons of different ethnic groups.

(c) Race is less a biological fact than a social
myth?" a myth which has in recent years
taken a heavy toll in human lives and
suffering and still keeps millions of
persons from normal development, and
civilization from the full use of the
co-operation of productive minds ".
Here we have a scientific vindication of the
Christian, and ethical championship of the rights of
the coloured people. It would seem that the reasons
for racial discrimination that remain are therefore
either frankly political and economic, or due to
psychological inability to deal with deep-seated fears
and superstitions due to old, unhappy, far-off things.

Disabled Persons
------------------
It is disappointing to find, in the section of the
Ministry of Labour's Report for 1949 which deals
with the resettlement of disabled persons, that there
is no reference to psychiatric or mental disability as
constituting a special problem. All that we are
told is that out of the 935,007 persons registered as
disabled at the end of October, 1949, 5 per cent, were
in the " psychiatric group but the proportion of
members of this group admitted to R.employ
Factories is not recorded.

It is stated that at the end of the year, 64,200
registrants were unemployed and that some of these
may prove to be unemployable, but we are not told
the reasons for unemployability and it would be
interesting to know what proportion of mentally
disabled persons is included in this " hard core ".
The National Advisory Council on the Employment of the Disabled has recommended a " stricter
application of the Regulations in the acceptance of
future registrations or renewals ".
" The Register ", it is stated, " is primarily a
means towards giving the disabled the satisfaction, wherever possible, of playing their part
as productive members of the community, and
there would be no purpose in having on the
Register persons who have no reasonable
prospect of undertaking remunerative work.
Registration of such persons could only lead
to disappointment."

There would seem to be an indication here that the
people to whom this statement alludes, could be
more suitably provided for by Welfare Services under
Section 29 of the National Assistance Act, which
includes, it will be remembered, the provision of
workshops and home employment.

It is encouraging to know that there is now a total
of 72 Remploy Factories but at the end of the year
they were not yet working to full capacity, for if they
were to develop as efficient production units, workers
had to be taken on gradually.

Mental Health Advisory Committee
--------------------------------
The first Report of the Central Health Services
Council constituted under Section 2 of the National
Health Service Act, has recently been published.
It is stated that the outstanding task of the
Standing Health Advisory Committee of the
Council during this first year was the preparation of
a report on the care of the aged; other mental
health matters occupy only four short paragraphs
?f its report and it must have been disappointing
to its members?all recognized for their eminence
and energy?that they did not find it possible to
give any constructive lead. Thus, on the subject
of" Prevention and After-Care " all that could be
said was:

" Very little in the way of organized effort in
the field of preventive psychiatry exists in this
country, but it is difficult to advise what should
be done as so little is known of the exact
causes of mental illness."

This is surely a rather pathetic statement and it is
remarkable that the Committee does not seem to
feel free, if the position is correctly described, to
make the obvious recommendation that more
opportunities of research should be provided.

The paragraph continues:

" Local Authority after-care services are also
far from fully developed; in particular, further
consideration is required of the arrangements
for those discharged for mental health reasons
from the Fighting Forces. The Committee
proposes to keep these subjects on its agenda."
Psychiatric social workers are, it is noted, in short
supply and the Committee accept the fact that
" some dilution may have to be faced "?a neat
understatement ! It must have been distressing for
them to have to study the Mackintosh Report and
Vet to be debarred, for financial reasons, to recommend its implementation.

Referring to the " Boarding Out of Mental
Patients in Family Care ", the Committee commend
the system and would " welcome an experimental
scheme on these lines in this country under expert
organization and direction ". On this subject it is
hoped to report at a later date.

Have the Voluntary Associations an opportunity
here ?

British Journal of Delinquency
------------------------------
In publishing a quarterly Journal, the Institute
tor the Study and Treatment of Delinquency has
taken an important step forward.

The Journal's object is described as being to
collate all available information in the field of
delinquency and to keep its readers in touch with
the latest advances and researches. Its Editorial
Board consists of Dr. Edward Glover, Dr. Hermann
Mannheim and Dr. Emanuel Miller, and on its
pdvisory Board are serving psychiatrists, psychologists and sociologists and other experts.
the first issue of 76 pages (July, 1950) are
articles on such subjects as " Capital Executions in
the United States", "Dorothy: the PsychoAnalysis of a Case of Stealing " The Dutch
Prison System: a New Psychiatric-Observation
Hospital with Notes, Reviews and Abstracts.
The annual subscription for four numbers is
27s. 6d. ($4.00), which should be sent direct to the
publishers, Balliere, Tindall & Cox, 8 Henrietta
Street, London, W.C.2.

Juvenile Delinquency
--------------------
In a Paper issued jointly by the Home Office and
the Ministry of Education in July, 1950, it is recorded
that 73 of the 145 Local Authorities in the country
have now held local conferences on Juvenile
Delinquency, in accordance with the suggestions
made in the Memorandum of April, 1949. A
further 15 have announced their intention of holding
conferences in the near future. In 58 areas,
committees composed of representatives of the local
services concerned with the welfare of children and
young persons, have been formed.

Figures so far available show a downward trend
in juvenile delinquency. In 1948, the number of
children under 14 found guilty of indictable offences
in England and Wales and dealt with by magistrates'
courts was 28,715; in 1949, 24,872; and for the
first five months of 1950, 11,175. Comparable
figures relating to delinquents aged 14 and under 17
were 16,991, 15,054 and 7,116.

Senior Child Care Course
------------------------
We have been asked to state that the note which
appeared in our Spring issue about this Course
organized by the London Institute of Education,
may have been misleading "in describing the
Course as leading to a qualification for particular
posts although posts of the kind stated have been
obtained by students

" There is", the statement continues, " no
approved qualification for appointment as Inspector
in the Children's Department of the Home Office;
such posts are open to candidates of varied qualification and experience."

Provision for E.S.N. Children
------------------------------
On July 13th, in reply to a question, the Minister
of Education stated that 27,577 children had been
ascertained by Local Education Authorities as
requiring education in special schools for the
educationally subnormal. Of these, 15,030 were
actually attending such schools and 63 were being
maintained in independent schools. The remaining
12,484 were awaiting admission to special schools.
Mr. Tomlinson added, in answer to a further
question, that although the problem was proving
difficult to solve, some progress had been made.
During the last four years, 1,750 additional places
had been provided, and by the end of 1951 another
2,000 should have been added.

Neglected Children
------------------
In a Circular issued jointly by the Home Office,
the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education (No. 943,863/28, July 31st 1950), attention
is called to the needs of children who are neglected
or ill-treated in their own homes, and some suggestions are made for dealing with the problem.

After enumerating the various statutory and
voluntary services from which the necessary help
may be obtained, the outstanding necessity for their
co-ordination is urged, and Local Authorities are
asked to consider the following suggestions:
(a) That a special officer should be designated
to be responsible for enlisting the interest
of those concerned, and for devising
arrangements to secure full co-operation.

(b) That the designated officer should hold
regular meetings of officers of the local
authority and other statutory and voluntary services concerned.

(c) That to the designated officer should be
reported all " significant " cases of child
neglect, and all cases of ill-treatment
coming to the notice of statutory or
voluntary bodies; such cases would be
presented by him to the meeting so that
after a consideration of the needs of the
family as a whole, agreement on how to
meet its needs might be reached.

It would seem that co-operative action on these
lines would go far towards remedying a situation
frequently found by workers of Family Service
Units, in which the advice given by officers of
Authorities and voluntary agencies, to mothers of
" problem families " is contradictory.

But however efficient the machinery of the
type indicated above proves to be, there will
remain a " hard core " of families where children
are neglected, which can be dealt with only by means
of the intensive and exceedingly " costing " social
work carried on by the Family Service Units.
Thus the First Annual Report of the Kensington
and Paddington Unit formulates its basic principles
as follows:

" The work is based on the belief that the
problem can only be dealt with by means of an
intimate friendly relationship between the caseworker and the whole family. This relationship must be one of respect and mutual confidence, of patient and persistent goodwill. It
must not, however, be allowed to degenerate
into sentimentality. The family must be
inspired to change, shown the way and supported through times of crisis until rehabilitation
is effected."

Such work, if adequate financial support is
forthcoming for its extension and stabilization,
should provide the scientific basis needed if ways of
preventing the future development of problem
families are to be discerned.

Mental Hygiene and the Dog
--------------------------
In an issue of the American journal, Mental
Hygiene (July, 1944), an article was published on
" The Mental Hygiene of Owning a Dog In the
current issue (July, 1950), the writer?Dr. JamesH.S.
Bossard, University of Pennsylvania?gives an
illuminating and diverting account of his experiences
as a result of that article.

In addition to comment upon it in editorials of
three widely-read newspapers, its reproduction in
four veterinary journals, its circulation as a pamphlet
by animal protection societies, and the sale of large
numbers of reprints, over 1,000 letters were received
from people of every type and class (including
psychiatrists and neurologists), ranging from a
high-ranking government official to a farm boy in
Delaware and a child of 14 wanting veterinary
advice about a poodle !

This extraordinary response is noteworthy, the
writer suggests, as revealing certain basic human
interests and needs, " leaving no doubt that the love
of animals by humans is one of the universals in the
existence of both". Thus the part played by
household pets in family life must, he contends, be
seriously taken into account by all students of
mental hygiene.

Royal Commission on Capital Punishment
At its twenty-third sitting (June 1st, 1950),
evidence before this Commission was given by
Dr. Henry Yellowlees, and on behalf of the Institute
of Psycho-Analysis by Dr. Dennis Carroll, Dr.
W. H. Gillespie and Mr. Roger E. Money-Kyrle,
Ph.D.

A verbatim report of the evidence submitted
by these psychiatric experts may be obtained from
H.M. Stationery Office (price 2s.). The Memorandum submitted to the Royal Commission by the
British Medical Association was published in the
British Medical Journal of August 5th.

Mental Health Service in Hampshire
The Health Department of the Hampshire County
Council has recently issued a useful little booklet for
the information of medical practitioners in the area,
giving short summaries of procedure under the
Mental Deficiency, Mental Treatment and Lunacy
Acts, in so far as this need be known for dealing
with patients. Lists of psychiatric clinics, Area
Welfare and Duly Authorized Officers, and Occupation Centres in the county, are included in the
pamphlet.

Easily accessible information of this type should
prove a great boon to doctors who lack the time
to make a detailed study of the intricacies of the
Mental Health Service, but who should be familiar
with its outstanding features.
