Mental Tests Foe Pre-School Children
=====================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1928, by Lightner "Witmer, Editor
Vol. XVI, No. 8-9
November-December, 1927

By Dorothy Kern Hallowell, M.A.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Introduction
It is not surprising that the earliest efforts of the clinical
psychologists should have centered around the school age groups.
When children begin school they enter upon a new and distinct
phase of competitive achievement. They are then pitted against
not only a class of fellow pupils of similar age, but also are judged
by the accumulative school standards of what the six-year-old should
be able to master. From this point on, through their school careers,
children are expected to conform more or less acceptably to specific standards in order to maintain their scholastic status. School
failures being suggestive to the teacher of limited or one-sided
mental development, the aid of the psychologist has frequently
been sought to help understand and readjust school misfits. Hence,
for the past thirty years, the clinician has been working on these
problems, devising and redevising tests, accumulating and evaluating norms. We have had, therefore, at our command for a number of years, a goodly range of equipment from which to select
material for a psychological evaluation of individuals from five
or six years up through adulthood.
With pre-school children, the problem is quite different. Their
successes and failures are not being measured so accurately. They
are not competitors against their age mates in anything like as
definite a way as when their school careers begin, and the need of
scientifically studying their mental development has not, until very
recently, been considered an important field of research.
At best, pre-school children have been compared with their few
immediate associates?neighbors or relatives?in accomplishments
such as walking, talking and play activities. The parent's perspective on what is normal baby development, is necessarily limited,
and it does not need, in the average case, to be otherwise. However, in certain social situations, there is a demand for very care236 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
ful judgment of mental potentialities. Especially pertinent is the
problem of the socially dependent baby, who is to be legally
adopted. In the past, even as recently as four or five years ago,
adoption plans were practically all effected solely on the basis
of physical and social studies. But with mental tests for the preschool age ever increasing, no social agency can well ignore the
aid from psychological tests. Only those who have seen at first
hand the acute disappointment which the wrong adoption brings to
foster parents, and the harm which also comes to the adopted child,
can sense the importance of this problem.
Tests for pre-school children have, of course, a much wider
application than their use in the process of adoption. As a preliminary step in dealing with the behavior problems familiar to
mental hygiene clinics, psychological studies of even such young
children can be of great aid. Much time and effort can often be
saved by determining at the earliest possible moment whether unsocial habits are engrafted on a good mentality, or on an inferior
one.
The progressive pediatrician is continually correlating mental
with physical development. The age of sitting up, standing, walking, and talking, are all dependent on both physical and mental
condition. If the appearance of any of these accomplishments is
delayed, a psychological study can often reveal whether in other
directions there is subnormal mental functioning, and also what
is the degree of retardation.
Since pre-school tests have such wide possibilities for service,
it seems that study in this direction should be extensive and varied.
Therefore, although a number of excellent contributions have already been made in the field of pre-school tests, the writer feels
that it is still a very worthwhile subject for additional research.
Present Status of Test Material for the Pre-School Child
When this study was begun in 1923, the Kuhlmann tests were
the only guide for a psychological study of a child under three
years. An interesting beginning was made by these pioneer tests,
but particularly from twelve months to three years they left much
to be desired, as the range of abilities tested was too limited and
too dependent on specific training.
Gesell's excellent book, The Mental Development of the PreSchool Child (1925), added much to the psychologist's equipment.
Especially from four to twelve months is the material very valuable,
MENTAL TESTS FOR PBE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 237
and at the higher levels also if one happens to be testing a child
at exactly the ages where the norms are applicable, as eighteen,
twenty-four or thirty-six months. If the subject, however, happens
to fall between these points, as for instance twenty-one or thirty
months, judgments based upon these tests cannot be so exact.
Stutsman's monograph (1926) contains some very interesting
performance tests. She does not, however, include any children
below eighteen months, and the fact that her results are reported
only by half yearly periods, is somewhat of a disadvantage.
Baldwin's study is also suggestive to the psychologist interested in tests for the younger ages.
Case Material Used
We will now proceed to our own pre-school study, showing the
sources from which the children came, the test material used and
the results obtained.
The writer believes that a series of norms to be representative
of a cross section of a given population, and therefore valid for
classifying the mental ability of any particular individual, should
include children from different economic classes, and from different
racial and nationality groups. This was kept in mind when cases
were sought for study. At the same time it is, of course, difficult
to determine exactly what percentage of the different groups should
theoretically be included. Practical exigencies in obtaining case
material are also a limiting factor of no small importance. But
the writer believes that the group of 650 children tested will, in
a general way, be found to be a fairly representative sampling
of an urban population.
Twenty-five per cent of the cases were secured through private sources, representing homes of a fairly high intellectual level,
one or both parents usually being college graduates. Aside from the
probability of a good mentality, through inheritance, these children
had material advantages, such as good housing conditions, proper
diet and clothing, and medical care when necessary. The child
was subjected to ample play material and considerable adult stimulation. We should expect this group to be reacting to their environment at the maximum of their potentialities. A few of this
group were, in addition to home stimulation, having the benefit
of nursery school training. A few negroes are in this series, but
the large proportion are white and all are of American parentage.
238 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
The other 75 per cent of the group were obtained through social agencies, though the reason for contact with the agency was
by no means always financial dependence. For instance, 11 per cent
came through a "well clinic" of a large babies hospital and through
a city health center. These families were practically all on a selfsupporting basis. Though they were a non-intellectual group, occupied at work such as small store-keeper, tailor, chef, shoemaker,
factory worker or laborer, they do not represent a depressed economic group. Their children were mostly well clothed and fed,
medically cared for, their homes, though often small, were usually
clean. The majority of these parents were foreign born.
Twenty-three per cent of these cases were examined at fifteen
day nurseries, a connection which probably implies a semi-dependent financial status. Some of the fathers were dead, but more
usually both parents were living and working. Most of them were
employed in industrial plants, though some were clerks, domestic
servants, or laborers. The fact that the mothers of these children
were employed all day, necessitated a minimum of attention to
home standards. The day nursery, since it had the child from ten
to twelve hours a day, could, however, largely offset the lack of
home care, by their attention to health, cleanliness, diet, rest and
supervised play. These children are about equally divided between
the white and colored, American and foreign born.
Eleven per cent of the cases were from three different institutions caring for white children of either American or foreign parentage. A problem produced by illegitimacy, by ill health, inadequate care, desertion or death of one or both parents, made the
placement of the baby necessary. Though adequate standards of
diet and health were maintained by the institutions, these children
undoubtedly received less stimulation to mental and physical activity than any of the other groups. The institutional staff was
usually over-worked or untrained or both, so that the minimum of
play material was supplied and practically no individual help or
encouragement was given for exploring their environment. These
conditions might readily produce a stunted development.
The other 30 per cent of the cases secured through social agencies were from two child placing agencies * The reason for care by
*1 am indebted to the Children's Aid Society of Pennsylvania, for their
vision in making possible the major part of this research, and especially to
Dr Jessie Taft, the Director of their Child Study Department, "who was
largely responsible for the initiation of the study.
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 239
these two agencies would parallel that of the institutions, meaning
a similar social status. Although the facilities for individualization
by the foster homes were good, many times a child was still handicapped in his fullest development by a previous unstable home care
or actual neglect.
Those who have not had actual experience with individual children from various social groups may be inclined to think that in
this study there are too many cases from social agencies, which
may imply a poor quality of mental equipment. In looking very
carefully over the individual diagnoses, this implication is not found
to be true. Among the brightest children tested were a Polish boy
and a colored girl from day nurseries. Nor were these exceptional
cases. Many very bright children, especially Jewish, came through
the Babies' Hospital. On the other hand, an intellectual parentage
does not necessarily imply that a child will be above average, and
this was found to be true in many of the 25 per cent of cases from
private sources. In general, the writer can state that from the
standpoint of the case material obtained in this piece of research,
that the economic, racial or nationality status has no bearing on the
mentality which we can expect in any individual case.
The writer realizes the difficulties involved in making an accurate racial classification if we attempt to set up certain criteria
for physical traits, such as skin color, nose width, type of hair, etc.
Not only is it impractical in such a study as this to make the actual
anthropometric measurements, but even if we did, there might still
be as much doubt as to just what degree and combination of
darkness, hair kinkiness, or nose flatness should constitute a negro.
Therefore, in this study, the grouping of white or negro was made
according to the lay standard of social acceptance. Only in one
ease, however, were the physical traits not pronounced enough for a
possible question to have been raised as to racial classification.
Fifiteen per cent were negroes; 85 per cent white.
Although we are all familiar with the different cultural standards in recreation, discipline, diet and dress, which are apparent in
homes of varying nationalities, it does not seem to the writer that
at present we can assume that there is any significance to such differences in relation to the degree of mentality exhibited. At least,
for the purpose of this study, the only bearing that another nationality seems to have, is the foreign language which the child
hears exclusively, or along with his learning of English. This
would especially affect the verbal tests, but should not influence
240 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
performance test results. For those who are interested in the
foreign nationalities contributing to this study, we can say that
Italians lead, with Polish, and Russians next, and an occasional
Greek, French, Armenian and Spanish.
Six hundred and fifty-seven cases were personally examined,
the ages ranging from twelve months to forty-seven months. To
gain familiarity with younger babies and how their reactions differ
from older children, about 100 cases under twelve months were
tested by the Kuhlmann and Gesell standards. No babies, however,
under twelve months appear in this study, as they are too immature
for the performance tests to mean anything except something to
grab, throw around, or put in the mouth. Four 11 month babies, who
by other tests appeared average, were given the 3 Disc Formboard
and Peg Board A, with entirely negative results.
On all the tables 12 months means from the day the child becomes 12 months old until the day before he is 13 months old.
When norms are being presented in bimonthly periods, a child can
be compared by this calculation just as accurately as if 12 months
means from 111/2 to 12^ months, and it seems much easier to compute any monthly age by using actual chronological dates than by
counting back half a month to find in which group he belongs.
No. Cases No. Cases No. Cases
12 m  14 2   16 3   23
13 m 17 2:1   21 3:1   13
14 m  13 2:2   25 3:2   23
15 m  13 2:3   28 3:3   21
16 m  18 2:4   23 3:4   14
17 m  16 2:5   19 3:5   16
18 m  20 2:6   27 3:6   14
19 m  18 2:7   22 3:7   19
20 m  18 2:8   19 3:8   14
21 m  17 2:9   15 3:9   17
22 m  17 2:10   15 3:10   15
23 m  20 2:11   20 3:11   17
Total 201 Total 250 Total 206
Anyone who has observed a child's development, even apart
from test responses, knows the very rapid advance that is made
month by month. For this reason it seems highly desirable to report all the results in as small groups as the entire number of cases
warrants. Therefore, bimonthly norms are being used as the age
group against which any one individual may be compared.
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 241
The number of cases for all the tables is not the same, as some
of the tests were added later in the study, and also, because of
difficulty, some of the tests were not even presented to certain
children at some ages.
The sex distribution is not quite even, 56 per cent boys, 44 per
cent girls, but for practical purposes this seems satisfactory. The
results are not being reported by boys and girls separately, as the
groups, being arranged bimonthly, would be too small, and from
reported studies, sex differences are on the whole small or entirely
insignificant.
A most important question in making a group of representative norms is the quality of the cases included. Should the cases
all be within the average range, thereby rejecting all feeble-minded
as well as superior children. It seems to the writer that the first
important criterion of acceptance is good physical condition. This
was controlled in many cases by a medical examination immediately
preceding the psychological study, or by observation of trained
nurses. If there was any question of a possible illness, the examination was postponed, or if made, the results were discarded in making up these norms. The question of rachitic children is at point.
The writer has not seen reported any studies showing the relation
in this disease between mental and physical retardation. However,
of some twenty rachitic children examined, all were mentally retarded, many even appearing to belong in the definitely feebleminded group, and because they definitely were below par on the
physical scale, it seemed better to discard these results from the
group study.
Assuming then, that, as far as we could know, the cases were
physically well at the time of examination, are we justified in including all of them in a representative group? It seems to the
writer, that if a child has not been socially excluded from his group,
that is, if he is accepted on a par with other children, to partake of
the same opportunities, and if he is not singled out for any special
treatment, he can legitimately be included. In any individual study
we want to know how a child measures up to his whole age group,
and his age group might well have an occasional feebleminded or
superior child in it.
Another question which might be raised is the validity of including retested children in the norms. If a retest is not given
too soon after an initial examination, it seems justifiable. For instance, a twelve months baby may be retested at sixteen or eighteen
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
months. The probability of the familiarity with the material from
the first examination influencing the second one is very slight. The
time interval between the tests is frequently such that entirely new
tests are given. For instance, at fourteen months the 3 Disc Formboard and Peg Board A are used, while at twenty-two months, the
3 Figure Formboard, Peg Board B and Colors would be added.
Unless a child was very resistant to the examination, results
have been included, though retests have at times shown the first
examination was not representative. A marked shyness or other
emotional condition may give poorer results than the child is really
capable of, but if the behavior is not abnormal with the refusal to
work, crying or temper tantrums, how can we know without retests that a particular examination is valid? This problem does,
of course, make tests of young children less dependable than of
older children, but of this more will be said later.
In making an individual study it is always necessary to secure
a careful history, so as to have an adequate understanding of the
child as we see him. This was not feasible for the group of 657
cases examined, but for every child except a few foundlings, we
had the correct birthdate, sex, color, nationality and general physical condition. In addition, the child was usually well enough known
to some responsible adult, so that if any outstanding difficulty in
behavior, habit training or development existed, we were told of it.
Significant facts in heredity could usually be gotten. Eight foundlings are included in this study, for whom no history whatever was
procurable. The birthdates were assigned by a physician according to physical maturity.
Test Material Used
Formboards at any age level, and particularly for the preschool child, lend themselves well for psychological study. They
are largely self-explanatory, which puts the foreign speaking child
or the "late talking" child at no particular disadvantage. They
negate as nearly as possible the training factor. Although general
experiences with certain kinds of toys may give some children a
slight advantage, the formboards themselves are a new problem to
any child. Their resemblance to games makes them readily appealing, especially to young children. Self-consciousness which is so
often evident when verbal responses are required, is not a deterring
factor with concrete material. An uneasy attitude many times completely vanishes as soon as the child begins to do something with
his hands.
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 243
With new material of the performance type, opportunity is
given to study the rapidity with which new associations can be built
up, which is, of course, the whole problem for learning. Also, when
a child is actually at work 011 a given test, many attitudes and
methods of approach can be observed, which are a good index to
future competency.
Because of all these general advantages from the presentation
of performance test material, the writer was interested to secure a
battery of tests of increasing difficulty for the ages of one to four,
and to present them to a sufficiently large group to obtain bimonthly norms.
The material selected for standardization was not newly devised
for this study. The Psychological Clinic at the University of
Pennsylvania has for a number of years had several very simple
block tests which were used chiefly for feeble-minded children, who
were unable to do the more difficult standardized tests. No one
had any definite knowledge as to what normal youngsters could do
with them, so it was thought these 3 Disc and 3 Figure Formboards
would be well worth standardizing. Very soon afterwards, the
Wallin Peg Boards, Series A, B, C and D, and the "Witmer Formboard were added to the battery of tests. In addition to the performance tests, color cubes were used for the detection of color
discrimination and the audito vocal digit memory span was obtained
when possible, either as a test by itself, or as one of the Binet tests.
Under method of procedure, complete descriptions of the above
mentioned tests will be given.
The writer wants to make clear to any interested in using preschool tests, that she does not feel this battery of tests should be the
only material used for a complete individual study. Especially
now with the Gesell and Stutsman norms available, they should be
supplemented whenever possible. Also, when there is a language
development, we should not neglect to use verbal tests, such as the
Binet. Particularly from 12 to 18 months, this battery is an incomplete gauge, for if interest in the 3 Disc Formboard, and Pegs A
and B fails, which are the only performance material simple enough
for so young a child, there is nothing else in the series by which
to evaluate mental development.
General Method of Procedure
The general conditions applying to all clinical psychology held
in this study except that with a large proportion of the cases the
244 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
testing was done, not in a strange laboratory, but in a place where
the babies felt at home?in their own houses, or, with the social
agency cases, in the nursery where they habitually spent a large
part of their time. A quiet room, made as attractive as possible,
was used and only those who had a definite relation to the work of
the experiments were present, that is the child, the examiner, and
frequently the mother or other familiar adult. In many cases, the
presence of the mother or caretaker was essential to reassure the
child and to help overcome the timidity and shyness which the
strange situation and the examiner produced. Particularly with
one- and two-year-olds did I feel that we could be more sure of the
best display of ability if a familiar person was allowed to stay with
the child. Of course, the disadvantage to this was the aid which it
was hard for the mother to resist giving. But except in a few unusual cases, caution against this prevented spoiling of the results.
In planning for a test, an hour was allowed, though frequently
less time was needed if co-operation of the child could be secured.
Of course, all this period was not consumed with the actual testing,
for often considerable time had to be spent making the right approach and building up rapport between examiner and child, and
there were distractions and times when free play had to be allowed.
The older the subject, obviously the easier it was to get conformity
to the test situation. The aim was for the child to be as free and
spontaneous as possible, and have, not a feeling for the artificial
conditions set up, but a natural play attitude. Often extreme patience was required on the part of the examiner. Ingenuity, indirect methods, persuasion and encouragement needed to be used
much more than with the average older child. Although there was
a routine procedure for each given test, still the examiner had to
have a flexibility of approach to suit the individual case.
Small children are so continuously active that the examiner
must always anticipate them and see that they are constantly supplied with material to hold their interest and attention. When
verbal tests are used, they must be introduced between the concrete
ones, for the child will become very impatient, restless and disinterested if many questions, such as the Binet, are presented for even
a short period of time, to say nothing of the self-consciousness that
with some children appears as soon as their ability takes a conscious
verbal form. Therefore, in presenting the series of tests, a uniform
order, though desirable, could not always be followed. It was essential, however, to see that the simplest material was given first.
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 245
It is fatal to many children and immediately destroys all interest,
if they have no sense of achievement. Though they are failing,
enough encouragement and praise must be given to offset discouragement and even to make them unaware of their failure. When
encouragement must be given, it should be indirectly, by the examiner's attitudes rather than by any definite assistance. If too
much help is given, it does not make an individual test result representative of that age and justly comparable to results with the same
material given to older children.
When possible, the order of presentation was 3 Disc Formboard, 3 Figure Formboard, Witmer Formboard, Pegs A, B, C, D,
Color Matching and Memory Span. When it was seen that a certain test was beyond the ability, still harder ones were not given.
Tests such as the Binet and the Gesell were interspersed for diversity or because it was known that many language tests could never
be given together.
In evaluating individual responses for diagnostic purposes,
a most essential factor to be kept in mind is the interest element
of the child. Especially with children under eighteen months, attention to a set task is at times very difficult to secure and hold,
and failure to do a test does not necessarily mean inability to do
it. We must also continually keep in mind the fact that innate
intelligence, personality and general training all have an influence
on responses to the tests, and the three are so closely interwoven
that many times we cannot separate the effects which are due to
each. Therefore, although we are required, in making up a series
of norms to take results as we obtain them, in an individual case
the response may not be an index to potential ability.
Individual Tests?Description, Presentation, Scoring and
Discussion
three disc formboard*
Description. This board is of wood, 8% inches long by 4^
inches wide, with three recesses *4 inch deep and % inch apart,
into which fit round wooden blocks, each 1% inches in diameter, and
Vig inch thick.
Presentation. The board is placed on a table in front of the
child, the long edge parallel to the table edge, and with the three
blocks in their recesses. As soon as the child's attention is on the
* The Three Disc, Three Figure, and Witmer Formboards can be purchased from the Psychological Clinic Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania.
246 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
formboard, the blocks are removed one at a time and placed on the
table between the board and the table edge, in one pile in front of
middle recess. Then examiner says, ''put the blocks back." If the
child does not seem to understand the verbal directions, motion. If
still the child does not replace the blocks in the three holes, repeat
the directions. If the blocks are not yet replaced, begin teaching,
taking the baby's hand, putting it on the block and directing it to
the hole. If necessary, repeat for the other two blocks until all
three are in. Count this as one teaching trial, and then say, "put
the blocks back again.'' If necessary use ten teaching trials.
Three Disc Formboard
(199 cases)
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1-1:1
L2
L2
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
1:2-1:3
L1
L1
L2
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
1:4-1:5
S
S
L1
Li
L1
L2
L2
L2
DNC
DNC
DNC
1:6-1:7
S
S
s
s
s
s
L1
L2
DNC
DNC
DNC
1:8-1:9
S
S
s
s
s
s
s
s
L1
L2
DNC
1:10-1:11
S
S
s
s
s
s
s
s
L1
L1
L2
%S
%L>
%L2
%DNC
%F
0
0
10
74
16
0
8
15
69
9
33
29
29
0
57
16
5
22
0
77
9
5
9
0
72
22
6
0
0
No. of Cases
31
26
34
37
35
36
Scoring. Success, learning, did not complete, or failure, is the
recorded qualitative performance. Success (S) in the norms means
immediate success on first two trials with no help given. Learning
(L) means success after teaching?L1, success after one to five
teachings; L2, success after six to ten teachings. Did not complete
(DNC) means the three discs were not all replaced after ten teaching trials, but single blocks were put in unaided. A block may be
considered replaced if it is more than half-way in the hole. Failure
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 247
(F) means no blocks at all were put in on any of the ten teaching
trials. The time element is not considered except in a general way,
as rapid, slow or very slow. Record carefully how the test is done
?for example, "first trial, all in"; "first trial, two in, third on top
of second"; "second trial, one in, throws others around"; "sixth
trial, still gets no idea of putting in.''
Discussion. Qualitatively there are four distinct types of response to this simple formboard. There is the child who immediately understands the problem of the test and solves it, which is
success. No individual under sixteen months succeeded and the
fact that at sixteen months only 9 per cent did succeed would seem
to indicate a superior intelligence at this age. From eighteen
months on more than half will succeed, so that the test then becomes
less significant for the selection of the best children. We must,
however, mention a response which appeared with a few cases, when
the 3 Disc Formboard was not done on first trial, but only after
being helped. A subsequent ability to do the 3 Figure Formboard,
a much harder problem, would indicate that it was a factor other
than lack of comprehension, presumably an inhibition due to shyness or self-consciousness, which gave an apparent failure. This
type of thing shows what was mentioned above, that with small
children especially, any individual test result can never be considered as a thing apart, but must be evaluated in light of the entire
range of responses.
Although a child did not immediately comprehend the test, it
seemed to be worth while to analyze other responses, and the study
has demonstrated the excellence of this formboard for teaching
material at lower age levels. The learning ability was determined
through studying the number of repetitions needed before the test
was solved without help. Although very few of the 16 to 17 month
children will do the test on first presentation, approximately the
middle 60 per cent can be taught to do it, the better half of this
group after one to five teachings, and the poorer half after six to
ten teachings. Only 23 per cent of the 14 to 15 month group can
even do the test after teaching. Ten per cent of the 12 to 13 month
babies can be taught to replace all three blocks, and even this small
number required more than five teachings before solution was possible. As with other material, attitude to the tests plays an important
part. The exceedingly active child whose ability and keeness may
even be above normal, frequently fails to learn the test because he is
too eager, reaching out for new stimuli, to fixate on this one object
248 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
long enough to learn how to do it. Because of a quieter, maybe
even duller disposition, the attention of another baby can be held
and the same performance will contentedly be done time after time,
until it is learned. Therefore, failure after teaching, especially
below the 18 months point, may readily include types of ability
besides the potentially dull. Above 18 months, however, when ontogenetically more concentration on any performance is developing,
failure after ten teachings has much more significance.
Another type of response, not either success or learning, is
DNC, did not complete, and which I have taken to describe the performance where there is some comprehension of the problem and
one or two blocks are understandingly placed back in their holes.
Particularly, in the group under sixteen months is this response
common. It surely means something to get evidence of an association being built up between the block and the hole sufficient for
single blocks to be purposefully replaced, even if the entire board
is not solved. It is apparently an undeveloped spread of attention,
a trait of immaturity whereby the baby puts in one or two blocks,
takes them out again, puts them back again, but always fails to put
in all three. It is as if the third hole were out of their field of
vision.
The most immature and inferior type of response is complete
failure?even after teaching, no blocks are replaced. The baby
may ignore them, put them in his mouth, throw them on the floor,
or hammer them together. At least, no evidence can be obtained for
thinking that a learning in relation to this problem is taking place.
Of course, we must remember that again it may be lack of interest
at the attempt to teach, which gives the failure.
THREE FIGURE FORMBOARD
Description. This board is also of wood, the same size and
general construction as the 3 Disc Formboard, only instead of there
being 3 circle blocks, there are in order, a circle, an equilateral triangle and a square.
Presentation. Place the board on the table with the long edge
parallel to the table edge, with the blocks in their recesses and the
circle at the child's right. For convenience call circle, block 1; triangle, block 2; square, block 3. Remove the blocks, while the child
is attending, and place in one pile directly in front of triangle recess, in order 1, 3, 2, circle on top. Examiner then says, "put the
blocks back." If the child seems to be trying, allow even several
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SGHOOL CHILDREN 249
minutes of independent effort, then, if incorrect, teach the correct
placements. '' Put the blocks back again,'' and for the second trial,
vary the order of the pile to 3, 1, 2, square on top. After each
failure, teach, and then have a retrial. Third trial, order 2, 3, 1.
Fourth trial, same as first 1, 3, 2. Fifth trial, same as second, 3, 1,
2, etc. After two consecutive correct trials, reverse the board to
Examiner
OD A ?
Position A
Child
position B with the circle at the child's left. This is done to vary
the problem and negate chance successes. It is noted that the order
of piled blocks is never the same as the order of the holes in the
board. Allow ten teaching trials if necessary.
Scoring. To obviate chance fitting in of the blocks, which by
the law of probability works out to three consecutive trials, require
two correct trials in position A, and the next immediate one in position B, or vice versa, two in position B, one in position A. Success
(S), therefore, means success on the first three consecutive trials,
two in position A, one in position B, or vice versa. Learning (L)
means success on three consecutive trials, but after teaching. Did
not complete (DNC) means out of ten trials with teaching, a failure
to replace the three blocks correctly in three consecutive trials. The
time element is not considered, but the qualitative performance is
recorded?for example, all correctly in, position A, trial and error
placements; one and three incorrect, position B; all correctly in,
position B, form discrimination used in placements. Count as correct if all but one block is correctly Set in, and this third one at least
half-way in, and over its hole in the proper position. Because of
difficult co-ordination, the square or triangle may be hard for the
younger children to replace.
Discussion. Obviously, the 3 Figure Formboard is a task considerably harder than the 3 Disc Formboard. It is an excellent test
for the study of the appearance of form discrimination. Better developed motor co-ordination is required to fit in the square and the
triangle than the circles of the 3 Disc Board. Since each block can
only go in its own hole, the problem becomes almost a triple intelligence test, and before discrimination for the different shapes
is developed, trial and error, which is a changeability in response,
is needed for the solution. It is only the very young or the dull
250 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
child who will interminably continue to try and force a square block
into a round hole, and it is the better mind which will sooner think
of some other plan to try. As the table of norms shows, quality of
performance correlates well with age progression. Below 18 months
all responses were failures. At 18 to 19 months, the earliest age
where the three blocks were fitted in on any three consecutive tests,
the solution, even for the best 11 per cent, was only after a teaching
period and was entirely by trial and error. By 24 months more
than half of the children will learn the solution and from this age
on, the number who get the idea of the test without teaching gradually increases until at two years, 6 months, the better half succeed
and the poorer half require teaching or fail. For three-year-olds,
the test has little value, except as introductory to the "Witmer Formboard. Not until 22 and 23 months did any performance reveal
distinctly more discrimination than trial and error for its solution.
Discriminative placements increase then very gradually, until by
36 months the successful responses are either entirely or predominately not trial and error. Only four out of 201 three-year-olds
failed to do this test after teaching?one because of attitude, as
later success with the "Witmer Formboard proved, and the other
three distinctly inferior children, and most probably feeble-minded.
None of the three failures was absolute either, as all occasionally
got the three blocks in and it might possibly have been faulty attention or shifting interest which prevented success on three consecutive trials. With the younger children, failure often meant a
different thing, no comprehension and all or some of the blocks left
lying over the wrong holes?the idea of solving by trial and error
could not be learned. So we see that even DNC has its qualitative
aspects which should, in an individual response, be carefully noted.
WITMER FORMBOARD
Description. This board has eleven figures, the general size of
which approximates the blocks of the 3 Disc and 3 Figure Formboards. Complete description, procedure and discussion of it will
be found in Dr Young's first standardization.
Presentation. The standard procedure of Young's should be
somewhat modified for very young children. The idea of quickly
or fast has practically no meaning for most children under four and
often confuses them. It seems better therefore to substitue
"nicely" for the words "quickly" and "fast." In the third trial,
substitute "even better" for "still quicker." If more help is given
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 251
to the younger children than the older ones, it does not make the
results comparable, but it does seem legitimate to urge continuance,
if necessary, by saying at least several times, "put the blocks all
back," instead of considering the test a failure if the additional
directions, according to Young, do not bring the appropriate response.
Scoring. A five minute time limit was placed on each of three
given trials. Although the norms report quantitative responses, the
qualitative aspects are equally important.
Discussion. At a point where half of the cases will succeed with
a given test, it becomes necessary to introduce a harder problem
if we wish to differentiate the children who are above the median.
Therefore the Witmer Formboard was given at the ages where success was obtained with the 3 Figure Formboard. It would be highly
desirable to have a board which in difficulty lies between the 3 blocks
and the 11 blocks and possibly in the near future such a test will
be ready for standardization.
In general we can say that the children who will do the 3
Figure Board without teaching, will, after teaching, solve the Witmer Formboard. Success on first trial is almost negligible in the
two year group and not until 3 years, 8 months, do half succeed.
Below this point, the test has value for teaching purposes, and from
the norms we see that, at 2 years, 10 months, almost a year below
the median age for initial success, we have 54 per cent succeeding by
at least the third trial.
The realization that this is a very hard task is evident apart
from the statistics. Many children, discouraged or fatigued by its
difficulty, push it aside long before the five minute time limit is up,
and they cannot be induced to try it again. Even with the threeyear-olds, some urging to keep at the task is usual. Hence we see
that this test requires more persistence than any previously presented. Also a wider distribution of attention is needed. Obviously
with a star and a cross to be fitted in, fairly good co-ordination
and motor control must be developed, and at times a failure to get
these forms in, may block the success of the test, since, after trying
Unsuccessfully, children will leave the correct holes and try to force
the forms into others. Of course this is only the case with the more
immature, for whom form recognition is not developed sufficiently
to assure them that the block is correct for the particular hole. To
those who have not yet acquired a visual form discrimination, kinesthesis is a great aid to correctly replacing the blocks, and with this
252 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
sensibility and sufficient persistence and some planfulness, the
Formboard can be and often is solved entirely by trial and error.
Although some language comprehension is necessary to understand the initial instructions, its need is even more apparent when
the test is used for the younger ages as a teaching problem. Many
times we meet children who do not even understand what you mean
by "try it in another hole," or, even by motioning to, do not get the
changeability idea. With these same children we usually have an
accompanying lack of observation and they are equally satisfied to
have a block fitting in a recess or to have it lying on top of a wrong
hole. It is the many psychological traits thus revealed that make
this one formboard so valuable a problem even for the pre-school
group.
WALLIN PEG BOARDS
Description. These pegboards, series A, B, C and D, are each
14 inches long and 3 inches wide, 6 pegs to a board, each peg 2i/?>
inches long and with a diameter of % inch. They are figured in
the catalogue of C. H. Stoelting Company, from whom they can
be purchased. Series A has 6 round pegs; series B, 6 square pegs;
series C, 3 round and 3 square pegs alternating; series D, 2 round,
2 square, 2 triangle pegs alternating.
Presentation Pegboard A. Place the board with the length
parallel to the table edge, the pegs removed. Place the 6 pegs in a
bunch at right angles to the board (so as not to roll off the table)
and between the board and the table edge. Examiner then takes
one peg and puts it in for the child, so that he sees what is expected.
The peg is removed again and placed with the other five. "Put all
the little sticks in like that.'' Record the time from the moment the
child gets the first peg in his hand. Give no additional directions
unless the child seems to play too much, loses interest or forgets the
task, when it may be added once or twice, "Put all the little sticks
in.'' Allow 3 minutes of independent effort, then if necessary complete for the child, making it a learning problem. Give 3 trials to
observe the improvement, allowing 3 minutes for each. For the
very young children from 12 months to about 17 months, the teaching will often take the form of guiding the hand with the peg in
it to the hole, in order to see if even single pegs can be replaced.
Scoring. The results are chiefly quantitative, recorded in seconds, although observations should be made on comprehension, coordination difficulties, and any abnormalities of response. Success
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 253
(S) means 6 pegs replaced in 180 seconds or less. Did not complete (DNC) means 2 or more single pegs put in, but the board
never filled up without help. Failure (F) means no single pegs put
in, even after two teaching trials.
Discussion. From the viewpoint of general difficulty, Pegboard A correlates fairly well with the 3 Disc Formboard. It is
much easier, however, even apart from size differences, to put in
a round block than round peg. Luck assists many times in helping
the block to roll in, after it is generally directed towards its hole,
but to replace a peg, the hand must be definitely turned at a particular angle. It seems therefore that more developed co-ordination is
needed for the Pegboard than for the 3 Disc Formboard. Though
the norms report more failures with the pegs, the observation of
many children really trying to insert a peg, seem to show a comprehension level about equal to that required for the 3 Disc Board
when a necessary association has been built up between the block
and its hole. The fact that at 12 and 13 months, 54 per cent will
fail entirely with the Pegboard A, while only 16 per cent will fail
with the 3 Disc Formboard, seems attributable to co-ordination difficulties rather than to degree of comprehension. Lack of persistence
and distribution of attention prevents the six pegs from being inserted by at least half of the cases until 18 and 19 months, the same
age at which half of the children fail to do the 3 Disc Formboard on
initial presentation. The higher percentage of success with the Pegs
and the 3 Disc Formboard, 81 per cent as against 57 per cent, would
seem to be due to the 3 Disc Board being presented at the beginning
of the examination when a self-consciousness or shyness prevented
the best possible response.
Above 19 months in at least one trial there were no failures with
this simplest pegboard, which therefore decreases its value except
as a measure for muscular co-ordination. The completion times
change quite gradually by bimonthly periods through the median
deciles, and decreasingly less as the ages increase. For instance,
the median time decreases from 18 months to 24 months by approximately a half minute, while through the entire 3 year group the
median does not vary by more than 5 seconds, an almost negligible
amount.
Presentation Pegboard B. The directions are the same as with
Pegboard A. Allow 3 trials, teaching if necessary.
Scoring. Same as with Pegboard A. Time limit is 180 seconds.
254 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Discussion. Pegboard B presents no harder a problem than
series A except from the standpoint of more difficult co-ordination
which in turn requires more persistence with the set task. Below 14
months not even a single square peg was inserted, and not until
20 months, did more than half succeed. The norms show, however,
a considerable difference for the point where all completed the
pegboards, 24 months for Pegboard A and 32 months for Pegboard
B. The time range is wider than with Board A, and especially
within any age group do we find more individual differences. For
instance, the range at 36 months with Pegboard A is only from 12
to 36 seconds while with Pegboard B it is from 13 to 116 seconds.
The higher in the age scale we go, the less does the time decrease,
which therefore lessens its test value.
Presentation Pegboard C. The same procedure is used as with
A and B series, but care must be taken that the pegs are definitely
mixed up, and not lying on the table in an order to correspond to
the order of the holes. Allow three trials, teaching if necessary
after the first two failures. If however, the first two trials are failures and the third trial is a success, a fourth trial should be given.
Scoring. The test is not considered passed unless at least 2
out of 4 trials are completed in 180 seconds each. Many children
by luck got the 6 pegs replaced, but could not repeat their success,
and to obviate this kind of chance success, 2 trials were required.
Note whether success is by apparent discrimination or by trial and
error.
Discussion. With the presentation of series C, an entirely new
problem is involved just as in the 3 Figure Formboard?analytic
discrimination. The most superior children will solve the test without error, through form discrimination, but if form recognition is
not developed, the test can however be solved by a systematic trial
and error method, particularly after a teaching trial. There are
often in this type of solution many useless moves made, correct
pegs being changed as well as incorrect ones. The more resourceful
children will shift the pegs until all fit in, while the less intelligent
ones will try endlessly to force a square peg into a round hole, not
thinking of trying it elsewhere. At 30 months where immediate
success is median for the 3 Figure Formboard, is success obtained
with the Pegboard C by 55 per cent of the cases on first trial, and
74 per cent after teaching. Solution of the 3 Figure Formboard
after teaching is median for 24 months. Therefore while there are
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 255
some similarities as to abilities required, Pegboard C is the harder
of the two problems.
Presentation Pegboard D. The same procedure is used as with
Pegboard C. Place the board with the point of the triangle towards
the child, to bring this distinguishing feature closer to his notice.
Scoring. Success means any one trial completed in 180 seconds.
Allow three trials to note improvement, and teach if necessary after
the first two failures.
Discussion. There are several features which make this the
most difficult of the 4 pegboards. There being 3 different shapes,
even more form discrimination is required than with Pegboard C,
and if the solution is by trial and error, more shifting needs to be
done. More mature co-ordination is required to fit in the triangle
pegs than even the square ones. Many children have such a hard
time trying to put in a triangle peg that they think the hole must
be the incorrect one and shift it to a square hole where it will go
in easily. Unless observation is keen, the chances for correcting
this mistake are slight. It is obviously only the most superior children who will solve the test by real form discrimination, that is, immediately placing the right peg in the right hole. Not until 34
months do more than half of the children do this test without teaching, while after teaching, success can be carried down to 30 months.
COLOR CUBES FOR MATCHING
Description. Use Milton Bradley's one inch color cubes?5
yellow, 5 red, 5 blue, 5 green, 5 purple, 5 orange.
Presentation. Throw on the table 20 blocks, 5 each of the four
primary colors. The examiner takes a yellow cube in her hand and
says, "Give me one like this." If the child does not understand,
examiner takes another yellow cube and placing it with the first
says, "See, these are alike. Give me another one like these." Illustrate again if not understood. When a block is correctly
matched, continue, saying, '' Give me another one like these,'' until
4 out of 5 blocks are correctly matched.
Repeat the directions with the red blocks. If red and yellow
are both failed, consider the test a failure. If red and yellow are
matched, continue, using green, then blue. If there is any doubt
as to the responses, go through the series again with the 4 primary
colors, so that at least 8 out of 10 blocks will have been correctly
matched. Then place the 5 orange and 5 purple blocks with the
other 20, go through the entire series again, using the same directions. It is to be noted that the color names are not used.
256 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Scoring. Failure (F) means no color matched in at least 4
out of 5 trials, or 8 out of 10 trials. Yellow (Y) means yellow
blocks matched in at least 4 out of 5 trials, or 8 out of 10. Red
Yellow (RY) means both red and yellow matched. Primary (P)
means yellow, red, blue and green matched. Success (S) means 6
colors matched, yellow, red, blue, green, orange and purple.
Discussion. The earliest age at which color discrimination appears has been variously reported. Some writers have experimented
and published results with children as young as 8 months. It
seems, however, in light of this research, very doubtful whether
at such an early age, the different colors actually arouse varied
visual images, or whether the baby is not rather reacting to what
is pretty and bright and arouses pleasure. Preyer, Shinn, Baldwin
and Moore have all reported on color discrimination, but the results
of their studies vary considerably. They all agree, however, that
reactions to light are evident before color reactions. In previous
investigations, the general methods of deciding when color images
have meaning to the small child was through a pleasure preference
or through giving color names for objects. Shinn says that all experiments are without conclusive evidence as to condition of color
perceptions before one year, but at about 15 to 16 months is the
dawn of conscious color discrimination proved through learning
color names, and by the third year, or maybe the end of the second
year, the child has the color discriminating ability of adults, and
can be taught to discriminate and name colors perfectly.
Preyer subjected his child to a series of learning tests with
color material, using 10 colors. At 25 months, or the age at which
Shinn says color discrimination is as good as with adults, success
with Preyer's baby was only 2 to 1. Even at 34 months, or almost
the third birthday, the color naming was still only 70 per cent correct.
The difficulties with all the previous color discrimination experiments seem to be that they are too individual in nature, so
that the results which held for a dozen babies, probably of superior
ability, would be of little value for comparison with the average
child. Also previous studies have all included the learning problem,
a definite attempt had been made to teach color discrimination and
color naming or the results were dependent on earlier teaching.
In this study the aim was to detect the age at which the child,
regardless of previous teaching, familiarity with color names, or
even a comprehension of verbal instructions, could demonstrate the
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 257
presence of color discrimination by matching cubes of the same
color. Color matching is an ability which ontogenetically appears,
regardless of training, and the earlier it is developed, the more
superior seems to be the ability of the child. Of all the battery of
tests, this one seemed best to pick out the dull and feeble-minded
children, for color matching cannot, like many tests, be done by
trial and error or any amount of persistence, but demands actual
differentiating ability.
Our results, even though the case material includes a number
of young superior children, show no child under 18 months matching the cubes, while Shinn reports 15 or 16 months as the dawn
period of conscious color discrimination. It is the very unusual
child under 24 months who shows any success with this test, and
not until 30 months do at least half of the cases reveal some degree
of discriminating color ability. The norms show good curves?not
only does the presence of the most rudimentary discrimination increase, but the refinement of the differentiation just as gradually
develops with age.
Apart from the age at which color matching appears, our research also gives different results from those usually reported as
to which color is first discriminated. It is usually claimed that red
is matched before all other colors. Of 20 children who successfully
matched only one color, that color, with one exception, was yellow
and not red, which would seem to show yellow to be the first discriminated color. Obviously yellow and red were matched before
blue and green, which, particularly for children under 3 years,
were readily confused. Purple was often confused with blue or
even red, and orange with yellow or red.
AUDITO-V0CAL DIGIT MEMORY SPAN
Presentation. The standard procedure was slightly modified
so as to make the digit material arouse interest and so as to begin
at a point as familiar as possible to the child. The examiner says,
'' Can you say 1, 2 ? " If there was no response, examiner attempted
to assure the child that he could say the numbers and commendation was given for the least attempt at trying them. "Now say 6,
3.'' When 2 digits were correctly repeated, a series of 3 were given,
then 4, and so on until the upper limit was reached. Care was
taken that the series of digits never followed the natural order.
The digits were pronounced at the rate of one per second, without
rhythm or changing intonation in the voice.
258 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Scoring. The memory span was taken as the highest number,
of digits that the child reproduced correctly in one of three trials.
Failure indicated a negative response.
Discussion. Since practically nothing has been reported on
memory span ability below the three year level, it seemed worth
while to try and obtain some results for one- and two-year-olds.
This study has shown, however, that below 30 months more than
half of the responses are failures. With children under 24 months
this negative response seemed to be chiefly due to limited vocabulary, and even with some older children to an unfamiliarity with
the numbers themselves. A shyness at times inhibited a response,
and often it appeared to be a pure disinterest in the test. By three
Audito-Vocal Digit Memory Span
(413 Cases)
Age
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
No. of
Cases
1:8
1:9
18
1:10
1:11
15
2
2:1
28
2:2
2:3
44
2:4
2:5
29
2:6
2:7
36
2:8
2:9
2:10
2:11
25
30
3:
3:1
30
3:2
3:3
39
3:4
3:5
28
3:6
3:7
31
3:8
3:9
29
3:10
3:11
5
5
4
4
4
4
3
3
3
2
F
30
years most children are learning in a limited way to count three
or four objects, and the test is then much easier to obtain results
for. Although the percentage of failures for one- and two-year-olds
is high, there is still no conclusive evidence that memory span
ability at this age is lacking, even for digit material. Verbal responses for small children are so variable, that the results of an
individual case might be contradicted on an almost immediate retest, or by a test given by a more familiar person, like the parent.
In some cases when negative results were obtained, the test was repeated later during the course of the examination and correct reMENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 259
sponses were gotten. Hence we cannot always say which responses
were due to inability, and which to lack of interest or emotional
negativism.
It is interesting to find that some children, even in the 3 year
group, have a 2 digit span. Of 192 two-year-olds, only 3 gave 5 digits, 20 gave 4 digits, while 3 was the mode. Even in the three year
group, not until 46 months or almost the fourth birthday, do at
least half of the cases give a span of 4 or more.
If time had permitted, more extensive experimentation should
have been made, using memory material other than digits, and also
a simple commission test.
BINET TESTS
Since the Stanford-Binet tests have aroused such universal interest, I am reporting on the responses as obtained in this study,
Stanford-Binet Results
Number and Percentage Passing Individual Tests
TEST
No. and %
Passing at 2 yrs.
No. and %
Passing at 3 yrs.
3-1 Face parts
3-2 Objects
3-6 Memory span
3-5 Last name
3-3 Pict. enum.
3-4 Sex
4-5 Comprehensions
4-6 4 Digits
4-1 Lines
4-2 Forms
4-3 4 pennies
5-4 Definitions
5-1 Weights
5-3 Prettier
7-2 Pict. descript.
7-3 5 digits
5-2 Colors
5-6 3 Commissions
4-4 Square
6-1 Comprehensions
124-82%
107-71
72-48
55-36
38-25
44-29
22-14
21-14
15-10
4- 3
1- 1
3- 2
1- 1
1- 1
1- 1
3- 2
2- 2
1- 1
0
1- 1
169-90%
163-87
152-81
123-66
131-70
121-65
78-42
69-37
72-38
56-30
29-15
16- 9
16- 9
15- 8
15- 8
11- 5
11- 5
11- 5
9- 4
6- 3
Specially showing the order of difficulty of the individual tests.
With a large group of unselected children there are instances where
Binet results are not a fair index to general ability. The reasons
260 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
for this, discussed by previous investigators, were also apparent
with my group. Because of a foreign language, many children were
placed at a special disadvantage, probably much more so even than
the older group, because our cases had not yet had the contact of
English in school life. A marked self-consciousness inhibited many
answers?for instance, children frequently would not point to parts
of their faces, try memory tests or give their surnames, when from
the information of a reliable parent, we were quite sure they could
pass the tests. Still credit could not be given unless the examiner
personally received a positive response. On the other hand, ambitious parents frequently teach their children the face parts, their
full name and their sex, so that the Binet question is not a new
problem, and such children through environmental acceleration may
Deciles of I. Q.s?Stanford Binet Tests
2 years 3 years
100%
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
179 160
130 119
118 106
112 100
108 95
103 94
100 89
92 84
86 76
Negative 62
Neg. (23) Neg. (15)
No. of Cases
150 186
get a much higher I.Q. than their intelligence warrants. Therefore,
as with all tests for young children, we must remember that any
individual test may not have good diagnostic value for a certain
child, still the tendencies revealed by a large group are, it seems to
me, very worth while knowing.
From a number of the cases which have been restudied the I.Q.
seems more unstable than we would expect in later years. Two outstanding instances are of boys placed for adoption. One, tested
while still in an institution, had an I.Q. of 79, while after one year,
with all the opportunities of an excellent private home, the Binet
score jumped to 99. Another child within two years had I.Q.'s of
120, 139, 179, 160. Although some of this fluctuation might have
MENTAL TESTS FOR PEE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 261
been partly conditioned by the adjustment to a new foster home,
it seems that the nature of the test material and the whimsicality
of the pre-school age better explains it. It is not rare for a child to
pass a test such as picture enumeration, the social comprehensions
or definitions, and, a year later, fail to succeed with the same material. Counting four pennies and distinguishing between right
and left are tests where chance plays a considerable part and therefore give unstable results.
Careful study of the percentage table of the number of two- and
three-year-olds passing each test will show their order of difficulty.
The most outstanding findings are the large number pointing to
parts of the face and naming common objects and the great difficulty of copying a square.
The I.Q. distribution is interesting in that it shows that the
two year group tends on the average to rank 7 points higher than
the three year group. The only explanation for this seems to be
that certain of the three year tests, as the table shows, are very
easy, and for three-year-olds there are no tests at the higher points
which are equally easy.
It might seem, especially for the three-year-olds, that this
group was an inferior one since the median I.Q. was only 94. The
general results from the performance tests did not give at all that
impression. I believe the explanation is the number of foreign
and social agency children in the study who do not have the stimulation along verbal lines which the upper social classes have, and
since practically all the tests require language, the I.Q. would naturally be lower.
Validity of Diagnoses for Pre-School Ages
The question has very frequently been asked, how reliable is a
diagnosis made on a baby ? One naturally has a right to be cautious
in accepting at 12 months or even 36 months a statement as to what
scholastic and social success we can expect at 16 years. The only
proof or reliability is through retests of the same individual. Fortunately, I was able to follow 142 children for periods ranging from
one to four years, which meant that each case had at least two
psychological examinations and some had as many as five. The results seem highly gratifying and are as follows:
Results on Retest
First exam, made, Same Rating Higher Rating Lower Rating
cases, under 24 months ?50 cases or 74%?15 cases or 22%?3 cases or 4%
j?? cases, from 24 to 36 months?34 cases or 65%?14 cases or 27%?4 cases or 8%
^ cases, from 36 to 48 months?20 cases or 90%? 2 cases or 10%?0 cases or 0%
!42 cases (total) 73% 22% 5%
262 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
It is important to analyze the cases where the diagnosis varied
on a retest. I should say in regard to the system of diagnoses used,
that the children were classified as superior, above average, average,
dull, doubtful and definitely feeble-minded. For practical purposes
it does not seem needful to have a further divisioning and it is
also doubtful how accurate we could be if we tried a finer refinement. Therefore when a case is diagnosed on a retest as "the
same rating," it means that on two or more tests the same one of
the six classifications was used to describe the child's capability.
For the total retested group, 73 per cent did not vary on restudy, and after 36 months 90 per cent of the diagnoses remained
stable. This does show, as we would expect, that it is more possible
to make accurate diagnoses the higher in the age scale we go.
Of the 22 per cent who tested better when examined the second
time, the reasons were practically always explainable by one of
three causes. Usually the improvement was due to a better established control of the emotions or better conformity to the test
conditions. Especially with the children under three, as we have
previously mentioned, there is often a timidity, self-consciousness or
disinterest which negates our initial findings in certain individual
cases and a retest corrects the first impression of ability. Another
cause for hiding the real competency was the effect of lack of stimulation in the environment, such as is true with institution or neglected children. After more stimulating training, it is not unusual
to get much better test responses. The third cause for mental improvement was a corresponding physical improvement.
The group who test poorer, when seen a second or third time,
is, for the purpose of adoption protection, the most important. We
can readily see how disastrous it is if a baby is placed for adoption
on the basis of a mental examination and later this diagnosis proves
to have been too hopeful. The factor which caused the variance in
rating was almost uniformly language development. From the
testing of older children we all know how frequently we find children who handle performance test well because they have good
concrete ability, but who have poor verbal ability as evidenced by
low Binet scores and also by slow academic progress, and therefore
on a general diagnosis are rated below average. It was this type of
child who on the initial examination seemed to be of better ability
than later study proved. Their language being late in appearing or
being inhibited before the examiner, the only basis of judgment was
on the simple performance tests. When restudied at a later peMENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 263
riod a language absence or inferiority had more serious significance
and gave a poorer general picture than when they had been judged
solely by concrete material. I might say that no child, however, was
ever diagnosed as average and later fell into a very inferior group.
The 7 cases whose ratings fell, were from above average to average,
and from average to dull.
From these 142 retested children it seems therefore that our
first judgment of a child, even though he be as young as one year,
if made cautiously by well standardized tests, will in at least 95
per cent of the cases, be reliable enough to make placement for
adoption a safe procedure. As a check against the small number
who test poorer on a second examination, is the measure which careful psychologists will urge for all small children?that is, at least
two mental test studies before legal adoption can be effected.
Another gratifying aspect of the reliability of diagnoses on
young children was the many times the estimates of intelligence,
which had been formed from the test responses, agreed with the
opinion of ability held by nursery school teachers, trained nurses,
and others who had the children under their daily care and observed
their reactions to habit training, play ability and general adaptations.
Conclusions
1. Tests for pre-school children have an important place in the
field of clinical psychology. The most vital application is in adoption studies, but their worth is also being realized by mental hygiene
clinics and by pediatricians in medical circles.
2. From the study of some 650 children between the ages of
one and four, selected from various racial nationality and economic
groups, it has been possible to obtain norms which seem a good
criteria for comparison of any individual pre-school child.
3. Too much emphasis cannot be laid on the caution needed
in diagnosing an individual case, since emotional upset or disinterest in conforming to the test conditions can obscure the real
competency much more than is the case with older children.
4. Performance tests make excellent material for the psychological study of small children as they so easily arouse the interest.
For a complete evaluation of ability, they should, however, be supplemented by language tests. The battery of simple concrete tests
standardized in this study should be a helpful part of the equipment for studying pre-school ability.
264 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
5. One hundred and forty-two cases restudied give a high reliability for the initial diagnosis. When tested later, 73 per cent
classified in the same group, 22 per cent in a higher group and only
5 per cent in a lower group. This seems to show that by the careful
use of standardized mental tests, the risk of adoption can be reduced to a very low degree.
Bibliography
Baldwin and Stecker?Psychology of the Pre-School Child?Appleton, 1924.
Gesell, Arnold?Mental Growth of the Pre-School Child?Macmillan, 1925.
Humpstone, H. J.?Some Aspects of the Memory Span Test?A Study in
Associalility?Psychological Clinic Press, 1917.
Kuhlmann, F.?A Handbook of Mental Tests?Warwick & York, 1922.
Moore, K. C.?The Mental Development of a Child?Psychological Review
Monograph, 1896.
Preyer, W.?The Senses and the Will?Appleton, 1914.
Development of the Intellect?Appleton, 1909.
Shinn, M. W.?Notes on the Development of a Child?U. of Cal. Pub., Education, Vol. 4, July, 1907.
Stern, W.?Psychology of Early Childhood?Henry Holt & Co., 1924.
Stutsman, Rachel?Performance Tests for Children of Pre-School Age.?
Genetic Psychology Monograph, Vol. I, No. 1, Jan. 1926.
Terman, L. R.?The Measurement of Intelligence?Houghton, Mifflin Co.,
1916.
Wallin, J. E.?The Peg Formboards?Psychological Clinic, Vol. XII, No.
2, April 15, 1918.
Witmer, Lightner?Performance and Success?Psychological Clinic, Vol.
XII, Nos. 5-9, May 15, 1919.
The Analytic Diagnosis?Psychological Clinic, Vol. XII, Nos. 5-6, Oct.
Nov. 1922.
Young, Herman?The Witmer Formboard?Psychological Clinic, Vol. X,
No. 4, June 15, 1916.
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 265
Three Figure Formboard
(594 Cases)
Age
1:4
1:5
1:6
1:7
1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
22:1
2:2
2:3
2:4
2:5
2:6
2:7
2:8
2:9
2:10
2:11
33:1
3:2
3:3
3:4
3:5
3:6 3:8 3:10
3:7 3:9 3:11
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
L
L
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
S
L
L
L
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
S
s
L
L
L
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
S
s
s
L
L
L
L
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
S
s
s
L
L
L
L
L
L
DNC
DNC
S
s
s
s
s
L
L
L
L
DNC
DNC
S
s
s
s
s
s
L
L
L
DNC
DNC
S
s
s
s
s
L
L
L
L
DNC
DNC
S
s
s
s
s
s
s
L
L
L
DNC
S
s
s
s
s
s
L
L
L
L
DNC
S
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
L
L
DNC
s s s
s s s
s s s
s s s
s s s
s s s
s s s
s s s
L L S
L L L
DNC L DNC
%S
%L
%DNC
0
0
100
0
11
89
3
28
69
11
35
54
24
35
41
29
49
22
33
45
22
51
37
12
38
48
14
63
23
14
51
46
3
79
21
0
71
26
3
68 77 91
29 23 6
3 0 3
No. of Cases
34
38
35
37
37
53
41
49
34
35
35
42
30
34 30 30
266 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
WlTMER FORMBOARD
(478 Cases)
First Trial
Age 1:101:11
22:1
2:22:3
2:42:5
2:62:7
2:82:9
2:10
2:11
33:1
3:23:3
3:43:5
3:63:7
3:8- 3:10
3:9 3:11
Deci les
100 DNC
90 DNC
80 DNC
70 DNC
60 DNC
50 DNC
40 DNC
30 DNC
20 DNC
10 DNC
0 DNC
%S
%DNC 100
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
100
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
100
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
100
123
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
92
225
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
91
150
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
6
94
71
94
244
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
20
80
76
102
257
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
22
78
92
112
206
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
29
71
90
104
160
236
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
38
62
62 53
104 78
118 86
134 100
160 160
180 275
DNC DNC
DNC DNC
DNC DNC
DNC DNC
DNC DNC
50 50
50 50
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 267
Best of 3 trials
Age
1:10
1:11
22:1
2:2
2:3
2:4
2:5
2:6
2:7
2:8
2:9
2:10
2:11
33:1
3:2
3:3
3:4
3:5
3:6
3:7
3:8 3:10
3:9 3:11
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
201
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
75
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
122
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
79
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
63
94
195
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
77
93
115
177
246
274
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
51
67
83
115
152
169
189
274
DNC
DNC
DNC
46
66
107
128
137
150
157
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
57
92
105
120
137
175
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
57
77
99
103
117
142
216
300
DNC
DNC
DNC
53 39
65 53
78 57
96 65
102 77
108 81
115 98
133 115
160 121
215 217
DNC DNC
%S
%DNC
3
97
100
3
97
5
95
16
84
24
76
54
46
32
62
38
59
41
68
32
90 93
10 7
No. of Cases
37
37
53
41
49
34
35
35
37
27
34
30 29
268 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Wallin Pegboard A
(614 Cases)
First Trial
Age 11:1
1:2
1:3
1:4
1:5
1:6
1:7
1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
22:1
2:2
2:3
2:4 2:6 2:8 2:103- 3:2 3:4 3:6 3:8 3:10
2:5 2:7 2:9 2:11 3:1 3:3 3:5 3:7 3:9 3:11
Deciles
100 60
90 DNC
80 DNC
70 DNC
60 DNC
50 F
40 F
30 F
20 F
10 F
0 F
%S 3
%DNC 40
%F 57
63
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
F
4
65
31
43
48
82
110
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
30
53
17
30
33
36
40
58
68
86
115
180
DNC
F
81
13
6
22
26
33
36
41
54
70
110
135
DNC
DNC
85
15
22
23
27
28
30
33
45
48
65
127
DNC
94
6
17
21
23
26
27
31
32
35
43
109
DNC
91
9
15
20
21
23
26
29
31
39
44
50
69
100
17 14 13 13 12 12 12 13 12 11
19 17 19 15 13 13 14 14 12 13
21 18 20 17 15 14 15 16 13 13
23 19 20 18 15 16 15 16 14 14
24 20 21 21 17 17 17 17 15 14
28 22 22 22 19 20 19 17 16 15
29 23 24 24 21 21 20 19 18 15
32 24 24 26 24 25 20 20 20 15
34 32 26 26 25 28 22 22 20 17
49 41 49 34 29 34 27 29 23 27
55 90 98 56 36 49 30 34 26 29
100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 269
Best of 3 Trials
Age
11:1
1:2
1:3
1:4
1:5
1:6
1:7
1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
22:1
2:2 2:4 2:6 2:8 2:10 3- 3:2 3:4 3:6 3:8 3:10
2:3 2:5 2:7 2:9 2:11 3:1 3:3 3:5 3:7 3:9 3:11
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
60
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
F
F
F
F
45
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
F
25
40
60
82
123
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
25
29
31
34
36
49
63
69
115
120
F
22
25
23
31
35
36
40
44
58
127
DNC
17
19
21
25
27
28
31
35
39
58
DNC
16
18
19
21
24
26
28
29
33
52
DNC
15 14 12 13 13 11 12 7 12 11
18 18 15 16 13 12 13 10 13 12 11
19 19 16 18 15 15 14 13 13 13 11
22 20 17 19 16 15 15 14 13 14 13
22 21 18 20 17 16 15 15 15 14 14
24 22 19 21 17 18 15 15 15 14 14
26 23 20 21 19 19 17 17 17 15 15
28 25 26 23 20 21 19 18 17 16 15
30 26 29 23 22 25 20 18 20 18 16
39 37 35 26 30 27 24 20 29 21 23
53 50 38 28 56 32 31 22 34 22 28
%S
%DNC
%F
No. of Cases
3
40
57
30
4
65
31
26
40
43
17
30
88
6
6
31
91
9
34
97
3
35
94
6
35
100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
49 38 42 29 32 36 41 30 33 31 32
270 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Wallin Pegboard C
(528 Cases)
First Trial
Age 1:6
1:7
1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
2:
2:1
2:2
2:3
2:4
2:5
2:6
2:7
2:8
2:9
2:10
2:11
3:
3:1
3:2
3:3
3:4
3:5
3:6
3:7
3:8 3:10
3:9 3:11
Deciles
100 DNC
90 DNC
80 DNC
70 DNC
60 DNC
50 DNC
40 DNC
30 DNC
20 DNC
10 DNC
0 DNC
%S
%DNC 100
119
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
3
97
28
77
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
14
86
23
35
126
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
22
78
17
41
67
90
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
33
67
19
39
115
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
24
76
16
26
34
45
57
98
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
55
45
21
27
41
95
118
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
42
58
15
29
30
52
85
160
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
50
50
15
18
25
27
35
37
80
123
DNC
DNC
DNC
78
22
15
19
24
26
32
35
50
90
DNC
DNC
DNC
76
24
17
19
22
23
25
26
46
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
70
30
15
18
22
23
30
43
56
93
134
150
DNC
91
9
15 12
17 14
18 15
20 18
23 21
30 23
35 34
82 43
150 85
DNC DNC
DNC DNC
87 84
13 16
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 271
Best of 3 Trials
Age
1:1
1:1
1:2
1:3
1:4
1:5
1:6
1:7
1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
2:
2:1
2:2
2:3
2:4
2:5
2:6
2:7
2:8 2:10 3: 3:2 3:4 3:6 38: 3:10
2:9 2:11 3:1 3:2 3:5 3:7 3:9 3:11
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
DNC
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
45
98
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
F
F
F
F
25
37
77
89
123
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
F
33
35
47
60
75
94
123
150
DNC
DNC
F
20
24
25
40
43
45
76
80
DNC
DNC
F
21
24
29
30
32
39
47
52
70
170
F
18
22
23
27
29
31
41
46
55
69
DNC
17
23
28
32
33
38
43
49
50
63
DNC
13
19
20
22
22
23
26
29
38
52
DNC
13 15 13 13 12 14 11 11
18 18 14 15 13 14 13 13
20 18 16 16 14 15 13 13
21 19 20 18 17 16 15 14
24 22 21 19 18 17 17 15
27 24 23 20 19 20 20 15
31 26 25 20 19 21 21 17
35 29 29 23 20 24 21 19
36 31 31 25 21 25 23 20
45 40 36 29 25 32 29 23
DNC 49 50 42 29 98 38 30
%S
%DNC
%F
6
94
23
77
13
29
58
42
35
23
65
26
77
12
11
89
2
9
98
2
97
3
97 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
3
No. of Cases
31
26
31
31
34
35
35
49
38
42
29 32 36 41 30 32 31 32
272 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Wallin Pegboard B
(585 Cases)
First Trial
Age 1:
1:1
Deciles
100 F
90 F
80 F
70 F
60 F
50 F
40 F
30 F
20 F
10 F
0 F
%S
%DNC
%F 100
1:2
1:3
DNC
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
4
96
1:4
1:5
85
130
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
F
F
F
F
13
29
58
1:6
1:7
55
77
92
130
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
F
F
32
45
23
1:8
1:9
33
35
60
75
95
142
170
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
59
32
9
1:10
1:11
27
31
40
45
63
80
117
DNC
DNC
DNC
F
63
26
11
2:
2:1
21
28
30
38
48
47
84
105
DNC
DNC
F
77
14
9
2:2
2:3
19
24
29
39
43
46
50
67
89
114
DNC
96
4
2:4
2:5
23
26
33
41
50
57
65
74
75
99
DNC
95
5
2:6
2:7
14
20
22
24
27
29
32
38
44
57
DNC
2:8 2:10 3: 3:2 3:4 3:6 3:8
2:9 2:11 3:1 3:3 3:5 3:7 3:9
18 17 13 13 12 14 11 13
20 18 15 16 14 15 13 14
20 19 16 17 17 16 15 14
26 21 20 19 19 20 17 15
31 23 22 20 20 21 18 16
32 25 25 22 22 20 19 16
35 28 27 23 23 22 23 18
43 31 29 25 25 26 24 20
45 35 31 29 27 29 28 21
64 55 38 39 36 46 38 26
DNC 101 116 52 54 107 46 33
97 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
3
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 273
Best Trial of at least 2 Successes
Age
1:6
1:7
1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
2:
2:1
2:2
2:3
2:4
2:5
2:6
2:7
2:8
2:9
2:10
2:11
3:
3:1
3:2
3:3
3:4
3:5
3:6 3:8 3:10
3:7 3:9 3:11
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
56
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
21
52
116
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
22
25
39
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
16
25
40
49
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
19
29
48
115
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
16
21
25
28
34
40
58
115
DNC
DNC
DNC
16
20
24
27
45
59
85
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
15
17
19
22
25
27
37
49
167
DNC
DNC
14
14
20
22
24
25
28
33
156
DNC
DNC
13
16
19
20
23
24
25
26
36
63
DNC
11
15
18
19
21
22
25
29
46
DNC
DNC
14 13 8
16 15 13
17 17 15
17 18 17
20 20 17
22 20 19
27 24 20
29 30 22
52 35 25
68 41 34
DNC 60 43
%s
%DNC
100
3
97
23
77
25
75
40
60
34
66
74
26
62
38
84
16
84
16
93
7
90
10
97 100 100
3
No. of Cases
32
34
35
36
49
38
42
29
32
36
41
30
32 31 31
274 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Wallin Pegboard D
(492 Cases)
First Trial
Age 1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
2
2:1
2:2
2:3
2:4
2:5
2:6
2:7
2:8
2:9
2:10
2:11
3
3:1
3:2
3:3
3:4
3:5
3:6
3:7
3:8 3:10
3:9 3:11
Deciles
100 92
90 DNC
80 DNC
70 DNC
60 DNC
50 DNC
40 DNC
30 DNC
20 DNC
10 DNC
0 DNC
%S 3
%DNC 97
45
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
9
91
71
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
6
94
52
93
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
17
83
28
46
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
11
26
40
51
122
DNC
DNC
DNC
DN'C
DNC
DNC
DNC
38
62
24
39
86
131
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
31
69
31
32
58
79
92
180
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
59
41
22
37
43
61
126
180
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
51
49
21
25
25
36
57
75
114
178
DNC
DNC
DNC
73
27
20
26
31
36
40
115
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
57
43
19
23
36
50
61
83
126
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
65
35
20 19
22 21
23 24
26 28
34 35
44 42
66 48
165 80
DNC DNC
DNC DNC
DNC DNC
80 75
20 25
MENTAL TESTS FOR PRE-SCHOOL CHILDREN 275
Best of 3 Trials
Age
1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
2
2:1
2:2
2:3
2:4
2:5
2:6
2:7
2:8
2:9
2:10
2:11
3
3:1
3:2
3:3
3:4
3:5
3:6
3:7
3:8 3:10
3:9 3:11
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
92
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
34
90
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
38
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
26
46
60
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
28
46
93
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
22
25
32
36
50
87
165
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
23
25
35
45
104
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
DNC
20
26
31
35
43
58
92
125
DNC
DNC
DNC
15
23
25
31
36
41
88
120
DNC
DNC
DNC
19
23
25
29
37
43
50
61
89
DNC
DNC
20
24
26
29
32
40
63
108
DNC
DNC
DNC
19
20
23
27
31
38
40
58
DNC
DNC
DNC
16 15
18 18
19 19
21 21
23 22
27 23
29 27
38 35
56 40
DNC 48
DNC DNC
%S
%DNC
3
97
11
89
6
94
29
71
19
81
60
40
45
55
75
25
71
29
90
10
74
26
79
21
90 91
10 9
No. of Cases
34
35
35
48
37
42
29
32
35
40
30
34
30 31
276 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Color Matching
(524 Cases)
Age
1:6
1:7
1:8
1:9
1:10
1:11
2
2:1
2:2
2:3
2:4
2:5
2:6
2:7
2:10
2:9
3
2:11
3:2
3:1
3:4 3:6 3:8 3:8
3:3 3:5 3:7 3:9
Deciles
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Y
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
Y
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
RY
Y
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
RY
RY
Y
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
S
P
Y
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
S
P
Y
Y
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
S
S
P
RY
RY
Y
F
F
F
F
F
S
S
P
P
RY
Y
F
F
F
F
F
S
S
P
P
P
RY
RY
RY
RY
Y
F
S
S
s
p
p
p
RY
Y
Y
F
F
s s s s
s s s s
s s s s
SPSS
P P s s
P P s s
RY RY P P
RY Y RY P
RY Y Y RY
Y F Y RY
F F F Y
%S
%P
%RY
%Y
%F
0
0
0
3
97
0
0
0
3
97
0
0
5
8
92
0
0
8
19
81
2
11
16
18
82
6
9
15
29
71
18
21
42
56
44
18
29
43
54
46
17
44
87
93
7
24
51
64
82
18
32 21 56 48
51 50 63 69
81 64 69 93
89 75 88 100
11 25 12 0
No. of Cases
38
33
37
37
44
34
34
28
30
33
37 28 33 29
S?6 Colors Matched (yellow, red, blue, green, orange, purple).
P?4 Colors Matched (yellow, red, blue, green).
RY?2 Colors Matched (yellow, red).
Y?1 Color Matched (yellow).
F?No colors Matched.
