Special Evacuation Difficulties of the Residential School Child
=================================================================

The Editorial Board does not hold itself responsible for the opinions of contributors
Vol. III. No. 1
WINTER 1942
Price lOd. (1/- Post Free)
:Author: G. KEIR

Reigate Child Guidance Clinic
--------------------------------

The purpose of this paper is (I) to examine the special billeting difficulties of the
residential school child as compared with those of the ordinary school child; (II) to
attempt an evaluation of the effects of evacuation upon the behaviour of residential
school children.

Procedure

(1) Method. Two sources of information were available:
(ia) Work with a residential school evacuated to this reception area in September
1939, whose children are compared with those evacuees from ordinary
homes seen at the Child Guidance Clinic during the same period.
(b) Results of a questionnaire on evacuation sent out to the teachers of this
school, and of three other residential schools evacuated to other reception
areas.

(2) Material. The schools will be referred to as A, B, C, and D. They are all
L.C.C. Residential Schools for the care of children whose parents, for one reason or
another, can no longer provide for them. The children can be sent for varying
periods; their ages range from 3 to 16 years. Many of the children are orphans,
many have parents in hospitals and institutions. Each school can take about 350
children, the ratio of boys to girls being about 3 : 2.

School A was of the cottage type, where the children (separated as to sex and age)
lived in groups of about 20 under the care of a cottage-mother. Children up to
11 years were taught in the school by non-residential teachers, those over 11 went out
to the neighbouring schools. It was evacuated in September 1939 from a semi-urban
district to billets in two housing estates on the outskirts of a town, population about
36,000. This housing area was once a village and still forms a community in itself,
with its own shops, church, school and clinic. The children are thus still very much
under the eyes of the teachers who were evacuated with them.

School B was in a suburb of London, run on the block system, about 40 children
to a block. All the children went out to various schools. This school was evacuated
twice?first to a coast town, and ten months later to a cluster of country villages
about 30 miles north of London. In the first reception area the children were
scattered in billets throughout the town and attended various schools with other
evacuees. In the second evacuation each small group, about 20 or 30, is in the care
of a teacher in a small village, attending the village school. There are about ten
such groups.

School C was in a small town just outside the fringe of Greater London, run on
the barracks system, and all the children were taught in the school with the exception
of about 40 older ones, who went out for more specialized education. It was evacu-
ated to a Thames-side town where the children are in billets scattered throughout
the town. They attend a local school for half the day as a self-contained group
under the care of their own teachers.

School D evacuated from the same type of place as School C, is also living in the
same Thames-side town, under the same evacuation conditions as School C. In
pre-war days this formed a fourth kind of residential school. It was of the cottage
type, but all the children were-taught in school within the grounds. They lived a
very self-contained life.

The schools all had a system of pocket-money and opportunities for spending
this, although School D did not allow the children out of the grounds as much as the
others. They all had opportunity for organized games and handicrafts, and during
the summer were taken to camp.

These schools were chosen because they differed in system, and it was thought
that different degrees of pre-war freedom and responsibility might have different
effects in evacuation.

I. Special Billeting Difficulties of the Residential School Child

Are there any difficulties in billeting schoolchildren from a residential school
which do not occur with the ordinary schoolchild ? It would seem that there are.
(i) The term residential school is apt to convey to the billetor that the child has
misbehaved in some way. The name of School A is unfortunately identical with that
of an approved school. Although this mistake was corrected, it is asked even now,
" What has the child done to be sent there ? " There is suspicion that a child who
comes from a " Home " must be abnormal, and for this reason quite small behaviour
difficulties are exaggerated.

(ii) Suspicion is also due to the fact that the billetors know so little of the parent.
As a billetor said recently when her evacuee had been pilfering, " The trouble with
him is, you've got nothing to work on: you don't know what his parents were like."
Even where the parents are known, the billetors may be slightly contemptuous of
them as unable to fulfil their social obligations to their children, and to the community.

These parents in any case have few rights over their children, and for this reason the
Headmaster should always accompany such a school. He' is not only the visible
sign that the school is a unity, but he can maintain the rights of the children and
exercise a final authority over them. Unfortunately, only in the case of School B on
its second evacuation did the Headmaster accompany his school.

This difficulty of meeting the parents has another unfavourable effect. The
majority of billetors rightly expect gratitude for all their trouble, and it is normally
expected from the parents. The children themselves have to supply it, and as they
rarely do, it forms a common ground for complaint. Again, where difficulties occur
in the management of the child which do not immediately yield to the billet-mother's
methods, lacking an object on which to vent her feelings of failure and frustration,
she blames the child instead of the parents, thus only increasing the trouble.
(iii) These children cannot return home and so seem more of a burden than the
ordinary school child.

If evacuated to small country communities as in the case of School B, less
difficulty is experienced in billeting the children, as the attitude of the billetors is
more favourable. ?

Against these must be weighed certain advantages enjoyed by them:
(i) On the material side the children are well cared for; there are no difficulties
?f clothing, shoe-repairing, mending, etc.
(ii) The lack of contact with parents helps to prevent friction with them, and to
prevent divided loyalties in the child's mind.
(iii) On the whole, residential school children are more helpful in the house.
They love running errands, gardening, and looking after the younger members of
the family.

Nevertheless, the disadvantages enumerated on the whole outweigh the advan-
tages.

II- Special Behaviour Difficulties of the Residential School Child
The children seen at the Child Guidance Clinic set up in October 1939 to deal
with evacuation problems have been divided into two groups?the residential school
and the non-residential school children evacuated into this area. A comparative
study can be made with regard to:

(a) the numbers attending the Clinic;
(b) the number of attendances per group;
(c) the reasons of referral.
(a) Numbers. In 1939-40 we saw 80 residential school children, 52 boys and
28 girls, as against 100 children (71 boys and 29 girls) of Group II. During the
eleven months following?October 1940-September 1941?20 residential school
children (13 boys and 7 girls) were seen, as against 51 (23 boys and 28 girls) of Group II.
The following table gives the percentages of these numbers estimated from the
total population in each group at the half year.

Residential School Non-Residential School
Period Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total
0/ 0/ 0/ 0/ 0/ 0/
/o /o /o /o /o /o
1939-40   18-6 10-0 28-6 4-7 1-9 6-6
1940-41   5-8 3-1 8-9 2-1 2-5 4-6

The difference in proportions of those attending in each group and the drop in
Group I in the second year are of interest.

(b) Number of Attendances. The number of attendances indicates that the
residential school children had more difficulty in settling down and require more
prolonged treatment. The attendances over the two periods were:
Residential School Non-Residential School
Period Boys Girls Total Boys Girls Total
1939-40   272 168 440 283 162 445
1940-41   150 71 221 173 109 282
422 239 661 456 271 727

(c) Type of Problems. The principal reasons for referral are given below.
These were not the only grounds for complaint, but were the chief causes of trouble
in the billet.

In Table III, the percentages are taken from the total numbers in each group
attending the Clinic over the 23 months (100 and 151). In Table IV the percentages
are taken from the population of each group estimated at the half-year in each case.
Table III Table IV

Group I Group II Group I Group II
Enuresis ..
Pilfering ..
Backwardness
Nervous Habits
Sex
Disobedient
Aggressive
Cheeky
T. Tantrums
Soiling
Depressed
Sullen
Fears
Lying
Truanting
Egotism ..
Timidity
38 23
14 10
10 5
7 1
4 13
5 8
1 5
2 3
5 2
1 8
1 4
6 1
4 5
? 1
2 2
? 1
8 7-5 1
6 2-7
9 1-9
3 1-4
2 -8
6 1-0
3 ?2
3 -4
7 1-0
0 -2
0 -2
3 M
3 -8
9 ?
7 -4
3 ?
7 -2
5
6
4
08
8
5
3
2
1
4
2
08
3
1
1
08
04
100% 99-9% 19-8% 5-78%

In connection with this table the following points are of interest:
(1) Enuresis. It should be noted:
(a) That cases of slight bed-wetting occurring during the first few weeks of
evacuation, due simply to the change, are not included. All are real enuretics with
a history prior to evacuation, although they may have had a period of dryness.
(b) That many of the real enuretics amongst the ordinary population were not
evacuated, or were taken home by their parents in the early days, so that our figures
for Group II are low. The incidence of enuresis in the ordinary population is
estimated at 3-4 per cent.*
The evidence of this table is substantiated by that of a master of School D, who
states that 6 per cent, of his children were known to be enuretic before evacuation
(probably much too low).
In no area was adequate provision made for the known enuretics from these
schools. The hostesses seem to have been literally swamped by their arrival
School'D reports: " This 6 per cent, were billeted with no special provision made
for their weakness other than the addition to their luggage of a large rubber sheet.
The conditions arising from the billeting of these children on the householders can
best be left to the imagination."

In this area there were, almost from the start, facilities for Child Guidance
treatment of the enuretics. But in the other schools not a great deal appears to have
been done for them. In School B some are in a small hostel. In School D " during
? the last twelve months, efforts have been made to segregate enuretics into one unit
under the care of a master and his wife, and this has, to some extent, relieved a very
unsatisfactory state of affairs ".

The conditions of evacuation produced no new enuretics, though some cases,
thought cured, relapsed in the first few weeks. Naturally, where treatment has been
available, there has been a sharp drop. The conditions of evacuation themselves,
however, have been responsible to some extent, since over a long period, even without
real treatment, an improvement in the occurrence of enuresis occurs.

(2) Pilfering. It is almost impossible to assess the true incidence of petty
Pilfering in the two groups. The numbers in this Clinic are too small to make any
valid comparison. It would seem as if pilfering has been significantly greater among
the population of School A than amongst the ordinary evacuated school population.
Opportunities have been much greater than in pre-war days, and the children have
taken advantage, though perhaps not to the extent one might expect.

(3) Sex. Two residential school boys came for sex instruction only.
(4) Lying has not been given as a main reason of referral, but was very prevalent,
more so than in Group II.
(5) General Nervous Habits and Fears especially among the younger children
evacuated at 5 years, were proportionately much higher in Group I. Fear of dogs,
with screaming attacks at their approach, was very marked.
(6) In both groups during the first year, girls experienced less difficulty in settling
down than boys. In Group II, however, difficulties amongst the girls remained
constant, whereas those among the boys dropped in numbers.
* Burt, " Journ. Educ. Psych", Vol. X, Part 1. Incidence of Neurotic Symptoms among
Evacuated Schoolchildren.

(7) Age. In both groups over the whole period the most difficult age group for
boys was 9-12 and for girls 11-14.
Results of Questionnaire
In an effort to assess the effects of evacuation upon the behaviour of the children
as a whole the following questionnaire was sent out to the teachers of the four schools.
It was based upon many discussions with the teachers of School A.
1. Have you noticed any differences in the reactions of the children to the staff
during the time they have been evacuated ?
2. Is there any sort of change in their relations to each other ? Do they get on
better or worse ?

3. School Work. Has the level of work risen in any case ? In what subjects ?
? To what do you ascribe this ? Has their attitude to work altered ?
4. Games. Is there any difference noticeable ?
5. Leisure Activities. Is there any change ?
6. Have you any difficult children in your form ? Enuretics, pilferers, liars,
over-aggressive, disobedient, nervous habits, etc. ? If so, do you consider
that they have improved during evacuation ? What do you take to be
the reason ? Have any new difficulties cropped up ?
7. Have you noticed any changes in behaviour which you take to be the direct'
result of evacuation ?

8. Would you consider evacuation has done them good or not ?
The answers to this questionnaire throw light on the various subsidiary com-
plaints made about residential school children especially throughout the first year of
evacuation.
These are that the residential school child differs from the non-residential school
child:
(a) in intelligence;
(b) in certain social attitudes.
(a) In Intelligence. Of about 75 per cent, of the residential school children
whom I visited I heard the remark that " the children seemed to know nothing ",

and that " they behaved like children several years younger than they really were
There seems no reason to doubt that knowledge of everyday things is deficient
in the first group. It would be surprising if this were not so. The young children
of 5, 6 and 7 are much more helpless than children of the same age from ordinary
homes. They find great difficulty in dressing themselves, they wait to be told what
to do, and cannot be trusted with the simplest message involving responsibility.
The older children, too, have little knowledge of the simplest matters of household
routine, they find difficulty in amusing themselves, they hang about the streets and
in countless small ways give the impression of backwardness.
All this is now much less obvious. Not only do the householders complain less,
but the teachers report that the general level of work in school has risen, despite
the lack of former facilities. As with all other evacuees, there is a widening of
interest due to evacuation to a different environment. But in residential school
children the circumstances of billeting are even more important.
Their interest in the country and country pursuits has greatly strengthened and
widened, but they also take a possessive interest in the gardens and animals of their
billetors and their attitude to nature study in school bears the imprint of this individual
experience.

Further, many of them are now responding to the stimulus wanting before
evacuation?to the very real interest taken in their work by the billetors.
In the school they are now more receptive. As one master puts it, " Conditions
have produced an entirely different atmosphere in the school. There is a friendliness
such as one experiences in a family circle, antipathy and defiance have been replaced
by interest and readiness to please."

Where games have been mainly of the organized type, children find a certain
difficulty in the freer, creative side of play. This was quite marked in the earlier
days of evacuation. It is no longer so.

(b) Social Relations. The changes involve the following points:
(i) Attitude to each other.
(ii) Attitude to authority.
(iii) Attitude towards property.
(iv) Attitude towards social responsibility.
(i) In the billets, at first, their attitude to the other children was one of jealousy,
outwardly shown by greed. In many cases the householders have been very good,
buying them toys and books and letting them share in all the treats of the other
children, so that they should feel as little difference as possible. But in most cases
they were not satisfied and would not play with their own toys. They had to take
away the other children's possessions and play with them too.

This has almost completely disappeared during the second year of evacuation.
They have learned to accept a fair division of things.

Amongst the infants of Schools B and C there is considerable aggression due
to the same causes as is the behaviour of the infants of School A, whereconsiderable
fear and anxiety have been noticed.
The older children all seem to have improved in this respect.
(ii) To their teachers they are more friendly and less evasive than either in
Pre-war days or in the early days of evacuation. They show, at the same time,
greater independence and greater desire to be liked.

This new readiness to recognize authority, without resenting it, is also apparent
in the billets. In showing of gratitude for favours received there is no change, but
it is probable that the billetors expect too much.

(iii) In caring for the property received, however, they have altered for the better.
A teacher in School B ascribes this change partly to the respect they have learned
for the flowers and animals of the countryside. It is probably due more to the
acquisition of property in a small community, such as the family. The only strong
opinion to the contrary comes from an Infant teacher.

i ' ? * '
(iv) At first these children were unwilling to bear anything in the nature of
responsibility. This has now altered greatly.

Answers to the last question bear out the general success of evacuation in at least
two schools. " Evacuation and more intimate home life has certainly been good for
the children. They seem glad to help wash up, mind children, run errands and help
in the garden. I feel that the opportunity to do these things has been all to the good."
"On the balance good effects. Physically?a lot of good; mentally, through
widening of interests?some; morally?I think a little good."

To sum up?two out of the four schools admit a general all-round improvement,
in difficult and non-difficult children alike, as the result of evacuation. Schools C
and D admit improvement in certain aspects. While School C is divided on the
subject of general benefit, School D does not agree, as the breakdowns in behaviour
were too numerous.
The differences between these sets of answers to the questionnaire is suggestive
of certain conditions for the successful evacuation of residential schools.
(1) The Headmaster should accompany his school.

(2) Billeting must be sympathetically and carefully carried out, and frequent
visits paid to billets where any difficulty arises.
(3) These children, more than children from ordinary homes, need the benefit
of treatment and advice in settling down. The more scattered and disintegrated is
the school, the greater is the assistance required.

(4) Evacuation into small communities is best. The difficulties in areas where
children are scattered over a fairly large town appear greater than where they are
evacuated into small country villages in groups of 20 or so, in charge of a teacher
This seems the best arrangement, with evacuation into a self-contained community
in a town, such as a housing estate, a good second.

(5) The two schools in which billeting has been most successful have been those
in which either all, or a certain proportion, of the children went out to school under
pre-evacuation conditions. It would seem that a residential school of the severely
self-contained kind does not stand up to the sudden freedom and responsibility of
evacuation conditions.
