A Review of the Psychoneuroses at Stockbridge
===============================================

MENTAL HEALTH 29
:Type: Reviews
:Author: G. P. Coon and A. F. Raymond.
? Austen Riggs Foundation Inc., Stockbridge,
Mass.

This work attempts a critical evaluation of the
cases which have been under treatment at
Rockbridge between the years 1910 and 1934.
jt is divided into three main parts. In the first
he setting is described in which treatment is
carried out, and a brief description follows of the
type of case and the methods of treatment used
to8ether with a case study of ninety-two patients.
In the second part a statistical study is under-
taken of 1,060 cases of anxiety state or neuras-
thenia selected from 5,300 admissions during
period .under review with two detailed
tv!?W~Up studies- Frequency and association
jables are given for a wide range of factors,
throughout this section there is a careful attempt
at comparison with the follow-up work of other
linits, the most important being those of the
avistock Clinic and the Cassel Hospital.

In the third part there is a general summary
ar>d a series of appendices giving not only
uable information as to how the follow-up
^ork was done but also a vivid insight into the
Methods of treatment in use at Stockbridge.

hese evidently rely to an important extent upon
|he education of the patient in sound psycho-
logical knowledge of the workings of his mind
through talks and pamphlets here reproduced.
.. is outside the scope of the present review to
1Scuss the principles upon which the Riggs
oundation has evolved except in so far as they
affect the significance of this book. Admission
ls limited to patients suffering from psycho-
neuroses who are able to live in the quite open
environment of the two hostels run by the
oundation which are situated in the small town
o Stockbridge. Thus many severe neurotic,
Psychopathic or delinquent personalities must
e inadmissible. The treatment appears to
consist^ of an intellectual re-alignment of the
Patient's attitude towards his problems and
symptoms by re-education and moral suasion
carried out during a first admission, which is,
y comparison with most other clinics, remark-
a 'y short. The authors frankly admit the
?mitations of these methods with certain
Patients, and the limitations become apparent
n the somewhat superficial dynamic accounts of
, e Problems of etiology. Nevertheless, within
ese limits there can be no question that the
methods employed have the utmost value, and
at the Stockbridge workers have much to
teach us concerning the rapid and effective
readjustment of psychoneurotic patients. For
example, the mean duration of first admission
is 37 ? 24 days which may be compared with
4 ? 1 months for the Cassel Hospital (probably
the most closely comparable English institution).
This latter figure is, itself, generally considered
to be low, but it is necessary to bear in mind that
treatment at Stockbridge is not usually concluded
at the end of the first admission, re-admission
and subsequent treatment interviews being the
common practice.

The immediate results obtained appear to be
very good, .57-8 per cent, of the cases being
graded " much improved " on discharge. In
the follow-up work which was carried out in
two separate studies, one between 1929 and 1930
and one between 1936 and 1939, some astounding
discrepancies are revealed. For example, approx-
imately 48 per cent, are graded as " well " or
" very much improved " at the first follow-up
compared with 8 per cent, at the second. The
authors bravely set out to explain this divergence.
The factors which they adduce are of interest to
all who are concerned with follow-up studies.
They mention in particular the difference in the
use of terms by the two separate groups of
investigators who carried out the earlier and
later studies, the factor of selection of cases and
the different methods employed. In the earlier
work, for example, the follow-up was by letter
only; in the later work many other methods of
contact were used in addition. This may involve
a double error in that the most grateful patients
may be most likely to reply and that their own
interpretation of their condition may be wide
of the mark. Experience at the Tavistock Clinic
where a group of patients who did not reply to
a follow-up letter were compared with a group
who did has tended to discount these errors,
but the question must remain an open one.
In general, the statistical handling of the
material in the book appears to be excellent
though the titles of some of the tables are a trifle
confusing and necessitate careful reference to
the text. One is, however, left with a feeling of
the inadequacy of most psychiatric case histories
for subsequent statistical research, a feeling
which is strengthened by the authors' observa-
tion that only 3*6 per cent, of the histories
studied could be termed " excellent " in the
sense of their completeness, whilst only a
further 9-9 per cent, were classed as " good ".
There can be no doubt that few psychiatric
clinics would emerge with a better record than
this, which is probably due to the copiousness
of the data which have to be recorded and the
tendency to omit negative findings.

This is a book which should be in the hands
of all those who are planning similar studies in
the future and.of those who have to plan the
keeping of records in the present.
C.H.R.
