Military Service for Mental Defectives
======================================

MENTAL HEALTH
By F. J. S. ESHER, M.B., Ch.B., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.M.
Medical Officer, Sheffield Mental Deficiency Acts Committee, Lecturer on Mental
Deficiency to the D.S.P., War Office, and to the University, Sheffield
The object of this article is to offer information gained in examining mentally
defective soldiers, to show their limitations, and the risks involved in keeping them in
the Army, and to outline the way in which they are being dealt with.
In civilian life we have to consider mental defect as a failure in social adaptation
due mainly to lack of sufficient intelligence but frequently also to poor upbringing
in the family home. At the outset I would stress that intellectual subnormality?
a " something " which academic psychologists try to measure?is not the same as
mental deficiency (a term denoting a clinical assessment of the patient's social capacity
having special reference to his ability to comprehend and execute tasks involving
intellectual operations). Or, to put it another way, there is no point in the scale of
intelligence ratings below which all persons are mentally defective and above which
all are normal. From this it follows that there are many people of both sexes who
are Intellectually Defective but, because they are sufficiently adapted socially, are not
Mentally Defective. They are not social failures, for they earn their livings, pay their
way, and adhere to the moral codes, social conventions and laws. They are lowly
but sound citizens.
However, it is equally true to say that their social competence is more apparent
than real, for they are frequently abnormally dependent upon the good offices of
others, such as employers, wives or social services; they cannot adapt themselves to
changes of circumstance and therefore tend to live in or near their childhood homes,
to have friends among the few who will not tease them or show up their defects,
to deal only with certain shopkeepers whose honesty they know by long experience,
to stick to one simple job which is not beyond them even though the pay is poor and
prospects of advancement are non-existent or to do work which other people do not
wish to do. Such men find niches in civilian life that are suited to their inferior
intelligence and adaptability.
In the Army, on the other hand, they have other difficulties to overcome.
Supervision and control are much greater than in civilian life and this may help
quite a number of defective recruits. But as they have a great deal to learn as soon
as they are taken into the Army and learning is their stumbling block, it is natural
that many of them are soon discovered to be mentally defective from' a military
standpoint?that is to say, they cannot acquire the fundamental knowledge necessary
to modern troops, even if given more individual and lengthy training in squads for
backward soldiers.
In addition, their uprooting from familiar surroundings and their presence
amongst strangers who do not understand and allow for their slowness and simplicity
is to them a source of anxiety. They are bewildered by the speed at which they
receive military uniform and equipment, medical examinations and inoculations, and
MENTAL HEALTH 15
at the necessity for quickly understanding orders and regulations, so that at the very
beginning of their military careers, many respectable and worthy simpletons are
thrown into a state of anxiety which increases their basic inefficiency.
Many defective recruits, however, do not experience this anxiety, or at any rate
get over it very soon. They learn the barrack square drills and the elements of
military life, for these are well within the range of their competence. But later on
their difficulties increase, for most soldiers in modern armies have to learn and
understand the use, maintenance and repair of a number of complicated mechanisms
SUch as automatic weapons, detectors, range-finders, motor vehicles, telephones,
wireless, etc. They also have to remember and apply codes that alter daily, work out
routes from maps, carry messages correctly, know first aid principles and be able to
much of their work in pitch darkness, often in unfamiliar surroundings.
Efficient units soon find out that a proportion of their men are unable to manage
such tasks and relegate them to " fatigue duties ". Others act on the old principle
of dumping their rubbish on to someone else and so get the men transferred to other
and no more suitable regiments. Some units submit them to a psychiatrist for
examination and disposal, and those who have once done so do not, as "a rule, revert
to their former procedure.
It may be remarked here that these inefficient men are not all mental defectives.
There are also dullards, psychopathic personalities, psychoneurotics and psychotics.
It is probably true to say that the more unstable tend to be examined, discharged or
transferred earlier and in proportion to their " nuisance value ", whilst the more
stable types of defectives and dullards tend to remain in their units.
Their retention, rather than their transfer to a different unit or their discharge,-
seems to be justified, especially if the work they are called upon to do is of a purely
manual and unskilled type, but to leave their " disposal " purely to chance is bad
administration. For example, some units?such as the Pioneer Corps, Royal
Artillery or Royal Engineers?can usefully employ a greater number of dull men
than the Royal Corps of Signals, the Royal Armoured Corps, or the Royal Army
Pay Corps. Further, certain jobs in any unit are better given out to dull men, the
more intelligent being retained for work of greater importance and difficulty. To this
end, the Army is at present testing the intelligence of all its new personnel and is
beginning "job analyses " in order to determine amongst other things the number
of defectives or dullards which can be used by different Corps and for what work in
the various Corps they are best suited.
This survey is part of the work being undertaken by the newly-created Directorate
for the Selection of Personnel (D.S.P.), which is now engaged in the formidable task
of testing the intelligence and abilities of every man and woman in the Army and the
intellectual and other requirements for the satisfactory performance of every duty
which a soldier or auxiliary may be called upon to carry out. This will not only
solve the vexed question as to whether dullards and defectives should or should not
be expelled from the Army, but will give the numbers which may safely be retained
in any unit. Defectives so retained, employed in work which is not beyond them
can be quite efficient and content and so are less likely to become anxious or badly
16 MENTAL HEALTH
beljaved. But, unless their numbers and the work they are called upon to do are
controlled by statistically examined investigations, their retention in fighting units
in any but small numbers is a " bad risk " and bad business.
We know that the work of defectives is often badly done but, quite apart from
this, they present another problem in that their general health and mental stability
are often much below par. It is not at all unusual to hear of a man taken into the
Army and given dental, surgical, medical, orthopaedic and ophthalmic treatment
spread over a year or more during which he has done little or no military training.
After such lengthy and presumably costly treatment, he may have proceeded to a
training unit where he was inefficient and constantly falling sick with minor ailments
for which no physical cause was discovered. For that reason he may then have been
sent to a psychiatrist for investigation.
Men with medical histories of this type whom I have examined, have generally
proved to be mentally defective and their complaints?bad teeth, defective vision and
speech, squints, dyspepsia, skin troubles, varicose veins, hernias, flat feet, enuresis,
catarrhs, etc.?may be thought of as stigmata of degeneracy. The ill-developed
mind or brafn is (from this point of view) just one of many ill-developed organs in
an inferior human being?inferior in every sense of the word, anatomically, physio-
logically and psychologically. It is a waste of medical time to attempt to patch up
such individuals in the forlorn hope that they may eventually make good soldiers.
In addition to purely physical disorders, the defective is liable to develop psycho-
neurosis?hysterical reactions being the more frequent. Common mild forms are
the exaggeration of the severity or the increase in the duration of a minor injury,
? illness or discomfort. Thus one man sprained his ankle jumping from a lorry and
still complained of pain three months later. The pain had excused him from many
difficulties such as marches, drills and other irksome duties. In addition he received
sympathy from his comrades rather than the well-known attitude of N.C.O.s towards
slow and stupid privates.
Anxiety states are frequent in defectives exposed to the dangers of active service,
and such men are terrified at the idea of having to face similar conditions in the future.
Many of them develop states of depression, if the anxiety remains unrecognized and
therefore untreated. Others wander away from camp with almost monotonous
regularity, for the camp conditions are more than they can cope with and there seems
to them to be no other way out of their dilemma. Some of these are just ordinarily
stupid, some are dazed, and others suffer from hysterical fugues, complaining that
they have lost their memories. When it is noticed that a man is receiving continual
punishment which is no deterrent and that he is doing no military training because
he is in constant detention, it is obvious he should be sent to a psychiatrist.
Some defectives on active service cause loss of life among their comrades by
their carelessness or clumsiness. From among the many defectives in the B.E.F.
seen soon after the Dunkirk evacuation, I can give these instances.* One backward
youth joined up when his " school hero " did. (This " hero " had always protected
him from being bullied at school and at the works where they were employed.)
* Unfortunately full notes were not taken at the time and can only quote from memory.
MENTAL HEALTH ' 17
During an engagement against the Germans, he got into difficulties, and his hero,
now a corporal in his Unit, came to rescue him. Bungling everything?in the Army
no less than in civil life?he upset a lot of tins at a time when silence was safety.
This drew the enemies' fire from a neighbouring farmhouse, and the corporal was shot.
The man ran for his life, escaped the stream of bullets fired at him and regained the
British lines. He subsequently broke down mentally, because he realized he was to
blame and that now he was " alone in the world ". Another defective could not get
over the fact that he had shot his section leader accidentally. What made it worse
was that he knew the man's wife and child who lived not far from his home. Yet
another?an ambulance driver?developed strong feelings of unworthiness and
depression, because he lost confidence in his ability to drive after fighting had broken
out in France. He had an accident with a loaded ambulance whilst in this mood,
Sot " knocked out " and never discovered the fate of his cargo. He dared not ask
in case he had killed some of the wounded men.
Among the men found untrainable is a class not mentioned above, to which 1
have given in my reports the term " scholastic defectives ". In these cases, there
is often quite a clear history showing why education was faulty, such as nomadic
habits of parents, chronic illness, truancy, retention by parents in the home, or
infantile psychoneurosis. These men tend to do poorly on tests of the Binet type
(scoring such mental ages as 9\ to 12) years, but grade normally on most perfor-
mance tests. Military training is as hard to them as it is to defectives, and their
behaviour is often very similar.
From the foregoing, it will be realized that the problem of Intellectual Defect in"
the Army is a very large one. Some 5 per cent, of all men taken into the Forces are
unable to learn the basic military training of the modern soldier and another 5 per
cent. can only learn it with difficulty and if trained in special backward squads.
The more complex and specialized military training becomes, the higher will such
Percentages be found to be.
The impression I have given so far is that there are many mental defectives in
the Army and that speaking generally they are a nuisance and a risk, but I now hope
to show that to discharge them is not the best solution of the problem and that the
Army has made special provision for this particular group.
At the outbreak of the war, the Army was largely unaware of the existence of
the problem?still less that it would be magnified by conscription. In a voluntary
recruitment system only a proportion of the nation's defectives join up, but into a
conscripted Army all are received unless their names have been notified to the
Mental Deficiency Authority of their area. But in this connection we must note
that for every man of a mental age of below 12 years who is notified as a mental
defective under the Mental Deficiency Acts, there are about 25 who have not been
so notified. According to the Board of Control's returns, about *2 per cent, of the
Population is under the care of a Local Authority and yet about 5 per cent, of the
Army intake is of a standard of intelligence equivalent to that of the *2 per cent
just mentioned. Thus, I have seen men with mental ages as low as 4 or 5 years who
make good shepherds, labourers and roadmen?men with mental ages between
18 MENTAL HEALTH
() and 9 years who appear to be efficient tractor drivers, milk roundsmen, painters
and automatic machine minders. But these men were quite out of their depth when
confronted by the demands of modern military training.
Broadly we may say that such intellectual (but not mental) defectives are good
enough workmen if employed in simple repetitive manual labour, especially if those
in authority treat them kindly and allow for some of their idiosyncrasies.
We may also say that discharge from the Forces of soldiers who seem to
their comrades to be merely slow and inefficient, is bad for military morale. It
tends to encourage malingering and leads to discontent.
A year or more ago psychiatrists who examined mentally defective men who had
been employed in civil life, were healthy and yet were untrainable in a modern
military sense, had no option but to discharge them, for even the Pioneer Corps
was (and still is) a potential fighting force. When the Army realized how many men
it was losing in this way and that it could retain their services if it made it unnecessary
to train them militarily, it instituted " B " Sections, attached to normal companies
of Pioneers. The men were not to be trained in the use of weapons. All its members
were to be mental defectives or dullards. Their N.C.O.s and officers are mostly
tolerant and understand the special needs of the men under their control. From the
inception of the scheme over a year ago, these " B " Sections (now named " Q "
Sections) were a great success, so long as they were used for work within the range
of their competence; and their existence has made it possible to retain within
the Army men with mental ages as low as 6 or 7 years. At the invitation of the
Northern Command, I visited two such Sections in the Yorkshire area. One was
digging trenches round an ordnance works and the other labouring for the Ouse
Catchment Board remaking the river banks. The men in the Section were happy
and liked their jobs, even though many had never laboured in the open air before,
e.g. one man had been a " mackintosh sticker " in civilian life, another a machine
minder in a Lancashire mill, whilst a third was a hawker and collected rags and bones.
These, and most of the others to whom I spoke, confessed that they were miserable
in their previous units and found the work far too hard. Several said they were now
in better health and were no longer always sick. They were satisfied that they were
doing work of national importance and that they were doing it well.
The latest development in this field is the establishment of whole companies of
" Q " men, and this will help to develop an esprit de corps and a still better morale
than could be developed when such a group was only a dull " hanger-on " to another
company.
To sum up?Intellectually Defective men are a very large problem to the British
Army. They cannot assimilate the training necessary for a modern soldier. If
retained in fighting or technical units, they tend to be inefficient, or troublesome, or
to break down mentally and physically. The provision of " Q " Companies for such
defective soldiers reduces their discharges from the Army to small proportions and
enormously increases their usefulness. As the D.S.P. staff now examines the
intelligence of all recruits, we shall in future no longer see the cases of gross mental
defect seen in the early days of the war.
