The Trend of Scientific Thought
=================================

By KENNETH WALKER, F.R.C.S.
" The N ?fn as^e<^ to amplify the article entitled
Which wa ^?r a ^osi^ve Philosophy of Life
Mental u published in a previous number of
^isquisitio EALTh* The natural sequel would be a
to know o" 0n ^ow to obtain one. But it is easier
them, and th WaPts than to discover how to supply
?f a nhiir. re is no general guide to the obtaining
We eventu living- The philosophy which
is essentiaH ^ we are successful in our search,
ttiore esoa a Pers?nal philosophy. "You can no
E>ix0njnji36 your philosophy", writes McNeile
y?ur shad Human Situation, "than you can escape
? All r?W' ^ a'so is a reflection of yourself,
bias is dueCfSOn"1S is in a manner biased, and the
ti?n of thP t^le nature, surroundings, and educa-
Philosophvtninker." it is impossible to formulate a
as it is irrin wiH be generally acceptable, just
which will e to have a single form of religion
Unkind Ipeet spiritual needs of the whole of
fcven if its essence be the same, its
?
f ?' , ?
outward form must differ. All that.can be done is to
examine the trend of modern thought and discover
the direction in which we are travelling. As I am
a medical man, and as medicine is based on science,
I shall try to summarize briefly the more philo-
sophical aspects of the science of today.
We live at an extremely interesting time, not only
of history, but also of human thought, a time which
has the appearance of being a period of transition.
The science of the nineteenth century was dominated
entirely by physics, the branch which had made the
furthest progress, and was frankly materialistic.
It was felt that matter was simple, obvious and
tangible, something that could be relied upon, and
something which supplied a criterion of reality.
The world of values, the world of the emotions, of
art, and of religious experience was, to the scientist,
imaginary, the product of subjective sensations, and
a world which had no real existence. Whilst the
external and real world of matter was ruled by laws,
V
34 MENTAL HEALTH
many of which science had already discovered, the
inner and subjective world of the spirit was entirely
irrational. Scientists knew exactly where they
stood; in all branches of science the amount of
knowledge which had been attained was measured
by the ability to interpret phenomena in terms of
physics. Whatever conformed to the law of cause
and effect was accepted as real, and whatever could
not be explained in terms of mechanism was regarded
as being unreal. It was believed that everything in
the universe, from the movements of atoms to the
actions, thoughts and hopes of mankind, was
strictly determined. So confidently did the scientific
world believe this that when Professor Tvndall
addressed the British Association in 1874, he
prophesied that one day science would be able to
explain all that had happened in the world's history
in terms of the " ultimately purely natural and
inevitable march of evolution from the atoms of the
primeval nebula to the proceedings of the British
Association."
Darwin had already explained the evolution of
life culminating in the appearance of man along
purely mechanical lines, and had stated that all the
varieties of life on the earth resulted from the opera-
tion of these mechanical forces. The automatic
sifting action of natural selection upon accidental
variations was responsible for the different species.
To the question what caused these variations on
which evolution depended, he returned no answer.
Psychology was also influenced by the materialism
and determinism which reigned in other departments
of science. Many psychologists were dissatisfied
with the methods of introspection, which had hitherto
been employed, as a means of investigating psycho-
logical phenomena, and sought other methods
susceptible of better control. Their efforts resulted
in the founding of the school of Behaviourist
psychology. This took for its physiological basis
Pavlov's experimental work on reflexes. According
to Pavlov all bodily movements can be interpreted
as being responses to stimuli, the life of an animal
being nothing but a chain of automatic or conditioned
reflexes. The school of Behaviourism attempted to
explain a man's psychological life along the same
lines. It regarded the brain as a receiving station
for a vast number of impulses reaching it from
various parts of the body, and believed its responses
to these to be as strictly determined as are the
responses of the spinal cord. Thinking, to the
Behaviourist, is really nothing but silent talking, and
is associated with a number of subconscious move-
ments, such as, contractions of the muscles of the
larynx. Thinking, therefore, like all other bodily
activities, is a reaction to various stimuli. This
being so, the Behaviourist dispenses with the concept
of mind, and regards the whole of the psychical life
as being a chain of automatic and conditioned
reflexes.
The analytical school of Freud, which has
also exercised a profound influence on modern
thought, employs as a means of investigation, the
method of introspection. Its fundamental thesis is
that human behaviour and human thought,
determined by the working of the subconsc^
mind. Although the Freudians did not, like
Behaviourists, eliminate reason, they relegated 11
a subsidiary position. Its only function was
rationalize actions which had already been
mined by subconscious factors. Originating as
empirical method for the treatment of certain nervf
disorders, the Freudian teaching gradually develop
into a system of psychology. The Freudian's <j
look was deterministic although he placed
emphasis on this than did the Behaviourist. We \
controlled by our subconscious mind, and if .
contents of the subconscious mind were fully knov
all our actions, feelings and thoughts could,
foretold. Professor McDougall, whose writ1
have also influenced present-day thought,
substituted for a tyranny of the subconscious
tyranny of the instinct. " All the complex
lectual apparatus of the most highly developed
is but the instrument by which these (instinct
impulses seek their satisfaction."
It will be seen therefore that not only phv.
and biology, but also the science which &
particularly with the study of man, psychoid
were at the beginning of this century dominated'
materialism and determinism. According to &
teachings everything in the universe from the fa'll|
of an apple to the writing of Shakespeare's Son'1'
could be accounted for by the working of mechafl1'
laws. Spirit and intelligence had been success^
eliminated from the universe. Suddenly, the Wi>
elaborate structure of thought began to crurtf'
and strange to say, it was the physicists who vV
responsible for this. They deliberately destro)'
the foundations on which so much had been erec'
by declaring that they had previously been mista*
about the nature of matter. Instead of being s.c
and real, matter was something which was infill
attenuated and elusive, so elusive that it could
even be visualized, but could be expressed only'
mathematical formulae. They even went so faf,
to state that the electron behaved as though it ^
possessed of free will. Its behaviour could only,
foretold in terms of probability. What was s
worse for those who had placed so much faith oP
previous findings of physics was the fact that
physicists themselves were beginning to talk ')
idealist philosophers. They were suggesting ^
matter exists only in so far as the mind apprehe
it, thereby implying that mind is primary in
cosmos, and matter only its projection. Profe*-
Planck, the most brilliant of European psych15
was reported to have said, when interviewed
J. W. N. Sullivan, " I regard consciousness
fundamental. I regard matter as derivative '}
consciousness. We cannot get behind consci?:
ness. Everything that we talk about, everytPj
that we postulate as existing, requires consciousne$:
The new discoveries of physics were not
disturbing to the biologists as they might have "
because they had already found that the phys1'
chemical mechanistic theory of life was no 1 of*
MENTAL HEALTH 35
p?ctoie. There was in all organisms an inner drive
? reach an appropriate structure which the lawsot
P ysico-chemistry could not possibly explain. This
l?ner drive was named the " elan vital by
ergson, and a new theory of life was elaborated in
Creative Evolution. The biologists, like the
Fh ^s/.c^sts? were beginning to use the language o
jdealist philosophers. The words uttered by the
Physiologist J. S. Haldane are very similar to those
used by Planck. " The conclusion forced upon me
!n the course of a life devoted to natural science
the universe as it is assumed to be in
Physical science is only an idealized world, while
the real world is a spiritual universe in which
Ptfitual values count for everything. (J- S.
a! ane>. Gifford Lectures, 1927-1928.)
, curious paradox has arisen now. Whilst the
P ysicists, the arch-mechanists of the nineteenth
cntury, have been turning into idealist philosophers,
ud the biologists have followed suit, the majority
? Psychologists still remain entrenched in material-
11n?- Spiritual values have come back into the
diverse, but are still denied to man. According to
reud, all man's religious aspirations are a relic
r. childish fantasies, and of the desire
'dttier-figure. Freud looked forward to s
for a
a future
civilization in which all religious superstitions?and
he considered religion to be only superstition?would
have disappeared, and science reign supreme.
Freud's world-wide fame as a psychotherapist has
lent a fictitious importance to his words, and many
people, ignorant of the history of science and
philosophy, still accept them as the verdict of science.
Freud evidently did not keep in touch with the trend
of modern scientific thought, for there no longer
exists any incompatibility between the views of the
scientist and the man of religion. That belonged to
the last century.
Enough has been said to show that he who looks
for a philosophy or a religion is no longer hampered
by the dictates of science. When I was a boy the
chief difficulties I encountered were the difficulty of
reconciling what I heard in the school chapel with
what I was taught in the laboratories and class-
rooms. Seeing that I was in difficulties, the head-
master presented me with a book which attempted,
with only moderate success, to reconcile science with
religion. Such a work is no longer necessary.
The Scientist is now much more modest, and
realizes how limited is the framework within which
he works. He no -longer asserts that his is the only
path to truth.
