Discipline and Obedience
=========================

:Author: Frank Bodman, M.D., Deputy director, Bristol Child Guidance Clinic
?bedie 'SCUss the vexed questions of discipline,
all havCC' and Punishment is difficult because we
attitud?e ?Ur OWn ?Pini?ns on what is the right
who h l? ac*?Pt- At one extreme are the people
Warns P , that all punishment is harmful and
the oth the executor anci the victim, while at
necessiter a^e those who believe firmly in the
an expiatio pun's^rnent' both as a preventive and
himselfU(^Mi ?f mles that the child makes for
from i_7 1 serve as an introduction. At the stage
especia"ii' ,e child wants to play like other children,
game ?'der ones, and to know how to play the
hirnselfPtSPerly" .In Practice he soon persuades
while i ? ? *s Playing right, though actually,
hirnselfmitc^ng e^ers, he is merely playing by
Plays nn i. Ven when playing a game in a group, he
till the km own anc* everyone can win. It is not
the elem reaches the age of 7 that there appears
each co-operation in group play. Then
^ach eViH tr'es to w*n while keeping to the rules,
which attempts to keep inside the common rule
Quarrel l??ntr?^s ?rouP?"so as not to
properiv"^ you must have rules and then play
y ? Finally at about 11-12 years, an interest
in the rules themselves develops, and the rules
are elaborated, and drawn up to meet every con-
tingency.

Now if these rules of the game are discussed with
the child, we find that up to 4 years of age, no idea
of compulsion seems to occur to him. He follows
his own sweet will. But somewhere about 6 years,
we find that the child regards the rules of the game
as sacred, untouchable. This stage may last for
3-4 years, but somewhere about the 10th year the
child realizes that while the rules of the game must
be kept, they may be altered, provided you can
obtain the consent of the majority. At first, then,
the rule is something external to the child, something
sacred; but as he makes the rule his own, the idea
of mutual consent appears and the rule becomes
part of a free agreement with his equals.

The child of 3-4 is saturated with rules made by
grown-ups, rules of when to get up, when to come
to meals, how to behave at table, when to wash,
when to go to bed. He yields to every suggestion,
for he has blind faith in adult authority. His not
to reason why. Up to 7-8 years of age, the child's
attitude to rules is that they are as much laws as it
is ordained that the sun must shine by day and the
^ePtember^94/~eCtUre ^ven t0 Mental Health Emergency Committee Course for Hostel Workers, Exeter,
moon by night; he can make no distinction between
moral and physical laws. The child feels he must
eat after going for a walk, must go to bed after
supper, must have a bath on Sundays, just as the
wind must blow the clouds, pebbles must sink,
while boats must float. The obligation to speak the
truth, not to steal, to be punctual, are all so many
duties which the child feels very deeply, though they
do not arise spontaneously in his own mind. It is
right to obey the will of the adult, wrong to have
a will of one's own. But because these rules are
imposed from without they do not transform him,
do not alter him. If the adult authority is removed,
he relapses into a self-seeking, self-pleasing being.
So this obedience is a literal obedience. He carries
out the letter of the law, but he cannot grasp its
intention. And this literal observance of the orders
means that the child cannot judge his acts by their
motives, but only whether they fit in with the rules
laid down by his elders.

This obedience, then, is one of constraint and
depends on the one-sided respect of the child for
the grown-up. In the nature of things the child
cannot establish a mutual relationship with a
grown-up, cannot see him as an equal. How, then,
does he free himself from this adult constraint ?
It is by intercourse with his equals, with other
children, that he achieves mutual respect and
co-operation. As he grows older, he finds that the
rules of the games he plays with his fellows may be
changed as a result of free discussion, and the
mutual respect of the other children's views. As this
mutual respect develops, he feels from within himself
the wish to treat others as he would wish to bec
treated. So he frees himself, and becomes to a
greater or lesser degree conscious of himself and his
own values. Blind obedience is gradually replaced
by mutual service. His own need to be respected
by his fellows, to be treated as an equal, balances
the one-sided respect he showed to the grown-up.
When the older child is accustomed to act from the
point of view of those around him, when he tries
to please them, rather than obey, he will judge his
acts by intentions rather than by results. He can
respect the motives of others, he can co-operate.
This co-operation does away with the mystical
feeling of authority, for when a rule depends on free
collective will, obedience is not constrained but
spontaneous.

Here, then, are two moralities?the morality of
constraint depending on the one-sided respect of the
child for the grown-up: this is normal up to the
age of 7-8; and the morality of co-operation
depending on mutual respect between his fellows,
which gradually should replace the first morality and
be active by 11-12.

It may be taken that in large families education
in right and wrong will depend more on the con-
tagion of example among the children than on
constant supervision by the adults. The pressure
of the group tends to outweigh the authority of the
adult. The more the child escapes from the family
conformity, the greater opportunity will he have for
realizing that rules can be changed. In evacuate
this escape is thrust upon him. As he escapes fr?^
the family circle, he frees himself from rules of $
parental authority. He cannot at first respect
authority of the foster-parents, for how can he resp#
someone he does not know ? When he becomes
member of a large group, the communal
inculcates respect for the group rather than ^
master. Suggestion and imitation are all-powerf^
This applies, perhaps, more particularly to boys, &
girls are found more tolerant and more adapta^
to innovations. The more, however, adolescent
are thrown together, the more they will try to free
themselves from direct adult constraint.
If, then, departure from the home, separate11
from the parents, and communal life accelerate th1*'
transition from obligations towards adult authority
to the freedom of mutual co-operation, what afe
the factors that retard this development ? fhj
chief factor of course is the continued and hea^
pressure of the adult. Perhaps this can be ill115'
trated by the common grown-up attitude to
natural clumsiness of the child. This adult reaction
to his unskilfulness plays an enormously importaij
part in the young child's life. At frequent interval^
the small child arouses the anger of those arou^
him by breaking, or spoiling, or dirtying some objec
or another. The small child feels the adult lo^e5
the broken glass, the scratched paint, the dirty
clothes, more than she loves him. The adult care5
mostly about the material results, and in her anger
takes no notice of the intentions of the child, goo?
or bad. If these are the values of the all-wise adul^.
then they are adopted by the young child. ?
parents lose their tempers in proportion to tfrj
amount of damage done, equally will the chi^
regard the disaster in that way. For the youflS
child it is naughtier to make a big hole in your dres5
than a little one, however good your intentions^
and the clumsy younger children feel guilt pr?'
portional to the amount of havoc wreaked, n?
guilt about their intentions. It is again the questio11
of adult constraint. It is an order not to touch
not to handle the breakable objects. They are tabtf-
How, then, are we to free the child from thiJ
constraint in this sphere of clumsiness and untidi'
ness ? We can appeal to his wish to co-operate-
We can draw attention to our own needs, our oWiJ
difficulties, even our own mistakes, and point
the consequences, thus making an atmosphere
mutual help and understanding. It is not possible
to avoid giving the young child (under 8) command5
that it cannot understand, but it relieves the pressure
of adult constraint if those commands can be put $
a co-operative light?" to help mummy "?to pleas6
her parents, to " show his little sister how
Let us consider another problem in which th6
child's natural attitude and the grown-up's differ1
the question of lying. A young child is telling
himself stories all the time. In his world of make'
believe he romances freely. He tends spontaneously
to alter the truth in accordance with his desires. I11
fact the truth is not in him; it is a foreign adul'
notion xv*
eorresn !i 111 ^at one must not lie does not
child fin?H any inner need. Up to 7-8 the
lying f0 tT? Culty *n Pekingto the truth. Without
others h S^e ^nS' with no intent to deceive
exPlan'at distorts the truth. His stories and
n?t what?^S are- exPressions of what he is feeling,
lhe small if- ^lieves. The manner of thinking of
him it ic ^ almost compels him to tell lies. To
makes it natura* and harmless. But the grown-up
order at f not to ?anc* be accepts the adult
cann f e value' an(l classes it as " naughty
the letter? f a^e *n t^le spirit of the command, only
realizes th ? e *aw' ^ *s on^ ^ater ^at the child
?ther c-vru 11 ^oes not Pa^ to tell lies because the
youngest v^i11 cann?t trust him if he does. The
than ste r en believe lying to be a graver sin
criticism 0r clumsiness. They accept without
lhey are ^.^dult order not to lie. Lies are wrong:

swear "Lies are naughty words", like
im u" "You mustn't say them." The
does nntPr? the lie, the worse it is. Intention
" someth C?Unt- ?etween 5-8 a lie is described as
naUghtvtmg ^at *snt true". But it is just as
intention ?i ?la^e an involuntary mistake as to tell an
rule not f r?st^ this literal interpretation of the
Can see th? ^ *s not ^ about 10 that a child
a lie, and al>a statement that is intentionally false is
it is.' g ^hat the more plausible the lie the worse
He has hls time he can pay attention to motives,
children e?rnt.by experience from his fellows that
The vr. cannot be trusted any more.

consider Ung?r children, under 7-8, on the whole
sterner .PUn.'shment just and necessary, and the
the neces t Juster. Under 7, children believe in
y?u don't ^?r Punishment. It is automatic. If
s?me aeo n61 ^ound out and punished by a grown-up,
Puni'v/11* ?r illness will happen to you that
?ccasioned y?U" ^eir disobedience they have
Parents Th ^reach between themselves and their
accePt the ? reparation is necessary, and
reParation piH?'shment and its pain as part of that
ar,d unrei \ T*1 e Punishment may be quite arbitrary
''ed,hefeel v, t0 crime- If a small child has
by taking f. e may justly be punished by a smacking,
^'thholdin t0ys away, by some school task, by
PUnishmem a,treat-. They consider the most severe
older, and r ^a^r.est- But as the child grows
attitu'de t rea . es bis equality with his fellows, his
^lief thauhUn^ment ahers, and he comes to the
ITlent of r ? 0I^y Possible punishment is a punish-
Putting ripfff i!1^011' making good the harm, of
disappeaJ e wrong done. The idea of expiation
Efficient ' Th^ reProach and explanation are
should ev ? OI?^y suffering -the wrong doer
s?lidaritv ueflence is a result of his breach of the
??nsequen Ween bis equals. He should realize the
injured. t>T the disapproval of the group he has
^ch Duni ^ Punishment should fit the crime,
that his art sb?uld make the transgressor feel
not co-one IO" Was wrong in the sense that he was
?f this ide raVve- At one stage in the development
*n eVe for L re

is an insistence on sheer equality,
an eye, irrespective of intention. But the
older child, the adolescent, can take into account
intention, and temper justice with mercy.
This sense of justice is not inculcated by adults;
it grows within the child as he learns to respect his
fellows and feels at one with them. So that the
idea of justice overcomes the authority of the
grown-up. Up to 6-7 the child, still impressed by
the all-wise, morally perfect adult, believes it right
to tell tales about other children to grown-ups; but
after 8 it is not right to tell the grown-ups ; his
loyalty is owed to his equals, and it is even sporting
to tell a false tale to shield a comrade. This sense .
of what is fair and what.is unfair is very important
to the child. Up to 8, the only unfairness is to
break rules: the authority of the grown-up is more
important than fairness. But from 8-11, the
important thing is that everything should be equal,
both treats and punishments, rewards and sanctions.
Authoritative rulings are no longer accepted with
docility, and protests are made against unequal
share-outs.

It is at this stage that we have a crisis. Just as
the child discovers that after all his parent does not
know everything, and is not omniscient, so a parallel
crisis is apt to occur here. The child discovers that
the parent is not perfectly just, that he can be unfair,
can make mistakes. The child can no longer trust
in an automatic justice. If he feels unjustly treated,
he will begin to revolt against the adult authority.
If the adult continues in unfair treatment, the revolt
becomes chronic and sustained: he rebels against
all authority all his life, against teachers, foremen
and officers.

This is not to condemn the adult authority. It
has its proper place in the development of the child.
Without it the child becomes a self-pleasing, self-
seeking gangster. There is no better example than
the Wolf Children in the U.S.S.R. after the Revolu-
tion. The period of adult constraint is necessary
for the security of the child. But it is important
that as the child develops, this adult authority should
not be prolonged, or we prevent him from growing
up, and his personality from developing. If a child
is to achieve a desire for work, a habit of" making
efforts, we must take into account and respect his
interests. Work must enlist his initiative and his
spontaneous activity. If the child is interested in
what he does, he is capable of making efforts to the
limits of physical endurance. We may feel his
interests are not what we approve, but we cannot
impose our interests; we have to accept his.

Justice can only at first develop between children;
then, as the child becomes adolescent, between the
adolescent and the grown-up. But by example and
practice of reciprocity the adult can influence the
child. True' discipline is the discipline that the
children themselves have willed and consented to.
Not all children may have the capacity to reach this
level of development. Some of them are born with
limitations that will keep them socially retarded.
These will always need a buttress of adult authority,
but for the rest we must provide the conditions in
which a true democracy may develop.
