Agricultural Hostels for Defectives 
====================================

Contributed by the Central Association for Mental Welfare
Under war conditions, fffsh that, given
arisen for demonstrating the pnnPunder-
sound training, a suitable envir?n;iTmm of control,
standing supervision with the min intelligence
individuals who are handicapped y citizens
0r emotional instability can becom ering serious
as those who are rehabilitated afte
Physical disablement. wtives have been
For a number of years mate defecti Certified
sent out daily from certain of th? J^es these
Institutions to work on farms, an ate Hostels;
working patients are housed m si P voluntary
^jere are also a few small indep Voluntary
condition ?acf
steady employment throughou respon-
fwmers are often unwilling to accept the
ability for a labourer who is handicapped
The great shortage of agricultural workers due to
the urgent needs of the present time, encouraged the
C.A.M.W., with the full support of the Board of
Control and of the Ministry of Agriculture, to
approach in the spring of 1941, a selected number of
War Agricultural Committees asking them to
consider the possibility of utilizing the labour of
trained defectives. In November 1941 after pro-
tracted negotiations and inevitable delays, the first
Hostel was opened in Gloucestershire. In the spring
of 1942 a second one was opened in the same county
and a third in Hampshire (on the initiative of the
County Mental Deficiency Committee). A fourth
Hostel, in Shropshire, followed, and the establish-
ment of a fifth is under consideration at the time of
writing.
In Gloucestershire the Hostels are adapted
country houses modernized by the addition of
shower baths, electric light, etc. In Hampshire and
Shropshire the men are housed in buildings of the
50
MENTAL HEALTH
type erected all over the country for agricultural
workers employed by War Agricultural Committees,
consisting of a large dormitory with double tier
bfunk beds, a combined day and dining room,
generous bathing facilities with shower and slipper
baths, a flat for the Warden and his wife, and
accommodation for other staff.
The two Gloucestershire Hostels accommodate
respectively 38 and 39 men, whilst in the Hampshire
Hostel there are 44 and in Shropshire 28. The men
come from 24 Institutions. The Board of Control
have not insisted on the Hostels being classified as
Certified Institutions but, as an emergency measure,
they have permitted the men to go " On Licence "
to the Wardens. This concession has been a great
help in freeing the enterprise from irksome technical
complications.
The greatest care is taken in selecting candidates
for admission. Medical Superintendents put for-
ward applications with full reports on physique,
capability of adapting to regular working conditions,
general behaviour, etc., and in addition, whenever
possible, every candidate is interviewed by a member
of the C.A.M.W. staff. It has been suggested that
the standards laid down for admission are unneces-
sarily high, but it must be remembered that in an
experiment of this nature, dependent for its success
not only on the defectives' capacity for employment
but also on their capacity to fit into village life,
special precautions have to be taken.
Adequate outfit is essential, for the work is heavy,
and it has been agreed that half the cost (though in
no case must this refund exceed ?10) shall be paid
back gradually to the Authority out of the men's
wages.
The men are all directly employed by the War
Agricultural Committee of the area and continuous
employment is guaranteed. They receive not less
than ?2 10s. a week (the present minimum fixed by
the Ministry of Agriculture for new entrants into
the industry for the first two months). A consider-
able number are now earning ?3; for others, not up
to the standard, a permit has to be obtained for
employment at the ?2 10s. rate. (In regard to this
point it must be borne in mind that although the
men are admittedly industrious workers, they do
need rather more supervision than the normal
labourer and they cannot be switched on to any and
every job, such as tractor-driving.) Out of each
man's weekly wage, deductions are made for board
and lodging (21s. to 25s.); cost of initial outfit, 4s.
(for approximately one year); laundry, games and
administration, 4s. 6d.; National Insurance Is. 3|d.
He receives 10s. as pocket money and the balance is
banked in the Post Office Savings account opened
in his name, or, if he prefers to do so, he may
contribute it to the National Savings Group
organized by the Hostel Warden.
The men are employed on general farm work,
including threshing and harvesting, and?in some
cases?milking. In the winter they work chiefly on
land reclamation, ditching and draining, tree felling,
etc. Generally they are organized in gangs and
taken to and from their work in lorries, but so#
times they are allocated in ones and twos to individj!"
farmers. In either case their wages are paid by'!'
War Agricultural Committee of the area concert^
Each Hostel is provided by the Ministry win1'
supply of bicycles for use when working at a distal
For the unskilled work on which they are employ
the men have undoubtedly proved their value. ?
farmer testified that with their help he had '' the K
threshing he had ever had". In an article
The Farmers' Weekly on the use of volunteer
labour in Gloucestershire," the following stated
is made:
"Probably the best casual workers of all
proved to be mental defectives?or at least men al.
boys slightly below the normal mental standard,
one of the committee's farms, 20 such men plon^
1\ acres of potatoes in 1 hour 50 minutes?and
the job properly. . . . They have been found
and willing workers, thoroughly enjoying the
and the life which the land provides them.''''
All the Hostels have gardens and in one of
the War Agricultural Committee has authorial
the employment of a defective for garden Wo1
(under direction), who is paid in the same way .
those who are working outside. Rabbits, hens
pigs are gradually being added to each menage ^
these quickly become a new source of interest. ,,
The notable success of this experiment is large
due to four factors;
(1) The thoroughness of the training given in $
Institutions from which the men come.
(2) The care with which candidates for ad miss'0
are selected. ,
(3) The goodwill and assistance of the ^
Agricultural Committee officials. w
(4) The skilled and unselfish service given by ttl1
Hostels' staffs.
Of this last factor, too much cannot be said. '!
the Wardens, their wives, and the other mein^
of their staffs, must be attributed in no small deg*e,
the excellent spirit shown by the men, and th6?
ready response to the call for overtime
(involving for the Hostel the necessity of provid'11:
hot meals at all sorts of hours). The post of War^
is, from every point of view, an exceptionally difficll i
one. The responsibility is great, and there is nee
for continual unobtrusive watchfulness. Personal
problems have to be wisely dealt with, aggriev^
farmers have to be pacified, the men's individ^
capabilities have to be assessed and their limitati^,
noted?excursions and amusements have to \
organized, educational classes arranged and go?j
contacts with the local inhabitants (who have in ^
cases shown the utmost kindliness) created ai>
maintained.
In the process of adjustment to conditions 5
unlike those of a large Institution, some of the n^
have, of course, failed. A few have found ^
work too physically strenuous; others have lack^!
enough intelligence to keep pace with the " gang
some have proved themselves unequal to the test
MENTAL HEALTH 51
unaccustomed freedom. But the Pr?P majority
such failures is only a small one, and under-
?f the men have readily responded to t^e
standing treatment they have received , sur_
atmosphere of happiness and security
rounds them. f war
It needed some courage and faith embark
Agricultural Committee first concerne , for
on such a pioneer venture, and had it n -Uee
the patience and goodwill shown by thi ^ me
-and subsequently by others-the whole scheme
.0 "ft rtsSS
of Social Service?are experiencing sta g ^
'^s, but on the whole, we have been fo, each
addition to Warden and Assistant ? t nts' (daily
Hostel has a cook and one or two assi
or resident) or/and one or two house boy
Licence or under Guardianship). Hostels?
. The spirit of these?as of other wartime , the
ls one of joint effort in a common cause, -
men are spurred to put forth their hardest ertorts
in order not to fall below the standard of achieve-
ment set. At times, a man will complain: "Some,
of them don't see that it's up to them to do their
best." Many of them take a great deal of pride
in their appearance and at the present time they are
very eager to acquire the Agricultural green " battle-
dress" which they like to sport when going out;
they also wear with immense satisfaction a special
blue and gold enamel badge with which, at their own
request, the C.A.M.W. has supplied them, bearing
the words " War Agricultural Service
These Hostels have come into being to meet the
contingencies of War. But has not experience shown
that they have a part to play in the Post-War World ?
Cannot one envisage them not only as a means of
dealing with defectives capable of employment in
agriculture, in industry or in domestic work, but
also for meeting the needs of other types of handi-
capped members of the community?the psycho-
neurotic and the unstable, for example?who, if
placed in the right conditions with suitable work and
a background of an orderly controlled life, can be
helped to overcome their disabilities and to make
their contribution to the community.
