Mental Health Emergency Committee
===================================

News and Notes

Children under Five. The work of the Sub-committee on Children under Five is
rapidly developing and requests for loan workers to help the staffs of the new War
Nurseries in establishing them on a sound educational basis are steadily coming in,-
neeessitating the appointment of further full-time or part-time workers to assist Miss
Ruth Thomas (C.A.M.W. Educational Psychologist) in these visits. Nurseries in the
following areas have already been visited: Bedford, Berkshire, Darlington, Herts,
Kingston-on-Thames, Lees, London (Islington and St. Pancras), Redditch, Tottenham
Stockton-on-Tees. It would appear, from the experience so far gained, that the
majority of Nurseries are urgently in need of educational equipment and play material,
and that the staff welcome information as to the type of material which is suitable
and suggestions on the right way of using it. A list of recommended equipment
has been prepared and is available on application.

Training Courses. A Week-end Course for Welfare Workers employed by Local
Authorities in Reception Areas is being held in London from February 13th to 16th.
f* is hoped that the Course will help such workers to meet the many problems confront-
lng them in dealing with cases of mental disorder, mental subnormality and mental
deficiency which they find in the course of their work amongst evacuees, or in Rest
Centres and Air Raid Shelters.

A second Course for Hostel Workers is to be held at Bingley in April.
Hostels for Mentally Subnormal " Difficult " Children. The problems created
ln Hostels for Difficult Children by the presence of children who, by reason of mental
snbnormality, are found to need different methods of treatment and a much longer
Period for adaptation, have been repeatedly brought to the attention of the Committee
bY its Regional Representatives and by other workers concerned.

It would seem that one possible solution of the problem might be the allocation
?f certain Hostels in each Region for this group of children, and the possibility
vyas discussed at an exploratory Conference called by the Committee at which
representatives of the Ministry of Health and of the Board of Education were present
ln a consultative capacity. The members of the Conference were generally in favour
?f the suggestion, provided that care was taken to ensure that such special Hostels
should only be placed in areas in which local schools were large enough to enable
them to absorb a number of " dull " children and which could offer facilities for
Providing them with the special type of education required. It was further suggested
that such a Hostel should not accmmodate more than 15 children. The necessity
?f ensuring that before transfer to a Special Hostel, a child should be examined
hy an expert in order that his degree of intelligence might be accurately ascertained,
was emphasized by all the members of the Conference.

A further consideration brought to the notice of the Conference was that the
?r?up under discussion would inevitably include some children who were certifiably
mentally defective, within the meaning of the 1921 Education Act (Part V), and to
meet the needs of this group it was proposed that the Mental Health Emergency
Committee should endeavour to ascertain whether Education Authorities with
evacuated Special School Parties in residential schools or camps had vacancies,
would be willing to allot to feeble-minded children from other areas, if this informa-
tion were then made known to Hostels and Billeting Officers, it was thought that
there would be a greater readiness to draw the attention of the Education Authority
in the Reception Area concerned to the need for examination in the case of a child
in a Hostel who appeared to be mentally defective.

Pamphlet on Hostels for Difficult Children. The Committee has recently
published a small pamphlet on Hostels for Difficult Children, containing suggestions
on methods of selection, classification, re-billeting, educational facilities, staffing,
etc. Copies of the pamphlet may be obtained from the Hon. Secretary, 24 Bucking-
ham Palace Road, S.W.I, on application.

Central Association for Mental Welfare
----------------------------------------

Hostel for Agricultural Workers. This Hostel?at Hatherley Court, Down
Hatherley, Gloucestershire?was opened in November 1941, and at the time of
writing, 35 youths on Licence from Certified Institutions, are in residence.
Excellent reports of their behaviour and capacity have been received from the
Gloucestershire War Agricultural Committee which is responsible for their work,
and farmers to whom they have been allocated speak highly of them, finding that
they compare very favourably with normal workers from other Hostels opened by the
Committee. The boys themselves are exceedingly happy and fit, and are quite
content with the arrangements made. Their wages vary between 42s. and 53s. 6d.
weekly; 25s. is paid direct to the C.A.M.W. for board, and Is. 6d. for laundry;
10s. may be kept for pocket money and the balance is then banked in the boy's
name, or put into National Savings.

So successful has been this initial experiment that the War Agricultural Com-
mittee has asked the Association to be responsible for a second Hostel run on similar
lines, in the same district, and it is hoped that this may be opened at the end of
March in premises which are being acquired by the Committee.

Note.?Gifts of " football shorts " and shirts, would be gratefully received
for the Hostels, to enable football teams to be organized.

Hostel for Industrial Workers. The Council is hoping to initiate a further
development in this work by opening a Hostel for youths on Licence from Certified
Institutions, who are not robust enough for heavy farm work but would be likely to
make efficient workers in some industrial occupation not involving exceptional strain
and pressure. This would exclude any form of " Munitions ", but it is envisaged
that there are a number of factories still engaged on some form of civilian production
which have difficulty in securing labour.

The Ministry of Labour and National Service, with whom negotiations are in
Progress, welcome the scheme, and it is thought that it will be particularly acceptable
!? Certified Institutions at the present time owing to the difficulty of providing
industrial occupation which arises from the shortage of raw material.

Social Case Work Department. An analysis of the cases dealt with during
941 shows a total of 1,871, made up as follows :
General (including Mental Health Emergency Cases) .. 1,170
Licence and Guardianship .. .. . . .. .. 269
Epileptics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 276
Joint Register of Foster-Homes .. .. .. .. 156

These cases were referred by Local Authorities, Societies of various kinds, hospitals,
Schools, psychiatric social workers, relatives and friends,etc., and 111 were received
.lrect from doctors. They fall, roughly, into the following types : Mentally Defec-
tlVe> 596 ; Mentally Disordered, 25 ; Senile, 25; unbalanced and borderline (in-
c uding psychoneurotics) and psychopathic personalities, 524.

It is, perhaps, of interest to record that the number of cases received from
^dical practitioners is continually increasing. In other cases, efforts are always
rfiade to obtain a medical report before further action is taken or advice given
except in the cases of obvious low-grade defectives and of unstable or unbalanced
applicants who cannot at the moment be induced to consult a psychiatrist. In regard
to this group, the policy of the Department is to befriend the family in the hope
?f effecting such easement of the situation as is possible until the patient can be
Persuaded to seek the expert medical aid which is his chief need.

The total number of cases dealt with has more than doubled in the last twelve
jrionths, and machinery has been devised to ensure that there is close co-operation
etween the various workers concerned. The body of information as to schools,
0rnes, foster-parents, etc., which has been collectively acquired, is now a considerable
?ne, and constructive advice and suggestions can be given on a wide variety of
Mental Health " problems.

The Department works under a Committee whose members are engaged in
yarious forms of social administration and have expert knowledge of many divergent
s?cial problems.

Educational Psychologists. To meet the increasing demand for the Association's
service of Educational Psychologists, the Council has appointed, as from March 1st,
42, a second full-time psychologist (Miss N. Gibbs, M.A.) who holds one of the
ellowships awarded by the C.A.M.W. and the Child Guidance Council under the
J0lnt scheme for providing psychologists with clinical experience. A psychologist
ls a^So being engaged, on a temporary basis, to work in Grimsby for three months,
under the Local Education Authority.

The Council has agreed to continue to contribute towards the provision of
ellowships under the joint scheme, and hopes to be able to increase its contribution
to meet the increasing demand for psychologists with educational and child guidance .
experience.

Middlesex Home Teaching Scheme. It is with much regret that the Association
has to record the ending of the Home Teaching Scheme which it has carried on for
the Middlesex Mental Deficiency Committee during the past 12 years.

In 1941, the staff of Home Teachers (reduced to three, to meet the exigencies
of war conditions), visited at regular intervals 160 to 170 children excluded from
school by reason of mental defect and unable to attend Occupation Centres, all of
which were closed down in September 1939. A successful experiment had also
been carried on in Group Teaching, and of the 170 children on the register, 70 were
being taught in groups.

It is therefore particularly disappointing that, for reasons of economy, the
Middlesex County Council have brought this work to an end, despite urgent represen-
tations as to its value made both by the C.A.M.W. Council and by the parents
themselves, on behalf of children for whom the periodical visits of " their teacher "
have been for so long the high light of uneventful and isolated lives.

Pamphlet on Mental Deficiency Acts. The Association's pamphlet briefly setting
out the chief provisions of these Acts, and the procedure enacted by them, has been
re-printed, with a supplement on the position of defectives in regard to certain
emergency regulations concerning Registration, fire-watching, etc. The pamphlet
can be obtained from the Offices of the Association, 24 Buckingham Palace
Road, London, price 3d. post free.

Child Guidance Council
-----------------------

The Council finds itself in a position to award a third Fellowship in Psychiatry
of the value of ?150 for one year half-time work. The successful candidate will be
trained at the Tavistock Clinic.

The Salford Education Committee Child Guidance Clinic which is classified as
a Group I Clinic, is now functioning with the following staff: Dr. Muriel Hughes
(Psychiatrist), Miss E. A. Bonniface (Educational Psychologist) and Miss B. Joseph
(Psychiatric Social Worker). The address of the new clinic in 49 The Crescent,
Salford 5. The social worker reports that a good start has been made and excellent
co-operation obtained.

The new Education Committee Clinic at Cambridge, which is not under medical
direction, has been classified in Group lib. The Psychologist is Mr. H. Bannister,
Ph.D., and the Psychiatric Social Worker, Miss D. Hutchinson. The clinic is housed
at the Municipal Health Centre, Coleridge Road, Cambridge.

Reigate Child Guidance Clinic has just issued a report on its second year of
work. In February 1941 the Clinic became part of the general School Medical
Services of the Borough, a consummation on which the clinic staff is to be congratu-
lated. The clinic is concerned with psychological work in two types of evacuation
areas and the Report is a valuable record of wartime problems.

Though the rush of work diminished in the second year of war, certain difficulties
^creased, e.g. decrease in number of billets for various reasons making it impossible
to deal with minor problems through a change of billet. Discharged cases had
to change billets for various unavoidable causes and in some instances breakdown
occurred again. The second winter of billeting proved more of a strain than the
first-?many wives were left to cope with evacuated children single-handed and the
second black-out often proved the last straw. In the summer, out-of-door recreation
had been possible.

The clinic staff has inaugurated a new social service?the after-care of evacuees
leaving their school group. Intelligence and performance tests have been helpful
as a guide to a child's future?whether training should be undertaken, or paid employ-
ment. An endeavour has been made to keep children in the evacuation area in
work of a suitable nature.

Preventive Work. In pursuance of its policy of stressing the need for prevention
?f behaviour problems, the Council has sought and obtained representation on the
Mothercraft Training Sub-committee of the National Association of Maternity and
Child Welfare Centres. Dr. Grace Calver had kindly consented to serve on this
Committee and also represented the Council at a Conference called by the National
Baby Welfare Council to discuss a new British Maternity and Child Welfare film. Dr.
Calver suggested that the film might begin with the ante-natal period and the mother's
n?ht emotional attitude towards both childbirth itself and the child in particular.
Tl-i ? .

ine importance of breast-feeding in relation to good emotional development was
stressed because, in actual fact, from the purely physical point of view, artificial
feeding can very well be substituted for breast-feeding, though breast-feeding ensures
the best foundation for the child's adaptation to life, and to the overcoming of early
anxieties. On these in turn depend future love relationships and social relationships
general.

The Conference expressed its gratitude for this contribution and the Chairman,
ln particular, said how extremely pleased they were to be given such a definite
explanation of psychological needs as the background of physical and mental health.

Hostel School for Evacuated Boys?A Scottish Experiment
--------------------------------------------------------

A Hostel School for boys has been instituted in Peebleshire under the Warden-
ship of Mr. W. David Wills to meet the needs of the group of wild, neglected and
undisciplined boys who seem to be unbilletable.

Members of the Society of Friends took the initiative in establishing the Hostel;
Provision for staff and for school equipment was made by the Education Authority
and the Peebleshire County Council, sanction being given by the Department of
health; while private subscriptions provided the salary of the Warden and running
expenses for a year. The Hostel was opened in July 1940 and 38 boys received.
The boys' histories were studied and showed a high incidence of truancy, stealing,
disciplinary problems and police records, while each boy's progress and idiosyn-
crasies were followed at regular staff meetings. The resulting treatment soon showed
the establishment of a sense of security and affection which came as an entirely new
experience to many of the boys.

Consciously, the community life aimed at showing the boys, in a practical way,
the need of discipline in the framework of an ordered society. Their response later
led to the institution of a regular house meeting, which opened for discussion all
the activities of the Hostel including practical administration, and which is attended
by everyone, including the domestic staff.

School curriculum was difficult as age groups and types of boys varied widely,
while free time has not been overmuch organized but aimed to give opportunity
for free expression. During the experimental year these children gained a sense of
inner security and happiness previously denied them and this feeling of well-being
has become part of the school, while there is considerable lessening of the constant
fighting and quarrelling and other symptoms of instability and unhappiness which
were evident in the early days.

The National Council for Mental Hygiene
----------------------------------------

Mental Health Lecture Course. The Council is holding a course of eight lectures
for students and also the general public on Fridays at 8 p.m. at University College
of the South West, Exeter. The first meeting took place on January 23rd and was
presided'over by the Principal of the College. There was a large attendance and a
keen discussion during which the lecturer, Major J. A. Hadfield, R.A.M.C., answered
a number of questions. The subjects being discussed deal with the developmental
stages of childhood and adolescence, mental health and the war, and an explanation
of the psychological theories of Freud, Jung and Adler. The speakers include
Dr. Culver Barker, Major R. F. Barbour, Dr. H. Crichton-Miller, Major A. McLeod
Fraser, Major Alan Maberly, Dr. H. C. Squires, and Major Geoffrey Thompson.

The course will end on March 13th. Full particulars may be obtained on application
to the Secretary of the National Council for Mental Hygiene.

Lectures for Civil Defence personnel. A series of eight lectures on nervous
manifestations under air raid conditions was given in December and January on
behalf of the Council by Major Wyndham Pearce, Northern Command Specialist
in Psychological Medicine, to members of the Leeds Civil Defence Casualty Service
and also to medical personnel. The audiences were composed of both men and women
whole-time and part-time Civil Defence workers employed in the City's various
First Aid Depots.

Similar lectures have been held or are being arranged in other parts of the country,
including Lancashire, Lincolnshire, Cheshire, Oxfordshire, Nottinghamshire (where
it is also hoped to arrange short courses for Rest Centre workers). A lecture on
" Nervous reactions in War-time " was given by Dr. H. Crichton-Miller on January
7th in a special course arranged by the Royal College of Nursing for those working
in the River Emergency Service, shelters, and first aid posts.

Early Treatment Facilities. The Council's Joint Committee of the Standing
Committees has given attention to the question of extending early treatment facilities
for both children and adults and the need for placing this important subject in the
forefront of post-war plans in relation to mental health. With the approval of the
Executive Committee a recommendation urging that every Voluntary and Municipal
General Hospital should itself or in conjunction with other agencies provide Clinics
for cases of nervous disorders and for Child Guidance has been sent to the Medical
Planning Committees of the British Medical Association and the Royal' Medico-
Psychological Association, to the British Hospitals Association, to the Committee
Post-War Legislation of the Central Association for Mental Welfare, and also to
ospitals with Medical Schools throughout the country. The Joint Committee has
a!S0 stressed the need for extending the number of hospitals for functional nervous
disorders in view of the extremely limited facilities in this direction which are at
Present available.

New Occupation Centre, Slough
------------------------------

It is encouraging to record that the Buckingham Voluntary Association for the
afe of the Mentally Defective has, despite the difficulties of the times, realized the
urgent neecl of providing for its defective children excluded from ordinary elementary
^nd Special Schools, by establishing an Occupation Centre in the busy town of Slough,
?r which it is receiving a grant from the County Council.

The Centre (opened on February 9th) is a full-time one, and when fully organized,
to 18 children will be in regular attendance. If necessary, provision may be made
or a still larger number. A trained Supervisor has been appointed, and provision
as been made for the appointment of an Assistant Supervisor and Guide. Cheap
travelling facilities have been granted by the London Passenger Transport Board.
ls hoped later to provide a mid-day meal, and arrangements are being made with
Milk Marketing Board for the supply of milk under the " Milk in Schools "
Scheme.

Edinburgh's Provision for M.D. Children
-----------------------------------------

It is encouraging to record that despite the difficult conditions described in a note
?n Scottish Special Schools, in our last issue, educational facilities for mentally
etective children in Edinburgh now approximate to normal standards. The Special
ehools are functioning as in pre-war days and adequately meet the needs of the
nildren left in the city, and of the returning evacuees.

During the early period of the war, the premises used for an Occupation Centre
0r imbecile children were commandeered, and when the Special Schools re-opened
111 April 1940, provision was made for these children in three of such Schools and
attendance was made compulsory. As, however, ascertainment steadily proceeded
and more children were referred for special school education, new arrangements
ecame necessary and a house was recently acquired to serve as an Occupation Centre
or between 80 and 90 children. The responsibility for the Centre is divided between
* e Public Health Committee who finance it, and the Education Committee who
SuPPly the staff and arrange transport, dinners, etc.

Visit of Canadian Investigators
--------------------------------

By arrangement with the Ministry of Health, three investigators from the
Canadian National Committee for Mental Hygiene recently spent some weeks in this
country engaged in surveying the provision made for children from bombed areas
and other mental health activities arising out of war conditions.

The'delegation consisted of Dr. C. M. Hincks, Director of the National Com-
mittee, Dr. William E. Blatz, Director of the Institute for Child Study and Professor
of Psychology, University of Toronto, and Dr. Stuart K. Jaffary, Director of the
School for Social Work, Toronto.

Mrs. Montagu Norman (Chairman of the Mental Health Emergency
Committee) and Miss Evelyn Fox had the opportunity of discussing with
Dr. Hincks and his colleagues the serious position arising out of the shortage of
trained Mental Health workers at the present time, and it is very much hoped that
by the loan of such workers Canada may be able to offer substantial help.

Mental Health Course, 1942-3
-----------------------------

An advertisement of the Mental Health Course appears in this Journal, and it is
hoped that suitable candidates will be encouraged to consider entering the training
course which begins in September 1942. The details of the course are set out in the
advertisement.

In this war, as in the last, the demand for psychiatric social workers has again
become manifest and, in fact, demand now threatens to exceed supply. The normal
channels of work are expanding as new child guidance clinics continue to be opened
both in evacuation and reception areas. E.M.S. Psychiatric Hospitals are recognizing
that such workers are a necessary addition to their staffs, workers have been appointed
to special positions in the W.R.N.S., and, what is perhaps the greatest expansion of
all, the Ministry of Health has sanctioned the appointment of psychiatric social
workers in reception areas to help and advise with the difficult evacuated children.
At the present time there are twenty of these last appointments with the possibility
that they will continue to increase as the value of the work becomes more and more
appreciated. In addition the Mental Health Emergency Committee has appointed
four psychiatric social workers as its Regional Representatives in certain of the
Civil Defence Regions together with a Regional Worker, who also has taken the
psychiatric training, in each case. It is expected that more of these appointments
will be made.

An Education Authority's Welfare Officer
----------------------------------------

We have received an interesting account of the work of a Woman Welfare
Officer (holding the Mental Health Course Certificate) appointed by a County
Education Authority?not to deal with special problems created by war conditions,
but as a permanent member of the staff.

The greater part of her work is concerned with children committed to the care
of the County Council under the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933. She assists
ln t^le preliminary enquiries and when a child is taken into care it is her duty to find
a suitable foster-home and to supervise afterwards, in co-operation with the Health
lsitor. Sometimes she attends the Juvenile Courts.

The most difficult of the cases with which she deals are t'hose of girls deemed by
the court to be in moral danger and for this reason committed to the Council's care.
Most of these girls are pregnant and the difficulty of finding suitable homes is acute,
n trying to solve the problems they present, the worker reports that " everything she
as ever learned of Mental Health and Psychiatry is useful ".

Other duties which are assigned to the Welfare Officer, including the visiting of
ponies for Maladjusted Children, the taking of case histories of children recommended
0r treatment of th'is kind, and the making of any special enquiries in connection with,
e-?- children who are deaf or mentally defective, or with some specific occupation
which a child may desire to enter.

We feel that this experiment is a valuable one, holding considerable possibilities,
and that its extension to other areas would constitute a real step forward in social
organization.

Institute for Scientific Treatment of Delinquency
--------------------------------------------------

It is interesting to learn that the LTniversity Extension Courses of lectures arranged
J the Institute are being well attended, despite the fact that the lectures have to be
?!ven on Sundays. Last term, the course on Criminal Law (Sunday mornings) was
attended by 30 to 35 students, and the course on Social Psychology (Sunday afternoons)
y between 50 and 60. Twelve lectures on the Psychology of Delinquency are being
S^en during the present term.

The Broadcast Appeal on behalf of the Institute given by Mr. Donald McCullough
?n December 7th resulted in the gratifying total of ?1,706, so that anxiety about the
immediate future hitherto so acute has been delayed and a drive is being made
0r new members.

The Institute's Annual Report for 1940, just issued, gives a record of work
j*CCornplished under the most difficult conditions and despite serious damage sustained
y enemy action necessitating a move to new premises.

Enquiries in regard to its work will be welcomed by the Institute whose address is:
^ Manchester Street, London, W.l.

The \\ar an(| pSyChosis
In a letter received from Dr. L. J. Bendit, he expresses the opinion that as a result
? the war, the number of cases of psychosis has increased, especially in the case of
eniales, by 25 per cent, to 30 per cent. He does not give detailed figures and controls,
and his opinion is not shared by many authorities who do. For example, in the
lscussion on war strain at the Tavistock Clinic (1940), it was stated that out of
cases admitted as psychotics during the London blitz, only in 9 was there any trace
0 effects of air raids, while in a general practice in North London, about 5 per cent.
developed mild anxiety which cleared quickly. Stalker (1940) quoted 7 acute
breakdowns, but all these occurred in previously unstable persons.
Twenty-one persons out of 179 psychoneurotics admitted the effects of sirens;
most of these were women over 60 (Bodman, 1941).

It is probably true, as Dr. Bendit says, that war conditions " toppled over "
patients who were previously disposed to mental breakdown. Thus Brown (1941)
states that psychoses only develops where there has been some previous abnormality
or predisposing conflict which leaves the patient emotionally insecure. Some
psychoses, especially depressions, may develop in persons who would not have
developed a psychosis but for the bombing. Psychotic incidents may be precipitated
by bombing, especially senile dementia.

On the other hand Harris (1941) remarks that out of 46 cases in a series of 300
consecutive admissions to a mental hospital supposed to be due to air raids, in only
4 were these regarded as causative, and in 6 as contributory. Again, in only 23 out
of 435 cases were air raids in any way causative.

Admissions to one mental hospital increased from about 350 to 435, but these
were mostly senile dements who could no longer be looked after at home, and it is
noteworthy that the socially unfit tend to gravitate towards institutions during
wartime.

On the other hand, in another mental hospital the admissions for 1940 (354)
were the lowest for five years, and in only 17 men and 14 women did war seem to
have any aetiological significance, and of these 21 gave a history of previous breakdown
or strong family taint (Hemphill, 1941).

REFERENCES
------------

Bodman, F. " Reactions to Air Raid Warnings." Lancet, August 10th, 1940.
Brown, F. " Civilian Psychiatric Air Raid Casualties." Lancet, May 31st, 1941.
Harris, A. " Psychiatric Reactions of Civilians in Wartime." Lancet, August 9th, 1941.
Hemphill, R. E. "The Influence of the War on Mental Disease." J. Ment. Sc., April 1941,
Vol. LXXXVII, 367, p. 170.
Stalker, H. " Panic States in Civilians." B.M.J., June 1st, 1940.
Tavistock Clinic. " War Strain." Lancet, December 28th, 1940.
