Behaviour in Relation to War Conditions a Preliminary Enquiry
==============================================================

the summer and autumn of 1939, the prophets
nad a great time. We learnt then what we were to
xPect. Our large cities would be destroyed by air
ornbardments. Whole sections of the population
would be wiped out by poison gas, and civilization,
we knew it, was bound to disappear. Among
ne minor prophets were those who were able to
oretell the effect of totalitarian war upon the nervous
cms of both young and old, and sad and dis-
paraging was the tale. Of course many things
_i!? . have happened that did not. But as it turned
ut, it was not always wise to draw deductions from
ntortunate instances of nervous disorders in the
rmmai stages of the last war and in the years that
followed it. it is difficult enough to assign with
: Cu?acy the roles of cause and effect to phenomena
the lives of individuals even after close and
in?rate scrutiny. To attempt this with groups ol
widuals is often more difficult still.
l reasoned attempts should be made, and I have
asked to describe a small investigation carried
t tinder the auspices of the Mental Health
l94irgenCy Committee durin? the latter
?n November 7th, 1940, the Executive Committee
of the National Council for Mental Hygiene
(the body that convened the Mental Health
Emergency Committee and which remains one of
its constituent elements), passed a resolution
recommending that the Mental Health Emergency
Committee (to be hereinafter termed, for short, the
M.H.E.C.) should nominate a small sub-committee
with a view to collecting and ultimately collating
data as to child behaviour in relation to war con-
ditions and the subsequent effect of these conditions.
The M.H.E.C. accepted the proposal and in March,
1941, appointed a Sub-Committee to report on the
matter.
The Sub-Committee recognized that an enquiry of
this kind, to be of any value, must not only be
extensive but must also be carried out in a manner
that would satisfy and meet enlightened criticism.
It was, moreover, unlikely that the M.H.E.C. could,
unaided, carry out such an enquiry. It had already
wide and extending commitments and its staff was
fully occupied in attending to these. In order,
however, to obtain financial and other assistance,
it would be necessary to demonstrate that the
results of the enquiry would justify the expenditure
of time and money involved.
36 MENTAL HEALTH
The Sub-Committee therefore decided:
(1) That a preliminary enquiry into the " Behaviour
of Children and Adults under War Con-
ditions " should be attempted.
(2) That from a number of selected sources par-
ticulars of not more than 400 cases of abnor-
mal behaviour should be examined.
(3) That the results of this preliminary enquiry
should be submitted to the main Committee
together with any recommendations that
might be agreed upon.
It was then arranged to send a questionnaire with
a covering letter to about thirty possible sources of
information. The questionnaire was a printed
foolscap sheet, one for each case to be recorded.
There was plenty of space allowed for the answers
and additional notes could be made, if necessary,
on the back. The fifteen points about which
information was requested, together with the
explanatory instructions that were added, were as
follows:
1 Initials of Case.
2 Sex.
3 Age.
4 Married or Single.
5 If attending school (mention type of school).
If employed.
6 Type of area (evacuation, neutral, reception).
7 Residing in: (own home, billet, hostel, rest
centre, shelter).
8 Referred by.
9 Reason for referral.
10 Past history, if available, and sources of informa-
tion. (Eldest, youngest, only child.
Nervous trouble prior to war. Illnesses
and other details.)
11 Diagnosis, by whom made. Supposed cause
of present condition. (E.g. leaving home or
parents, specific incident, shelter life, physical
trauma, etc. Indicate particularly whether
cause is related to war.)
12 Present condition.
(a) Intelligence (Good, Fair, Poor, M.D.).
(b) General condition. (Good, Fair, Poor,
Stout, Thin, Losing weight, No change,
etc.)
(c) Physical symptoms (Fits, Tics, Bed-
wetting, Paralysis, Dyspepsia, Asthma,
Migraine, etc.)
(d) Behaviour. (Give (some idea of patient's
reactions. Interpretation must be left to
individual discretion.)
(e) Personality (Model child, Delinquent,
Aggressive, Passive, Silent, Depressed,
Troublesome, Destructive, etc.).
13 Action Taken. (Psychiatric Treatment, re-
moval from home or billet, evacuation, con-
valescent treatment, referral to other
organization, etc.)
14 Would further action have been advisable 1
facilities had existed ? If so, what ?
15 Is a follow-up of the case considered to ^
urgently necessary ?
There were, finally, spaces for the names ^
official positions of those responsible for the replieS,
It will be seen that the questionnaire was a detail^
one and that specific indications were given of $
kind of information desired.
Of the sources of information selected, two wef*
excluded when the returns came in, as it was fou^
that in certain ways the cases with which they deal
were not exactly comparable to the remainder.
28 sources that were used may be grouped as follo^5
9 from Mental Treatment Clinics.
2 from In-patient Departments of hospitals dealifl-
with cases of Nervous Disorder. .
(These 11 sources provided mainly adult cases )
8 from Child Guidance Clinics.
5 from Children's Hostels.
4 from M.H.E.C. workers in reception areas.
A covering letter sent with the questionnaire ask^
that the cases reported on should be the first
that came under notice on or after January 1st, 1941'
In a few instances less than ten cases were returned'
and the total came to 270. Of these, 94 were adul'5
and 176 were children. The one factor common10
all was that they came under notice during the
seventeenth month of the war towards the end0'
a period of intensive air bombardment of the larg6
towns and industrial centres.
Taking the sex distribution first, there were amoi^
the adults 59 males and 35 females. Among
children there were 117 boys and 59 girls, but as t^e
number of boys referred to Child Guidance Clini?s
invariably exceeds that of girls, no special signifr
cance need be attached to this. It may be noted-
however, that the two most prominent symptotf1*
for which children were referred were eneuresis afl*1
stealing. There were 39 cases of each. )t
It will be realized that the term " war conditions
must obviously cover a number of factors of vetf
different character. But for the purposes of tin5
enquiry, it seemed necessary to distinguish only twd
varieties, namely those of a terrifying nature afljj
those of a disturbing nature. The former, whi^j
included direct bombing experiences, were classify
as " war incidents " and the latter, which included
evacuation, billeting, shelter life, separation frof
parents, etc., as " war circumstances .
In this series, then, of 270 cases of abnorffl^
behaviour collected from 28 different sources, it
found possible to answer the following questions:
1 What proportion could be attributed to
incidents ?
2 What proportion could be attributed to
circumstances ?
and in these two sub-groups
3 What proportion had a previous history ^
nervous instability ?
MENTAL HEALTH 37
Taking adults and children separately, the figures
were:
Adults, 94.
Attributed to:
war incidents .. 9 approx. 9 ? 5 per cent.
war circumstances 15 ? 16 0 ?
24 25-5
Children, 176.
Attributed to:
War incidents .. 4 approx. 2 ? 2 per cent,
ar circumstances 24 ? 13-6 ?
28 15-8 ?
more'thCaSes among the 24 adults, i.e. in rather
attribut e11 those whose disability was
the 28 hV0 War con(iitions, and in 21 cases among
disabii t en' '-e- *n three-quarters of those whose
was a d fi V/as attributed to war conditions, there
No^ite history of previous nervous instability.
pi-Qvid data available in this investigation can
there f n? answer to the question as to whether
durinpISti?r t^lere is n?t more nervous behaviour
i^med t Second year of the war than in the
PfODort pre_war period. We do not know what
1Qn of either the adult or child population is
being affected in this way. And if we did know, we
have no pre-war figures with which to make com-
parisons. The three points that appear to be
demonstrated are these:
1 That the number of children in the series who
have been adversely affected by war incidents
is very small.
2 That war circumstances were found to be a con-
siderable but not an outstanding factor in the
production of behaviour problems of both
adults and children in the series.
3 That there was a high proportion?58 per cent.
in the adults and 75 per cent, in the children?
of cases with a previous history of mental
instability in the war conditioned groups of
the series.
In presenting their report, the Sub-Committee did
not feel that they were able to recommend that any
further investigations on similar lines should be
sponsored by the M.H.E.C. But it was suggested
that the Committee might be willing to place the data
already obtained at the disposal of any competent
authority that might be interested to analyse them
in greater detail.
Finally, the Sub-Committee wished to express its
thanks to all those who co-operated by filling in and
returning the questionnaires.
H.C.S.
