The National Council for Mental Hygiene
========================================

News and Notes

The President. The Council suffered a grievous loss
through the death on active service on August 25th,
1942, of Air-Commodore H.R.H. The Duke of Kent,
who had been President of the National Council for
Mental Hygiene since 1933.

His Royal Highness's distinguished support helped to
give mental health its rightful position in the eyes of the
public, and to emphasize its fundamental importance in
the life of the community. Members will recall the
occasions on which the Duke of Kent presided at the
Council's biennial Conferences and International
Reunions, and the many other ways in which he showed
his keen sympathy with and interest in the Council's
work.

His Royal Highness had won the esteem and admiration
of the people of this country and of the Empire not only
for his distinguished services during the present crisis,
but for the deep interest which he took in the social
welfare of our people, and we desire respectfully to
express our profound sympathy with all the members of
the Royal Family in their great sorrow.

Lectures. A number of lectures on Human Problems
of Wartime have been given to Rest Centre and other
Civil Defence workers in Lincolnshire, Derbyshire,
Yorkshire, and Worcestershire, during recent months,
and lectures on Mental Reactions to Air Raids were
included in two Training Courses held at Ludlow and
Evesham and arranged by the Regional Officer of the
National Council of Social Service. The field has been
particularly well covered in Lincolnshire, where Rest
Centre workers from practically every one of the larger
towns have had the opportunity of hearing talks by
Dr. Lois Munro on practical methods of dealing with
cases of nervous manifestations under emergency
conditions, and very satisfactory reports have been
received as to the great value and help of these.

Lectures on mental health subjects have also been
arranged by the Council under the Army Education
Scheme for a number of men's units in various parts of
the country and for the A.T.S.

Further lectures in various parts of Gloucestershire,
Buckinghamshire, Berkshire and Hampshire have been
arranged on behalf of the Committee for Rural Health
Education, and with the co-operation of the Regional
representatives of the Mental Health Emergency Com-
mittee, for meetings of the Mothers' Union, Towns-
women's Guilds, Women's Co-operative Guilds, Women's
Institutes and several local groups, including a group of
young teachers.

Consideration is being given to the question of
arranging group meetings for members of the various
allied nations who are at present in this country with a
view to interesting them in mental health questions and
to exchange information in regard to Mental Health
Services generally.

Directory of Out-Patient Clinics. A revised edition of
the Directory, which has proved of great value and has
been widely utilized, is at present being prepared, and
the Council hopes to publish this early in the New Year.
Annual Report. The Council's Annual Report for the
period April 1st, 1941, to March 31st, 1942, is now avail-
able and copies may be had on application to the Secre-
tary at 76 Chandos House, Palmer Street, London, S.W.I.
The Report contains a record of several important new
developments in the mental health field and of a consid ,
able extension of its lecture services for which there "
been a great demand.

Central Association for Mental Welfare
Social Case Work. During the quarter end^i
September 30th, 1942, a total of 817 cases were
with (General, 333; Guardianship and Licence,
Epileptics, 99; Joint Register of Foster Homes, I.j
which once more shows an increase on the previ?
quarter.

Educational Work. The Course at University Co
Nottingham, held in August at the request of the L?\j
Education Authority, was attended by 61 teachers
whom 41 were from Nottingham City, 6 from ^
County, 6 from Birmingham, and the remainder fr?.
Chesterfield, Mansfield and Lincoln. The Course v.
under the general direction of Miss Ruth Thomas,
the lecturers included several members of the staft j
the Nottingham Education Committee. A new featuf^
the curriculum was the introduction of five periods
remedial teaching for each student, under the supervis'^
of the Educational Psychologists assisting in the Cotf .
The Association was particularly glad to have ^
opportunity of organizing such a Course for a specl
Local Authority, and it is hoped that from other afe
similar requests may come?particularly from j
areas where teachers are working in isolation. ^
beginning in this direction is about to be made with ?
organization of a Course in Shropshire as a " follow-ijP ?
activity for teachers who have previously been heir.,
individually in their schools by one of the Associate
Psychologists.

Emergency Homes. The. children at the West?,
super-Mare Home which was destroyed by enemy act'
last June, have?after a period in temporary quart,,
found for them by the Borough's Evacuation DeP?.
ment?been re-housed in premises secured at ?
Haddon, Northants. .

Residential Nursery for Difficult " Under-Fives "?
the request of the Ministry of Health and in co-operat'
with the Church of England Waifs and Strays Society,
Association is about to open a special Home for child'
evacuated to Residential War Nurseries who are
to be difficult, unstable or maladjusted. A house L
been acquired for the purpose by the Ministry in W'
shire (Haybrook House, Pusey) which will accommod^
from 20 to 25 children. A staff has been appointed,
includes a specially qualified matron and an experie^.,
teacher, and the C.A.M.W.s Educational PsycholoS1'
Miss Ruth Thomas (who is in charge of the MeK
Health Emergency Committee's work for children ufl-l
five) will visit at regular intervals. ' In addition,
services of a psychiatrist will be available.

Child Guidance Council
-----------------------

Council Meeting. The Council Meeting was held.
June and was followed by a discussion on " Hostels'
Difficult Children j

. Medical Director. Dr. Gordon left England in ^
for service overseas and pending the appointment ^
temporary Medical Director in his absence, Dr. HadP ,
very kindly served as Interim Medical Director, und
taking the chairmanship of the July Conference,
giving much time and consideration to the amalgamat'1
h Council.

Proposals which have been before te ^ as Tem-
September, Dr. Alan Maberly was appo
Porary Medical Director (part-time). of child
Conference. A Conference f?.r Psychologists and
Guidance Clinic teams (Psychiatrists, function,
. Psychiatric Social Workers) to discus teams, was
, training and status of members ot tn rt being
held on July 18th in London A ?ep ble from the
Prepared for publication and will be o
Council's offices in due course. nueen has given
Northern Ireland. Her Majesty Britain " Fund,
sum of ?2,000 from the "Bundles for e cUnic in
for the establishment of a Child rujidren, Belfast,
, connection with the Hospital for Sick ? d from an
and a further gift of ?1,000 has been rece tQ gQ
anonymous source. Dr. Doris Odium ^ Guidance
to Belfast to advise on the formation o ^ ^ie child
Council for Northern Ireland and also ^ a publlC
Guidance Clinic. She gave an adores ^ Counties
meeting at which representatives ot a ' f Abercorn
Were present, and at which the Ducnesj Northern
Proposed that a Child Guidance Council cQme int0
Ireland should be established. This ' - ai experience,
heing. Miss Keir, a psychologist with . undertake some
bas visited Belfast and hopes to be ab -tb the Child
of the pioneer work in connectio
Guidance Clinic. T function with the
Clinics and Juvenile Courts. Jn c pnauiry into the
Home Office the Council made an l enq. _ between
relationship which exists in the van Interesting
Child Guidance Clinics and Juvenile C V tbe enquiry
information was received, and the res Report of the
have been noted in the 21st Annual Repo
Magistrates' Association (1941-42). . a compre-
Bibliography of Child Psychology. *n?ouncil which
hensive reading list published by th been
includes a 1941 Supplement. Fr0?Uable for Socia
Published separately a list of books . Educational
Workers, and one for students from the
Psychology. These can all be obtained .

Council's offices at the following prices. 1?_ 6d.
Complete Bibliography ? ? " '6d-
Reading List for Social Workers ?? a|
Reading List for Students of Educat 2d.
Psychology .. . ? ? ? ? ? 79 BuCkingham
The address of the Council is now- ' vict0ria
palace Road, London, S.W.I. Telephone
Mental Health Emergency Committee ^ Hostel
Hostel Workers' Course. A third Course 19th to
s was held in Oxford from Septe nded by
25th, 1942. The Course, which was ^ Thomas
fp^nty"six students, was directed by , enthusiastic
(Educational Psychologist, C.A.M-W.) ana
appreciation was expressed as to its v ? ^ Qf the
Children under Five. Requests ?r be received,
Committee's Nursery Advisers contl?f'int further
has been found necessary to app hM tbe
orkers (made financially possible disposal by the
Queens gift from money placed at her reported in our
t^-A. " Bundles for Britain fund reP fiUing a
last issue). That this Advisory and more
sperately urgent need is becomi S . -s aimost
parent and the field for useful acti y worker
unlimited, it is satisfactory to rec?.fhafbeen retained
hvt0 the Devon County Council has Qiher areas
vl hat.Authority on a permanent ? a period of
sued include Kirigston-on-Thames ( Chelmsford,
Slx months), Gloucestershire, Grantham, ^
and various districts in Lancashire and in the Home
Counties.

Youth Work. Another activity upon which it has been
possible to embark as the result of the Queen's gift, is
that of investigating the need of Youth Organizations
for help in dealing with mental health problems. A
special worker has been appointed for this purpose and
from the result of her preliminary enquiries, it is apparent
that such a need does exist, particularly for talks and
lectures to Youth Leaders. A syllabus has been drawn
up under the direction of Miss L. G. Fildes, and arrange-
ments for lectures are now being made. A special
Committee consisting of members of the main Com-
mittee together with Dr. Macalister Brew (National
Association of Girls' Clubs), Mr. Randall Keane
(National Association of Boys' Clubs), Miss Dora
Morton (Y.W.C.A.) and Mr. Basil Henriques, J.P., is
directing the work.

Regional Work. Work in two new Regions has lately
been inaugurated, viz. in Region 9, with Miss Shaw
(c/o Birmingham Settlement, 318 Summer Lane, Birming-
ham, 19) as Regional Representative, and in Region 12
where Miss Robina Addis (84 London Road, Tunbridge
Wells) is working as Regional Representative. With the
resignation of Miss Dyson from Region 3, this area is for
the time being without a Representative, but a loan worker
has been lent, at the request of the Ministry of Health,
for a limited period. In two Regions (9 and 10) special
consideration is being given to the need for mental
health work amongst Industrial Workers, particularly
those in Hostels.

Canadian Social Workers. Of seventeen Social
Workers from Canada who recently arrived in this
country, two have been allocated to the Committee and
after some preliminary experience in Regions 2 and 10,
both are taking up salaried appointments in Mental
Health work, for which they are specially qualified.
" New World " Hostel for Difficult Boys
As announced in our last issue, a generous gift from
the English-Speaking Union, made available through the
kindness of Mrs. Sholto Smith, a Canadian citizen,
enabled the Joint Register of Foster Homes for Nervous,
Difficult and Retarded Children, to consider?in
co-operation with the Department of Psychological
Medicine, Guy's Hospital?a scheme for providing a
Home where children with special difficulties can be
given skilled observation and treatment.

We are glad to be able to announce that premises have
now been acquired at 66 Ashburton Road, Addiscombe,
Croydon, which will be opened, under the.name of the
" New World Hostel ", as soon as the necessary repairs,
etc., have been completed.

A Matron with good experience of handling difficult
children has been engaged, and arrangements will be
made for treatment at the Guy's Hospital Child Guidance
Clinic. The inclusive weekly charge per head is at
present fixed at 33s., and not more than twelve children
will be taken.
Applications should be sent to the Secretary, Joint
Register of Foster Homes, 24 Buckingham Palace Road,
London, S.W.I. It should be noted that boys only,
between 5 and 11, are eligible for admission.
Mental Defectives in the Army. A Leeds Report
An interesting report has been received from
Leeds Mental Health Services Committee who have
dealt with some 400 cases coming within the prescribed
age groups for exemption from registration for military
services by reason of their being on licence from

Institutions, under Guardianship or under Statutory
Supervision. Inevitably, however, certain defectives
have registered or enlisted voluntarily without their
condition being disclosed, and where this has been
detected later, the Authorities have referred to the
Mental Health Services Department.

In some cases it has been recommended that they
remain in the Army, and at the present time, twenty-three
are serving in this country or overseas and doing well.
In addition two have been killed and one is a prisoner of
war. On application from the Department, ten have
been discharged, and eight others have been discharged
for other reasons. A certain number of applications for
discharge have been received from the defectives them-
selves who complained that they could not look after
their equipment or manage the military routine. In
other cases, parents have applied for the return of sons
who could not read or write and with whom consequently
they were losing touch.

The Committee feel that it can be stated with a con-
siderable degree of confidence, that Leeds defectives are
not allowed to remain in the Army unless there is
reasonable ground to believe that they can do so
successfully.

" Lord " Memorial Essay Competition
This Annual Essay Competition, which is administered
by the National Council for Mental Hygiene, is open to
certificated male and female mental nurses of the rank of
staff, charge or chief charge, in Mental Hospitals in the
United Kingdom and Northern Ireland. A prize of
?3 3s. and a medal is offered for the best essay submitted,
and the title chosen for this year is " Which Reform in
Mental Nursing would you put first in Post-War
Reconstruction, and why ? "

Essays are limited to approximately 2,000 words, and
the latest date for the reception of these is January 30th,
1943. Further particulars may be had on application
to the Secretary, The National Council for Mental
Hygiene, 76-77 Chandos House, Palmer Street, London,
S.W.I.

A Helper of the Handicapped
----------------------------

The House of Help, Lillie Road, Fulham (London),
founded by Miss B. C. Arnould, who died last June, was
a forerunner of the modern " Occupation Centre " for
defective children, and her name should ever be
remembered in this connection. Many years before the
responsibility for the training of the physically or mentally
defective was laid as a duty upon Local Authorities,
Miss Arnould responded to the needs of those in her own
neighbourhood, and, through classes at her home, she
occupied and taught them, and brought into their lives
the happiness and interest which hitherto it had been no
one's concern to supply.

With the aid of a Committee of supporters and friends,
the work developed, under the name of the Employment
,w
Association for the Defective (West London), and ?
House grew into a centre for the helping of the cripP'
the blind, and the mentally handicapped. At the ^
of Miss Arnould's death there were some 200 cases o* j,
ages on the books, and although it is not possible
carry on the work without her personal direction ^
inspiration, the Committee are making arrangement,
transfer these poor people to appropriate bodies (sU,[
as the L.C.C. Mental Health Department) for frien
care and visiting.

Board of Control
-----------------

We are asked to announce that as Professor Sir Artfl
J. Hall, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.C.P., has resigned the pos
Honorary Consultant Physician at Rampton
Institution, near Retford, Nottinghamshire, the Board j
Control, with the approval of the Minister of H^1,
have appointed Mr. C. Gray Imrie, M.D., F.R.C.P'"
his successor.

Training the Low-grade Defective
-----------------------------------

In the Vineland Training School Bulletin for Octo^;
there is an interesting contribution describing
methods of training low-grade defectives which are &
successfully employed in certain American institution
At the Woodbine (New Jersey) Colony for Fe^
Minded Males roller skating has been introduced
surprisingly good results. In a unit of 120 low-g^l,
boys between the ages of 5 and 15, we are told, 80 vn
been taught to be " self-sufficient on skates"> ^
not one of the 70 sustained even a minor injury dufj
the process of learning. This immunity from accidff
it is suggested, may be due to the fact that the menta'(
of the children was so low that they failed to Perce($'
the possibility of danger, and hence avoided themusc11
tension induced by fear. f

In the writer's own institution (Southbury, ^
necticut), he reports that bulky play equipment
proved particularly popular?e.g. large rubber
carts made from discarded farm wagons, sliding b?3c;
and swings. The children learn to walk by holding ,
to a rope extending from the front to the rear of the lj. (
and up and down the halls and dayrooms they pu'j
weighted block covered with felt material with
attached. Ostensibly this is for the purpose of polisr1'
the floors, but its importance lies in its " energy
value? J

Referring to the widespread use of parole, the vvj\.
stresses the need for a " carry-over of training " n>
the institution to the home, a process which invo',
some instruction being given to the parents.
administrators utilize, he says, their parent contacts
modify the specific training programme used f?f,
particular child, and some superintendents encouf^
parents to pay observation visits for the purpose
watching the ordinary training routine regarded &
sort of " pre-home " training.
