The German Psychological Machine and the need to Combat it
==========================================================

54 I MENTAL HEALTH

By MAJOR-GENERAL G. M. LINDSAY, C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.
Deputy Regional Commissioner, South-Western Region
Victory or defeat in this war depends in the last
resort upon whether the ordinary citizens of this
country can hold the " Will to Victory " in face of
every misery, of every disappointment, of every loss,
and of every discomfort.
The war effort can be likened to a triangle, the
apex of which is the Fighting Forces, the base of
which represents the ordinary population of the
country. If the base of that triangle should dis-
integrate the apex will fall to the ground. In other
words, if the Germans could weaken our will to win,
no strength of fighting forces, no supply of war
material, could save us from defeat. The human
element is therefore, in my opinion, more important
than the material, and it is with the human element
in particular that the Civil Defence Organization has
to deal, for if it neglects that, then the rest of its
work is of very little value.
Confidence consists mainly, as far as the civil
population is concerned, in three things?confidence
in ourselves, confidence in our leaders, and con-
fidence in the efficiency of the organization of which
we are a part.
In a large scale air attack there are a great many
people who can have no job to do, and who perforce
must become part of that permanently, or temporarily
homeless crowd who are in air raid shelters or rest
centres. If the attack continues for several nights
in succession, they may also form part of that
crowd who are seeking quarters in the surrounding
country. With these people the only tangible thing
that helps to keep their morale from serious deter-
ioration is confidence in the organization which is
charged with their care and welfare. As long as it
is obvious that everything possible is being done to
help them, and that the organization for doing so
is working efficiently, people will stand up to almost
anything.
The first and most important duty of the Civil
Defence Organization is, as far as possible, to make
perfect every arrangement for the care and welfare
of the people during air raids, and more important
still, in the post-raid period.
This is Total War
The German doctrine of Total War means that
their whole method of conducting war embraces the
military and the civil, the moral and the material,
the mind as well as the body. The war on the
civil front is prepared politically before hostilities
commence when the fifth column is organized. Wh?.
open hostilities begin the fifth column merges '
activities with those of the military front afl
reinforced by airborne troops, gives active militaf)
assistance. . (
Therefore, when we consider the German doctrj11,
of the offensive we must consider total war carfle
out on both the-military and civil fronts at the sa^,
time. This is the essence of the Blitzkrieg.
when the civil front does not respond, when ^
fifth column does not exist, and when the morale
the attacked remains unshaken, the machine of {
war loses some of its essential constituents and ^
Blitzkreig becomes a far less formidable enemy-. i
The Blitzkreig is a thing of many parts, polity
and economic, fifth column and rumour, uncertain ?
and terror, air and tanks, and all the rest of ^
modern mechanized technique. Its fundament
success lies in the breaking down of the will to >*''
of the ordinary citizen. If we can prevent it d0$
that we have deprived it of one of its essential Paftt
Now there are two things which are particular ?
likely to lead to such a breakdown?ignorance c
what is likely to happen, of what it is proposed to ^
to meet that happening, and lack of a definite J?(
to do when it does happen. We must ensure tfl
people are not ignorant, that the civilian and ^
soldier fully understand the part that each will pl?j
and that all feel that they are one army, fighting 0l\
battle, and fighting it for one purpose?the destr^
tion of the enemy wherever he may be. J
With this object in view we are carrying ?\
exercises in which we aim at bringing the gene^
public fully into the picture, teaching them vvt^
they are likely to be confronted with, and what the'
duties will be in case of invasion. We wish to ens^
' that as many people of all ages and sexes, who
capable of doing a job, are detailed to some defio'i
form of duty. Our motto for " Stay Put " is
" Get in a Funk Hole and stay there ", but " Hav
a Job to do and stay and do it ".
The German Psychological Machine
The Germans set out to produce, scientifically
a " Crusader Spirit " in their Youth. They teaf
all the young that service to their country is the a^
of life, that the State is everything, that to die far {
is the greatest honour. Dying for the State !,
translated into dying for Hitler, who has been ma<*
a demi-god. The Japanese are taught much ^
* Summary of an Address given at the Annual Meeting of the National Council for Mental Hygiene on Septetf^
29th, 1942.
MENTAL HEALTH 55
same: to die for the Divine Emperor. ^ beat
must have a " Crusader Spirit if we a fight
these people. It is the primary job ot at ain an
?n the Civil Front to have and to
unbeatable " Will to Victory home and
The Germans use propaganda be) results they
abroad, to produce the psychologi ^
require. In addition they have "J? tions 0f the
are specialists in the processes and choosing
human mind and use them for assist g and
leaders for their Army Youth Movements, etc^
ln devising means of assisting the p y
attack on their enemies. . ^mral resources
. Are we organizing all our psychoil g ^ a
m the same way ? Have we a faith, an 10
cause, for which we will fight to the en ? natiCal
The German system may Pr?dn believe that
courage and an hysterical idealism, b cause,
faith and confidence, in ourselves dynamic
which alone can provide the nec history
force, can only be produced in people of o ^
and traditions, and by a revival of . Qf some
and practice?by a spiritual regewe not
kind. How this can be impleme t^at the
Pretend to know, but it does appear to m
Church must play a prominent part m ? ^, ^es
But we cannot sit back and just let the Unu of
get on with it for they, like us,# are J fio^tjng one
that Great Army which is all togeth o purp0se,
battle, and all together fighting it fo which is
the destruction of that intensely evil thi g
?nr enemy in this war. .
Psychological and Spiritual Aspects of the Wa
My work in Civil Defence, and ^P-f^y con-
experience of a series of Civil and Regional
kjences which I have conducted a forcibly
Staff School, have brought home to rn pSycho-
during the last few months how mu occupying
logical and spiritual aspects of this wa
the minds of a great many people. eeA that in
Pne thing stands out, that all are; g cts of
spite of the importance of the ma. ? nt issue,
this war, the spiritual aspect is a-pre1do fylth, in
namely that this is a war for religio Christian
our case and that of Europe generally, a war
faith, against paganism and barbari y. ^ force
r decency and collaboration aga:1 ? We are
and world domination by the Ger ? -s|an(i
fighting for the preservation not only for its
and the Empire, but of the Briitis ' s of the
destruction is one of the foremost o J preser-
Germans. But it is not only ?^f ?^0n is the
ation that is at stake; that Pre| freedom-
fundamental condition of victory for a
loving peoples.
The danger
e^ dan8er of
are up a!"8er ?f not fully understanding what we '
sniritflniSt' the terrific evil that we are fighting,
that we ^1,confli?t that this war represents, is
nught be induced under stress of clever
propaganda, put forward at a time when our people
were suffering from disappointment?weariness of
what might seem a war without end, a feeling of
frustration caused by lack of military success,
heavy bombing of this country combined with an
intensification of the battle of the Atlantic, and
an imminent threat of invasion?to agree to a
negotiated peace.
Such a peace would not only entail our certain
doom in the near future since it would permit the
Germans, freed from blockade, bombing and
internal resistance, to turn Europe into one vast
munitions factory and one vast war base, but it
would do worse than that as it would cause us to
lose our souls.
Remember that there are thousands of gallant
men and women throughout Europe fighting the
bestial barbarians who are occupying their countries,
fighting them above and below ground, in open
revolt and by secret means, in any way they can.
These gallant people look to us British as their
eventual saviours, how or when they do not know,
but they believe that we will never desert them and
that we will fight on for however long is necessary
until we have freed them. To make a negotiated
peace would be to desert them, to turn them into
our enemies, to earn their and the world's everlasting
contempt.
Conclusion
It is obvious that we shall have to make the
greatest possible material efforts and the greatest
material sacrifices if we are to win the war. But we
must never forget that transcending all is the
psychological aspect, which is what will stop panic
and give to all a feeling of aggressive determination
to win at all costs. For this reason the more people
and the more interests that are drawn in, the better.
This will engender a war mentality, a confident and
aggressive spirit and a general acceleration of the
whole war effort.
It should also be remembered that while it is
essential that we have a united front for the prosecu-
tion of the war, we must also have a united front to
face the chaos which will reign when the war
terminates. Then, the only hope for Europe will be
a stable Britain using her influence, organizing
power and her resources to bring order out of that
chaos.
If, through the combined work which we all put
in now, we ensure that everyone is imbued with the
spirit that I have indicated, then we need have no
fear that we shall not overcome our present difficul-
ties or that those that will certainly arise when the
war is over, will not be satisfactorily settled.
Thus and thus only can we, expert and non-expert,
create that united front and engender that universal
morale that can ensure a total victory in the war,
and after the war that strong and united Britain
which can use its strength, influence and resources
in helping to create not only a better Britain but a
better world.
