Health of the Future
====================

By Aleck W. Bourne, M.B.,
F.R.C.S. Penguin. 9d.
It is impossible in the compass of a " Penguin " to
give with any great statistical detail, a picture of the
health of our community. Nor, in a book intended for a
wide public, is it desirable. Mr. Aleck Bourne, in
Health of the Future, has done something of infinitely
greater value. He has examined the very foundation of
his subject, and established an attitude of mind towards
it which, if generally accepted and understood, would do
much to bring us nearer to a sane and constructive
solution of the whole problem of health and disease.
He finds his " causa causarum ", the root of all ills,
in that form of social organization which permits poverty
to exist. Under present conditions, " the good life " is
impossible for all but the very few, and it will remain so
as long as palliative measures only are applied to the
four major manifestations of poverty. Bad housing, bad
feeding, overwork and anxiety constitute an environment
in which illness flourishes and " off-health " is normal.
The facts and figures are gloomy enough. They strike
the mind with the force of things, known, perhaps,
but inadequately realized. That dark region lying
beyond our surgeries and hospitals is vividly, if briefly,
illuminated.
There are some suggestions for immediate and
practical advance. It is not quite clear whether Mr.
. Bourne believes these to be useful in themselves, or only
in conjunction with the great major reform of the
abolition of poverty. In any case, most of them, as he
points out, are already under discussion by the various
bodies which are planning the future of medicine. The
unique value of his book lies less in these, than in the
angle of vision from which the whole is viewed. He
sees that both systems and science have virtue only
in so far as they minister to the fuller and happier
development of individual men. It is an attitude not
yet altogether common either among professional
administrators or professional medical men.
Some of the philosophical premises are arguable.
We may doubt whether happiness, even as a by-product,
is the most satisfactory goal of life; we may wonder if
economic security and health education will, in fact,
defeat the whole of " credulity, prejudice and super-
stition ", as readily as Mr. Bourne appears to believe.
But, with the more specific conclusions, the insistence
on the sociological causes of illness, and the vision of the
whole man trained in joyous positive health, there will
be ready and enthusiastic assent. The book should
stimulate a wide public. It may, perhaps, be hoped it
will not be a wholly non-professional one.
H.S.D.
