A Simple System for Discovering some Factors Influencing Non-Promotion
=======================================================================

Leonard P. Aykes, Pii.D.,
Russell Sage Foundation, New York City.
A recent German work 011 what we term retardation is
entitled "Warum kommen die Kinder nicht vorvvarts ?"?"Why
do the children not progress or, freely translated into the ver-
nacular of the school-room, "What are the causes for non-promo-
tion ?" A notable account of a recent attempt to find out why
children do not go forward in the schools of one city has just
appeared in the annual report of the Ninth School District of the
town of Manchester, Connecticut, for the year 1910.
The Ninth District of the town of Manchester is really the
manufacturing town of South Manchester. It is the home of
Mr. Howell Cheney, one of Connecticut's foremost manufacturers,
and also -one of the most progressive and active members of its
State Board of Education. For some years Mr. Cheney has been
insistently asking school men why it should not be possible to
apply to the business of education some of the same business pro-
cesses of checking results, comparing the finished product with
raw material, and disclosing leaks and wastes, that are applied to
modern manufacturing.
One result has been an attempt carried on during the past
year, with the cooperation of Superintendent of Schools F. A. Ver-
planck, to discover the factors which influence the promotion and
non-promotion of children in the public schools of South Man-
chester. The method employed was to record certain significant
facts regarding all of the pupils at the close of the last school year,
and tabulate them for the promoted and the non-promoted pupils
so as to discover in what respects records for the first group dif-
fered from those of the second group. This method avoided the
common error which results from gathering data concerning solely
the pupils who fail, and then having no way of determining in
what respects the records of these pupils differ from those of the
successful ones.
?(189)
190 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The blank form used to gather the data for each room was a
simple sheet worded and arranged as follows:
MANCHESTER PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Ninth School District
Number Among Number Among
Children Promoted Children Not
at end of Year Promoted
Boys
Girls
Average Age
Average Days Attended
From Non-English Speaking Families.
Foreign Born
Suffering From Malnutrition
Mentally Defective
Defect of Vision
" " Hearing
Adenoids
Other Throat Troubles
Enlarged Glands
Defective Teeth
Other Defects
Grade  School  Teacher  Date.
These blanks were used to gather data concerning 1396 pupils
who remained in the eight grades of the public schools at the end of
the school year 1909-10. Of these pupils, 1093 were promoted
to the next higher grades and 303 failed of promotion; in other
words, 78 per cent were promoted and 22 per cent failed.
A salient fact brought out by the tabulation of the data from
all of the rooms was that 94 per cent of the girls had received pro-
motion as contrasted with only, 75 per cent of the boys. More-
over, failures among the boys were especially frequent in the
highest grades. This fact at once raises the question whether or
not our public school system is giving as fair opportunities to the
boys as it is to the girls. Other investigations have disclosed the
same condition in other cities. The condition seems to suggest
that as our courses of study and methods of school administration
have developed, we have unconsciously fitted them to the needs
and abilites of the girls, rather than to those of their brothers.
The next fact brought to light was that the average age of the
promoted pupils was ten years and ten months, whereas that of the
A SIMPLE SYSTEM. 191
unpromoted pupils was eleven years and four months. That is to
say, those who failed were on the average older than those who
succeeded. This same condition was disclosed by the investiga-
tions of Superintendent Morss in Medford, Mass., in 1908.
In South Manchester the school year has 185 actual school
days. On the average, the pupils who were promoted had been
absent from school 19 days during the year. The unpromoted
pupils had, on the average, been absent 29 days. In other words,
the non-promoted pupils had been absent over 50 per cent more
than the promoted pupils.
The rest of the data referred to the social and plysical condi-
tions of the pupils, and the results are shown in the following
table, which gives in percentages the proportion of promoted pupils
and of non-promoted pupils affected by each one of the conditions:
Percentage Percentage
Among Among
Pupils Pupils
Promoted Not Promoted
From non-English speaking homes. 9 12
Foreign born  7 13
Suffering from malnutrition  9 25
Poor mentality  8 49
Defective eyesight   4 3
Adenoids  15 20
Other throat troubles   14 13
Defective teeth  25 38
The figures giving the proportion of children from homes
where English is not the home language, and the number of pupils
actually born abroad, show that foreign birth and ignorance of
English are real, although not very important, factors in retarding
the child. As was to be expected, much higher percentages of
malnutrition and poor mentality are found among the non-pro-
moted than among the promoted. Eye defects are more common
among the more successful children, and this result is in accord-
ance with similar observations made during the past two years in
New York City. Adenoids and defective teeth show a much
higher percentage among the unsuccessful pupils.
Although these figures are for one town only, they cover a
sufficient number of cases, distributed over the entire eight grades,
to be regarded as significant in themselves, and as of distinct im-
portance in indicating a simple method for making this kind of
192 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
an investigation in other places. Simply as they are, these figures
indicate that among the factors which prevented the children in
South Manchester from going forward, we may name the following
in the order of their retarding influence:
(1
(2
(3
(4
(5
(6
(?
(8
Poor mentality,;
Malnutrition;
Handicap of foreign birth;
Bad teeth;
Absence from school;
Adenoids;
Coming from non-English speaking families;
The fact of being a boy.
The figures as interpreted in the printed report point to the
following surmises as to the distribution of the causes of failure
among each one hundred cases:
Failures due to
Per cent
Character of instruction and organization of school. 19
Poor attendance   0
Influence of foreign birth  9
Poor nutrition   1G
Deficient mentality  28
Physical deficiencies other than mentality and nu-
trition    1
Unclassified  15
100
It is of course impossible to give proper weight to any indi-
vidual cause or set of causes, because of the duplications in the
items of the individual records. That is to say, a child who is
recorded as suffering from adenoids also probably figures in the
group suffering from malnutrition and in that of poor mentality..
Nevertheless, such a weighing of the individual causes is not neces-
sary for the application of the method.
Mr. Cheney and Superintendent Verplanck have developed
a most useful instrument, whereby significant facts concerning
the progress of school children may be disclosed, and in large
measure evaluated.
