The Boy in the Private School
==============================


By Charles Keen Taylor.
To discuss a boy's relations with his school would really take
a great amount of space, it being possible to write volumes upon
the subject. All that will be attempted here will be to bring out
for consideration a few salient points chosen on account of their
importance and common neglect. ^
In the character and body building of the school-boy there are
two separate responsibilities, that of the parent and^.that of the
attitude toward the schools. The American school-boy suffers
The parents should see to it that their sons have a correct
school.
greatly when he is compared with his English cousin, for instance.
The English boy is taught to look upon his school a's a place not
to be considered lightly. The average American boy is no respecter of educational institutions, just as his father does not think
a great deal about real culture. Then the average American boy
looks upon his teachers with little or no respect, and this follows
naturally from the father's private opinion that the man who
teaches, or, for the matter of that, the woman who teaches, does
go only for the reason that he, or she, has failed at everything else;
and perhaps this attitude, as much as any other, is the cause of
the inadequacy of the average teacher's salary?a salary at which
a good carpenter or second rate plumber would promptly turn up
his nose. The mentality and cultivation of the succeeding generations depend largely upon the efforts of the teachers of a country,
and for such a work the best men and women should be demanded.
But the best men and women are not going to beggar themselves by receiving day-laborers' wages, when they can just as
easily earn comfortable! livings otherwise, and particularly if
they are going to be looked down upon, not only by their charges,
but by the parents of their charges as well. It is a duty of parents
to cultivate in their children a proper respect for their teachers.
Parents should also give their children a proper attitude
towards their lessons. Many children dislike their lessons because
they see no practical value in them. Children are intensely practical. They see little value in geography, history, geometry, and
(132)
THE BOY IN THE PRIVATE SCHOOL. 133
the like, not realizing that the mental discipline they get is probably
the most valuable thing gained at school, a mental discipline that
will enable them to attack the much more difficult problems which
will be placed before them later on. If children would look upon
lessons as a kind of mind-training, just as they can be made to
look upon physical exercise as body-training, they would begin to
work at their daily tasks in a different spirit and to their own great
mental advantage.
That the parents should give their children a knowledge of
personal hygiene, and should see that they are sensibly clothed,
goes without question. Yet many would be surprised at the ignorance, the total and almost criminal ignorance, of such subjects,
shown by the parents of many children. If you have doubts, get
any teacher to narrate his or her experiences.
And now for the school's part, and we will not discuss the
actual teaching, for that is beyond the sphere of this brief paper.
Parents can and should demand of the schools, first of all,
that the class-rooms be well lighted, well ventilated, that the desks
be arranged according to the direction of the light and adjusted
to the size of the children, and also that the rooms be not crowded.
One would think that in these enlightened days the question
of lighting and ventilation need not be mentioned, and yet should
the writer give a faithful description of conditions in these respects in schools seen by him, he would hardly be believed, for he
has seen all grades of inadequate lighting, down to one small
window for a large room, and he has seen the desks placed in all
kinds of improper positions, as regards the direction of the light,
even instances where the pupils directly faced the light. Generally
speaking, in many schools, it looks as though the windows had been
inserted merely to break the monotony of the walls, and for no
other earthly reason. As to ventilation?I doubt if there are any
rooms in the whole country, used for assemblies of any kind, more
abominably ventilated than are the average school-rooms. There
are brilliant exceptions, of course, but if you enter an average
class-room, especially on a winter day, you will find the closeness
and foulness of the air almost overpowering, and will not be a bit
surprised at the restlessness of the inmates.
The seemingly innocent question of the 'recess' is one of
gravest importance. "Recesses," says Dr. A. K. Gardner, "are
fearful exposures to scholars of all ages."1 This, of course, means
the short recess of, say, ten or fifteen minutes, with which long
*A. K. Gardjier. Our Children; their Physical and Mental Development.
134 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
periods of study are broken. In spring and autumn they are above
criticism, but in winter they are dangerous almost beyond description. And this is the reason why. When the recess bell rings, no
matter if the temperature outside be way below freezing, out go
the children, pell-mell, from their close, over-heated rooms, into
the cold, and without adding one extra stitch of clothing. This
is so common that nothing is thought about it, either by the
parents, the schools, or, least of all, by the children themselves.
Out they go, in dire need for fresh air, no doubt, and the result
is a chilled body, and, painfully often, a doctor's bill, and more
than a few undertakers' bills to make good balance, for everything
from simple 'colds' to the terrible pneumonia result from such
exposure. The writer, in fact, one cold winter, saw class-rooms;
with no less than 30 per cent of their pupils absent at one time,
all with colds or throat or lung troubles of more or less severity,
and to no other cause could they be attributed than to their exposure, during recess, to the exceedingly cold, damp air of the playground.
The schools, then, should see to it that at recess the children
wear the extra garments with which their parents have provided
them.
And then comes the question of 'lunches'. It is surprising
how many mothers lack discernment in providing lunches for
their children's use at school, but it is infinitely more surprising
to see what kind of food is frequently sold to children at school
lunch-counters, or at lunch-counters connected with schools. A
few may have hot, nourishing soups for sale, with bread and
butter, or rolls, or the like, but the majority make great profits
by the sale of soggy cinnamon buns, crullers, indigestible pies, or
other similar dainties. No wonder so many children suffer from
digestive troubles, have headaches, and undergo a mental eclipse of
more or less severity immediately upon partaking of the lunches
generally provided. In schools, where lunches are a necessity,
lunch-counters should be run by the school, or under the direction
of the school, whose duty it would be to limit the sale to nourishing
and easily digested foods.
There is one more duty of the school, and one almost if not
quite neglected by the great majority of them. It is the school's
bounden duty to give its pupils true ideals of public morality, so
that when the boys go out into the world they will carry with them
such principles that they will throw their energies against the civic
corruption so rife in our cities, be scrupulously honest and aboveTHE BOY IN THE PRIVATE SCHOOL. 135
board in their own business dealings, and will have such high principles of right living that the present flame of private immorality
will perish from sheer lack of fuel. But if there is one duty
of the school upon which it is quite useless to enlarge, it is this
very one of moral training, for the simple reason that the failure of
the parents in this regard is worse, if possible, than the schools;
and thus arises the vast amount of immorality which exists among
our very school-children, to their infinite injury, and our infinite
shame.
