Our Responsibility for Retardation
===================================

By Cakkie R. Squire, Ph.D.,
Principal of Training Dept., State Normal School, Superior, Wis.
That there is waste, terrific waste in our public schools
through retardation has been proven beyond a doubt by the studies
of Ayres. and Thorndike. Ayres estimates that the cost of the
repeater in 55 of our largest cities is equal to 14 per cent of the
cost of maintenance for whole system. Yet the financial loss to the
community is small in comparison with the loss in time, in vigorous mental development, and in will to succeed in the children who
repeat. The dumping of such a large percentage of confessed
failures upon the community is a loss that cannot be estimated
in dollars.
Who is responsible ? The valuable statistical studies of Thorndike and Ayres give us tlie broad general outline of the situation.
They give us facts. But special studies, such as A. E. Wagner's
"Retardation and Elimination in Schools of Mauch Chunk Township,"1 by persons who are familiar with the children, their home
and school environment, will give so far as they go a truer answer
as to the real causes underlying retardation.
The school of which I am principal?the training department
of a State Normal?presents an excellent field for such an intimate
study. We know each other pretty thoroughly, children, parents
and teachers.
Our pupils represent three general classes. There are those
whose parents have sought the most hygienic school environment
in the community from the beginning of the school life of their
children. Then there are children who have failed in the public
schools. Their parents, weary of ineffectual prodding, have followed some neighbor's prescription and sent them to the Normal
to be cured. Finally there is a small class of boys and girls who
have shown tendencies that have interfered with the harmony of a
system planned to handle masses of children. These are the socalled unmanageable boys and girls. These are, with scarcely an
exception, children who are strongly individualized and respond
in a perfectly normal and wholesome way to individual treatment. The last two classes represent the children who would soon
1The Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 6, November 15, 1909, p. 164.
(46)
RESPONSIBILITY FOR RETARDATION. 47
be eliminated were they compelled to attend a public school. It
has been our policy to accept these children when they apply if
there is a vacant seat. We, therefore, undoubtedly show a greater
proportion of retardation than the average public school. Our
school accommodates 200 pupils through the first eight grades. In
this study I have omitted the kindergarten. Our pupils were
asked to fill out the following questionaire:
1. Name.
2. Nationality of parents.
3. Where were you born ?
4. Date of your birth?
5. How long have you attended the Normal ?
6. What other schools have you attended ?
7. Why did you change ?
8. Have you ever been out of school for a term ? How
long have you been out 1 Why ?
9. What studies do you like best ?
10. Why do you like them ?
11. Are there any studies you do not like?
12. Why did you not like them?
13. Have you ever had any teachers you did not like?
14. Why did you not like them ?
15. Have you ever repeated the work of any grade ?
If so, which grade?
16. Why were you obliged to repeat?
17. Have you ever had a double promotion? If so in
what grades?
The answers were thoroughly frank. The children felt that
I was interested to know their whole school history and in many
cases volunteered additional data after they had talked with their
parents. Their replies were supplemented by knowledge which
I had previously obtained in conversation with the parents and
data on file in the office.
The answers to questions 9, 10, 11, and 12 were so suggestive
and took us so far afield that I have reserved them for another
paper and will only refer to them incidentally.
The results of the inquiry bear us out in the presumption that
we have our full share of retarded children. Taking six years
as the standard age for the first grade we find 76 retarded
children; this is 38 per cent of our total enrolment. The following table shows the amount of retardation:
48 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Retarded. Total number.
1 year   36
2 years   25
3 years    8
4 years   7
It will be seen at a glance that there are only fifteen cases
which looked at superficially would cause apprehension.
When we come to the consideration of the individual cases
with the causes for the retardation, we find the problematic cases
are even fewer than this table would indicate. That retardation
is not necessarily an indication of inferior mental ability is shown
by the following table. I have taken the average standings of the
retarded children in all their school work, using the terms excellent, very good, good, fair, poor and very poor in their usual
significance. These standings are compared with the number of
years or retardation.
Standing. Retardation in Years.
1 2.3 4 Total No.
Excellent  11 6 .. .. 17
Very good  6 5 .. .. 12
Good  10 10 3 1 24
Fair  8 1 2 2 13
Poor  1 3 1 2 7
Very poor  .. 2 1 3
With special classes for the weak and special classes for the
exceptionally strong who may be able to go faster than the average of the class, with daily physical training in a thoroughly
equipped gymnasium, with considerable emphasis upon the manual
arts, together with an attempt to bring both material and method
of instruction into accord with the children's needs and aptitudes,
we have succeeded in securing a very fair standard of achievement in the formal work of the grades. All but ten of the retarded
children carry the formal work of their grades with an average of
seventy-five or above. Only four of these ten cases are discouraging. Three of these four are entered as very poor in the table.
None of the three has been with us a full year. One entered but
a month ago. This is a child of ten who has attended school regularly since he was six years of age. His ability to read and write
is scarcely equal to that of our first grade pupils. He is listless
and inert, yet there is no trace of physical defect other than a
slight defect of vision which has been corrected by glasses. In
fact he seems rather above the average child of ten in physical
development. Until within a week ago we were inclined to beRESPONSIBILITY FOR RETARDATION. 49
lieve that he was defective mentally, although we had made no
special tests. He is now showing signs of a mental awakening
and has lately made considerable progress under individual instruction. Every success has become an added spur to effort. This
case bids fair to prove merely another instance of what a school
may do in the case of a normal but rather slow child to deaden
interest, impede mental growth and blight the future.
Another of the failures is a young lad who entered our eighth
grade. After a few weeks' trial it was found necessary to place
him in the seventh grade. Even here his average standing is very
poor. He has bad habits, is indifferent to all appeals that a school
can make. We are certain that the difficulty here is moral, though,
rather than mental.
The third case is that of a girl who has a bad heredity and
a poor home environment. The report of her teachers is uniformly that when she wills to apply herself she is capable of good
work. There is no mental defect here, but a defect of will which
may prove even more fatal in its consequences.
The fourth case which I have cited as discouraging is a child
in our first grade. She is the only pupil in the grade who is a
repeater. This child has been graded poor. While she has
learned to read and will undoubtedly be able to do regular school
work within certain limits, she shows signs of mental defect,
chiefly in flighty attention, poor motor control and general perversity of conduct.
Referring to the table above, it is apparent at once that
the best work is done by children who are not retarded more than
two years. There is one case in which a girl who is retarded
four years has yet received a standing of very good. This girl is
a member of our seventh grade. She came to us because she
dreaded being classed with younger children in an ordinary public
school. In maturity of judgment and ability to express herself,
this girl would rank well if classed with those of her own age.
The years of school lost have not meant any real arrest of development. There is another case of four years' retardation in our
seventh grade with an average standing of good. The history is
very similar to the preceding one. A young girl was kept out
of school on account of her own illness and that of her mother
until she found her former schoolmates far beyond her.
Another fact is brought out strongly in this table. Twentynine of our very best pupils belong to the retarded class. Sixtysix of those whose work ranks considerably above passable, evi50 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
dencing power to grapple with school problems, are retarded. In
other words, about eighty-seven per cent of our retarded pupils
possess considerable ability when given an opportunity for individual expression and initiative. If we follow Cornell's classifition of the defective children in the public schools, these eightyseven per cent would necessarily fall in his first class as children
who have not reached their own best development because of poor
general health and other disabling factors. The rest, with the
exception of the one child, would fall into his second class. These
he calls the dull children who are slow mentally and in school
work, though intelligent in behavior and ordinary conversation.
He finds about ten per cent of the younger school children belong
to this class. We have only one pupil who could be placed in his
third class of backward children and none who would belong to
his fourth group of feeble minded.
Retardation, so far as this study goes, cannot be taken as an
index of inferior mental ability. It is much more likely to be
due to an unfortunate combination of circumstances in which
society as it is represented in the home and the average school
seems to have conspired with other factors, as ill health, to hinder
progress.
If it were possible to get at individual histories in other
studies of retardation, we would undoubtedly find similar results.
Classifying causes of retardation after a detailed study of
individual histories, we find the following factors operative:
1. Late entrance into school.
2. An additional grade called the connecting class inserted
between the kindergarten and first grade, now abolished in our
school.
3. A change in school with imperfect adjustment at time of
change.
4. Inefficient schools. This is necessarily a general term
which includes several specific causes as, overcrowded classes,
poor systems of promotion, lack of sympathy with and comprehension of the pupils on part of teacher, poor methods of instruction, and matter poorly adapted to children's needs and interests.
5. Illness. This includes cases of prolonged illness as well
as those of a briefer term, resulting in irregular and interrupted
attendance.
6. Physical defects which were imperfectly remedied and
thus present constant sources of loss.
7. Language difficulties due to use of a foreign language in
the home and consequent imperfect mastery of English.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR RETARDATION. 51
8. Slow mental development.
The following table shows these factors as they appeared, so
far as we could estimate, according to years of retardation.
?s ? ? !. ?1
ell ? -a* a-s J-s sg M ?i l
a 5 ? ^ -S"? So Sfio <8? ?? g
?<3 ^ 12 ?= -flu cu a-5 <s5 .2
>-3^3 -<JC Ocq i-hcQ w<J &hQ hP cc
1 12 9 8 3 2 2.. 1
2 14 5 10 7 10 2 3
41.. 251323
43.. 1 531 1 3
Total 30 14 21 20 16 8 3 10
Several factors may and did enter into a number of the cases
of retardation. Irregular attendance is undoubtedly as Ayres has
shown a very potent cause of retardation. We have no histories
of irregular attendance, however, that are' not included under the
categories of irregularity from illness and change of school.
All of the children who have physical defects have been
treated by competent physicians. Two of the children have undergone operations during the last year. In the three cases where
the language of the home is foreign, it has proven a great handicap.
It has been responsible for at least one year's retardation out of
the two and three occurring.
Late entrance seems to be the largest factor in causing retardation among our pupils. Final results may demonstrate the
wisdom of parents who thus retard the children's progress in
school. However, with healthy children the natural stimulation
of a well organized school should be beneficial.
The fourteen children who lost a year because of the connecting class between the kindergarten and first grade are children
who have been in the training department since they began school.
We found when taking charge of the school that the children from
the connecting class could do no better work and, in fact, were
not as keen as the children coming directly from the kindergarten.
Thereupon both groups were classed as first grades. Subdivisions
of the first grade were then based on the ability of the children
and not upon the length of time they had been out of the kindergarten. In several instances we have found the prolongation of
the kindergarten period distinctly detrimental. One pupil, a
bright child, keener intellectually than the average, was retained
in the kindergarten an extra year at the request of her parents.
The child has gone noticeably backward, has contracted dreamy
52 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
habits, is silly and inattentive. Had she been promoted and
received the stimulation suited to her phase of development, I
feel certain she would never have manifested her present tendencies.
In reviewing the answers of the children to reasons for
changes of schools, and also their summaries of studies and characteristics of teachers disliked, it seems as though the table underestimates rather than over-estimates the part played by the inefficient school and teacher in retarding children's normal progress.
The following are characteristic answers to reasons for their
change of school: "The school was too crowded." "I changed on
account of my health." "I was not learning." "I was seated
in a basement." "The doctor advised it." "Air better; I was
sick at the other school." "Did not like the teacher." "I came
for gymnasium and swimming." "I wanted to come to the Normal and be cleaner." "I needed more exercise and gymnasium
work." "Because I would feel more comfortable." "Didn't get
along." The gymnasium is mentioned repeatedly as a cause for
change, as also the crowded and unsanitary conditions of other
schools. The unsympathetic teacher also seemed to play a leading
role in the cause for change. Some of these teachers were vividly
recollected. "She hit us hard with a ruler if we didn't sit up
straight." Another child complains that "She made you write
'whispering' four hundred times." Another piteous complaint
from a timid little soul is, "I could not understand her. She
was cross." What a picture of a child seeking to establish sympathetic and harmonious relations between himself and his teacher
to no avail! Of such is the kingdom of school teachers too frequently composed. The individual child does not count with
them. He must move with the procession or get out of the way.
As Swift has said, "School boys many times recognize ability in
an associate where the teacher has missed it. Native tendencies
have never counted for much in the : schools. Principals and
superintendents can make better ones to order in the office."
My experience in dealing with the children who are sent to t
us after they have been pronounced failures in the public schools
is in agreement with that of Dr. Jones. "It is my opinion that
the great majority of such children are not at all abnormal but
are regarded as defective because the character of the teaching
has not been adapted to their individual physical and mental
needs."
The results of our special classes again conform to Dr. J ones'
RESPONSIBILITY FOR RETARDATION. 53
statement that "The record of the supposedly defective boy under
individual training is about as good as that of the normal child
under class instruction." The teacher must arouse the child's
interests and enter into his activities sympathetically. She must
individualize her pupils. That the majority of the public school
teachers have failed to' do this, and have fallen to the level of
wage earners is not entirely their fault. The social conditions
which have created the unprofessional teacher are the real
offenders. Those who have followed the discussion in the World's
Work since "The Confession of a School Teacher," appeared in
the November issue of last year, will realize that teachers of this
type, undeserving of our sympathy as they may appear, often
began their professional life with high ideals, only to lose them
under the grind of a system. As Swift says, "Men and women
of independence and power will not continue in a position in which
individuality must be submerged in obedience."
