A Misleading Average
=====================

News and Comments.
A figure not infrequently found in school reports is the average age
of the pupils in each of the elementary grades. Such series conform to
the same type. In the lower grades there is usually a greater interval
than one year between the average ages of successive grades and in the
upper grades an interval of less than one year. Generally speaking the
tables, like most of the tables in school reports, are printed without comment, though occasionally a report is found which points out as the
obvious interpretation, that while pupils progress more slowly than the
course of study in the lower grades, they advance more rapidly in the
upper grades.
The Memphis, Tenn., report of 1907-08 offers a striking instance
because the same report contains so much excellent material to show the
falsity of the conclusion. It prints the following figures:
Memphis, June, 1908.
United States.
White. Colored. 1903.
Number Average Number Average Average
Grades. in grade. in years. in grade. in years. in years.
1 2043 7 2223 8.5 6
2 1278 8 860 10.9 7.6
3 1269 9.9 686 11.6 9
4 1089 11.1 420 12.8 10
5 798 12.1 288 13.7 11
6 790 12.9 200 14.0 12
7 579 13.7 131 14.8 13
8 392 14.5 80 15.5 14
On these figures the following comment is made,?"The white schools
here are very close to the national average. It will be seen that the
average child in the first grade here is older than in the United States in
general, but that notwithstanding the fact that our children are older
when they enter school, they finish the work of the highest grade in the
grammar schools at the same age as the average children of all sections,
and in less time."
There is in fact in the figures cited for1 the United States an interval of
8.5 years between the first and eighth grades, while in the Memphis white
schools it is 7.5 years, and this apparently has led the writer to believe
that Memphis children finished their school work in less time. If he
had observed that in the colored schools the interval is 7 years it is
possible he would have hesitated to have drawn the conclusion that the
colored pupils advanced more rapidly than the white pupils.
(56)
NEWS AND COMMENT. 57
But of course the figures really tell us nothing about progress, but
simply the ages in the grades. The interval between the average ages in
the upper grades is less than one year, not because pupils advance more
rapidly but because the older pupils are dropping out of school.
An age and grade table published in the report gives abundant means/
of proof. There were in the fourth grade 1089 pupils of whom 716 or1 65.5
per cent were retarded. In the eighth grade there were 392 pupils yof
whom 193 or 49.3 per cent were retarded. Such a loss in the proportion of
retarded pupils might it is true be due to greater progress, but when it
is taken in connection with the great drop in number? it is not likely.
There were in the fourth grade 273 pupils of normal age or under, in the
eighth grade 199, the difference being 174. On the other hand the fourth
grade contained 716 retarded pupils, the eighth grade 192, a difference
between the two grades of 524. It is probable that the present eighth
grade has lost pupils in about these proportions, i. e. about three over
age or retarded for each pupil of normal age and under.
In the colored schools, where retardation is still greater, similar
comparisons are still more striking. The fourth grade contained 33
normal pupils, the eighth grade 15, a difference of 18. The fourth grade
contained 387 retarded pupils and the eighth grade 65, a difference of
322. Now if these differences represent approximately the losses which
the present eighth grade group has had in the last four years, then they
?re in the ratio of one normal age pupil to nearly eighteen retarded
pupils.
In further evidence that the average is reduced by the elimination
of over age or retarded pupils we may cite the experience of Providence,
I. In that city no child can leave at the age of fourteen years to go
to work without a certificate. Of all the certificates issued in 1907-08
only 22.5 per cent were given to children who were in normal grades for
the age 14 years, and 77.5 per cent were given to those below the normal
grade.
The average age as printed in the school reports is doubtless correct,
the conclusion not infrequently drawn from it is undoubtedly wrong.
The error has arisen from a failure to take into account the diminishing
numbers in the grades upon which such averages are based and the
causes of such diminution.
Roland P. Falkner.
Special Schools and Glasses,?the Administrative Problem.
In the current report of the Superintendent of Public Schools for
Philadelphia, which is just now in press, Dr. Brumbaugh gives an
effective statement of many of the administrative problems that arise
in connection with the organization of special schools and classes. This
admirable consideration of Philadelphia problems will doubtless prove
helpful to many other communities. The question of the special class
versus the special school is treated with great thoroughness. The
58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Psychological Clinic has therefore deemed it serviceable to publish in
these columns the paragraphs dealing with these problems. Superintendent Brumbaugh's report for 1908 will also repay careful examination
by any one interested in the statistical treatment of public school
problems.
"Until comparatively recent years the Public School systems of this
country have been developed and operated to meet the educational requirements of the average or normal child. So exclusively has attention been
thus directed to education 'in the mass' that the existence of variations
from the so-called normal has hardly been recognized, much less taken
into account in the practical regime of the schools. The pupil who failed
to keep step with his fellows or who because of physical or moral defect
seriously interfered with the regular work of a class tended to drop out,
or to be forced out, of school and the problem of the exceptional child
disappeared with him.
"The enactment of compulsory education laws and the gradual
improvement in the enforcement of the law, however, forced the problem
upon the attention of the schools and of the school authorities. Special
schools, and special classes in regular schools, have been established in
many cities throughout the United States, for truant, incorrigible, backward and otherwise defective pupils of whose presence it is imperative
that the regular classes be relieved and for whose education adequate
provision is equally imperative.
"The first special school for the truant and incorrigible was established in this city in 1898. The number of such schools has grown to
nine (9) at the present date. The first class for1 backward children in a
regular school was established in 1901. The number of such classes has
grown to six (6) and one school?the John Quincy Adams?of six (6)
classes has been organized as a special school for backward and mentally
deficient children only. With but two exceptions, the special schools,
though originally intended for the truant and incorrigible only, have by
a natural classification of the pupils attending them been organized for
backward and mentally deficient pupils also. The schools, however, are
small, varying in size from but two (2) to a maximum of seven (7)
classes and make provision for only 1000 pupils. There are in all twentythree (23) disciplinary classes with an enrolment of 458 boys; and
twenty-five (25) backward classes (six of these are in regular schools)
with an enrolment of 350 boys and 107 girls. (Report for November,
1909.) As these figures show, the growth of the system of special schools
and classes has been slow and uneven, and far from equal to the demands
for the proper segregation and training of the defective child.
"The pressing need for special classes has been generally admitted
and more or less accurate estimates of the number of pupils to be provided for have from time to time been made. Ten years ago a census of
mentally deficient children attending the public schools was taken by
the principals, who reported approximately 1000 such children. The principals did not receive expert assistance or direction in this work and, no
doubt, many mistakes in the diagnosis of individual cases were made;
but the fact that in 637 of the cases reported the pupils had been two
NEWS AND COMMENT. 59
to three years in one grade and 144 had been three years or more in grade
serves as a check upon the returns and would indicate that the census
was probably not very far wide of the mark. No account was taken at
this time of other classes of defectives.
"In February, 1909, a census of the mentally sub-normal and of the
truant and incorrigible children in the public schools was taken under
the direction of the Bureau of Health acting in conjunction with the
Department of Superintendence of Schools. The returns were carefully
collated and published in a special report by a Committee of the Philadelphia Teachers' Association.* The Committee was composed of representative teachers and principals of both regular and special schools, the
head of the department of psychology of the Normal School, two district
superintendents and an associate superintendent. This committee was
m close touch with the Bureau of Health and with the Department of
Superintendence and the results of its investigation are significant and
valuable. The report thus prepared shows?to employ round numbers
only?about 500 denominated as 'feeble minded' in all the public schools
of the city. Of these about 50 are enrolled in special schools, so that
special provision is made for only about one-tenth of all the cases. About
1500 'truant and incorrigible,' one-third of whom are in special schools,
are also reported. The census probably under-estimates the number of
defective children in the city. It undoubtedly is a fair indication of the
need for special schools and classes for the sub-normal child.
"A careful, scientific study of this question is in my judgment highly
desirable and I have therefore appointed, under the authority of the
Board of Education, the following committee to undertake the work:
Milton C. Cooper, District Superintendent; Holman White, Principal
Northeast School; Dr. Walter S. Cornell, Bureau of Health; Louis Nusbaum, Principal Binney School, Secretary; Oliver P. Cornman, Associate
Superintendent, Chairman. This committee will endeavor to determine
as accurately as possible by individual examination of cases the number
of sub-normal children in the schools and the degree of backwardness of
each pupil reported. The committee will continue its work throughout
the school year 1909-10 and its investigations will no doubt furnish data
of value for the solution of the problem of the education of the backward child.
"It must also be noted that the special schools have not been distributed geographically so as best to meet the needs of the system.
I he several areas and school populations served by these schools vary
enormously. Schools Nos. 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are not properly
located even as regards their own territory. No. 7 is the only special
school west of the Schuylkill River. There should plainly be several
centres for special classes in a district so large as West Philadelphia.
The relative inaccessibility of some of the special schools is shown in the
variation in enrolment in these schools. While the schools as a whole
accommodate about one-sixth of the estimated number of defectives of the
city, some of the schools have but one-tenth, others nearly one-third of
the defectives of their respective territories.
?Document No. 3.
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"Another indication of the unevenness of the growth of the special
schools is found in the varying proportions of boys and girls enrolled in
the several schools and the disproportionate number of boys in the total
for all the schools. There are approximately as many backward girls as
backward boys in the public schools, yet the special schools and classes
contain but one-third as many sub-normal girls as boys of corresponding
type, and while cases of chronic truancy and disorderly conduct are much
more numerous among boys than girls, nevertheless there are truant
girls, and girls who are otherwise fit subjects for disciplinary classes, but
no provision whatever has been made for them. In consequence, girls
who exert a truly demoralizing influence upon a class and otherwise
retard its progress are often retained in school because the law compels
it or because the loss to the normal pupil is endured rather than have the
unfortunate girl suffer exclusion from such benefits as she may derive
from the regular class. On the other hand, cases that become intolerable
are sometimes forced out of school just at a time when they most need
sympathetic guidance and control to save them from continued error and
future misery. There can be no question but that provision should be
made whereby such girls may be retained in school under the best educational influences possible to accord them. In justice to the normal child
this can only be done by segregation of such pupils in special classes.
"It is of equal, if not of greater, importance to secure properly qualified teachers for the special classes as it is to provide a sufficient number
of well equipped class-rooms. Unfortunately the conditions under which
the special schools have been established and maintained have not been
favorable to the development of a corps of teachers as exceptional in
character as the nature of the work really demands. The salary paid
special teachers is the same as that for primary grades in the regular
schools; the grammar grade teacher of a special class receives less salary,
therefore, than a teacher of a corresponding grade of a regular class.
The absence of salary inducement, together with the relatively inferior
environment of the special schools as now constituted and the special
character of the work have made it difficult to obtain teachers of experience at all, much less to secure those who have special preparation for
this field of work. Indeed, in the earlier years, vacancies in these
schools were sometimes filled by the appointment of persons without certificates to teach. In recent years, no such appointments have been made,
but persons without previous teaching experience have been assigned
to these important places. It should be stated that a number of the
teachers in the special schools have taken university and other special
courses and have visited training schools and institutions for defectives
in order better to qualify themselves for their positions, and there is
much good work being done to-day in the .special schools and classes.
What has been done voluntarily by some, however1, should be made a
condition of appointment for all. Teachers in sufficient numbers to meet
the demands, however, cannot be induced to make the necessary special
preparation for this work unless the salary for these positions be made
somewhat higher than that for the Regular grade positions. The provision of such a salary increment for those who obtain the requisite
NEWS AND COMMENT. 61
qualifications is a necessary preliminary, therefore, to raising the
standard for teachers of defective children and for improving the quality
of the work in special schools and classes.
"The need of professional training for work in special classes is
generally recognized and opportunity for securing it is now afforded by
courses given in both the regular term work and in the summer schools
of many teachers' colleges, and in the pedagogical and psychological
departments of universities and in training schools for defective children.
It would, in my judgment, be feasible and highly desir'able for such
courses to be offered in the normal training schools under the Board of
Public Education. Until the supply of trained teachers may be largely
increased much improvement may be expected, however, by a careful
selection of experienced teachers in the grades who by reason of patience,
sympathy and other gifts of temperament have natural aptitude for
special class work. A few teachers of this character who have charge of
special classes have been notably successful and have found the work so
interesting that they prefer to continue in it rather than return to the
regular class-room.
"The schools have suffered also in that they have not heretofore
received the amount and kind of supervision that is essential for their
highest welfare. The principals of these schools have each a class to
teach in addition to suffering the numerous interruptions occasioned
by official visits of medical inspectors, attendance and probation officers,
and interviews with parents. In consequence they not only have little
or no time for supervision of the work of the school, but are even obliged
to neglect, more or less, the work of their own classes. Moreover, the
Director of Special Schools was able to give but a portion of her time
to the supervision of these schools as she had charge also of the sewing
m the elementary grades, and the District Superintendents were not
brought into official relation with the special schools except to receive
their statistical reports and to supervise the transfer of pupils to and
from the schools. A partial remedy for the lack of professional supervision will be found in the arrangements that have been made for this
year whereby the District Superintendents have been given official
charge of the special schools within their respective territories, and the
general direction of the work of the schools has been assigned to one
of the Associate Superintendents. This will not only secure for the
principals and teachers of the special schools a greater share of professional assistance and direction, but should lead to a closer relation
between the special and the regular schools and an understanding of
each other's problems that will be mutually helpful.
"The amount and kind of supervision that should be accorded the
special classes, however, cannot be secured unless they be brought into
a still closer relation to the regular schools. The backward classes that
have been etablished in regular schools are under the direct charge and
daily oversight of principals trained in the work of supervision who are
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
thus enabled to study at close range the problem of the backward and the
mentally deficient pupil. Disciplinary classes also should be established
upon a similar basis. The advantages inherent in a plan of organization
whereby the special classes become an integral part of the regular schools
are many and important. It reduces to a minimum the 'institutionalizing' of the defective pupil by affording him the opportunity and the
benefit of association with his more normal fellows in many general
exercises of the school. Under judicious management, the fact that
he is segregated as a special pupil may seem to him in no essential
different from the classification by grades of all the other pupils. It
thus removes the stigma that invariably attaches to a special school as
such and lessens the opposition of parents to the transfer of their children
to special classes, and the transfer of pupils from regular to special
classes and vice versa becomes easier of accomplishment. It brings the
teachers of regular classes into closer contact with the problem, and
enables them to diagnose with greater accuracy special cases that come
under their observation. In many cases special treatment may thus be
secured for a child before it is too late to apply the proper remedy.
Observation of the work in special classes, moreover, may not only
furnish the grade teacher with valuable suggestion for her own work,
but so arouse her interest in the problem as to lead her into the work
herself. The transfer of teachers from regular to special work is therefore facilitated.
"The establishment of additional special schools or classes would
not wholly solve the problem of making adequate provision for children
who deviate markedly from the normal. The truly feeble-minded or
imbecile child should not be permitted to attend a day school class,
regular or special at all, but for the good of society as well as for his
own greatest benefit, should be committed to an institution for permanent custody. This is imperative in order to prevent multiplication of
the evil. The mental deficiency of children of feeble-minded or lower
grade is incurable, but under proper institutional care, these unfortunates
may be trained to be partially, if not wholly, self-supporting while their
lives are made as happy as possible. Until this method of treatment shall
be adopted for the mentally deficient, they should at least be separated
from the merely backward pupil of the special class. In other words,
backward classes should be established in such numbers as to permit
of a better classification of the pupils. This could be done at very little
expense, as a brief consideration will show. If the average attendance
of 40 per teacher of the regular class were raised to but 40.5 pupils it
would permit of the formation of nearly 100 special classes of 15 to 20
pupils each without the necessity of making any increase at all to the
total teaching force.
"There are also, unfortunately, certain cases of chronic truancy and
incorrigibility for which the special schools offer little or no hope of
improvement or cure. The child's home environment and habits outside
NEWS AND COMMENT. 63
of school may be such as to counteract the good results of the healthful
moral influence of a well-conducted special school, and the only solution
of the problem is the complete and continuous control of the child during
such period as may be necessary to set him upon the proper road in life.
The establishment of a parental school is, therefore, an essential condition
of the proper treatment of this question.
"Unlike the training school for the permanent custody of the mentally deficient children committed to it, the parental school aims to retain
its pupils for a limited period only. As soon as the pupil entrusted to
its care has made such improvement as to give reasonable assurance that
he may resume his place with normal children, he is returned to his home
and to regular school work. Should the home environment be of such
a character as to endanger the state of moral health attained in the
parental school, the boy should be retained in the school until through
private assistance or philanthropic societies interested in this work,
a place may be found for" him under good family conditions. The
parental school may thus be made to serve the purpose not only of
upbuilding the physical and moral health of the pupils but also as a
temporary refuge until home conditions rather than institutional training
Eiay be secured for them.
"Such a school bears the same relation to a special school or disciplinary class as the latter bears to the regular classes of our public
schools. The special class is established for the two-fold purpose of
(a) relieving the regular class of a group of pupils who take a disproportionate share of the teacher's time and effort and thus interfere with
the progress of the normal child and (b) of providing the most favorable
conditions for the effective education of the pupils segregated. Similarly the parental school would further the interest of the troublesome,
hut not completely incorrigible, pupils of the disciplinary class by
removing from this group the child of truly vicious habits or criminal
tendencies whose only hope of reformation is to be found in the special
regimen of nutrition, physical education and carefully exercised control
of an institution planned along modern lines for this specialized educational function. Until parental schools are established, our disciplinary
classes are liable to contain such , a proportion of this type of pupil as
to render them doubtful, if not totally unfit, places for the ordinary
truant' and difficult pupil for whom they are really planned and for
whom they could otherwise render a valuable service.
"The establishment of a parental school has been regularly urged
by the Chief of the Bureau of Compulsory Education in his annual
reports. The necessity for it has been noted also by magistrates before
whom the delinquent children are brought and indeed, by practically
all who have had experience in dealing with the chronic truant and
incorrigible boy. New York, Chicago, Cleveland, Cincinnati, and a
number of smaller cities have already established parental schools.
64 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Philadelphia should also be included in the list of cities making adequate provision for the unfortunate juvenile delinquent who, either by
reason of unfortunate heredity or the evil influences of a hopelessly
inferior environment, is in danger of becoming a criminal charge upon
the community. The cost of providing and maintaining a modern
parental school would be returned many times over not only in the
reduction of expenditures for maintenance of criminal courts and penal
institutions, but in the service ultimately rendered the community by
the redemption of the youthful offenders to lives of useful citizenship.
"To summarize briefly the recommendations of this report in
regard to the education of the defective child:
"1. The buildings in which special schools are located should be
modernized, or where this is impossible, their1 use abandoned and the
equipment of the classes should be made full and complete in every
essential particular.
"2. These classes should be so located as to be readily accessible to
the pupils of the territory contributing to them and so grouped as to
permit separate classification of the disciplinary pupils from the backward and of the merely backward from the mentally deficient or feebleminded.
"3. Additional disciplinary and backward classes should be established where conditions will permit and provision should be made for
girls as well as for1 boys.
"4. The special schools and classes should be as closely related to
the regular schools as possible and be given the advantage of trained
supervision.
"5. Care should be exercised in the choice of teachers for special
classes. Only teachers of experience and those who have had special
training for the work should be appointed. Some increase over the
salary of the regular grade positions should be given as an inducement
for teachers to undertake the work.
"6. The normal training schools of this city offer courses to give
professional preparation for special class work as the system of special
education develops and the demand for qualified teachers increases.
"7. Every effort should be made to secure institutional care for the
feeble-minded children and those of still lower grade of mentality.
"8. A parental school should be established for chronic truants and
incorrigible children who cannot be treated successfully in the special
class."
