Two Methods to Open a Door
==========================

By Lightnek. Witmer.
Curiosity and Imitation Impel a Macacus Monkey, without Training, 
to Lift the Latch and Open a Door Intelligent Imitation and Curiosity in a Monkey.
This monkey is a Macacus (M. cynomolgus) brought by
Dr. William H. Furness 3rd from the Island of Java. The animal
is a female and has just reached puberty. Her dominant traits
are constant activity and curiosity. This makes her exceedingly
troublesome when given the freedom of a room. A dark corner,
cupboard, or pocket tempts her to investigate, regardless of the consequences.
Until recently she was kept in a cage in a room of Dr. Furness' greenhouse. A door of this room is shown in the illustrations accompanying this article. The door was fastened by an
ordinary latch. The monkey was often released from her cage and
given the freedom of the room. She spent this time in constant
motion, jumping and climbing about, examining every object with
fleeting but minute attention. Perhaps it was the mere impulse
to explore which led her in the first instance to open the door of the
greenhouse. She did this first by hanging by her hind legs from a
pipe just below the roof, reaching the latch with her hands, as
shown in one of the two illustrations. There was no trial and
error, for Dr. Furness tells me she succeeded in lifting the latch
and pulling the door open at the first attempt. She had never
been subjected to any of the lock and maze experiments of the
animal psychologists, nor had any effort been made to train her.
She was never known to hang by her hind legs in examining or
playing with any other object in the room. She may have conceived the purpose of opening the greenhouse door, thus making
an intelligent attempt to imitate the persons whom she had seen
going in and out of this door. She has never imitated any action
which was not of direct interest to herself. Properly speaking,
she does not blindly imitate at all. She does only what instinct
and interest lead her to undertake.
She learned to open the door of her cage and also the door
leading into another room, the knob of which she could reach
through the bars of her cage. This door was partly of glass and
through it she could look into the adjoining room. On one occasion I saw her observe intently some people in this room who
(225)
226 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
were about to come into the room containing her cage. She then
reached through the bars of the cage, turned the knob of the door,
pushed the door wide open and sat waiting on her haunches with
expectant gaze. There could be no doubt that she had conceived
in her mind the entrance into the room of the persons whom she saw
in the adjoining room, and it looked as though she had opened
the door for the purpose of allowing them to enter.
She learned to lift the latch of the door of her room by another
method shown in the second of the two illustrations. To do this
she climbed up the screen partition wall until she reached the
height of the latch. She learned this method some time after she
had been opening the door by the method of hanging from above.
She was never taught either method; in fact she was punished for
opening the door. Punishment had no effect upon her and it
became necessary to stop her from escaping into the next room by
attaching to the door a small bar which could be turned to hold the
latch in place. She never learned to move this bar to one side
and very soon her attempts to open the door became less frequent.
The method by which she was induced to open the door when
we undertook to photograph her in the act calls attention to the
importance of finding motives which really appeal to the animal
intelligence we may have under investigation. Thus, we tried
to persuade her to manipulate the latch by calling her attention to
it, opening and shutting the door, carrying her to the door and
placing her hand on the latch. She would make no effort to do
what we desired. Tier hand when placed on the latch fell feebly
from it. I tried to induce her to hang from the pipe with her
hind legs, lifting her into the proper position, but she would not
try to hang from the bar. We were compelled to give up our
attempt to photograph her and did not succeed until we tried a
different method some days following. Dr. Twitmyer, who took
the photograph, remained in the room with her, ready to snap
the picture as soon as she should be in position. Dr. Furness and
I went through the door into the greenhouse, called to her, stamped
our feet, came back and looked into the room, jiggled the latch and
finally succeeded in getting her mind fixed upon the idea of following us into the next room. Perhaps we were breaking down in
the animal's mind the opposing influence of the previous punishment which she had received for opening the door. At all events,
she finally opened the door several times and by both methods.
The illustrations are photographs of the animal at the moment of
lifting the latch.
CURIOSITY IN A MONKEY. 227
I fear to make hasty interpretations of animal behavior, but
I must admit I have been struck by what appear to be flashes of
intelligence which are the result of a momentary concentration of
attention. Since Herbart's time we have been willing enough to
recognize the educational value of an appeal to the child's natural
interest. The animal has interests also, but these are not necessarily the same as human interests. A just measure of an animal's
intelligence can be made only by studying him at moments when
his whole interest is aroused. A blind instinct to do something,
no matter what, or a blind curiosity, may indeed have inspired the
first opening of the door. Of a blind impulse to imitate, such as
appears in the anthropoids and in children and even in men and
women, I have seen no trace in this monkey. She pays no heed
to what does not concern her. But let her interest be aroused and
she manifests through her behavior an awakened consciousness
which approaches the human under like circumstances. What'
ever motive may have inspired the first opening of the door, I
believe the act came to be a conscious and intelligent imitation
of a human action, and, at the time she was photographed, was
performed with a consciously conceived purpose of gaining an
entrance into the adjoining room.
