Can Impacted Teeth Cause Moral Delinquency?
===========================================

By Arthur Holmes, Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
A teacher in a crowded school room was fretted beyond endurance by one boy in particular. It was not because of his lessons;
he stood well in his class, in fact at the head. There was plenty
of evidence that he did not come from a poor home. His clothing
was good, his hands were clean, he wore a necktie and collar;
there was a general air of good breeding about him. It was neither
dulness nor home training that made Harry the most troublesome
boy to handle in that school. He could never sit still; he was
always turning around, moving about and talking to the other
scholars, until finally he so wore upon the nerves of his teacher
that she was compelled to send him home with a note of suspension.
Then the father took him in hand, but parental authority,
discipline, and persuasion all failed. Conduct at home and school
grew steadily worse and along with elements of mischievousness
came actual criminal tendencies. Truth telling became a lost art;
be lied continually and without apparent reason; things about the
house disappeared; his father's watch was purloined and sold for
five cents; small articles at school were not safe if left within his
reach. The climax was attained when this acquisitive faculty
took the form of financial appropriation, which ended in his stealing sums of money from the neighbors, amounting at one time to
five dollars.
Having got completely beyond the control of both school and
family discipline, the boy was handed over to the Juvenile Court
and put on probation. This treatment, however, did not bring
the desired results. Frequent incarcerations at the House of
Detention for the purpose of frightening Harry failed to affect
him in the least. Next, a special school was tried, but that had
no permanent effect. Finally, in October of 1909, as a last resort,
he was brought to the Psychological Clinic for examination.
Nothing abnormal was found in his physical condition. There
were no special stigmata of degeneration nor any hint of mental or
moral imbecility. At the Nose and Throat Clinic a small adenoid
(19)
20 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
growth was found and an operation advised. His parents were
informed of this fact and arrangements for an operation were
promised. For a couple of months Harry disappeared from the
view of the Psychological Clinic and it was thought that he had
returned to the well trodden paths of school and home proprieties.
However, about the first of December, he turned up again in
the company of his father and a probation officer. His conduct
instead of improving had been growing steadily worse; his nervousness at school had reached a point where he not only wouldn't
sit still, he even climbed upon his desk, wished to answer all questions, was noisy and troublesome, utterly fearless and careless of
consequences. At home his disobedience, irritability and stubbornness were frequent causes of domestic turmoil. When permitted
to go out on the street at night, only upon his promise to return
by a specified hour, he seemed utterly to forget supper, bedtime, or
parental discipline and returned at his own pleasure or was found
and brought home by his father. His other bad habits had also
increased rather than decreased.
Outwardly there was no apparent change in his condition,
but a careful examination of his mouth revealed the chief factor
in his trouble. A number of his first teeth had not yet been shed
and the second teeth were slowly forcing their way out alongside
of the old ones. His gums, now very much swollen and red, were
the source of constant and almost unbearable irritation. He was
immediately taken to the Dental Clinic where Dr. Edward C. Kirk
was struck with the interesting condition of the boy and suggested
that the whole difficulty might primarily be due to impacted dentition. In his report he says:?
"On the lower right side, the space between the first permanent molar and first premolar has been partially closed by the
pushing forward of the first permanent molar. This condition has
led to a partial impaction of the second premolar which is, as yet,
unerupted and which may be a source of peripheral irritation.
On the whole, the case is, from my point of view, a typical one of
what I called dentitional stress; that is to say, of nervous irritation leading to a choreic tendency resulting from the general
nervous irritation which frequently arises during the period of
exchange of the permanent for the deciduous set of teeth.
"I am of the opinion that as soon as the secondary dentition
is fully in place his nervous phenomena will disappear. I should
consider it the part of wisdom to relieve the young boy of all
other sources of nervous stress until that stage of dentition already
CAN TEETH CAUSE MORAL DELINQUENCY? 21
referred to has been reached. It is a case for fresh air, out-of-door
employments and general improvement of hygienic conditions
rather than for medical treatment."
In spite of Harry's rebellion and loudly expressed fear, he
was immediately relieved of one outgrown canine tooth. The
effect was almost instantaneous. His whole nervous system seemed
to express itself in one sigh of relief. On the way back from the
Dental Clinic, he began an animated conversation with the social
worker, unburdened his mind 011 many points and initiated confidences which have grown ever since. From that time his
improvement has been marked and continuous. His teeth were
removed gradually as it was found expedient. Closely associated
with this dental condition, and possibly aggravated by it, was an
eye weakness discovered at the Eye Clinic. In order to insure
proper treatment, Harry was placed in charge of the social worker
of the Psychological Clinic who saw that the drops were regularly
put in his eyes, accompanied him to the eye specialist, and not only
secured glasses for him but accomplished the hitherto impossible
feat of making him wear them.
On account of the dental work and the refraction of his eyes,
he was not sent back to public school. Through the Psychological
Clinic a private school was found where the boy could receive the
intelligent and sympathetic training he needed. His whole
demeanor under the private instruction has been that of a normal
boj. He has been put upon his honor and trusted in numberless
ways and in every ca'se he has justified the expectations of his
teacher. He is now a healthy boy, with a boy's natural curiosity,
with good manners, good temper, with no more than the average
nervousness, and with every prospect of taking his proper place
in society and developing into an efficient and moral citizen.
The case described is typical of the work done in the Psychological Clinic. The home, public school, special school, and Juvenile Court with its system of probation, each working independently, had failed. The Psychological Clinic, performing the
function of clearing house in relation to its allied agencies, was
able to ameliorate the condition. In this case the Clinic came in
contact with the home through a skilled social worker, who gave
advice to the parents and information concerning various kinds of
schools. It touched the public schools and special schools through
the teacher and principal who first had trouble with this boy and
were compelled at times to suspend him. To them it furnished
information concerning the cause of the boy's bad conduct which
22 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
may prove helpful in future cases. The Juvenile Court, through
its probation officer, turned to the Clinic for information concerning the mental condition of this boy with special reference to his
moral responsibility, for in such a case of delinquency the first
question of importance is whether the child is a moral imbecile
and should be placed in some institution for life, or whether he is
merely bad and in need of certain disciplinary and reformatory
measures. The various medical departments through their clinics,
and the Dental Department gave their contributions toward the
solution of the problem; but, without some one to see that the boy
visited these clinics, their effects would not have reached him.
Finally, when the physical defects had been removed, the Psychological Clinic was brought in direct communication with a number
of private schools and institutions.
Cases of this kind illustrate the peculiar function of the
Psychological Clinic and demonstrate the necessity for its existence.
No other institution for the welfare of children can take so comprehensive and intelligent an interest in each individual boy or
girl and at the same time bring so many agencies to bear upon
the case. Sociologically considered, its chief function is in correlating these various agencies for ameliorating the condition of
children.
