The Autobiography?A Critical and Comparative Study
===================================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

By Anna
Robeson Burr. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Com-
pany, 1909.
In "The Autobiography" Mrs. Burr has made a genuine and valu-
able contribution to psychological literature. As we are reminded, the
objective record has for years furnished material to the historian, while
in the subjective record lies unused material of enormous value to the
psychologist. The book is a pioneer, the first serious attempt at a com-
parative study of subjective autobiography, and contains a careful and
critical survey of two hundred and sixty-five autobiographies, dating
from the earliest Christian times to the beginning of the nineteenth
century. These figures, however, can convey only a faint idea of the
prodigious amount of work involved, since many times that number
of books had to be read before they could be rejected as unfit for' the
author's purpose. Confining herself exclusively to subjective autobiog-
raphy?the "culte de soi"?she has admitted none to her pages who
fails to pass at her hands the double test of earnestness of purpose and
sincerity of execution. This "autobiographical intention" is best defined
in Mrs. Burr's opinion by the words of Marie Bashkirtsev,?"As if no
one in the world were to read it, yet with the purpose of being read."
The book makes an appeal, however, not only to the psychologist,
nor solely to the student, for whose help and guidance certain classsifi-
cations and an index are appended, but also to the lover of books, and
especially of personal memoirs. To him comes the delight of old friend-
ships renewed, and thanks to Mrs. Burr's stimulating choice of quota-
tions, the even greater joy of sampling unknown treasures.
Mrs. Burr first traces the history of autobiography from its appear-
ance in the Christian Era. The main classification is in three great
groups: historical, religious, and scientific, each headed by its arche-
type, Julius Caesar, Augustin, and Cardan.
Of these three the last, Jerome Cardan, is the only one likely to be
unfamiliar to the average reader. An Italian scientist, living in the six-
teenth century, by many deemed a madman, Mrs. Burr presents him to us
as the first introspective psychologist, "a Bibot studying an Aristotle,"
standing "in the same relation to the new psychology as Galileo to
astronomy." His was a curious personality, uniting an intense, inde-
pendent, intellectual development with a marked degree of the super-
stition common to his age. It is hardly possible to reconcile Cardan's
superstition with his intellectual power without a knowledge of his
social group. This fact illustrates one of the reasons for Mrs. Burr's
sub-grouping of her material, and through this arrangement we get
a more comprehensive, and as it were, birds-eye view of the whole
autobiographical field. By such a comparative study of contempora-
(89)
90 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
neous groups, it is possible to throw much light on the social and moral
movements of the past. One deduction drawn seems natural, that "the
subjective autobiography groups itself about the intellectual movements
and changes of the world, and lessens or disappears in times of material
change." Also through this grouping it is possible to see more clearly
the influence of certain autobiographies on their imitators, for instance
the outbreaks of military memoirs following Blaize de Monluc's Com-
mentaries, the effect of Bassompierre on Saint Simon, of Rousseau on
George Eliot, or Marmontel on John Stuart Mill. This last has received
much obtuse comment, according to Mrs. Burr, not the least of it from
the pen of Professor William James.
In discussing nationality and profession in their relation to self-
study, Mrs. Burr claims for the Italians that they approach more nearly
than any other nation to the ideal autobiography, that rare ability to
combine the scientific method with high intellectual capacity, emotion,
and literay style. She finds the distinctive note in French autobiog-
raphy is literary, in German, sentimental, in English, religious, and in
American, utilitarian. This last is based on Benjamin Franklin's
autobiography. There are many, especially among the worshipers of
Abraham Lincoln, who will quarrel with Mrs. Burt's assertion that
Franklin is the American ideal, "the most typically American of all
our great men." Those who are more than willing to accept him as
6uch, may still fail to see why "Burns has clearer insight," or why
"some courageous idealist" would have added more to our national
glory. Some men live the poetry and idealism that others write about.
No man who was not courageous could have faced as he did the English
parliament and none but an idealist could have held before himself
and the world the beacon-light of American independence,?only his
was an idealism welded to practical common sense.
The contribution of the various autobiographers to the subject of
memory but sustains the prevalent theory of its close relation to genius.
This chapter on memory, too, is replete with valuable information for
the child psychologist on the subject of first memories and the begin-
ning of self-consciousness.
Enough is quoted from the many religious confessions to convert
the reader to Mrs. Burr's opinion that a complete and authoritative
work on religious autobiography would be an invaluable contribution
to the world's literature. The relation of physical causes to religious
mania is only one among many suggestive ideas contained in this
chapter.
We are not surprised to hear that if there be one subject upon
which the autobiographer is likely to write fully, it is the sex-relation,
but in spite of this it appears that confessions of genuine passion are
rare.
Inexorably opposed to the pathological interpretation of genius,
Mrs. Burt* believes that "the intellectual life holds the only enduring
NEWS AND COMMENT. 91
and vital happiness which humanity is likely to know"; and in this
mass of self-revelation she finds a wealth of testimony to support this
opinion. In spite of the richer and more impressive self-revelation
of men of genius like Rousseau, the fact remains that one does not
need to be a genius in order to be a great autobiographer. The impres-
sion that such work must be the outcome of a restless egotism, of a
neurotic temperament, or unbalanced mind, is false. It appears that
the great body of self-revelation has been presented by persons who
differ very little from ourselves except in their ability.
The author lays great stress on the sincerity of the subjective
record and on her belief that the "majority of capital autobiographies
have beeen written in the interest of truth and are the outcome of
serious intention, the result of a deep-seated psychological impulse."
To the sceptic who doubts the validity of the material, claiming that
we cannot if we will tell the exact truth about ourselves, Mrs. Burr
retorts that to this rule the great are an exception, that in them ia
the imperious lash of truth driving them to a finer sincerity, a more
penetrating candor. She points out that serious and laudable motives
for writing are in the ascendant, and her data show that self-study
makes its appeal to the exact rather than to the imaginative mind. It
is interesting to find that although Mrs. Burr quotes Weiniger to sup-
port the claim that the incitement to autobiography comes from special
psychological qualifications, she allows thirty-four women to pass her
test of autobiographical intention, especially commending her sex for
their continuity of -memory. This is a substantial piece of evidence
against Weiniger's claim that woman is incapable of either sincerity
or continuity of memory.
Critics will probably dissent from some of Mrs. Burr's judgments.
Some persons will take exception to the short shrift vouchsafed Cardinal
Newman; Havelock Ellis is bound to quarrel with the cutting out of
Casanova; some student of insanity will object to Mr. Beers being
classified as a "freak," considering his motives were humanitarian. Per-
haps this is one of the book's charms, the interesting questions it opens
up, its stimulating, its suggestive quality. For Mrs. Burr herself says
that the object of her book is "mainly suggestive rather than con-
elusive." Scarcely a chapter which does not either arouse the ardor
of the litterateur or open to the student some fruitful line of research.
Above all, Mrs. Burr's manner of treatment is alien to the' statistician,
and rarely encountered in comparative studies or in books of reference.
She handles her subject with discrimination and humor, with vivid
sympathy and delicate understanding.
