Medical and Dental Inspection in the Cleveland Schools
=======================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. IV. USTo. 4. June 15; 1910. y

By J. E. Wallace Wallust, Ph.D.,
Normal Training School, Cleveland, Ohio.
I. The Development of Medical School Inspection.
In 1906 the Board of Health of Cleveland appointed twentysix ward physicians, a part of whose duties consisted in inspecting
every other day the public and parochial schools of their districts
for the detection and exclusion from the schools, of pupils suffering
from contagious and communicable diseases. But excluding children, in conformity with the law, with such communicable diseases
as pediculosis, scabies, impetigo, etc., created another problem.
Many children thus excluded remained out of school for days;
they received no corrective treatment at home, hence when they
returned they were often in a worse condition than when they
left; their exclusion seriously handicapped the regular work of
the classroom, for these pupils frequently stood in greatest need
of the classroom processes, and they had to be excluded in large
numbers owing to the enormous prevalence of some form or other
of communicable disease. In a number of the congested foreign
districts of the city, conditions were such that not only would
exclusion result in a breakdown of the system from the point of
view of school attendance, but a large percentage of children were
forced to labor under the handicap of needless suffering, owing to
the ignorance, indifference, or poverty of the parents.
To checkmate the evils due to those conditions and to demonstrate to the Board of Education the importance of a system of
medical inspection that should embrace examination for physical
defects, certain inspectors, working through the Sanitation Committee of the Chamber of Commerce, volunteered their services
without compensation if the Board of Education would provide
inspection stations in those schools in which the need was the most
(93)
94 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
pressing. The Board established five of these stations in schools
which drained large foreign populations, each station in charge of
a graduate nurse of the Visiting Nurses' Association. The first
was organized by L. W. Childs, M.D., at the Murray Hill school
in 1908. School dispensaries or clinics, the first and perhaps
still the only ones of the sort in the country, were connected with
two of these stations (Murray Hill and Marion). Three others
were subsequently added. The equipment of these clinics, provided
at the expense of the School Board, varies, but consists mainly
of diagnostic appliances for examining the ear, nose and throat,
eye test cards, instruments for removing adenoids and tonsils and
for performing the simpler operations, ointments, solutions for
treating communicable diseases, an instrument case, a metal stand
for basins, glass top table, couch, enameled chairs, etc. While
treatment at the clinic has not been contemplated, emergency
cases receive prompt attention, and at one of the schools, the
Murray Hill (and in a measure, at a couple of the others also),
all cases of infection, of wax and suppurating ears, atrophic
rhinitis, and all marked cases of adenoids and hypertrophied tonsils
have received remedial or operative treatment.
The inspection work has been rendered practically effective,
however, largely through the "follow up" work and the diversified
ministration of the school nurse. She makes a record of the
examination, and sends a copy to the child's parents. She visits
the home to ascertain whether the physician's advice has been followed. If it has not, recourse is had to the gentle art of suasion,
or in extreme cases of neglect the juvenile court is invoked. Indigent parents are advised to take the child to a free dispensary or
hospital clinic. She looks after many of the minor troubles while
the child remains in school, attends to ordinary dressings and the
child's hygiene in general, inspects the rooms daily and treats at
the dispensary the simpler infections of the skin and head, while
referring the more complicated cases to the medical inspector.
After treatment she follows the child home and instructs the
mother how to continue treatment, or, in case the mother is
employed, takes personal charge. She also teaches the older girls
in school how to apply bandages and antiseptics, how to prepare
common disinfectants and antidotes, and explains the importance
of sanitation and personal cleanliness. She gives baths to the
girls where showers are provided. Hers is a diversified calling,
filled with noble achievement. In one month in the Murray Hill
school, nurses' aid was given to 680 cases while 75 homes were
MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSPECTION. 95
visited. A monthly report of nurses' aid in the Harmon school included 195 baths, 215 treatments for impetigo, 50 for pediculosis,
50 ocular cases were referred to the Humane Society and one to
the Blind Institute. Similar cases from another school in a congested section (Eagle) are frequently referred to dental, medical,
and babies' dispensaries, and family physicians. In 1907 through
the cooperation of nurses, physicians, teachers, principals, parents,
dispensaries, free hospital clinics, and philanthropic organizations, over 3300 pupils received aid, of the following nature:
Number. Per cent.
Glasses secured by ,  990 29.2
Other eye treatment     1016 30.
Ear treatment   228 6.7
Nasal treatment      379 11.1
Dental treatment   664 19.6
Unclassified   Ill 3.4
Total    3388 100.
To the thousands of children and parents who have profited
from this humanitarian and philanthropic ministration, the school
nurse has become a guardian angel and the inspector a patron
saint. There has been no frenzied outcry in Cleveland against
this physical welfare work,?the transcendent value of which has
been obvious upon the very surface,?either on the part of ignorant
or superstitious parents, or studied opponents of "communism"
or "socialism." Objections, so far as they have been at all heard,
have been directed by parents against operations, or by physicians
against free treatments. Some parents object to the removal of
tonsils, through the mistaken fear that this will injure the voice;
and others to the wearing of glasses, because they fear that once
worn they can never be discarded.
What a boon this work has been to the schools! Instead of
nithlessly excluding infected children from the schools and thereby
clogging the school machinery, the district physician has given
Avay to the medical inspector and the school nurse, and the child
has remained in school without the danger of infecting his fellows.
The statistics from one of the medical stations (Marion school)
show most impressively how irregular attendance can be effectually
counteracted. It has been computed by the Principal (Miss
0']STeill) that the school nurse and dispensary between January 1
and June 1, 1909, saved 1871 days for the child and the school.
Without these adjuncts of the school the following cases of exclusion would have been necessary:
96 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
43 infections for 5 days, or  215 days.
118 cases of conjunctivitis for 5 days  590
23 " " scabies for 5 days   115
23 " " scabies for 5 days   115
25 " " ringworm for 10 days  250
57 " " pediculosis of head for 3 days    171
6 " " pediculosis of skin for 10 days  GO
94 " " impetigo for 5 days  470
Total   1871
With a rigidly enforced exclusion law these children, and others
who might have been infected by them, would have been deprived
of the processes of the schools for about ten years in the aggregate, at a tremendous economic loss to the taxpayer. This enormous waste was obviated at a merely nominal cost to the community. This saving takes no account of the increased working
efficiency which resulted from properly caring for the following
283 non-communicable or private ailments during the corresponding period:
79 cases of minor injuries. 10 cases of* foreign bodies in eyes.
65 " " throat affections. 10
40 " " burns. 10
20 " " chapped hands. 9
19 " " ear affections. 7
12 " " nasal affections. 2
removed tonsils,
eczema,
adenoids.
canker sores,
cold sores.
To render this auxiliary work of the schools still more
effectual, volunteer work in the direction of feeding indigent
anaemic and underfed children has been started in some of the
schools. The Philanthropic Committee of the Cleveland Federation of Women's Clubs regularly serves a simple breakfast in the
Eagle school to an average of thirty-six pupils per day.
As a result of this hygienic and medical work the attendance
records have reached unprecedented heights in these irregular districts. The principals estimate that 90 per cent of the affected
pupils have remained in school who would in the absence of this
service have dropped out for several days. This fact is of vital
significance to the schools and the community in view of the contention of Ayres1 that irregular attendance isi the chief cause of
backwardness and non-promotion, and that ill health is the chief
cause of irregular attendance. He found that in ISTew York 43
per cent of the boys and 48 per cent of the girls of the 16,000
completing the eighth grade in 1909 were absent from school from
illness. The net loss to the girls amounted to 3.5 per cent of the
length of the term, and to the boys 3.2 per cent. The causes of
*Ayres, Leonard P. Irregular Attendance?A Cause of Retardation. The
Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 1, March 15, 1909.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSPECTION. 97
these absences were: measles, 2108 ; scarlet fever, 1550; diphtheria,
1002; pneumonia, 621; whooping cough, 473; chicken pox, 387;
mumps, 288; tonsilitis, 251; typhoid fever, 219; rheumatism,
200; malaria, 151. Without any system of medical inspection
and nurses' supervision in the ISTew York schools, these absences
would probably have been increased from minor infections such
as those which prevailed in the Marion school.
Since the work attempted in these stations has not contemplated a routine examination of every child, and since the form
and completeness of the records kept have varied more or less with
each inspector, it is impossible to state how many cases have been
examined by the physicians since the work was launched, or how
many defects (particularly the non-communicable physical abnormalities) have been discovered, or what the relative proportions
of different kinds of physical defects are, or precisely how the
influence upon mental retardation differs with different defects,
or what have been the subsequent effects upon the physical growth,
the increase in body weight, and the mental efficiency of the hygienic and medical treatment of the affected child. The magnitude of
the tinspection work may be inferred, however, from the records
at the Murray Hill and Marion schools, where, during the months
of January, February, and March, 28,820 inspections were made.
Moreover, I have been able to obtain three sets of reliable data,
one from the printed records and two in response to a questionnaire. The first shows the ratio of the various physical defects
obtaining among children in the better sections and congested
districts of the city. During the academic year 1906-07 the department of physical training of the public schools examined 30,000
children with respect to the conditions of the eyes, ears, nose and
throat only, in grades three to seven. The following table is based
upon the examination of 1284: pupils in two schools, one in the
"east end" and the other in a congested district:
East End. Congested District.
Per cent. Per cent.
Number examined   668 616
Wearing glasses   6.4 1.8
Defective vision   32.4 71.1
Other symptoms of eye trouble 27.8 35.2
Defective hearing  5.2 1.8
Diseased ears    8.9 12.8
Obstructed nasal breathing.. 45.1 57.1
Habitual mouth breathers... 12.1 14.7
Teeth very defective  1.3 15.7
Teeth very dirty    27.8 46.4
Average   18.55 28.4
98 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Dr Childs has more recently made a routine examination of
425 pupils in the lower grades (from the second to the fifth) in
the Murray Hill school, where 97 per cent of the school population is Italian, covering the ear, nose and throat, and has kindly
supplied me with the results of his careful survey, to wit:
Per cent.
Retraction of drum membranes of both ears   32
Retraction of membrane of one ear    16
Impaired bearing    22
Enlargement of both tonsils   22
Enlargement of one tonsil  3Y2
Adenoids   13
Impacted wax in ears   13
Enlarged cervical glands   10
Goitre   7
Atrophic rhinitis   5
Deviated septum   4
Suppurating ears  2
Hypertrophied inferior turbinals    2
In a still later examination of 120 sixth, seventh, and eighth grade
girls in the same school, 32 per cent suffered from goitre, and 16
per cent from anaemia.
In a routine examination of the 972 pupils in the eight
grades of Mayflower school (station opened March 25, 1909), the
inspector, Dr S. A. Weisenberg, to whom I am indebted for a
full report, found the most prevalent troubles to be the following:
Per cent.
Pediculosis   51
Defective eyesight .,  7
Miscellaneous eye cases   13
Eye troubles, total   20
Miscellaneous throat cases      8.4
Hypertrophied tonsils    4.5
Tonsilitis    2.7
Adenoids   2.2
Adenitis   1.3
Throat troubles, total   19.1
Impetigo   9
Injuries   8.2
Miscellaneous ear cases   4.5
Chronic rhinitis   1.6
Nasal defects      1.3
Nose troubles, total   2.9
Over 78 per cent of these children were Jewish, nearly half of
these being Russian Jews (47.9 per cent).
The inspectors agree that adenoids, enlarged tonsils and
defective breathing (with malnutrition, epilepsy and chorea)
are the physical defects which most retard mental progress.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSPECTION. 99
These observations agree with Ayres's1 rating of the relative
capacities for work of normals and various physical defectives.
He finds the percentages of handicap or loss of efficiency as follows : defective teeth, 6 per cent; defective breathing, 7 per cent;
enlarged tonsils, 9 per cent; adenoids, 14 per cent; and enlarged
glands, 15 per cent (based on the time required to finish the elementary grades).
That the conditions revealed by these medical surveys in
Cleveland are paralleled in other centers of population may be
seen from the following tabulation of a few of the available
returns.
Among 1442 children, largely of Irish, Jewish, and Italian
stock, in three schools out of a total of 142,000 examined in ISTew
York City in 1908, 73 per cent suffered from defective teeth, 59
per cent from nasal breathing, 42 per cent from visual defects,
39 per cent from hypertrophicd tonsils, and 15 per cent from
anaemia. Based upon another medical census of 23,000 children
m all grades, the following distribution was found at the ages of
six and fifteen:
At 6 years. At 15 years.
Defective teeth   65 per cent 31 per cent
Enlarged tonsils  40 14
" glands   40 7
Adenoids  ....  23 3
Defective breathing   23 9
" vision  .17 26
About 80 per cent of these children were physically defective in
some way. Gland, mouth, and throat troubles, it will be observed,
are typical childhood infirmities, while defective vision (as well
as defective teeth) constitutes the bane of youth. In Worcester
^58 pupils examined in two elementary schools showed enlarged
glands in 64.5 per cent of the cases, affected tonsils in 37 per cent,
adenoids ("suspected") in 21 per cent, eye defects in 15 per cent,
anaemia in 4.5 per cent, poor nutrition in 5.5 per cent, medium
nutrition in 36 per cent, and good nutrition in 57.5 per cent.
Decayed teeth were found in 86.5 per cent of the pupils, the
average number per child being 4.85, and the corresponding averages in the different grades (given in order from the first to
the ninth grade), 7, 6.54, 6.08, 4.90, 4, 3.50, 4, 4, and 3.66 per
cent. There is a noticeable foiling off in the five upper grades.
The figures show a wide variation from grade to grade in some
of the defects. In Chicago in 1909, 123,900 children were examined (this was not an ultimate examination, only the major defects
^yres, Leonard P. The Effect of Physical Defects on School Progress. The
Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 3, May 15, 1909, p. 71.
100 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
being noticed), and of these about 36 per cent had defective teeth,
22 per cent enlarged tonsils, 13 per cent enlarged glands, 5 1/2 per
cent nasal defects, 3 x/2 Per cen^ adenoids, and 2 1/3 per cent hearing defects. Of more than 5000 children examined in Los Angeles,
' 61 per cent suffered from defective eyesight, 31 per cent from
adenoids, 25 per cent from enlarged tonsils, and 22 per cent from
defective hearing. In the rural districts of St. Louis County1 the
vision was below normal in one or two eyes in 30.6 per cent of the
2000 cases examined, less than two-thirds normal in 14 per cent,
less than one-half normal in 3 per cent (these figures do not
include hyperopia or mild astigmatism), the hearing was defective
in either of the ears in 7 per cent, somewhat less than 2 per cent
could not hear a whisper with either ear, and 0.9 per cent were
troubled with serious adenoids. Of the children examined in
Jefferson City, Mo., for eye, nose and throat troubles, 41 per
cent were in need of glasses, and 7.7 per cent did not hear well,
usually in one ear. Of 156 pupils examined in the seven grades
of the school of observation connected with the Summer School
of the University of Pennsylvania,2 38.5 per cent had decayed
teeth, 20.5 per cent suffered from eye strain, 13.5 per cent from
nasal obstruction, 5.1 per cent from defective hearing and enlarged
tonsils, 4.5 per cent from poor nutrition, and 2 per cent from
nervous exhaustion and stoop shoulders.* A survey of a special
retarded class of 41 pupils in Philadelphia yielded 48.7 per cent
of eye defects, 34 per cent of defective speech, 26.8 per cent nose
and throat troubles, 19.5 per cent nervous temperaments, 17 per
cent each of orthopedic defects and lack of motor control, and 17
per cent of hearing defects. Nineteen out of twenty school children
examined in London had some eye disease.
It is impossible to state under the present rather chaotic
conditions of conducting medical school inspection whether these
figures exaggerate or minimize the true state of affairs. Some
inspectors record only serious affections, others all sorts of minor
defects. There is diversity of opinion as to the amount of deviation necessary to constitute sensory defects (e. g., of vision and
hearing), or to produce organic abnormalities which require treatment. Thus A. E. Taussig, M.D., maintains that the criterion
of defective vision should be a degree of acuity less than 20/30.
The same chaotic condition exists with regard to the records. These
1Taussig, Albert E. The Prevalence of Visual and Aural Defects among the
Public School Children of St. Louis Co., Mo. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill,
No. 6, November 15, 1909.
sCornell, Walter S. The Physical Condition of the School Children of the
School of Observation, Univ. of Pa. The Psychological Glinic, Vol. Ill, No. 5,
October 15, 1909.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSPECTION. 101
differ from city to city; many give no indication as to which are
the principal defects discovered; many do not specify clearly the
exact nature of the defects; some group the secondary troubles with
the primary, the contagious with the non-contagious physical deviations, the temporary and curable ailments with the non-curable or
protracted defects; some give no individual records for visual and
auditory acuity in comparative objective measures for each eye and
ear separately (although such information is of paramount value
to the teacher in enabling her to seat her children judiciously) ;
others omit the age, sex, nationality, grade, home, and community
conditions of the child (although, such details are of surpassing
importance, to enable us to correlate physical effectiveness and
disease with age, sex, nationality, and environment) ; and practically all omit reference to the mental condition, disposition, and
behavior of the child prior to inspection and treatment, and nearly
all lack a "follow-up" form of card on which to record the results
of treatment upon the child's subsequent mental efficiency, disposition, deportment, health!, increase in weight, and physical
growth and development. That the latter has received scant if
any scientific study is no doubt due to the difficulty of obtaining
pedagogical and psychological measures which, shall be objectively
and scientifically valid. The classroom registers and the judgments of the teachers surely have their values, but the grading
and judgments of the teachers are so variable that to measure the
child's increasing proficiency as the result of treatment in quantitative terms is out of the question. Nevertheless a "follow-up"
system of recording the influence of various forms of treatment
upon various kinds of defects based upon the teachers' marks and
opinions is infinitely better than no system at all, and is imperatively needed unless we are content to be empiricists in this newly
organized community and school work. To develop this work
aright we must have accurate knowledge of the influence of various
abnormalities and of their treatment upon mental and physical
development. Taussig has recently proposed a means of measuring the influence of physical defects upon school work; and the
same is applicable as a measure of the effects of treatment. He
would calculate the average grade of proficiency for each age for
the normal and defective pupils by multiplying the number of
children in each grade by the number) of the grade. The average
grade can then be secured by dividing the result by the total
number of children. This gives an objective measure, but it
assumes the accuracy of the teacher's marks. Unfortunately these
102 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
are far from infallible. But assuming a fair degree of accuracy
for the individual markings, the scheme offers a criterion of general
validity for gauging these influences. It ought to be given a fair
trial.
But a scheme of supplementing the teacher's grades and
opinions by means of careful psychological tests of the pupil's
quickness of perception, rapidity of association, strength of immediate visual and auditory memory, strength of grip, ability to
spell and add, etc., carried out a short time prior to treatment
and subsequently at different intervals, will eventually command
the attention of medical inspection departments. Such tests are
perfectly feasible and will enable us to quantify the influences
whose effects upon the working capacity of the pupil we wish to
estimate. In an initial plan these tests might well be confined to
selected groups of boys and girls.
But to return from this digression to the medical inspection
work in Cleveland. The conditions revealed by the volunteer
inspections in the schools and the humanitarian work performed
by the nurses and physicians in relieving needless physical suffering, which interfered with the working efficiency of both the
child and the school, demonstrated to the Board of Education the
urgency, on economic, educational, and moral grounds, of establishing as an integral part of the schools a department of medical
supervision and inspection. Such a department, under the administrative charge of Director Orr, was put into operation on the
first of April. It has at its disposal an annual budget of $30,000.
It has in its employ one supervisor at a salary of $3000 per
annum (Dr H. G. Sherman, who as chairman of the committee
on municipal sanitation of the chamber of commerce did yeoman
service in getting the department established), fifteen medical
assistants or inspectors at $100 per month for twelve months per
year, ten nurses at $60 per month the first year, $70 the second,
$75 the third, and $80 thereafter, and one clerk at $1000 per
annum. The department contemplates the inspection of all the
pupils to determine their state of health and the presence of diseased conditions and physical anomalies. Teachers and parents
will receive advice on the diseases and defects found, with, recommendations fori their relief; the pupils and teachers will receive
advice on the safeguarding of their health, and suggestions will
be offered respecting the course of study, construction of buildings, etc. Records in duplicate will be on file at the schools and
the headquarters of the department, and will be sent home to the
MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSPECTION. 103
parents. These records will accompany the child throughout his
course in the grades. It is expected that the records will be made
unusually complete and accurate. The city will be divided into
fifteen districts, comprising about six schools each, with one physician and nurse in charge of each, making each physician responsible for inspecting somewhat less than 5000 children (each of
the two hundred inspectors in New York has about 4000 children
under his care, while each of Chicago's one hundred has approximately 6000). By thoroughly inspecting the first year entrants
it is believed that the work will be materially lightened in the
upper grades. Tree treatment is not a part of the program. The
rules and regulations of the department are made by the Board
of Education.
II. Opening of the National Campaign on Oral Hygiene
Under the Auspices of the National Dental Association,, the Ohio State Dental Society, and the
Cleveland Dental Society.
In 1908 the Committee on Education and Hygiene of the
Cleveland Dental Society reported a plan for dental education
m the public schools of the city, embracing among other matters
a course of lectures to be given to the teachers. The plan was
censored and criticised by the Dental Society and given scant consideration by the Board of Education. Nothing was accomplished
beyond the issuing of a bulletin of information on the care of the
teeth by the Superintendent of Schools to the teachers, who were
directed to impart the information to the children. Somewhat
over a year later a free dental clinic was established at the City
Hospital. The venture proved largely unsuccessful, due to the
unfavorable location of the clinic. Inspection trips were then
made to Boston, New York, Rochester, Birmingham, Ala., and
other places for the purpose of studying the methods employed
for the dental education of school children. At this juncture Dr.
"W". G. Ebersole, who was chairman of the Cleveland Committee
on Education and Hygiene, became chairman of the Oral Hygiene
Committee of the National Dental Association. With the oral
hygiene headquarters established in Cleveland, and data available
from the cities visited, the campaign began afresh. Permission
was received from the Board of Education to conduct a dental
survey in four representative schools. This survey was made in
one day by about forty dentists. The detailed results are embodied
in the following table. The table is not absolutely accurate, owing
104: THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to the haste with which the work had to be done, and the occasional misinterpretation of the instructions by some of the examiners. Thus some examiners; thought that "good," "fair," or
"bad" referred to the teeth only, and therefore some mouths were
marked good when the oral conditions were unhygienic. The
results thus rather minimize than overemphasize the actual oral
conditions found. The figures from the Marion school are the
most accurate.
Murray Hill.
Doan.
Waterson.
Marion.
Total
Number of Pupils Examined.
Condition of the Mouth:
Good
Fair
Bad
Condition of the Gums:
Good
Bad
Use Tooth Brush:
Yes
No
Teeth Filled:
Yes
No
Mal-occlusion:
Yes
No
Teeth containing Cavities.
Teeth Extracted
Nationality:
American...
German....
English
Italian
Russian
Slavish.
Bohemian.,
Swedish....
Irish
French
Norwegian.
Polish
864
346
381
134
594
253
101
762
9
843
230
633
25
4
4
828
1
1
691
132
429
117
504
169
524
161
275
404
421
452
641
69
657
1
298
135
99
63
221
73
193
100
102
191
93
169
257
14
198
20
45
7
824
244
336
241
447
300
243
456
72
707
343
308
745
125
116
73
11
420
2677
Number of Perfect Mouths
Number of Defective Mouths...
Number of Cavities
62? 7.17%
802?92.83%
3920
20? 2.9%
671?97.1%
4294
14? 4.69%
284?95.31%
1342
9
49
13? 1.5'
811?98.43%
5505
The 2677 mouths examined contained 15,061 dental cavities,
or an average per month of 5.6 (somewhat above the Worcester
average, 4.85) ; in 2145 mouths, or in about 80 per cent, the
teeth were not filled; mal-occlusion affected 1087, or somewhat over
40 per cent; in 1479, or 55 per cent, a tooth brush,?the instrument that is mightier than the sword in national eugenics,?was
never used; the number of defective mouths ranged from 92 per
cent to 98 per cent; and practically 97 per cent of the oral cavities required some sort of hygienic attention or dental service,
MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSPECTION. 105
to render the mouth healthy and functionally efficient. As will
be seen in the table, some of the defects are most prevalent in the
schools with a preponderant Italian population?an indication
of the relation of unwholesome environmental influences and unenlightened or poverty-stricken conditions in the home to unsanitary oral conditions.
It will be of interest to recount some of the results of dental
surveys in other cities. One of the first, if not actually the first,
inspection was made in Russia in 1879. Defective dentures
afflicted 80 per cent of the inhabitants of St. Petersburg. Of
Berlin school children, 90 per cent were similarly affected
(Hitter), and of 100,000 school children examined in different
states of Germany, from 81 per cent to 99 per cent had diseased
teeth. In Ludlow, Mass., the 500 pupils examined (from eight
to fifteen years old) displayed palpable neglect of dental cleanliness, very few used brushes, none had received any dental treatment beyond a few instances in which teeth had been extracted,
bacterial deposits and malodorousness existed in varying degrees,
some suffered from prolonged retention of the temporary teeth,
while still more had lost these teeth prematurely, showing a disregard of the value of the temporary teeth. In New York an expert
examination was made of the teeth of 500 boys and girls from
fourteen to sixteen who were applying for work certificates, on
behalf of Children's Aid Society. Less than 3 per cent of these
had sound teeth; 456, had 2808 decayed teeth, or an average of
about 6.1 each, 90 per cent of which could be saved by proper
dental attention. Gangrenous pulps, or decayed pulps exposing
the roots, were found in 247 boys and 152 girls; and only 25 out
of the 500 had received any dental care other than extraction. In
an early inspection of all the pupils in Cleveland by the ward
physicians under the direction of the Board of Health, 79 per cent
of the children suffered from decayed or defective teeth.
With such distressing revelations as these it is little wonder
that experts have come to regard caries of the teeth as the "disease of the people," a world-wide affliction of civilized nations, and
the unsanitary mouth, which is the gateway to the stomach, as
the body's chief breeding place for pathogenic bacteria, a hidden
source of infection little attended to because of its hidden character. And with these revelations the modern propagandist of the
body hygienic has rallied his forces about a new battle-cry: "Keep
the mouth with diligence, for out of it are the issues of life."
"Good teeth, good health"?is the modern orthogenic tocsin. In
106 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
no branch of public hygiene are such decisive results obtained and
with such small cost.
The results of the Cleveland survey induced the Board of
Education, in October, 1909, to grant the request of the National
Dental Association, the Ohio Dental Society, and the Cleveland
Dental Society, to conduct dental examinations of all the pupils
in the public schools during a period of one year, to treat gratuitously all indigent children so desiring, and to offer lectures in
the school buildings to teachers, parents and pupils on the proper
care and use of the teeth and mouth. On March 18, 1910, the
formal opening of these clinics?four in public schools, and one
each in St. Alexis Hospital and the City Clinic?was signalized
by a convention in Cleveland, at which addresses were made by
the President of the National Dental Association, the Chairman
of the Education and Oral Hygiene Committee of the Ohio State
Dental Society, the Chairman of the Oral Hygiene Committee
of the National Dental Association, the Commissioner of Health
of Chicago, the Superintendent of Schools of Cleveland, the Dental
Surgeon of the Naval Academy, the Mayor of Cleveland, the
personal representatives of President Taft and Governor Harmon,
and others. The exercises included the formal dedication of the
clinics and addresses on various aspects of dental school inspection. The convention marked the inauguration of a country-wide
campaign for the organization of departments of dental inspection as integral parts of the public school systems of our cities.
It is expected that one year of volunteer work in Cleveland will
demonstrate the importance of the work, as one of the worthiest
and noblest undertakings of the schools, whether from an altruistic, educational or economic point of view. Special scholarship
and deportment blanks will be kept on which records of the treatment will be made and of its effect upon the subsequent working
efficiency and behavior of the child. It is planned to\ conduct a
few of the simpler psychological tests upon quickness of perception and association, the visual and auditory memory span, and
ability to add, both before and subsequent to treatment, in order
to measure objectively and under control conditions the effects
of the corrective treatment upon various mental operations.
Other blanks in triplicate will be furnished to the Director
of Schools, the Cleveland Dental Society, and one to the pupil
or teacher for the parent. Parents who desire treatment for their
children on the ground of poverty must make application upon
a separate "indigent" blank. The clinic patient will be supplied
MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSPECTION. 107
gratis with a brush, tooth powder, antiseptic wash, plastic (not
gold) fillings, and pulp and root treatments. The examiners and
clinicians will be certified and assigned to their respective schools
by the Director of Schools and the Supervisor of Dental Inspection. Permanent clinicians will probably be secured. The material equipment of the clinics is furnished by the National and
Ohio Dental Associations, and the dentists and assistants (each
examiner will have a woman assistant) by the Cleveland Dental
Society. Each examiner will donate one week's services, or twelve
half days. The lecture course will be in the hands of twenty men.
The cash equivalent to the Cleveland Society amounts to about
$3491.00,?$1866 for examination work, $1500 for clinic work,
and $125 for the lecture and educational work.
Thus the year 1910 marks the introduction upon a volunteer
basis of the first dental school clinic in the United States, six
years after the first dental school clinic was established in Strassburg by Dr Jessen. This clinic is open to all school children
without charge, and is manned by regularly registered dentists
under municipal control. School clinics of the same type have
since been established in thirty-five or more German cities. With
the better understanding which we now have of the effects of the
unhygienic oral cavity upon the health, happiness, mental and
physical efficiency, and the morals of the child, it is predicted that
the spread of the dental school clinic will be no less rapid in our
own country. It is reported of a certain juvenile judge that he
always has the teeth of his youthful culprits examined before he
imposes sentence; and not infrequently the penalty imposed is a
trip to the dental chair. Match manufacturers subject their
employees to dental inspection and exclude all persons with
decayed teeth. Phosphorous necrosis has thus disappeared among
match workers. Some hidden cavity in a tooth or unclean surface is often a focus for latent bacteria. Such foci serve as the
breeding places of acute infections, of scarlet fever, diphtheria,
and tuberculosis, and enlargements of the glands of the neck and
throat may occur through absorptions from these cavities. The
gases and poisons generated in an unsanitary mouth and the pain
from toothache often produce general and gastric neurasthenia,
indigestion, ill health, irritability, bad temper, mental inefficiency,
inability to concentrate attention, bad morals, and even insanity.
The machinery for discovering these conditions in the schools?
the only organized social agency with anything like police power?
"Will come inevitably. Will we get the machinery for rectifying
108 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
these conditions, tlie dental school clinic in addition to the dental
school inspection station ? Whether or not compulsory school
clinics are desirable, some form of pressure cannot be dispensed
with if this work is to realize proper returns upon the investment.
In one of the German cities such pressure is secured by barring
children with diseased teeth from the privileges of the recreation
grounds, forest school and vacation colonies.
"Without good teeth there cannot be thorough mastication.
Without thorough mastication there cannot be perfect digestion.
Without perfect digestion there cannot be proper assimilation.
Without assimilation there cannot be nutrition. Without nutrition there cannot be health." And it might be added, without the
retention of the teeth there cannot be beauty of countenance.
REFERENCES.
Ayres, L. P. The Effect of Physical Defects on School Progress. The
Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 3, May, 1909, p. 71.
Cornell, Walter S. The Relation of Physical to Mental Defect in School
Children. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. I, No. 9, February, 1908,
p. 231.
,  . Mentally Defective Children in the Public Schools. The
Psychological Clinic, Vol. II, No. 3, May, 1908, p. 75.
,  . The Physical Condition of the School Children of the
School of Observation, University of Pennsylvania. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 5, October, 1909, p. 134.
The Need of Improved Records of the Physical Condition
of School Children. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 6, November, 1909, p. 161.
Ebersole. Report on the Proposed Dental Educational and Hygienic Work
in the Cleveland Schools. Dental Summary, February and March, 1910
(reprinted in the Dental Brief and Dental Digest, same issue).
Elson, W. H. Annual Report of the Superintendent of Schools, Board
of Education, Cleveland, O., 1907, p. 38.
Emery, Medical Inspection in Two Worcester Schools. The Pedagogical
Seminary, Vol. XVII, No. 2, April, 1910, p. 111.
Greene, Mary Belle. A Class of Backward and Defective Children. The
Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 5, October, 1910, p. 125.
Holmes, Arthur. Can Impacted Teeth cause Moral Delinquency? The
Psychological Clinic, Vol. IV, No. 1, March, 1910, p. 19.
McHenry. Medical School Inspection in Cleveland. The Cleveland Medical
Journal, Vol. VIII, 1909, p. 338.
Orr. The New Medical Inspection Department in the Cleveland Public
School. The Cleveland Sunday Leader, Magazine and Workers' Section, March 13, 1910.
Sneed, C. M., and Whipple, G. M. An Examination of the Eyes, Ears, and
Throats of Children in the Public Schools of Jefferson City, Mo. The
Psychological Clinic, Vol. II, No. 8, January, 1909, p. 234.
Taussig, A. E. The Prevalence of Visual and Aural Defects among the
Public School Children of St. Louis County, Mo. The Psychological
Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 6, November, 1909, p. 149.
Wallin, J. E. W. Medical and Psychological Inspection of School Children.
The Western Journal of Education (Ypsilanti, Mich.), Vol. II, 1909,
p. 433.
