The Nervous Disorders of School Children
=========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. IV. IsTo. 3. May 15, 1910.
:Author: Walter S. Cornell, M.D.

The practical purpose of this article limits it to a brief exposition of the conditions existing in a disordered nervous system,
the causes of these conditions and the symptoms arising therefrom.
^To attempt has been made to discuss child psychology, adolescence,
mentally deficient children, difficult children and kindred subjects.
The study of nervous disorders is greatly simplified by reason
?f the fact that many apparently diverse affections are really
expressions in different degree by different parts of the nervous
system of the same faults. This is true particularly of general
nervousness, neurasthenia, chorea, habit-spasm, migraine, epilepsy,
hysteria, and neuralgia.

The following propositions may almost be taken as axioms
lrx the study of neurology.
1. Heredity influences the nervous system more than any
other tissue. Original stability on the one hand, or an
inherent weakness and tendency to exhaustion on the
other, largely predetermine the existence of nervous
health or disease in childhood.
2. The principal exciting causes of nervous disorders are
anaemia, reflex irritation, intoxication of the system,
and injury of the brain and spinal cord.
3. Increased sensibility and irritability, rapid fatigue, and
lack of emotional control are the three fundamental
conditions underlying the various nervous disorders
named in the next paragraph, and existing in these
disorders singly or in combination.
4. Ordinary nervousness, neurasthenia, hysteria, epilepsy,
migraine, habit spasm, chorea and neuralgia are expressions of the three conditions just mentioned, manifested
singly or in combination. The more severe of these,
epilepsy, hysteria, and migraine, are frequently found
in persons of the same family,
The causes of the nervous disorders of children are both predisposing and exciting.
The predisposing causes are?1. An inherent weakness and
irritability of the nervous system,?the so called neurotic constitution. 2. Poor general health. 3. Improper social habits. 4.
Dissipation.

1. The neurotic constitution. Heredity is the most powerful
and the most common cause of inherent nervous weakness. In
such cases low physical, nervous, mental or social standards exist
in the parents. Thus, one or both may have been insane, hysterical, illiterate, intemperate, or broken down from overwork.
Lack of vigor and of nervous stability if present, are manifested early in life. Indigestion will produce convulsions in one
baby and not affect another. A healthy school girl will endure
without apparent effect a shock or fright which produces an emotional outbreak in her classmate. Adolescence is a period during
which these morbid tendencies are particularly manifest, owing
to the profound disturbance incidental to the evolution of many
of the glandular structures and nerve centers. Occurring as it
does coincidently with school life, irreparable damage is often
inflicted on neurotic children by the double strain thus imposed
upon them.

2. Poor general health. This may be the expression of numerous influences, particularly poor nutrition, anaemia, organic heart
and kidney disease, or the depressing poisons of some recent infectious disease, such as typhoid fever or diphtheria.
The explanation of the relation between lowered general
health and nervous disorder is a very simple one. The nervous
system suffers from starvation or intoxication in common with
the other parts of the body, but its delicate and complex character
makes it extraordinarily liable to injury and difficult to repair.
3. Improper social habits, such as late hours, loss of sleep,
overwork, uncongenial work, unhappy home life, and the general
depressing effects of poverty, all lower the vitality of the nervous
organization and predispose it to exhaustion.

4. Vicious personal habits, including intemperance, are among
the most powerful of influences contributing to this same end, and
if indulged in at the critical adolescent period, when rapid development and internal readjustment are disturbing the nervous balance, they may be considered as actually exciting rather than predisposing causes. Unfortunately, the victims are of the very type
destined to suffer most from any depressing influence. Their vivid
imaginations, weak will power, and emotional nature make them
an easy prey to such attractions as dissipation may offer.
The principal exciting causes of nervous disorder are (1) the
overstimulation of the nervous system, and (2) intoxication.
1. Overstimulation may be due to reflex irritation resulting
from eye-strain, post-nasal adenoid growth, indigestion, intestinal worms, and menstrual disorders. Particularly do nervous
symptoms arise from astigmatic eyes,1 and from nasal obstruction.2
Exhaustion may also be the result of continued mental irritation from friction at home or at school. Particularly is a high
strung school teacher an unfortunate guardian for a nervous child,
since two such emotional, poorly controlled natures react badly
on one another to the misery of both. A nervous, poorly disciplined
mother is a still worse influence on the child than an unsuitable
teacher, and unfortunately in the class of children under discussion
she usually exists.

Overstimulation may occur as a single severe shock. Thus
emotional disturbance, particularly fright, is causative of general
nervousness and of such special nervous symptoms as hysterical
attacks, epilepsy, enuresis, disturbed sleep and chorea. Contrariwise the most narrow escapes from dangerous physical accidents
usually make but little impression. Healthy children are repeatedly mentioned in the daily press as half-drowned, or rescued from
burning buildings, but resulting nervous disorders are actually
rare because danger is not appreciated until the imaginative faculty is developed. The average boy will carelessly risk life and
limb stealing rides on street cars and wagons and climbing poles
and roofs, but will be fretful for hours if scolded by his teacher,
and paralyzed with terror if suddenly seized by a policeman for
throwing a snow-ball. The viewpoint of the child is far different
from that of the adult, a fact which cannot be too strongly emphasized.
1In astigmatism, the strain on the ciliary muscle of the eye, from its constant
contractions while endeavoring to obtain a focus, frequently results in the most
violent headaches and occasionally in irritability of temper, emotional outbreaks,
nausea, and lassitude from nervous exhaustion.

'Notwithstanding the exploitation of late, in the daily press, of adenoid growtns,
as the cause of nervous defect and disorder, thereby creating a very imperfect conception of a complex subject, there is no doubt that they constitute the most powerful of any single influence. Medical and other scientific journals frequently present
communications calling attention to mental deficiency, stupidity, lack of mental
concentration and of memory, headache, dyspnoea, incontinence of urine, renex
cough, chorea, habit spasm, night terrors, iritability of disposition, and epileptic
convulsions, as the result of this condition.

2. Intoxication of the nervous system may be caused by
numerous agencies such as kidney disease, gout, alcoholism, constipation and drugs, but fortunately only one of these, constipation (and indigestion), need be considered in the study of children.
Indigestion and constipation are one of the principal causes of
epilepsy, of acute rheumatism, chorea and headache. Probably
a condition of faulty metabolism, akin to gout, exists in many
children with resulting nervous manifestations, but too little is
known at the present time to warrant more than this passing mention.
Manifestations of Nervous Disorders.
The essentials of a healthy condition of the nervous system
are power and endurance in muscular movement, a sufficient but
not excessive degree of sensibility, and a reasonable control over
the emotions.
Conversely the most prominent symptoms of a weak nervous
constitution are (1) motor weakness, (2) over-sensitiveness and
(3) lack of emotional control. Individuals so constituted are said
to be neurotic. They form a numerous and easily recognizable
class in every walk of life.
(1) Motor weakness:?Children in whom this condition exists
are often so listless and adverse to activity that their lack of animation readily distinguishes them. A more frequent condition and
therefore even more characteristic is rapid fatigue. The children
of this numerous latter group start the day refreshed by the night's
sleep and in the morning may display exuberant vigor and spirits.
The nerve centers rapidly tire upon mental or physical effort,
however, and a degree of exhaustion ensues which is in striking
contrast to the apparent healthy condition of the period a few
hours previous.

A poor control of muscular movement (poor coordination),
if present, signifies that the motor centers are not acting in harmony owing to weakness in them or to lack of development of the
association nerve tracts connecting them. A lowered tone of the
sympathetic system may result in a general poor circulation with
cold hands and feet, to excessive perspiration on slight exertion,
and attacks of palpitation of the heart.

(2) Over-sensitiveness:?(1) Annoyance by loud sounds and
bright light are symptoms due to hypersensitiveness of the auditory nerve or of the retina. (2) Hypersensitiveness to heat? cold
NERVOUS DISORDERS OF CHILDREN. 69
and pain may be manifested by the general nervous system. (3)
Hyperirritability of the sympathetic system is shown by too ready
flushing, often to an uncomfortable degree. (4) Irritability of
the motor centers leads to involuntary movement. This may
merely be a condition of restlessness or fidgets, or may be severe
enough to be classed as chorea or as habit spasm. In quiet children
this condition may be betrayed only by a tense expression of the
face, or by involuntary movements of the muscles of the forehead
or jaw, or perhaps by general restlessness.

Excitement on slight provocation is evidence of brain irritability, and the gesticulations frequently accompanying excited
speech furnish a common instance of the increased irritability of
neighboring brain centers which ordinarily in health are not
affected. This condition may be observed in the shrill tones unconsciously acquired by earnest speakers, especially when under the
nerve strain incident to difficult work. The pitch of the voice
constantly rises as the excitement increases, so that in extreme
cases of nervousness it becomes very marked.

It would be a grave error, although one scarcely possible of
occurrence, to mistake an excess of energy in a healthy child for
irritability due to weakness. A vigorous boy, full of animal spirits,
does not exhibit the drooping figure, rapid fatigue and emotional
temperament of the neurotic child.

(3) Lack of emotional control:?This is evidenced by weeping, laughing, or outbreaks of anger on slight provocation. Other
symptoms more or less related are great sensitiveness to criticism,
weak will power, craving for sympathy, a vivid imagination, and
a tendency to magnify real or imaginary misfortunes.
The signs of nervous exhaustion and their significance once
understood, the recognition of the various nervous symptoms displayed by school children becomes a comparatively simple matter.
A list of those most commonly occurring is given below, both for
its practical help, and as a demonstration of the applicability of the
scientific truths just stated.

These nerve signs of fatigue are most marked at times when
the child is tired, worried, or excited. Approaching examinations
and entertainments are therefore particularly favorable seasons for
the observation. The depression of spirits incident to the low
atmospheric pressure existing before a rain storm produces a condition of nervousness well recognized by teachers.

1. General Nervousness.?"Nervous Children."
By far the greater number of these children cannot be classified more accurately than by the general appellation "nervous,"
owing to the large number of possible symptoms and their numerous combinations. The general characteristic of weakness and
irritability in body and mind is present in all, and this is best
seen in those parts of the body possessing the most delicate nervous
organization, namely, the face, the hands, and the general speech
apparatus. For this reason trembling or tensely held hands, quivering lips, husky voice, and feeble or jerky articular speech are the
most peculiar signs of nervousness in a child. The following may
be noted by the teacher:

By observation:??
Face. Great mobility of expression.
Wandering of the eyes.
Twitching of the muscles of the
eyes and mouth.
Grinding of the teeth.
Extremities. Twitching of the fingers.
Peculiar and jerky handwriting.
Shuffling of feet.
Body. General restlessness.
Frequent movement and changes of
position, either spontaneously or
Lowered nerve tone / on trifling cause.
with irritability. \ Abnormally quick reaction or response to
stimulus.
Associated purposeless movements, upon
emotional disturbance or excitement,
such as involuntary winking, protruding
of the tongue, laughing, waving the
hands, etc.
A shrill voice.
Rapid stuttering or stammering speech.
Irritability of temper. Outbursts of passion.
Emotional outbreaks. Ready laughing or
crying on slight cause.
with exhaustion.
NERVOUS DISORDERS OF CHILDREN. 71
' !iii!
Face. Toneless apathetic expression.
Eyes dull.
Extremities. Nerveless drooping position
of the hands and arms
when extended forward.
Slouching gait.
T , / Body. Drooping shoulders.
-Lowered nerve tone < ?>
Poor station and balance when
standing.
Inattention.
Mental dulness and stupidity.
Poor memory.
Sighing and yawning from poor circulation.
(2) By test:?
Test vigor by asking class to sit up straight.
Test control by asking class to sit perfectly quiet for
five minutes.
Test motor power by asking child to place fingers on
desk, and then tap desk rapidly with the forefinger.
Examination periods, those devoted to such occupations as sewing, or drawing, and also the recess
hour, are especially favorable times for observation.
(3) By statement of the child:?Fatigue, headaches, morbid
fears and apprehensions.
(4) Frequently associated conditions:?
Physical defects (eye strain, adenoids, indigestion) which
act by reflex irritation.

Poor nutrition and anaemia, which starve the nervous
system as well as the other parts of the body.
Mental dulness, which if not due to evident physical
cause, signifies defect in the entire nervous system.
Certain groups of symptoms occur frequently enough to admit
of classification as definite nervous disorders. The most common
of these are chorea, habit spasm, hysteria, epilepsy, and headache. | : - ;i
Chorea (St. Vitus's Dance). This is the most frequent of
the nervous disorders of childhood and is characterized by jerky
irregular contractions of muscles. Associated conditions not suf72 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ficiently emphasized in many books describing the disease, are
mental irritability, and frequent temporary weakness of the muscles affected.
The causes of chorea are those already given for the group of
nervous diseases now under consideration, but especially rheumatism (probably one-half of all cases), and poor nutrition, or other
cause of nervous exhaustion. As might be expected, nervous
fatigue or excitement makes the condition worse, and so chorea
is particularly seen in the springtime, a season associated with
tired nerves. One author has remarked that chorea is "a school
made disease." The great majority of cases of chorea occur in
children between the ages of five and fifteen years.
The symptoms of chorea1 are chiefly motor and psychic.
Motor. In the mild cases, restlessness and inability to sit
still are the only visible signs of inability to control the muscles.
Jerking of the head, grinding of the teeth, spasmodic twitching
of the face, and shuffling of the feet are common.
In the more severe and well defined cases, involuntary, irregular jerking movements of the limbs are present. These take the
child out of school and may become so severe that the child is not
able to dress, to hold anything in the hand or even to talk. A well
defined case of chorea tossing in bed with jerking movements of the
hands and arms never ceasing while awake, can never be forgotten.
Psychic symptoms. The association of these with the muscular movements should always be borne in mind. Irritability of
temper is very characteristic, and emotional outbreaks during the
day and bad dreams at night result.

The recognition of chorea is important for three reasons:
(1) That it may be treated early in its course. (2) Because its
existence signifies something wrong?the existence of rheumatism,
or nerve exhaustion, or poor nutrition. (3) Because it absolves
the unfortunate victim from the charge of malicious intent in
making grimaces at the teacher, being noisy, restless and troublesome, and of dropping articles with apparent carelessness. This
is most important from practical as well as humane considerations,
since punishment only makes the symptoms worse.

The treatment of chorea is the medical treatment of the underlying cause, and the avoidance of overwork by too many studies
and insufficient relaxation. The teacher should guard these cases
carefully, as nervous disorders particularly demand her cooperation
Huntingdon's chorea and chorea insaniensis are not here considered.
in the treatment of the case. Without doubt all these children are
best treated by a return to care-free country life, but this is of
course usually impracticable.

Habit spasm ('Habit chorea) :?This resembles chorea and
may possibly be a variety of it. Habit spasm is observed among
children in the lower grades, and consists in the habitual sudden
contraction of certain muscles. The regions of the eyes, mouth,
neck and shoulders are the most commonly affected. The spasm
may be quick, almost instantaneous, or may last for one or two
seconds while the face is distorted by the tense muscles. Shrugging
of the shoulders is a fairly frequent symptom, and I have frequently noticed in overworked college students a spasmodic clenching of the jaws occurring every few seconds.
When the eyelids are blinked forcibly and frequently, the
condition is termed blepharo-spasm; and it is usually significant
of eye strain in a nervous person.

Facial habit spasm is frequently associated with frequent
sniffing of the nose. So many of these cases arise from adenoids
and nasal catarrh that the quick nervous character of the movement rather than its simple occurrence is necessary to make this
sign a suspicious one.

The chief features which help to differentiate habit spasm
from chorea are the usual existence of a local rather than a general
cause (i. e. eye strain rather than rheumatism or nervous shock),
the limitation of the affection to the face, neck and shoulders, and
the repetition of the same muscular movement more or less
rhythmically. The contraction of the muscles is spasmodic and
powerful, and quite different from the wild jerky and irregular
movements of chorea.

Habit spasm is a hint both of a nervous constitution and of
local physical defect. The treatment should therefore consider
both. Most cases recover, some lasting only a few months. Rarely
it becomes chronic and incurable.

A few days previous to this writing I examined a boy of ten
years, at the Miller school, who was suffering from habit spasm.
He frequently drew down his lower lip in a spasmodic manner
showing the lower teeth conspicuously. His eyes, nose and throat
proved to be normal, but he was poorly nourished and nervous.
The knowledge that he was being observed made the facial grimace
particularly noticeable. He had a bruise upon the forehead, and
the principal asked its source. "My father kicked me there,"
"Why, Joe, I thought your sister hit you there with a flat iron."
"That was here," he replied, and exhibited another wound behind
the left ear.

Epilepsy:?Epilepsy is a habitual disposition to, and an occasional occurrence of convulsions which are accompanied by loss of
consciousness.

The tendency of medical writers is to look upon persons suffering from epilepsy as divisible into three classes according to the
nature of the cause of the attack:?1. Individuals possessing an
exceedingly unstable nervous system, who require very little disturbance to precipitate an attack. 2. Those with mora or less
instability of the nervous system, but with some evident exciting
cause, such as eye-strain, intestinal indigestion, post-nasal adenoid
growths, etc. 3.' Those persons possessing an originally sound and
healthy nervous system, but afflicted by some overwhelming poison,
as in Bright's disease, or by the pressure of a tumor, or by an
injury.

The convulsions of babies are not considered as epileptic in
character unless the habit becomes established.
The symptoms may be here very briefly described, to relieve
the inexperienced teacher of alarm and uncertainty, and to call
attention to the occurrence and sinister significance of the minor
form, and the psychic form of the disease.

Major epilepsy constitutes the ordinary epileptic convulsion.
Its onset may be instantaneous, but usually the brain disturbance
causes very various premonitory symptoms, such as numbness and
tingling in one of the extremities, or flashes of light or color before
the eyes. The actual convulsion frequently begins with an inarticulate cry on the part of the sufferer, who falls regardless of disastrous results. The muscles of the entire body are at first rigidly
contracted, causing inability to breathe and an apparently alarming congestion and blueness of the face for some time less than a
minute. The rigidity ceases soon because of the exhaustion of the
nerve force and probably by reason of the partial asphyxia, the
contractions continue but become jerky and intermittent in character with a beginning of return to a more natural color. Frothy
saliva, possibly bloody from a bitten tongue, shows at the mouth.
This stage lasts two or three minutes (rarely considerably more),
and is succeeded by a third stage of stupor due to nervous exhaustion, from which the patient can soon be aroused if necessary.
Such persons usually suffer for several liours from headache and
fatigue, a few appear to be scarcely affected, while others may be
incapacitated for a day or two.

The treatment of the attack is conducted with the assurance,
born of experience, that the patient will speedily recover if not
injured accidentally by the fall. The clothing should be loosened
at the neck to allow of free respiration, and an endeavor made to
secure privacy for the sufferer, and safe custody for his personal
property. A handkerchief should be inserted between the teeth
to prevent injury to the tongue.

Minor epilepsy. This may be defined as habitual, or at least
occasional periods of lost nervous control. The attack presents a
great variety of symptoms in different subjects, and is diagnosed
by its periodical occurrence, by the fairly constant character of the
symptoms in each person affected, and by the (almost) certain
occurrence of loss of consciousness, though this is so transient that
it may not be noticed, unless a dish is dropped from the nerveless
hand, or conversation stopped in the middle of a sentence, with
more or less subsequent mental confusion. Peculiar automatic
actions and a few irrational words may betray the condition.
P arents are frequently cognizant of such attacks of minor epilepsy,
but fail to realize their true significance, and carelessly speak of
them as "spells,"?a medical waste-basket for uncertain diagnosis.
Psychic epilepsy. This, like minor epilepsy, must rest its
claim for existence in each case upon the fact that it is either of
habitual occurrence, or that the patient suffers also from one of the
other forms of epilepsy. Psychic epilepsy exhibits a loss of control
(inhibition) and action results rather than inaction, as in typical
minor epilepsy. The attack usually consists of sudden maniacal
excitement, aptly described as a brain storm, often accompanied
by violent automatic movements. In the mentally irresponsible
state existing, articles may be recklessly destroyed, or an assault
committed. The ensuing mental calm is in striking contrast to
the emotional outbreak.

A knowledge of epilepsy is valuable to the teacher as well as
the physician, since the former possesses facilities for observation
second only to those of the family and is often much more discerning.
First it should be realized that children suffering from convulsions are frequently curable if only the cause is found, and removed
before the fit habit is established. The unthinking doctor doses
his patients with bromides, until a pimply complexion, dyspepsia,
and a deadened intellect all attest the vigor of his treatment. The
convulsions become less severe and less frequent and this is considered a fair equivalent for the practical invaliding of the sufferer.
This is a necessary procedure of last resort in severe and proven
incurable cases; but the scientific and proper treatment of epilepsy
is based on the theory of the removal of the cause if such procedure
be possible. For this reason, the causes of nervous disorder already
mentioned should be considered carefully one by one, with especial
attention devoted to the examination of the stomach and the bowels,
the eyes, and the naso-pharynx.

Another most important point is the recognition of the true
character of minor and psychic epilepsy, both theoretically and
practically when actually seen. The former because the minor
forms have all the potential significance of the major and may
develop into it if not checked. The latter because of the paramount
importance of recognizing psychic epilepsy, or kindred emotional
disturbances occurring in ill balanced children, in order that the
child may be shielded from exciting shocks, and terrifying punishments, otherwise very liable to fall to him.
Needless to say that an ordinary fit of bad temper should not
be taken as a case of psychic epilepsy, or an absent minded movement construed as an attack of minor epilepsy. The repeated
occurrence of these, however, should give rise to a suspicion that
abnormal conditions exist, and cause a quiet inquiry into the child's
home life, the nervous health of the family, and the existence of
physical defects of the character already discussed. The diagnosis
of such cases carries with it such heavy purport that it should be
only tentatively made by any one not a physician.

Headache:?While the causes of headache systematically considered are numerous and practically correspond to those of other
functional nervous disorders such as epilepsy and chorea, it may be
said definitely that eye strain is the basis of at least four-fifths of
the habitual headaches occurring in school children. The
remainder arise from adenoid growths and obstructive nasal
catarrh, and from constipation. A few cases may be ascribed to
coffee combined with lack of proper nourishment.
Single accidental headaches result from injuries, indigestion
or beginning acute illness.

The headaches of eye strain are localized over the eyes, are
accompanied as a rule by discomfort in the eyes after their use,
and by more or less imperfect vision. Astigmatism is particularly
a cause of headache, and the minor degrees of error with little or
no diminution in vision by the ordinary type-test, may cause much
distress. It is my custom when children are referred to me in this
connection to first ask whether the headache occurs frequently.
If it does further inquiry is made as to tiring of the eyes after
reading, which usually elicits an affirmative answer. The vision
should then be tested with the ordinary type-card and the diagnosis
established.

The evident presence of adenoids, a question or two as to the
character of the breakfast (cinnamon bun and coffee), and the
statement of constipation explain the remaining causes.
As to accidental cases, I have had a considerable number of
children referred to me by teachers in whom the headache was the
first one ever experienced, and due to a blow on the head a few
minutes previously. A hasty assumption of eye strain by the
teacher dependent on her own judgment would lead to a diagnosis
easily susceptible of disproof and as mortifying as it is ridiculous.,
Hysteria:?True hysteria presenting profound preversions of
mind, sensation, and motion rarely occurs before the age of puberty.
Throughout school life, however, there are encountered numerous
nervous, emotional children who can hardly be described by any
other term than hysterical, and who in their later years are prone
actually to develop the disease by reason of the neurotic constitution thus early manifested.
Our thought therefore in the study of these cases should center
on the presence of the predisposition rather than the existence of
the full-fledged disorder. The traits of children particularly indicative of hysterical tendency are:?
1. Emotional temperament. There is a lack of control resulting in frequent exhibitions of joy or temper, or grief. Particularly
occurring in shop and factory girls but occasionally seen in older
school children are severe nervous attacks due to menstrual disturbance. There may be simply a semi-collapse accompanied by
a nervous chill, or there may take place a demonstrative outburst
with sobbing and screaming.

2. Weah will power and weak moral sense. This causes a craving for sympathy and mental support, so that every mishap is loudly
lamented over, rather than resolutely faced. The vivid imaginations possessed by these children cause exaggerations in their tales
of misfortune experienced and the most startling falsehoods may
be told. Teachers are accused of barbarous punishments or of
improper conduct, classmates of assault, and all with a plausibility
that goes far toward convicting the one falsely accused. It may be
noted in this connection that an absolute rule in the conduct of
medical inspection should be to avoid examining girls unless in the
presence of teacher or classmates. The ordinary tests of vision and
hearing conducted in school will be reported to the parents at home
with added imaginary acts and conversation to attract interest.
The request to exhibit a vaccination mark has often been quietly
complied with, but resulted subsequently in a parent's complaint
that a request had been made to undress. Curiously enough these
false accusations are from the most unexpected sources, so that, aa
I have remarked, the presence of a third person in a room when
one is a girl should be absolutely insisted upon.

The same perverted traits lead to a remarkable faculty of
imitation either of the peculiarities of others or of diseases accidentally read of in newspapers. A patent medicine advertisement describing a lame back or the symptoms of consumption may
produce like symptoms in the hysterical child. In continental
Europe whole classes have been simultaneously affected. Thus
Schoedel reports (Jahrbuck fur Kinderh., Volume LXIV, ISTo. 4)
an epidemic of imitation, in which the children shook their hands
and arms continually so that writing was impossible. Twenty-one
out of thirty-five were affected. The cause was a newspaper
account of a similar nervous epidemic in a neighboring town, and
cure was accomplished by the dismissal and dispersion of the class
for several days. The London School Report for 1907 (Report of
the London County Council) mentions four cases of temporary
paralysis in the left arm occurring among the children of one
school class, because of the admission of a girl into the class who
possessed a true paralysis in that limb. The children affected were
not English, but Poles and Italians.
