The Restoration of Children Of The Slums
=========================================

By Ligiitner Wit me it, Ph.D.
The finished product of slum life has been many times de-
scribed. Emaciated, neurasthenic, ill nourished, perhaps tuber-
culous, and certainly afflicted with many physical ailments, the
adult man or woman of this adverse environment can rarely do
a day's work for a day's wage. Unable to maintain a satisfactory
standard of living, the victim sinks deeper into the abyss.
One does not expect ligs to grow from thistles, and the slum
child seems naturally destined by the force of heredity to grow
into an inefficient adult. There are many reasons, however, for
repudiating this belief in the potency of heredity. The different
races of men are not separated from one another as are the fig'
tree and the thistle. The different social classes of the white races
constitute more nearly a single human family. Modern research,
such as the parliamentary investigation into the physical deteri-
oration of the English people, indicates that the degeneracy which
is symptomatically associated with slum life, is to a great extent
acquired by each generation and not inherited from the. preced-
ing. The inefficient product of the slum is the result of the treat-
ment received during infancy and childhood. Children of the
rich, of the moderately well-to-do, and of the poor are, as it were,
representatives of the same species of plant growing under diverse
influences of soil, sunshine, air and moisture. You would
doubtless consider it dangerous for your own child to spend a
single night in a typical home of the slum. Children born into
slum life, of slum parents, apparently do not differ very greatly
from your own. A few of them, but only a few, are strong
enough to fight their way out of their environment into better
conditions, and even these bear permanently the scars of the
battle. Many succumb quickly to the unfavorable conditions.
The majority are irretrievably damaged in early life and their
physical, mental and moral development is more or less seriously
retarded. Shall we shut our eyes in order not to see that grinding
poverty is slowly executing a death sentence upon many of these
children, a sentence which is only the more cruel because it takes
so many years to be finally carried out ?
(266)
CHILDREN OF THE SLUMS. 267
Ignorance and preconceived opinions only too frequently
act as a bar to social and intellectual progress. They affect judges
upon tlie bench, medical experts, school authorities, charitable
organizations, and are reflected in legislation. A case in point is
the common belief that the children of inefficient or criminal
parents inherit an ineradicable tendency to inefficiency or crime.
Another is the sentimental belief in the value of the family
as a social unit which blinds many people to the inadequacy
and evil influence of particular homes. We should not lightly
give the name of "home" to every domicile where parents and
children are living together. Granted that the right kind of
father and mother and the right kind of home exert an influence
upon the child intellectually and morally which no other agency
can ever satisfactorily reproduce, at the same time it is only fair
to recognize that there are many homes from which children must
be permanently rescued if they are to become in adult life the
centers of satisfactory home life for their own children. Homes
which are in no sense worthy of the name, rear children who in
turn are incapable of establishing homes for themselves. The
single social problem presented by one family is thus multiplied
by four or five in the next generation. From the standpoint of
science, children who are retarded in physical, mental, and moral
development as a result of environmental conditions, are unneces-
sarily retarded. If we permit this retardation to persist, it means
permanently arrested development and degeneracy. If, as many
believe, acquired degeneracy exceeds in amount inherited degen-
eracy, then temporary help which leaves the child still at the mercy
of his environment does little to solve the problem. In many cases
it succeeds only in enabling children to survive, propagate their
kind, and thus reproduce the social problem four 01* five fold.
It is only through a persistent effort to restore defective
children of the slums to normal physical and mental condition
that we may expect to throw light upon the causes which are pro-
ducing degeneracy. My object in reporting the cases of two
children for whom the Psychological Clinic has undertaken this
work of restoration, is to contribute to a better understanding of the
social problem. Primarily our aim is to discover mental and
moral defects and to treat the child in such a way that these defects
may be overcome or rendered harmless through the development
of other mental and moral traits. In endeavoring to do this we
must necessarily take cognizance of certain causes, which are
268 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
at the root of the evil. Among' these causes are the physical
defects constituting the soil in which mental defect and retar-
dation frequently develop, and for the treatment of such physical
conditions the Psychological Clinic sends these children to the
proper medical experts. Both the physical and the mental
defects are also directly the result of environmental conditions.
Through its social service department the Psychological Clinic
takes into consideration the entire social life of the child. To some
extent we may suggest social treatment, hut for the most part we
must rely upon the many organized charities for the care of the
physical and social condition of the poor. The kind of treatment
which is required in those cases cannot be adequately carried out by
any one agency. It is necessary that the Psychological Clinic should
be adequately equipped to carry 011 its own work, and it is equally
necessary that many other agencies should be contributing their
share to the treatment which the case demands.
In the treatment of a defective child of the slums physical
defects must be cured if possible. If deterioration has progressed
so far that cure is out of the question, the condition of the child
may be at least ameliorated. Adenoids are removed easily enough:
deafness resulting from adenoids requires prolonged treatment
which may never succeed in making the child's hearing normal.
The results of an insufficient nutrition of long standing can rarely
be cured. Months or years may be required to bring the child
into satisfactory condition for mental progress. That society is
beginning to appreciate the value of undertaking treatment of long
duration for the cure of certain diseases is evidenced by the social
and medical battle for the treatment and cure of tuberculosis.
Mental and moral defects, whether developed upon the basis of
ph ysical defects or due to neglect of training, may be expected to
occupy a longer time than physical defects for their treatment and
cure.
A second stage in the treatment of any defect is the after-cure.
In many cases it is a waste of effort to remove a child's adenoids and
allow him to return immediately to the same conditions under which
the adenoids developed. Mental and moral defects may yield to
treatment in a suitable environment, only to reappear at once in
the old environment. A child may be considered cured by the
Psychological Clinic, and its cure may be attested by its response
to intellectual and moral training in the Hospital School, and yet
it can not be expected to stay cured if it returns too soon to the
CHILDREN OF THE SLUMS. 269
old conditions. If tlie work of the Psychological Clinic is to be
really effective, some provision must therefore be made for a more
or less prolonged after-treatment, which may be carried ont in
suitable homes provided by agencies for the care of children.
The homes of many children are of such a character that no
child living in them could be free for any length of time from
physical and mental defects. Unless these homes are in some
way reconstructed, the children can not be returned to them without
risking a recurrence of the earlier conditions. Social work upon
the home is essential if these children are to he permanently helped,
and if child degeneracy is to he reduced to a minimum. The neces-
sity of having homes of a satisfactory social and economic level
for the protection of children and for the successful combat against
race degeneracy, should add renewed energy to those agencies'whose
province is the care of the home life of the poor.
AT THE PARTING OF THE WAYS
OUGHT WE TO ALLOW HUMAN MATERIAL LIKE THIS TO BE WASTED AND DESTROYED,
TO DEVELOP PHYSICAL DEGENERACY, MENTAL RETARDATION AND MORAL DELINQUENCY?
210 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
A striking illustration of the conditions whicli produce the
type of child who is brought to the Psychological Clinic is shown by
the little girl whose likeness appears on the preceding page. She
is the daughter of a ragpicker, the flower of a flock of seven chil-
dren, of whom two have died, one as the result of accident, and
one from pneumonia. Of the remaining children, the oldest boy
is a low-grade imbecile and the second boy is a frail looking child
who is not getting on well in school. The social worker who visited
the home and the school for the Psychological Clinic found this boy
one of a large group of desperately poor foreigners, who were being
taught in a room entirely without ventilation. Of the younger
children, one is apparently in very poor physical condition, and is
said to be afflicted with tuberculosis. A baby has been for
some time in the hospital, where he was treated with thyroid extract
for cretinism. In addition to insufficient nutrition and lack of
care, the result of the impoverished home, there is some marked
cause of degeneracy in the family, possibly syphilis, which has
affected at least two of the children.
When this little girl came with her elder brother on November
20th to the Psychological Clinic, her appearance was very different
from that presented in the picture. The mother had brought the
boy because of feeblemindedness. The little girl accompanied her
mother because she could not be left at home. I was attracted by
the bright face and good looks of this child, which were all the
more striking because of their setting of ill health and physical
degeneracy. In spite of dirt and inadequate clothing (on a cold,
rainy day, the child came with leaky shoes and no overshoes) she
seemed to be of normal mentality and attractive appearance, a child
of whom any mother might be proud. Her teeth were in a serious
condition; she was afflicted with pediculosis; she had a bad cough
which suggested tuberculosis, and the nasopharynx was obstructed
with adenoids and enlarged tonsils. She appeared, however, to be
mentally normal and therefore not exactly a case for the Psycholog-
ical Clinic, but wre undertook her treatment because her condition
was a critical one where further mental development might be
retarded.
This child, who came -from a neighboring city, was cared for
during a period of two months under the supervision of the Psycho-
logical Clinic. Miss Kolin, who was then Superintendent of the
Industrial Home for Jewish Girls, took charge of her. She was
CHILDREN OF TILE SLUMS. 271
taken for regular treatment to the dental clinic of the University
of Pennsylvania, where she was examined by Dr. Kirk, who
reported her mouth to be in an extremely unsanitary condition.
To quote from his letter:
"She is just at that stage when her dentures are changing from
the deciduous to the permanent set, which is a critical period even
under normal conditions; but added to the extreme probabilities of
nervous stress ordinarily incident to this dentitional crisis, her
alveolar borders are infected and in a state of more or less active
inflammation. She is undoubtedly swallowing large quantities of
pus germs and other toxic substances arising from bacterial action
in her mouth.
"ITer powers of mastication are extremely limited, not only
by reason of the damage to her masticating mechanism from
caries, but mastication is necessarily painful to her by reason of
the inflamed and infected condition of her gums.
"I would call your attention to the malformation of the hard
structures of both her upper and lower incisor teeth, and of a
portion of the crowns of her first permanent molars above an'd
below. The condition of these teeth indicates that during their
formative period the child has been subjected to some general
inflammatory disturbance, which has arrested for a time the normal
development of the teeth under consideration."
Under the direction of Dr. Ludlum she was placed on anti-
syphilitic treatment, and following Dr. Butler's diagnosis of
adenoids she was taken to the Woman's Hospital and operated on
for adenoids and tonsils. Clothing was obtained for her through
Miss Kolin, and her improved appearance made it possible to take
the photograph in the Psychological Laboratory which is repro-
duced on the preceding page.
Despite the great improvement shown after two months of
treatment, physical deterioration had already set in, and at seven
years it was already too late to free this child entirely from the
degenerating effects of her environment. If this little girl could
be kept for six months or a year in a favorable environment,
and subjected to satisfactory educational influences, it might be
possible to arrest the progress of physical degeneracy and to over-
come the mental and moral retardation. While under Miss Kohn's
care she manifested the persistence of the infantile instinct of
appropriation, taking things which did not belong to her, without
any regard for the rights of others. Little impression could be
272 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
made upon her during this brief period, attention being chiefly
directed to the improvement of her physical condition. If there
had been at my disposal the necessary funds for her board and
training, I should have kept her in the Hospital School for a period
of time under observation and training. Iler failure to recognize
the property rights of others is nothing more than an evidence of the
lack of moral training. I do not believe in the existence of crim-
inal instincts, and the fact that this child is unable to distinguish
between right and wrong with respect to property is in my opinion
no evidence that she is at this time a moral degenerate. Instincts
which are perfectly normal in the young child are sometimes out-
grown by the natural process of development. Sometimes they are
inhibited by the development of other instincts, and sometimes
they are subjected to control through the right sort of training.
Just as a child's second teeth can not be expected to be normal and
sound unless the child is in fairly good health at the time when
the teeth naturally appear, so we cannot expect a child to pass
through the several stages of development, acquiring one trait of
character after another, unless the child has an opportunity to
develop normally, both physically and mentally.
Traits of character develop at diverse periods in a child's life,
and are a natural process of growth. Just as stones, weeds, drought,
or vermin will maim the plant, so that the buds it brings forth are
stunted, worm-eaten, doomed to decay before maturity, so the lack
of good food, light, air, and happiness may delay the appearance
of instinctive traits of character until the child, like the bud, is
stunted, weak, inefficient, perhaps imbecile. The second tease
which I shall report is a striking illustration of the effect of
environmental conditions upon the development of mental and
moral character.
Fannie is the offspring of Russian Jewish parents, who with
their seven children were crowded into two small rooms. The
living-room had one window, and contained a table, a few chairs,
a stove, a lounge, dirty clothes piled in one corner, a barking cur
and many flies. The table was covered with a piece of black oil-
cloth, and on this were usually to be found pieces of brown bread
and glasses of tea. No meals were prepared and the family never
sat down to table. Their diet consisted chiefly of bread, tea, and
sometimes fish. The bread was always on the table for the flies
to crawl over and the children to eat when their hunger drove them
to it. The front of the house looked out on a board fence which
CHILDREN OF TIIE SLUMS. 273
divided a double alley. In the rear was a small back yard. One
hydrant at the entrance sufficed for the different families. There
was underground drainage, but an offensive odor came from the
closets. This was the soil in which Fannie had struggled to grow
for eight years. AYhen the school nurse visited the house Eannie
sat crouched in a corner, her eyes sullen and dead, her mouth hang-
ing open, her skin showing her poorly nourished condition. Her
eyes were crossed, her teeth irregular, the whole face devoid of life
or interest.
Fannie had been two years in the first grade of a Philadelphia
school and had made in that time so little progress that there
was no possibility of promoting her to the next grade at the end
of the school year. During the first year her attendance had been
somewjiat irregular, but despite the regular attendance of the
second year she had profited little, and had come to be overlooked,
because she was thought to be too feeble-minded to progress in a
school for normal children.
When brought to the Psychological Clinic by a school nurse
of the district, she was wearing glasses prescribed by the school
physician, but she was still noticeably cross-eyed. Iler speech was
so defective that it was practically impossible to understand any-
thing she said. She appeared extremely dull, sullen and stubborn.
I discovered, however, that she was quite deaf and questions of
a very simple character, which she appeared too stubborn to answer,
would bring forth a reply, if repeated in a very loud tone of voice.
Despite these physical handicaps, her most serious defects in my
opinion were temperamental and lay in the emotional rather than
the intellectual field. She did not seem to understand affection,
showed at first no curiosity, 110 vanity, no generosity, 110 spirit of
helpfulness, 110 domestic traits or interest in the house, and very
little fondness for a doll. I believe that curiosity, vanity, energy,
good-will, affection, self-respect, domestic and maternal instincts
are very important elements in the training of a child. Stubborn-
ness, lethargy, and indifference are the weeds which choke these
healthy emotional growths, and until removed they preclude all
possibility of advance.
First Fannie was sent to a hospital where she was operated
011 for adenoids and enlarged tonsils.
Two weeks after the operation I saw her again. Even in
that short time the child's appearance had altered for the better.
She looked stronger and her skin gave evidence of her improved
274 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
condition. The moutli was still open hut her whole expression
had changed. She was a little more alert and took some interest
in her surroundings.
In the course of the next two months she made very little
additional improvement. A more thorough examination showed
that she was very deaf for words and sounds, but especially for
spoken language. Her inability to give attention rendered it diffi-
cult to ascertain the exact degree of deafness. Iler articulation
also remained defective, although her speech had improved suffi-
ciently to enable her teacher to understand nearly all that she said.
On the opening of the Hospital School, July 1, 1907, Fannie
was entered for training. Here she remained for one year, attend-
ing for the first six weeks the class for backward children at the
University of Pennsylvania. For the next six weeks she was in the
country under training, and on October 1st she was entered in the
first grade of a Philadelphia schoool, living in the Hospital School
and receiving constant assistance in her lessons. Although she made
satisfactory if slow progress in her school work, her greatest strides
were made in the emotional field.
She was extremely obstinate, but her obstinacy was not mere
wilfulness which could be eradicated through strict discipline or an
appeal to her moral sense. It appeared rather as a temporary
clouding of her consciousness which it was found best to ignore.
When treated thus, she would gradually brighten up and be ready
to receive instruction. Her dullest period was the first in the day
before her interest was awakened. In the beginning a half hour
was allowed her to adjust herself to the school environment. At
the end of four weeks the period of her apparent stupor was reduced
to about fifteen minutes, and in two weeks more she was actively
attentive and quick to learn during even the first half hour. At
first she did not seem to understand affection, and when another
little girl, who was homesick and needed a petting, grew demonstra-
tive, Fanny laughed in a bewildered way as at a strange manifesta-
tion. Before six weeks were up she was the most demonstratively
affectionate child in the school.
How much of Fannie's shyness was due to a perception of her
failures it would be difficult to say. In the beginning it was impos-
sible to get her to read or cipher before people, but after the first
year she did this with the greatest pleasure and was ready with
pride to exhibit her attainments. Several times during the first
six weeks she was with us we tried to photograph her but she per-
CHILDREN OF TEE SLUMS. 275
sistently turned her back. Was this shyness or shame at the
pitiable appearance she presented ? Certainly at the beginning she
showed no signs of vanity whatever or of interest in her person, but
as we gave her better clothes she began to take the keenest pride in
herself, and vanity became one of those traits to which we could
appeal with uncommon success. A year and a half later she
brought a photograph of herself to me with the greatest pleas-
ure,?a pride and pleasure not to be wondered at when I remem-
bered the starved, dull, miserable, sickly child and then looked at
the happy, alert face, the intelligent eyes, the closed mouth, the neat
dress and pretty hair ribbon, and saw what the photograph could
not reveal, the clear, white skin and healthy color in the cheeks.
During the first summer she appeared extremely sluggish.
She showed very little tendency to play and preferred to sit more
01* less motionless. As good food, better air, sunlight, and kindly
treatment began to take effect, she burst forth with such excessive
vitality, such exuberant spirits, that once when I had her before
the Psychological Clinic, one of the teachers asked if the lively
movements were not the result of St. Vitus' Dance. This first
outburst of vitality gradually subsided, leaving her a normally
active child.
When her mother came to school to see her, Fannie would run
and hide. When brought forth, she was once again the dull, sullen,
obstinate child of the past. Once the mother brought her some
fruit but the child would not take it from her, receiving it at last
through a third person. The presence of the mother or other mem-
bers of her family brought out in the child all her earlier traits.
A puppy raised in the kennel and later trained to be a house-dog,
never fails to resent being put back in the kennel, nor could this
child fail to react as she did towards the relatives who were the
only links with her past miserable existence. Every time Fannie
was allowed to visit her family?she was never permitted to spend
a night with them while in my care?she was ill for two or three
days afterwards.
At first entirely lacking in domestic traits or interest in the
house, she later evinced a great desire to help in the housekeeping,
overcoming great awkwardness in order to carry out this purpose.
Six months after entering the Hospital School, she received
at Christmas the first doll she had ever had, and this remained for
a long time her most cherished possession. In this way the
maternal instinct made its appearance, and about the same time
276 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
she was taught to sew and began to take an interest in the personal
care of her clothing. In time her curiosity awoke and she began
to show a child's usual inquisitiveness.
The operation for adenoids had been followed by a marked
improvement, but during the first summer the child's nose again
filled up. Iler deafness seemed to increase, periods of stupor
appeared, and finally her attention could not be held for school
work at all. Her breathing showed increased obstruction and the
mouth was again held widely open. These unfavorable conditions
were all removed through a second operation. The obstructed
breathing did .not disappear more rapidly than did the obstructed
intellectual and emotional processes. The operation made her again
a fairly bright child. A period of more rapid improvement in all
her work followed, the child laughing and talking more and seem-
ing anxious to assist with the work.
The defective hearing due to the disease of the middle ear,
the result of the adenoids, was a severe handicap. In spite of this,
during the second year, while living under my care with a private
family, she made satisfactory progress in the public school. When'
Fannie first came to us we failed to appreciate how little she under-
stood of what was said to her. Six months afterwards, we discov-
ered she had not the faintest conception of the English word "bird".
When told about Christmas and Santa Clans, she asked, "Will
to-morrow be Santa Clans ?"
Articulation exercises enabled Fannie to express herself so
that she could be understood. They also improved her hearing very
greatly, and this in turn made her articulation more nearly perfect.
The mental discipline to which she was subjected cultivated and
steadied her powers of attention. But if I were asked to. state
what had been most essential for this child's development, I believe
I should say good food, a hygienic environment and a measure of
happiness.
Certainly all of this child's defects flowed directly from the
impoverished condition of her family. An older sister, sixteen
years of age, presented a striking picture of physical degeneracy.
She had left school at thirteen, when in the fourth grade, to go to
work in a factory. About the time Fannie came to the Hospital
School, the older sister was thrown out of work, for what reason I
do not know, but six months later she was physically unfit for any
kind of labor. For a year she was looked after by the medical dis-
pensary of the University Hospital, whose social service depart-
CHILDREN OF THE SLUMS. 277
merit demonstrated its usefulness bj finding a temporary home for
her in the country, after other treatment had failed. She was a
pitiable looking specimen and medical opinion characterized this
sixteen-year-old child as a chronic neurasthenic. Her life energies
are practically exhausted. She is done for, and fit only for the
scrap-heap. She is a physical degenerate, but there is no warrant
for blaming this fact on inheritance, accident or disease, on the
contrary there is every indication that it is due to poverty and
neglect. When one looked beneath the unpleasant aspect of the older
child, one saw a good looking girl with perfectly normal features,
undoubtedly possessed of normal intelligence. She and her younger
sister Fannie entered life as little handicapped physically and
mentally as any other normal children. There are two children
younger than Fannie, who are yet to go through the mill, a girl
aged, two years, and one aged nine, who has already been taken to
a dispensary by the school nurse to have her tonsils removed. If
this were supplemented by a daily trip to a bakery and dairy, she
might have a chance. Between Fannie and the sixteen-year-old
sister, is a boy of thirteen. Concerning him the older sister said,
"He gets 011 all right, he's never sick, only had typhoid fever
twice." He occasionally makes a little money for the family by
selling papers. Another boy, aged fifteen, was rescued from his
family by the Juvenile Aid Society and placed in a private home,
but the opportunity for restoration offered him was of brief dura-
tion. His mother appeared before the Juvenile Court and suc-
ceeded by the use of strenuous pleading in inducing the judge to
order the boy returned to her custody. His labor is now con-
tributing to the income of the family. The mother states that
she is willing to commit the entire care of Fannie to others until
the girl is fourteen years old, when she will be taken home and
put to work to contribute to their support. Last summer Miss
Elliott, with whom I had placed Fannie for a year, having become
much attached to her, was ready to take the child with her to her
western home. She offered to adopt her but the mother's consent
to this could not be obtained. I placed the matter in the hands of
the Children's Aid Society, to see if a court order could not be
obtained committing Fannie to Miss Elliott's care until she was
twenty-one, but after consultation we deemed it hopeless to make
this appeal to the court, because of the disinclination of judges to
take any action resulting in breaking up so-called "family life".
There can be no doubt that the mother of these children has some
278 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
maternal feeling and under ordinary' circumstances she is entitled
to the possession of her children. On the other hand there is also
no doubt that she looks upon her children as an investment on
which she has the right to draw interest as soon as the children are
57^ ? - am inmm . , -
Hi
it? mm i
BECAUSE NO PItOVISION IS HADE FOR THE TRAINING OF A CIIILI)
LIKE THIS IN TIIE PHILADELPHIA SCHOOLS, IT WAS PROPOSED TO
PLACE HER IN AN INSTITUTION FOR FEEBLEMINDED CHILDREN.
CHILDREN OF THE SLUMS. 279
able to work. She cannot be made to understand that her methods
are productive of deterioration, and that if these children were
given an opportunity to regain a normal condition of mind and
body, and were not forced to labor prematurely in an unfavorable
environment, they would be better able in the long run to contribute
toward the sustenance of the family.
If our history of Fannie's restoration shows the inadequacy
of social service organizations and of the Juvenile Court to cope
with such difficulties, it also shows the unpreparedness of the public
school system to provide the proper sort of training for children
like Fannie. For a year and a half Fannie was a pupil in the
Newton School for Girls, where she made fairly good progress.
She succeeded in doing the work of the first grade, owing to the
fact that Miss Bradshaw took unusual interest in the child, and
that she was one of the few children in the school requiring
special attention. Her deafness seemed to be her chief handicap,
although in some directions Fannie is mentally slow and dull.
Naturally, the instruction was in reading, writing, and arithmetic.
What Fannie needed was instruction in manual work, especially
in domestic science, which she could readily learn and for which
she is temperamentally adapted. In another public school where
she was entered this fall, the child was considered unfit for the
normal grades, and the suggestion was made that she should be
sent to an institution for feeble-minded children, because only in
this way could she obtain suitable instruction. Undoubtedly
Fannie is not a child who can be taught in classes of fifty the
ordinary subjects of the school curriculum; but the child does not
belong in an institution for feeble-minded children, and it is a
depressing commentary on the public schools of Philadelphia that
the lack of provision for girls of this kind should make it necessary
to consider the possibility of placing her in such an institution.
The work of restoration with this child has been partly mental
and partly physical. It has been of long duration, and is not yet
completed. It has been accompanied by the expenditure of con-
siderable money, and many agencies have taken part, as well as
many private individuals. It may not be undesirable to enumerate
these agencies:?
The school nurse;
The school medical inspector ;
The Psychological Clinic and Hospital School of the Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania;
The Polyclinic Hospital;
280 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The Nose and Throat Clinic of the University of Pennsyl-
vania ;
The Dental Dispensary of the University of Pennsylvania;
Professional services of an oculist, Dr. Burton Chance;
Professional services of a nose and throat specialist, Dr.
Ralph Bntler;
Professional services of Dr. S. D. Ludlum;
Miss Elliott;
The Newton Girls' School;
The Children's Aid Society;
The Juvenile Aid Society;
The social service department of the Psychological Clinic;
Miss Marion Kolm and the Industrial Home for Jewish Girls.
Because the services of these various individuals and organi-
zations were rendered without direct charge, nevertheless some one
paid in time or money. The expense, however, can not be accu-
rately estimated. In addition to these services Fannie has been
supplied with clothing for the last two years and a half through
the kindness of persons interested in her behalf by the Psycho-
logical Clinic. Moreover, the cost of her board and training in the
Hospital School was contributed by private philanthropy. This
alone amounted to several hundred dollars. I estimate the cost
of Fannie's restoration up to the present time to be in the neighbor-*
hood of from fifteen hundred to two thousand dollars. This expendi-
ture has been made to restore a child to normal condition, to repair
the damage done by the environment. The problem is not yet
solved, for all this expenditure of effort and money will go for
naught if Fannie is sent back to her former environment.
The problem calls for preventive social action. The con-
servation rather than the restoration of the child is to be preferred
as social work?to keep the child on its feet rather than to lift
it up after it has been knocked down. To conserve the children
of the next generation, however, we must begin by restoring their
future parents, the children of this generation. We should offer
the slum parent something better than a choice between race
suicide and child murder.
