The Irrepressible Ego
=======================

By Ligiitner Witmek, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.
Iii the February, 1910, number of this journal I reported
the case of a typical child of low vitality, apathetic and without
initiative. With such a child nothing can be done unless by
means of good food, fresh air, baths and appropriate medical
treatment we can affect the nervous system in such a way that
the apathy is overcome and the child acquires a new energy.
At the opposite extreme we have the child of great energy
and abounding vitality, a vigorous personality which may be
sometimes found tenanting even a feeble or diseased body. In
an environment where energy and personality have a normal
outlet such a child may unfold, to the gratification of his parents,
traits of character which will distinguish him by an early independence of thought and action. Coop this child up in an institution and he will be sure to get into trouble.
An ideal child for an institution is one who stays where he
is put. And yet the troublesome children are often the best
material for mental and even moral development. This is true
with not only large groups or classes of children,, it is true also
of families. The black sheep sometimes turns out to be the
mainstay of the family, and many who follow the trail of acquired
degeneracy to its barren end might have been diverted into happier paths if they had been subjected in their youth to proper
guidance. In my classes at the college preparatory school, where
I taught after my graduation from college, the most troublesome
boys often gave the greatest promise. One lad I remember still
with a great deal of pleasure, though he was probably the most
difficult case I encountered in my three years' experience. When
his father died leaving his business in a precarious condition,
this boy who was then about fifteen years of age, buckled down
and devoted himself to working in the most energetic manner to
support his mother.
It is a great pity that the public schools of to-day are doing
relatively so little for many active but troublesome children be(*93)
194 TEE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
tween the ages of ten and fourteen. This is especially true of
the boys who, yearning to go to work so as to have something to
occupy their minds and hands, are yet compelled to sit in school
over uncongenial tasks which for many of them lack the slightest
educational value. Parents are also apt to find the most vital and
energetic member of the family the one Avhom they are least able
to control and direct. In the home or at school, the troublesome
child requires a larger outlay of time and thought, but he is
worth it.
A child of this type was brought to the Psychological Clinic
in October, 1908, by an agent of the Children's Aid Society of
Pennsylvania. In the preceding March she had been entrusted
to the care of the society in Philadelphia because the local
authorities of the county from which she came were no longer
able to control her by reason of her persistent and excessive
incorrigibility. I am told that she is remembered to this day
in the county poor house, where she had been an inmate,
and in the local hospital, as the most difficult and in every
way obnoxious case they had ever attempted to handle. The
condition of her eyes called for an operation and prolonged
treatment, and this added another reason for confiding her to
the care of the Philadelphia society.
Though eleven years of age, Mary, as I shall call her, had not
yet taken the initial steps in school work and was considered to
be mentally deficient as well as morally defective. There is some
vagueness concerning her parentage, but the mother had been for
a time under the care of the county poor house and was reported to be feebleminded and to have a feebleminded sister.
The report stated that the mother and sister were weak minded
but not insane, a detail doubtless added because the girl's moral
symptoms justly awakened the suspicion of insanity. As a matter of fact, all that is known about the child's family is that the
mother and her sister are weak minded (not a professional diagnosis) and the father deserted the mother.
In accepting the care and custody of this child, the Children's
Aid Society of Pennsylvania showed that it does not shirk its
obligation to look after even the most difficult cases. The history of this child from March, 1908, until the present day, is
the history of a ward of the society. During a part of this time,
about a year and a half, she was confided by the society to the
professional care of the Psychological Clinic and Hospital School.
THE IRREPRESSIBLE EGO. 195
Sent first in March, 1908, to a hospital for the treatment
of her eyes, the authorities there were glad enough to get rid of
her. The nurse stated that she became very mischievous, even
malicious, as soon as her vision began to improve. For this
reason she was discharged before the completion of the treatment.
Still in need of medical treatment, she had been from July
20th until October 22d in a boarding house waiting for some
disposal to be made of her case. The child could not possibly
be recommended to a private family, either for adoption or boarding. The Pennsylvania Training School for Feeble Minded
Children is overcrowded, and moreover will not accept feebleminded children with moral symptoms so long as more easily
managed children are on the waiting list. A reform school
scarcely seemed to meet the situation, for the child was in need
of hospital care and of school training even more than of remedial
discipline.
While awaiting the disposal of her case in the boarding
house, she was reported to be uncontrollable, even dangerous, rushing at adults and other children, biting and scratching them.
Whipping, to which she had doubtless been too frequently subjected, aroused the child's stubbornness and sullenness to the last
degree. The caretaker reported that it was necessary to give
Mary valerian every day to keep her quiet. She would bite
herself apparently in a sullen rage, and was said at times to clutch
at her throat, though I am inclined to consider this a bit of sensational fiction. It was claimed, and I believe with justice, that
she could not be left alone for a moment. While often attacking
children of her own age or older, she was reported to be invariably
kind to smaller children.
The Children's Aid Society had not been willing to run the
risk of sending her to the public school, as they were afraid she
might harm the other children. ISTo effort had been made to start
her education. Affairs finally reached a crisis at the temporary
home, and at the time I first saw her she had been for some days
in the personal care of an agent of the society who had found her
fairly tractable, although she reported that the child had had an attack of temper, the first in two weeks, on the day before her visit to
the Clinic. Mary behaved herself better than usual because of her
devotion to this woman, probably the best friend the poor waif
had ever known. The oculist, who'considered the child's eyes to
be in a fairly serious condition, was demanding better physical
19G THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
treatment and moral control, if he was to have any success in
improving the condition of her eyesight. The examining neurologist had advised the society that the child should not be
placed with "other healthy and normal children." When the
Children's Aid Society referred the case to the Psychological
Clinic, its agent brought the child to the University of Pennsylvania as to a place of last resort.
I was aware of the main features of the child's history, when
I saw her for the first time in the examination room of the Psychological Clinic. The little girl who sat there, apparently about
twelve years of age, looked very like the representation of her
shown on this page. Certainly she presented no better appearTHIS GIRL APPEARS TO BE AN INCORRIGIBLE DEGENERATE BUT
THE IRREPRESSIBLE EGO. 197
ance, for lier hair at tliat time was cropped short and she lacked
the improved physical condition which was the result of six
months' treatment. Huddled together on her chair, her head,
covered with short, tousled, brown hair, thrust well forward, her
shoulders somewhat elevated, she looked out at me from narrow
slit-like eyes, ready to offer sullen resistance to any move I might
make. Her forehead was low and somewhat bulging, the bridge
of the nose slightly depressed, the lower lip protruding. At that
moment she appeared to me the picture of a mental and moral
degenerate.
ISTo one can avoid entirely the effect on his judgment of
preconceptions and prejudices. It is well known to the psycholSHE IS THE SAME GIltL, WHO APPEARS IN THIS PICTURE TO BE NORMAL.
SHE IS THE SAME GIRL, WHO APPEARS IN THIS PICTURE TO BE NORMAL.
198 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ogist that not only our opinions may be modified in this way, but
that our perceptions, the very objects which we seem to see about
us, will be transformed by our preconceptions and our feelings
concerning them. Did this little girl really look like a degenerate,
or was it merely that all who came in contact with her, including
myself, thought she looked like a degenerate because we knew that
she behaved like one ? I was doubtless influenced not only by the
history which had been given me, but to some extent also by the
child's mean attire and sullen expression. Who can look at the
picture which she then presented and arrive at any other conclusion ?
The photograph on page 197 is an excellent likeness of her
after she had been under the treatment of the Psychological Clinic
and Hospital School for about six months. The photograph which
makes her look like a degenerate, was really taken a few moments
after the other photograph, and was made for the purpose of
obtaining a picture of one of the child's characteristic but fastdisappearing expressions. ITer dress was changed and the ribbons
removed from her hair. Mary's volatile temperament assisted us
in obtaining a good likeness of her old, sullen self. She hated to
have her former clothing put on her and she rebelled, most justifiably, at the necessity of being photographed with disheveled hair,
and without her beloved hair ribbon. She was told to hold her
head in the old way and to look as she used to, but she did not
have to try very hard, for her natural resentment was aroused,
and her lips went out instinctively in the desired expression of
sullen resistance. For a moment she was the hopeless degenerate
I had seen that first day at the Psychologic Clinic.
A very few months separated these two children. In fact, it
would be more accurate to say that both children had existed six
months before and both still continued to exist in the same body.
It is an extreme instance of "there was a little girl who had a little
curl." What is required of one who holds the fate of any troublesome child in his hands is sufficient psychological insight to see the
other child beneath the one who is apt to be uppermost. This is
the secret of selecting for treatment children whose mental and
moral traits give promise of restoration to normal condition. However much a history, of the case may influence my first impressions
on seeing a child, I learned very early the necessity of proceeding to the examination as though the history did not exist. Every
scrap of information obtainable must be secured, but it must not
THE IRREPRESSIBLE EGO. 199
be accepted as final, nor can it be allowed to stand for a moment
in the light of facts discovered during the examination. Thus it
took but a few minutes to assure myself that if this child knew
so much less than the average child of her age, it was not due to the
fact that she was feebleminded. A few tests convinced me that
I had to deal with a case of intellectual retardation due either to
neglect or else to the child's inability, owing to her moral and
physical defects, to take advantage of the limited educational
opportunities which had been put before her. A favorable opinion
was formed of her ability to progress under adequate mental
taining.1
The determination of the moral status of a child calls for*
even greater reserve of judgment than the determination of its
mental status. An hour's examination, or several visits to the
Psychological Clinic, seldom suffice to establish the basis for a
sound opinion. I consider most reprehensible the celerity with
which some physicians, not a few judges and probation officers, and
most layman, will reach a conclusion as to a child's moral normality or degeneracy after a brief inspection and a hasty review
of mostly hearsay reports. A competent social worker may keep
a child under expert observation in his home, or the child may
be under constant observation and scientific training for many
weeks in the Hospital School, and it may still be necessary to
decline to give a positive diagnosis. In Mary's case it was six
months before I ventured to express an opinion involving a prognosis, and then very nearly a year went by before I ceased to fear
that my prognosis might not be proved incorrect.
It is always possible, however, to reach a tentative opinion
based upon the results of an examination. Thus I may not be
able to affirm that a child is morally normal, but I may at least
assert that my examination has revealed no abnormality. In the
absence of positive signs of moral perversity, the existence of
traits of character which may be used for the child's moral development is a fact of the first importance. At my first examination
I discovered that Mary possessed considerable emotional spontaneity. I had occasion to test her with simple objects, such as
iThe physical examination revealed defective eyesight, which can be only partially corrected owing to a clouding of the lens, and an irritative affection of the ears and nose giving
rise to an offensive discharge which was cured only after a year of medical treatment and an
operation for the removal of adenoids. In addition the child presented marked symptoms of
intestinal disorder. Her case has been nearly three years under constant medical super
vision. Physical ailments readily account for many "bad days" which caretakers had attrib
uted to moral perversity.
200 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
a doll and other toys. She bounded to the doll as if she had
never before seen this object, but had spent all her life thirsting for
it. For the first time she was her real self, and her behavior was
that of a perfectly normal child possessed of strong emotion which
expressed itself in the most intense and vivid manner. Here was
good material to be moulded into shape. The child was certainly
not abnormal in the sense of being apathetic.
During the examination she manifested another trait oftentimes difficult to deal with but which I consider a most valuable
educational asset. While I was questioning the agent of the
society, the child became completely absorbed in stringing some
beads; not a very exciting task, but for her the interest which this
awakened caused complete abstraction from her surroundings.
When I spoke to her it was obvious that she did not hear one
word. Stringing beads is in one sense play, but in another sense
it comes very close to work, and the task was given as work, not
as play. In this brief examination she had shown that she
could work hard and play hard, and this ability to concentrate
remained a dominant characteristic throughout the months of
training. She could develop crazes At one time it might be
a bicycle, or skates, and then she thought and dreamed and
talked of nothing else, but it could also be the care of her room,
of her person and even successes in school* work. Here was a
rushing current capable of carrying the child in many directions,
and the problem presented to the skillful educator was to direct
the current into helpful channels. Her history showed, and my
entire experience with this child justifies the opinion, that the
current could not be dammed without injury to herself and those
about her.
Of all the traits of character which were disclosed at that firstexamination, and I can speak here only, of the more significant, I
was drawn especially, to what I cannot but call her spiritual courage. Neither an isolated farm life with a weak minded mother
scarcely able to support herself, nor an almshouse experience, nor
being driven from pillar to post, first in the charge of this society
and then of that, nor yet semi-blindness and a serious chronic disease of ears and nose, nor an intestinal disorder which must have
given her a constant feeling of malaise, not all these things had
been able to daunt the spirit of this child. She had lived fighting
against her fate like a rat in a corner, and nothing short of death
could have caused her to admit defeat. She met harsh treatment
THE IRREPRESSIBLE EGO. 201
with sullen defiance or open revolt. Hers was not tlie mean spirit
which lies down and allows the juggernaut of circumstance and
society to run over her, hers the upward reaching spirit of the
rebel. And vet, rebel though she was, irrepressible to the very
core of her being, she was just the child to follow and obey you
with the fidelity of a dog if once you won her esteem and love.
For she was demonstrative and possessed of strong affections. It
was love she craved, even insisted upon from those about her, and
here I came to see lay the chief tragedy of her personality. Physically unattractive, and possessed of an offensive odor which it
took many months to overcome owing to the disease at the root of
her various ailments, she was to most persons who came in contact
with her a very repulsive object. The child must have lived and
to some extent is still living, in the depressing and perhaps irritating atmosphere of having her advances repelled, the advances
of a perfectly normal and healthy minded child, which, coming
from a more attractive physical personality, would have met with
sympathy and encouragement. '
My examination, therefore, had revealed no moral abnormality, but 011 the contrary had shown certain admirable
traits. A brief examination, however, is not competent to set
aside such a history as had been given me. A child who is reported a menace in an institution and who cannot be left alone
for a moment must be cared for in an environment where she
can be constantly overlooked. I could not take her into the
Hospital School because I could not safely trust her with other
children, and for the same reason I could not advise the Children's Aid Society to place her in a private home. Nevertheless,
my examination had disclosed nothing to justify a diagnosis of
moral degeneracy, and it seemed to me a matter of some importance to determine how this child had acquired the attributes
which gave her her present reputation. I therefore advised that
she be placed in a private family, the same that harbored Fannie.2
Here she was under observation for three months.
Mary and Fannie got 011 very well together, barring the
usual quarrels, Mary's energy acting as a great stimulus to the
more apathetic Fannie. Mary's affection, like everything else
about her, was boisterous and ungovernable. She said once to
me in the laboratory, "You know I like everybody," This seemed
at the time very suspicious, hut I learned that the child came as
2The Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 9, February,1910, pp. 272-280.
202 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
near tlie truth as those whose stories only emphasized her outbreaks of temper. The same energy which caused her to express
her affection by throwing her arms around other children and
hugging them, made her when crossed or angry attack these same
children, scratching, biting, spitting at, or kicking them. Whether
it was affection, anger or any other emotion, Mary expressed it
with all the force of which she was capable. During the three
months she spent in the house with Fannie she showed the faults
of an active young creature who all her life had had to fight to
get and keep what she wanted. She was inordinately selfish about
all her possessions, small as they were, not sharing them or even
allowing them to be touched. On the other hand, if she saw anything she coveted in the possession of another child, she would
grab it. Sometimes with her desire to possess was combined a
feeling of impatience at the stupid manner in which the toy or
game was being handled, for Mary was clever with her hands, and
even in these first days of training she learned to sew, and to wash
and iron her doll's clothes.
She was stubborn, clung obstinately to her own way, and
when compelled to obey was apt to be exceedingly impertinent.
At this time she showed no interest whatever in her personal appearance; her table manners were abominable and she refused
any kind of food with which she was unfamiliar. As the days
passed in this new environment, her tendency to strike other
children gradually diminished. The fits of temper in which she
threw herself on the floor, kicked and screamed, or bit herself in
an apparent frenzy, became noticeably less.
Ten days after she was placed in this private family I
entered her in the first grade of a Philadelphia public school,
where she remained for a little over two months. Although the
child took a great deal of interest in the work, she was reported
as unsatisfactory in both behavior and progress, and the result
confirmed my belief in the inadequacy of the public school to
solve a problem of this kind.
Mary would be sent to school in the morning in a neat dress,
the buttons 011 her coat, face and hands clean, a fresh handkerchief in her pocket, and her gloves sewed to a tape on her coat.
At noon when she arrived home, her buttons were off, handkerchief gone, tape torn off the gloves, and generally one glove lost.
Her dress was black and dirty as if she had rolled in the mire. In
a few weeks she reduced one pair of best quality, rubber shoes
THE IRREPRESSIBLE EGO. 203
to frazzles, and lost two or three pairs of gloves. Her appearance after a morning at school was that of a person who has been
downed in a street fight and buffeted by a cyclone. ]STo wonder this
spirit of destructiveness wrought havoc in county poor houses, and
such like economical institutions! Mary gave no indication of
feeblemindedness. In all her play she showed great imagination,
talking vivaciously to her doll and to the canary bird. There
were signs that this gift of imagination had helped to soften some
of the rough places in her own small life. Once she avowed to
the trainer, "Every one has always spoiled me!" And this from
a poor waif who had doubtless seen the roughest side of institution life!
Mary was accepted for training in the Hospital School on
February 23, 1909. On her arrival she did not have the faintest
idea how to behave properly at any time or in any place. In
the school-room, for instance, she dropped things, upset chairs,
banged doors, shouted aloud any remarks she wished to make, and
if the other children looked at her inquiringly or exclaimed at
her behavior, she would shout at them, "What are you looking
at ?" or "Shut up!" If her examples were marked right she
would be elated; if wrong, she would grow sullen, throw chalk or
pencil on the floor, stamp her foot, and behave as if the person
who did the marking were to blame. The second day she was in
the school she was sent to bed for the day. This punishment was
found to be very effective, as was also denying her some plaything or article of attire.
She objected to taking her cold bath in the mornings, resented any criticism by sulks and fits of temper, ate like a little
pig, and teased and tormented the other children.
Little by little, never relaxing the discipline, but at the same
time giving her more things to attract and hold her interest, making her periods of good temper and obedience as pleasant and gay
as possible, and her rebellious times as wholly unpleasant, a great
improvement manifested itself.
Two or three new dresses, and a pretty comb and hair
ribbon changed her whole careless attitude toward her clothes,
which up to this time had not been attractive enough to inspire
either pride or neatness. She was given a room of her own containing a small wardrobe. This impressed her, and having been
told once, she never failed to hang up and put away her clothes.
AS SHE APPEARED ;WHEN BROUGHT TO THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
.
AS SHE APPEARED ;WHEN BROUGHT TO THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
AS SHE APPEARED AFTER SIX MONTHS CARE AND TRAINING.
AS SHE APPEARED AFTEIt SIX MONTHS CAKE AND TRAINING.
206 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
In the school-room Mary learned to be obedient and quiet,
and to take a poor mark goodnaturedly. She could be trusted
alone to study her reading and spelling, and not to waste a minute.
She always studied aloud and never paused until all the words
were learned.
She got over her objection to a cold bath in the mornings,
learned to dress herself, to eat her food slowly and neatly, and to
act quietly on the street. Taught to wash her hands and clean her
finger nails, she spent a great deal of time on this and other details
of her personal appearance, showing a marked desire to look well
and to be thought pretty.
Outside of Mary's abounding vitality, her most salient characteristic was her keen desire to do things herself, and her most
joyous moments centered around her initiation into some simple
duties confined up to that time to the "Olympians". Thus she
loved to care for the younger children, to dress and undress them,
her zeal in this direction often outstripping her discretion. Whatever she saw the nurse do she wished to try herself. In helping
to teach or take charge of younger children she mimicked exactly the words and tone of those in authority. But this desire
to do things was one of her most troublesome qualities. She
played with the hands of a large clock in the drawing room, setting
them back and forward and making it strike the different hours,
and this she amused herself with secretly, the clockmaker coming
several times to investigate its apparently irresponsible behavior.
The quiet, firm discipline, the regular life, good food and steady
occupation helped the work. Mary's rebellious periods grew less
frequent, and when they did occur, were broken up more quickly.
One Sunday she got up in a very amiable mood, took her
cold bath, and was allowed to put on a new dress in honor of
the day. She felt her superior appearance so much that at breakfast she asked for a clean napkin in rather a critical way. She
was told she must take Avhat was given her as the rest did. When
the cream was passed for her oatmeal she pettishly refused to
take it. Afterward when she asked for it she was told she could
not have it, and when the tears came into her eyes she was told
she must not cry. She burst into tears at this and was ordered
to go upstairs and take off her new dress. She left the table with
loud crying which soon became bellowing. The trainer in charge
followed her, and Mary kept repeating again and again, "I will
be quiet if you won't make me take off my new dress." When
TIIE IRREPRESSIBLE EGO. 207
told she could not be excused this time she tried the old trick
of biting her hand, presumably to alarm the trainer. She was
informed she could not frighten any one by this behavior and
so far from gaining anything by it she must now take off all
her clothes and go to bed until dinner time. This produced violent crying. She was assured that if she took her deserved punishment quietly she would be allowed to go down to dinner and have
her ice cream, but if she persisted in being naughty she would
have to remain in bed all day. At this she gave in and behaved
admirably for the rest of the day. This was her only resort to
biting herself during her three month's stay at the school.
Mary coveted the privilege of wearing a watch which belonged to one of the trainers. This was used as an incentive to
good behavior, and she was allowed to wear it only when she was
good, it being immediately forfeited in case of any naughtiness.
Instead of sulking when it was taken from her she learned in time
to take it off and return it voluntarily whenever she had
misbehaved.
In spite of the strict discipline to which she was subjected,
she enjoyed her life at the school. After she had been there a
month, she announced, "I am so glad I ever came here. This
is the best home I ever had," going on to enumerate the things
she liked, prominent among them being nice places to keep
her things.
In all this time, Mary had shown no sign of being incorrigible. Her faults were those of any other homeless waif who
had lacked the proper incentives to good behavior.
In May, a home was found for her on a farm in New
England, where she was to be taken care of and perhaps ultimately adopted. When she was told of this plan for her future,
she was delighted with the idea and was rapturous over each new
frock which made up her small trousseau.
On June 3d she left for her new home, accompanied by the
agent of the Children's Aid Society. In Boston the finger-bowls
on the table interested her more than anything on the trip. She
asked at once what they were for, and, on being told, she waited
obediently until the proper time, and then, promptly copying her
companion, used her finger-bowl very daintily. At the next meal
when no finger-bowls were forthcoming she said reprovingly to
the waitress, "You did not give us any finger-bowls. We always
have them." On this journey to Boston the agent of the society
208 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
noticed a great improvement in Mary's manners, at table and
elsewhere. She was very good and helpful, getting up early,
dressing herself and packing all her own things. After breakfast,
she wrote two postals to the school, refusing to do this in pencil.
She quoted one of her teachers as saying, "If you think enough of
any one to write them a letter always use ink." At a small station
in the country she was met by the woman who was to give her a
home in the true meaning of the word. With her sense of the
dramatic requirements of a situation, she threw her arms around
this woman, exclaiming, "Oh, mother! I am so glad that you
have come!"
A happy summer ended, Mary was compelled to return to
Philadelphia, October 30, 1909, because the family with whom
she had been placed moved so far into the country that adequate
school advantages were lacking. Since her return to Philadelphia
she has lived at a boarding school and in two homes, and has
attended one public school. There is little variation in the reports
of those who have had her in charge. She is never vicious, is
extremely imaginative and demonstrative, honest and truthful,
fairly obedient, very loyal to those who are kind to her. Her
general health is good, but she is constantly handicapped by. the
condition of her eyes which varies from time to time. During the
summer of 1910 while in school at Ocean City, 1ST. J., under the
supervision of the Psychological Clinic, her vision became so impaired that it was necessary to bring her to Philadelphia for
the purpose of consulting an oculist. At the end of a week she
was allowed to return to the school. Again on September 9th
her eye condition became serious. She had so little vision that
placing her in a school for the blind was under consideration. By
October 1st, however, the eyes were so improved that she could see
well enough to go to school.
Mary grieved greatly at being obliged to leave her iSTew
England home where every one had been most kind to her and
where she. had enjoyed to the utmost a real, country home life.
She had been allowed to call her caretakers "father" and "mother"
and she frequently speaks of having found a father and mother
whom she was obliged to leave in order to go to school in Philadelphia. That she will return to their care some day is a great
help and incentive to Mary, to do good work both in school and
at home.
THE IRREPRESSIBLE EGO. 209
The training she received in tlie Hospital School still remains
fixed in the child's mind. She is orderly about her clothes and
is interested in her personal appearance, bathes regularly and
willingly, keeps her hands and nails in good condition and is apt
to criticise those who neglect these personal duties. She has fair
reasoning power, and uses it. She recently told a friend about
the younger children in the home where she had formerly been.
The children had complained of what they had had for supper and
had said to her,?"Milk and bread is not anything, is it Mary?"
Mary had replied,?"Yes it is something but not much". She
is undoubtedly clean minded, has never used improper language
and seems to be wholly innocent of ideas of sex. She enjoys
boys' society, apparently because she likes the rougher games
which they play. Once when she was seen in the street with
several nice looking boys who said that they were flirting with
Mary, she said, "I was not flirting with them because I don't
know what that means, but I like to play the games with them."
Since October 2G, 1910, Mary has attended a Philadelphia
public school. She is in the second grade, class A. In a recent
interview, her teacher gives the following report:?"Mary is
neither troublesome nor incorrigible. She is not used to the
routine of the school room where there are fifty-five pupils. She is
much interested and diverted by their conduct and spends much
time in consulting them about her work. This is largely due to
the fact that she does not see well. The child is not able to see the
work on the board from any seat in the room and is obliged to sit
on a chair well up in front. This is not conducive to order as it
is necessary for her to use a book 011 her lap instead of a desk.
But in spite of these disadvantages, Mary is improving constantly. I11 a special class of about twenty children her progress
would be rapid. I do not object to having the child in my room,
and I am deeply, interested in her. I suggest the special class only
because of the greater and more rapid progress that could be
made there."
At home Mary is interested, willing and considerate, her chief
faults being inattention and an excessive demonstrativeness with
the younger children. She helps with household tasks, and takes
great interest in the home life around her. At the present time she
is in the charge of the Children's Aid Society, which has placed
her in a boarding home where she is living peacefully and happily
with a number of children who are in the care of either the Chil210 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
dren's Aid Society or the Psychological Clinic. To those who
have contributed so generously, financially, and to the physicians
and societies who have shown unending patience during the last
two years, her restoration to normal condition must be a source of
great satisfaction. A bright future can be assured the child if
her vision continues to improve. How far she will climb upward,
depends for the rest entirely upon her environment and the training which is provided her.
The moral reconstruction of a child like Mary is in the nature
of a work of art. The loving hands of many nurses, teachers,
trainers, and social workers are acquiring to-day the skilful touch
which is needed to mold the plastic human material into forms of
beauty. The Mary of to-day, is a product of Miss Campion's mind
and heart, first as the agent of the Children's Aid Society, and since
October, 1909, as the social worker in charge of the social service
department of the Psychological Clinic. Miss Campion discovered Mary, took hope for her future, and then supplied the energy
necessary to obtain the co-operation of every agency likely, to help.
It is fitting that I should close this history with a quotation from
her last report: "Mary as she is to-day, with her improved vision
and happy, interested face, and with her extreme gratitude to all
who have helped her, is an inspiration to any one interested in
child helping work."
