News and Comments
==================

Journal of the American Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology.
Last month saw the dedication to the public service of yet another
journal,?unlike many that have gone before it, in that it promises
to bridge a yawning gap in American periodical literature. The Editorin-Chief is Professor James W. Garner, of the University of Illinois,
and the Editorial Director is Colonel and Judge-Advocate Harvey C.
Carbaugh, U. S. A., assisted by the following associate editors:?Charles
F. Amidon, Frederic B. Crossley, Charles A. DeCourcey, Charles A.
Ellwood, Frederick R. Green, Charles R. Henderson, Francis J. Heney,
Charles H. Huberich, John D. Lawson, Orlando F. Lewis, Edward
Lindsey, Adolf Meyer, Frank H. Nor cross, Roscoe Pound, Richard
A. Sylvester, Arthur W. Towne, John H. Wigmore, and Lightner
Witmer.
In an editorial Dr. Garner outlines the plan of the journal as
follows:
"During the sessions of the National Conference on Criminal
Law and Criminology at Chicago in June, 1909, the fact was brought
out that there is no journal or bulletin published in the English language devoted wholly or in part to the cause of criminal law and criminology or to the problems connected therewith, although there are
thirty or forty periodicals of this character published in foreign countries, notably Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, and even India and South
America.. ... ,
"Very recently there has been a remarkable awakening of interest
in the scientific study of crime and penal methods?an interest which
is beginning to manifest itself in a productive research and investigation as well as in destructive criticism of antiquated methods and in
constructive proposals of reform. Believing that an organ should be
provided for promoting this new spirit of research and investigation,
the American Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology has undertaken the establishment of this Journal.
"It will aim to arouse and extend a wider interest in the study of
all questions relating to the administration of the criminal law, including the causes and prevention of crime, methods of criminal procedure
and the treatment of criminals; to provide a common medium for
recording the results of the best scientific thought and professional
practice in this and foreign countries concerning the larger problems
of criminal science; to consider the present state of the criminal law
m every branch, and to bring to the attention of all who are interested
the evidences of progress in legislation and administration so far as
(117)
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
it relates to the detection and punishment of crime, criminal procedure,
and the punishment of offenders. It will advocate the introduction
of such reforms in existing penal methods as experience and reason
have shown to be desirable, to the end that a more effective, speedy, and,
inexpensive system of criminal justice may be secured, more modern
and effective methods of dealing with criminals may be introduced, and
the causes of the present widespread and increasing popular dissatisfaction with the administration of the criminal law may be removed. . . .
"It is believed that such a journal will appeal not only to intelligent practitioners who are interested in the progress of a scientific
criminal law, but to all persons, public officials and private individuals
alike, who are concerned directly or indirectly with the administration
of punitive justice, as well as to a large group of scholars who are
working in the allied fields of sociology, anthropology, psychology, philanthropy, etc. It is now recognized that all these sciences are more
or less closely related to criminal jurisprudence and criminology and
that they are capable of throwing a vast amount of much-needed light
on many problems of the criminal law. Each is in a sense contributory
to the others, and at many points their spheres touch and even overlap."
Summer Courses in Psychology.
The catalogue of the Summer School of the University of Pennsylvania announces a number of courses planned for those interested in
clinical psychology. These courses, offered in addition to those meeting
the requirements of college and graduate students, are addressed to
students who desire to acquaint themselves with psychology as applied
to practical social and educational problems. In these courses physicians, educators in positions of supervision, grade teachers, teachers of
special classes, probation officers, and church workers will have an opportunity to study the scientific methods employed in this field and to
observe the results of their applications.
The courses divide themselves into four groups:
I. SYSTEMATIC COURSES.
Psychology 1 and 2 present a systematic and Hetailed survey of the
general field of psychology. Psychology 1 is an elementary course, offering an opportunity for students to make a thorough acquaintance with
psychology. Psychology 2, an advanced course, considers in further detail
certain of the problems and theories of psychology from the genetic point
of view. This course is offered to meet the requirements of students who
have had one or more years' training in psychology.
n. LABORATORY COURSES.
Psychology 3 deals primarily with the anatomy and physiology of
the nervous system and sense organs in their relation to conscious proNEWS AND COMMENT. 119
cesses and to the production of bodily movement. This course lays a
foundation for thorough work in psychology and its practical applications. It is recommended as a course for students beginning the study
of psychology and for those preparing for practical work with defective
children, social workers, etc. Psychology 4 is an advanced experimental
course in which certain psychological processes are studied in detail.
This course is offered primarily for advanced students and those wishing
to pursue post-graduate work.
in. PRACTICAL COURSES.
Psychology 7 is designed to present to the student a scientific outline of the history, classification, diagnosis, training, and treatment of
deficient children, as well as to demonstrate typical examples of cases
of backwardness and physical defects. Children brought to the Psychological Clinic for examination furnish abundant opportunities for students in this course to observe and study mental and physical defects
and the methods of diagnosis.
The Psychological Clinic has at its disposal reception and waiting
rooms, two rooms for examinations, and all the necessary measuring
and testing instruments, as well as the entire apparatus of the laboratory, and a staff of psychologists, medical examiners, a social worker, and
a recorder. Psychology 7 offers an opportunity for advanced investigation in the special field of child psychology, either upon the literature
of the subjects or upon the boys in the special class. Psychology 10, a
new course in Clinical Social Service, is an application of the laboratory
idea to a new field of psychology made especially urgent by the estaV
lishment of social departments in connection with hospital clinics. The
free Psychological Clinic offers the opportunity for some firsthand
study of the operation of the clinic, while the large number of social
service institutions in Philadelphia affords a large field of practical
study for1 any student looking forward towards a professional career
in this work. A special class for adolescent boys will give immediate
and close opportunity for observation of the methods of dealing with
troublesome boys at puberty and early adolescence. The effect of intelligent leadership, suitable instruction and environment will be closely
studied.
IV. TOPICAL COURSES.
Psychology 5a, a new course, presents a comprehensive and systematic treatment of the normal child, his physical, mental, and moral
development, with special reference to the adolescent period. Psychology
8 presents an analysis of mental diseases, their causes, symptoms, and
principles of cure, with reference both to child and adult life. Psychology 9 outlines in detail the work of medical inspection of school
children, with special reference to methods which can be employed to
120 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
prevent retardation through infectious and contagious diseases and
remediable physical defects.
A credit of one unit will be given, in either the College or the
Graduate School, for each of these courses, except Course 4, for which
two or three credits may be given. To obtain this credit, the student
must hand in, at the conclusion of the course, a satisfactory note-book
and pass a written examination. The note-book and the examination
must equal, in quality and quantity, those that are required of students
in the College or the Graduate School.
The Psychological Laboratory and Clinic are situated in the west
wing of College Hall and comprise three lecture rooms on the first floor
and basement, a seminar and reading room with a department library,
including all the psychological periodicals, a workshop for the manufacture of apparatus, a photographic dark room, two rooms for the
Psychological Clinic, and seven other rooms for examination and experimental research. The entire laboratory equipment will be available
during the summer session of the school.
Eeaders of The Psychological Clinic who wish further information about these courses may address Professor E. B. Twitmyer, who
will be in charge of the Psychological Laboratory and Clinic during the
session of the Summer School.
