News and Comments
===================

Munsterberg Replies to Criticism.
In the January and February numbers of The Psychological Clinic
for 1909 appeared a criticism of some of the scientific work of Professors
Munsterberg, James and Royce. Up to the present time no published
answer has been made to this criticism. Professor Munsterberg, however, has not been inactive. Rumor had it that he wrote to the Council
of the American Psychological Association, stating that he could not
invite the Association to hold its recent meeting in Emerson Hall so
long as Professor Witmer remained a member of the Association, and
suggesting at least by implication that Professor Witmer be expelled
from membership prior to the last annual meeting. Professor Witmer
therefore introduced at the business session of the annual meeting a
resolution requesting the President and Council of the American Psychological Association to forward to him a copy of the correspondence had
between them and Professor Miinsterberg in relation to this matter.
The President of the Association hereupon turned lawyer, and ruled
the resolution out of order on the quibble that no such letter had been
received by the Council from Professor Munsterberg. Professor Miinsterberg, however, saved the situation for Professor Witmer, and stated
that he had written a letter to the Council or to members of the Council,
in which he had taken up the cudgels in behalf of his colleagues, Professors James and Royce (modesty perhaps forbade him to act in this
matter in his own behalf). In this letter he said that he could not
invite to Emerson Hall, devoted as it was to the highest traditions of
scholarship, an Association which included among its membership one
who had insulted with his criticism men of the standing of his two
colleagues.

To meet this covert attack of Professor Munsterberg, it is sufficient to give the widest publicity possible to Profesor Miinsterberg's method of answering scientific criticism. It is worth asking,
however, by what right a member' of the faculty of Harvard University
can exclude from any of its buildings one who is personally distasteful
to himself. It is hardly credible that Professor Munsterberg acted in
this matter with the authority of the President and Corporation of the
institution which he represents, and from whom he acquires his only
authority over Emerson Hall and his own laboratory of psychology.
The distinguished philosopher whose name adorns the building from
which Professor Munsterberg sought to exclude his critic would be the
first, were he alive, to appreciate the irony of the situation. No one
stood more frankly for freedom of speech and thought than Emerson.
(248)
