The Bright Child
=================

By Ella Frances Lynch,
Atlantic City, N. J.
As a teacher for many years in the public schools, with an
experience ranging from the primary through the grammar and
high school grades, I became aroused over the undeniable failure
of the public school system to give the children what it professes
to guarantee?an education. There seemed so many children
classed as "failures," "stupid," or "not up to grade," that, at last,
in spite of the overawing splendor of the school system, I dared
to wonder if therein lay the difficulty and if these little "failures"
did not possess hidden possibilities of greatness, could one but
find the right key. On this point I sought the opinion of outsiders,?physicians, parents, business men, and, can best sum up
my conclusion in the words of Lodge: "Stupidity and bad teaching are synonymous terms."
The public school system attempts the impossible feat of
making a course for all children, irrespective of physical strength,
mentality, inheritance, or home environment,?whether they are
to be lawyers or blacksmiths, artists or mathematicians.
Plainly this course cannot suit all children. Is it then adapted
to the bright child ? Dr. Witmer, professor of psychology in the
University of Pennsylvania says: "The public schools are not
giving the bright child a square deal. He is marking time, waiting for the lame duck to catch up." Is the course intended to fit
the dull pupil ? Evidently not, in view of the tears shed by the
many who, despite all efforts, fail to keep up to grade. It has
been suggested that the course is designed for the average pupil.
The "average" pupil does not exist. You cannot strike an average
between a goose and an eagle nor can you add a dull pupil and
a bright pupil together and get anything. A course of study
based on this idea is not fitted to anyone. Instead, then, of a
school to fit the pupil, the pupil is made to fit the school. The
lock-step masquerades under the name of discipline. The rigid
curriculum tends with each passing year, to produce more and
more the type of factory employees, obliterating individuality and
forcing all into the same mould. As Dr. Eliot says,?"Uniformity
is the curse of our schools."
(141)
142 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The public school attempts too much. The rudiments of education are few and these alone should be given the student in his
earliest years. Train him in obedience to rightful authority, selfcontrol, self-respect, perseverance, and awaken in him a thirst for
knowledge. Thus equipped he is better prepared to make the
most of his natural powers and secure an education outside of
the public school than under its present curriculum. Minds
properly disciplined will in later years grasp with avidity what
requires an effort in the earlier years. It is this fruitless
effort which creates in the pupil a dislike of the subject. Long
ago a good teacher said to his pupils: "There are your books, but
if I did nothing more than come here day after day and teach
you what is between their covers, I should be very far from doing
my duty as a teacher."
The child who spends eight years of five hours a day in acquiring the knowledge demanded for admission to high school, is squandering time. Rightly disciplined, he can grasp in thirty minutes
of eager study all that is new and valuable to him in an entire
day's assignment.
Much time is wasted for the individual in recitation in the
public schools. He can tell you in three minutes what he has
learned in geography; yet he must listen for forty minutes to
forty other pupils answering questions that will aid the teacher
in determining the "mark" to be placed opposite each name in
her little book. These marks are important as among other uses
they form the basis of the splendid assortment of statistics in the
superintendent's office.
Again, more than one subject could well be omitted. Take,
for example, American history which has slight claim to be considered a fundamental subject. We find it taught orally in the
third and fourth grades, and from a text-book in the fifth and sixth
grades. In the seventh grade the weary student greets it as "Not
a friend but my most intimate enemy." Then follows eighth
grade American history. Nor does a teacher say to some child
nauseated because of the repetition of the subject: "John, you
seem to understand history fairly well; you may devote this period
to other lessons for the rest of the year."
We recognize that the public school attempts to provide a
course for all children; that this is no small task; that time and
opportunity, equipment and teaching force sufficient to meet the
needs of all would mean a tremendous outlay. But it is worth
while. The school system too closely resembles the factory system
THE BRIGHT CHILD. 143
where human beings lose all individuality in becoming admirable
machines. A few years hence we may see our school work further
systematized by "numbering" the pupils.
Our school system will be improved when parents adopt
towards it their rightful attitude and demand a course planned
by educators,?parents, physicians, business men, teachers, and
theorists. The improvement will consist in a resort to a simpler
curriculum in which the pupils shall do a few things well rather
than many things poorly. Mastering one thing is better than
attempting many things and mastering none. Let the pupil have
the sense of victory over one subject and he will attack others with
a confidence that assures another conquest. Knowledge is power
only when it is the right kind of knowledge and is assimilated
and becomes part of the individual. We do not want human
machines nor do we want human cyclopedias. The late Dr.
Edward Everett Iiale said: "At present we are making a great
deal too much of points of instruction and of facts. Much more
than half the time of our public schools is taken up with statistics."
Desirous of bettering conditions for at least a few children,
I established a school of individual instruction, in which the
pupils' needs, ability, disposition, health, and other things affecting his educational progress would be taken into account. As I
had previously demonstrated the value of such a plan in the schools
of northern New York it was an experiment only from the financial standpoint. A few words will make clear the plan of the
school; no teacher to have more than six pupils; abundance of
light and air; work outdoors when possible,?always with open
windows; no home work.
These essentials are taught:
How to study; that "Heaven is not reached at a single bound" ;
that habits early formed determine character and destiny; that
"Genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains"; that "He that
ruleth his own spirit is greater than he that taketh a city"; that
all work is ennobling, idleness unfruitful, degrading, abhorrent
alike to God and man.
Neat and accurate work is demanded but originality is encouraged and, in the realm of mathematics, reward is given for finding
a new way to solve a problem.
The first requisite being to teach right habits of study and develop the power of concentration, the beginning seems slow as the
seed-time must be. One or two branches only are taken up, one
being that in which the pupil is least proficient,?usually arith144 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
metic. Owing to the abominable methods of teaching it, there are
more failures in this than in any other subject. I have never
found a normal child who did not have an aptitude for arithmetic.
Pupils are not arranged in classes. Each is given forty
minutes individual attention by his teacher. He returns to the
study room and prepares the assigned work, knowing that when
it is satisfactorily completed he will be dismissed for the day.
As the weeks go by his capacity for work increases and other
subjects are added accordingly. The time spent in school increases, but no pupil remains over four hours a day, and the usual
period is two hours.
In this way, surely the natural way, the bright boy is not
"marking time" for the dullard; the pupil physically weak will
not be pushed to exhaustion and a nervous breakdown, trying to
keep pace with the strong. The pupils acquire interest and ambition,?two powerful factors of progress. A boy who in public
school proved troublesome, "not up to grade," and failed of promotion, has in a single year become a student and acquired more
of real education than three years of public school training gives
his companions. He is now prepared to re-enter the public school
in an advanced grade and achieve success.
