The Dental Disabilities of School Children
==========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1909, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. III. No. 8. January 15, 1910.

By Edward C. Kirk, D.D.S., Sc.D.,
Dean of the Dental School, University of Pennsylvania.
I esteem it a special privilege to be given the opportunity to
address an audience of teachers upon a phase of hygiene which is
growing daily in importance and which has a direct bearing upon
the character and progress of educational work.
Perhaps no aspect of modern educational activity is more
characteristic than that which is concerned with the interrelationship of bodily and mental health. A generation ago, serious
consideration of the health factor was regarded as outside the
sphere of educational discussion, even a decade ago the hygiene of
school children was only of incidental interest, whereas to-day it
is commanding the attention of educators the world over as a problem of paramount importance fundamental to the work of education. So actively has the conception of interdependence of bodily
health and mental efficiency been developed, that the old dictum
of Juvenal, mens sana in corpore sano, in the light of modern
investigation has attained to the dignity of a scientific axiom.
To-day no one of intelligence questions the essential importance
of the health of school children as a prerequisite to efficient school
work, and the health problem is becoming a more and more important consideration in its educational relations.
While the hygienic aspect of the educational problem is
distinctly modern in its development, the underlying principle
of the interdependence of mental and bodily activity awakened
interest much earlier as an educational question.
In a remarkable paper by Dr. Edward Seguin, of New York,
entitled, "New Facts and Remarks Concerning Idiocy,"2 the
'An address delivered before the Teachers' Institute of the Reading
District at Reading, Pa., October 30, 1909.
aA lecture delivered before tbe New York Medical Journal Association,
October, 18G9.
(217)
218 TI1E PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
author points out the mutual dependence of the great nervou9
centers and the peripheral nerve endings, and the. greater possibility of acting upon the centers through the periphery than on
the periphery through the centers, at least during the period of
growth. He was led to this important deduction as the result
of his experience in the successful education of imbeciles by a
system of training based upon the stimulation of the sensorium
through the tactile and visual perceptive faculties, as a result of
which he was enabled to enunciate the physiological principle
afterwards successfully utilized in the manual training idea, i. e.
the education of the brain through the perceptive faculties as a
whole rather than through those of the ear and eye exclusively.
Reference is made to this pioneer work because it so clearly involves
a recognition of the important part played by the nervous mechanism of the body in the educational process, and thus affords an easy
step to the logical deduction that whatever interferes with the
integrity of the nervous mechanism as such or with its normal
functioning, constitutes in greater or less degree an obstacle to
the education of the mind.
In the consideration of physical defects as related to individual
educational progress, those deficiencies which obviously interfere
with the child's ability to study were naturally the first to attract
attention. Hence defects of vision and of hearing, being direct
obstacles to study, have commanded greater and more sympathetic
consideration upon the part of school authorities than a much
larger and equally potent, though less obvious, group of disabilities
which are only now beginning to excite the interest which their
importance warrants. In this latter class may be included the
whole range of disorders, local and constitutional, which have
their origin in abnormal conditions of the mouth and its contained
dental organs. Time will permit of only a general and hasty
reference to the main features of this phase of the subject.
Apart from its relation to articulate speech and respiration,
the mouth is the portal of the digestive tract; it is the laboratory
in which the food is prepared for digestion, and in which the initial
stage of digestion takes place. In order that the preparation and
predigestion of foods shall proceed normally, it is essential that the
dental apparatus shall be normally developed, the teeth correctly
arranged with reference to their relative positions and that they be
sound and clean, and that the saliva which is the digestive juice
of the oral cavity shall be normal in composition and sufficient
in quantity. Imperfections in these requisites entail disturbance
DISABILITIES OF SCHOOL CHILDREN. 219
not only of the process of food preparation and its normal predigestion in tlie mouth, but wliere these processes are continuously
interfered with, derangement of the entire digestive and assimilative mechanism ensues, giving rise to a long category of disease
conditions. Such being the case, the care of the mouth and teeth
becomes an important and necessary department of hygiene, requiring the same careful study and intelligent application of
health rules and their enforcement which we recognize as essential to the protection of bodily health against other sources of
disease causation.
The most potent and general cause of dental disability and
consequent disease is uncleanliness of the mouth and teeth. In
the past twenty-five years the scientific investigations which have
been made of the causes of dental disease have demonstrated beyond
question that the human mouth presents conditions favorable to the
growth and development of a large variety of bacterial organisms,
very many of them being the known causes of a large number of
local or bodily diseases. In the human mouth the conditions of temperature, moisture, oxygen and food supply required for the development of bacteria are found in an ideal relation so that the mouth
becomes as it were an incubator in which these disease-producing
organisms multiply with astonishing rapidity. In an habitually
unclean mouth certain of these germs bring about fermentation of
starchy foods and sugars, generating an acid which dissolves the
mineral salts from the hard structures of the teeth, exposing the
cartilaginous matrix or basis of the dentine; this in its turn
becomes infected by germs of putrefaction which liquefy and
destroy it, producing the disease known as dental caries or tooth
decay. Beside the germs of dental caries, pus germs or those
which are the exciting cause of suppurative inflammation are found
abundantly in all unclean mouths as well as the germs which are
the exciters of pneumonia, tuberculosis and a host of other wellknown diseases. Where ordinary care is given to brushing and
cleansing the teeth, the total number of these disease-producing
germs does not reach a point beyond the power of the defensive
forces of the healthy body to take care of, but in neglected mouths
not only are disease processes set up in and about the teeth themselves, but the constant swallowing of disease-producing germs
and their excretions along with the food infected by contact with
the germ-laden teeth and soft tissues of the mouth, sets up infections of the whole digestive tract. This in time becomes a manufactory of poisonous substances which are absorbed into the general
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
circulation, causing a chronic blood poisoning and general interference with the whole bodily nutrition.
It will thus be seen that an unclean mouth is the originator
not only of local dental disturbances, but it is a source of infection
to the whole body. The chronic poisoning of the blood stream in
this manner may and often does, in the course of time, so interfere
with the processes of nutrition as to depress the vital resistance of
the body to a plane where it is unable to prevent infection from
specific disease germs and the unfortunate sufferer may thus be
carried off by an attack of acute disease, having its unsuspected
predisposing cause in a chronically filthy mouth. Another result
of tooth decay is important to note. When caries has destroyed the
hard tissues which protect the central organ of the tooth, the dental
pulp, its infection and death quickly follow, the process usually
being signalized by an attack of acute toothache. Death and loss
of the pulp leaves an open passageway through the tooth root for
the entrance of disease-producing germs, affording them direct
access to the bony structures in which the tooth roots are embedded.
The production of a dental abscess resulting in a so-called "gum
boil" is a common expression of this type of infection. But pusproducing germs are not the only disease producers that find
entrance to the circulation through this channel. It has been
found as the result of careful, clinical and scientific study, that
the germ of tuberculosis is among the invaders that gain frequent
access to the body through the avenue of the empty tooth pulp
chamber giving rise to tuberculous abscesses so commonly observed
in or about the lymphatic glands of the neck or giving rise to
tubercular inflammation of the bones of the jaws and those of
their related regions.
The local and general diseases whose origin has been unquestionably traced to infections arising from filthy mouths are
numerous and convincing, but time will not permit even a short
enumeration of them here. I have merely endeavored to point
out and briefly illustrate the general fact.
Apart from the damage to health and the consequent physical
disability arising from oral uncleanliness, neglect of mouth hygiene
leads to loss of the teeth, a loss which has never been taken as
seriously by the uninformed as its importance warrants. The
loss of even a single tooth should be looked upon as a calamity,
for the reason that it means always the loss of function of two
teeth, the one actually lost and its opposing tooth, for a tooth
without its normal antagonist is functionally useless. But even if
DISABILITIES OF SCHOOL CHILDREN. 221
this should constitute the total loss there soon follows a disarrangement of the whole denture, the teeth assuming abnormal and
irregular positions because of the loss of mutual support which the
individual teeth exert upon each other in a normally arranged
denture. This entails a disturbance of the proper relations of the
food-grinding mechanism and interferes with the function of
mastication. The evils of imperfect mastication need scarcely
be dilated upon. To put upon the stomach the burden of digesting
food imperfectly masticated, is to invite disease of the entire nutritional apparatus. The study of this phase of the nutritional question and the results obtained from the experiments made by Prof.
Chittenden, of Yale, in collaboration with Mr. Horace Fletcher
are sufficiently convincing and are doubtless familiar to all of you.
The relation of this broad subject to the health of school
children and to their mental efficiency is just now attracting worldwide attention. America, the land of dentistry and dentists, has,
strange to say, been rather tardy in giving it serious and practical
consideration. Germany and Austria, Russia, France, Switzerland, Sweden, England, and Australia have been making careful
studies of dental and oral hygiene in relation to school children
for a number of years. The institution of systematic dental inspection of school children and the creation of free dental clinics
may, generally speaking, be said to be accomplished facts in the
countries I have named. Statistics show that from 90 to 98 per
cent of the school children in all countries suffer from some form
of preventable dental disease, and what concerns us more directly
is that the greater proportion of backward children, those unable
to keep up with the average work of the class, are found to be sufferers from some form of dental disorder, arising mainly from
neglect of the simplest and most obvious rules of mouth hygiene.
Among upwards of fifteen thousand patients annually treated at
the dental clinic of the University of Pennsylvania, a large proportion are school children between the ages of six and fifteen
years. Examination of their mouths rarely discovers one that is
maintained in a fair state of cleanliness, few own or use a tooth
brush, and all require more or less professional attention.
In studying the causes of mental inefficiency in backward
school children, Prof. Lightner Witmer of the department of
psychology at the University of Pennsylvania has been focussing
attention upon the mouth conditions of these children. Many of
them are referred by Dr. Witmer's department to our dental clinic,
they are invariably "dental cripples" as some one has aptly termed
222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
them, they present infected mouths, decaying teeth, damaged grinding mechanism from loss of teeth or from irregularities, all of
which are manifestly interferences with bodily health and therefore of mental efficiency. It has been discovered that one-third
of the 148,000 pupils in the public schools of Philadelphia are
over age for their grade. Records show that 483 children have
been thirty months or more in the same grade, while 9486 pupils
have been recorded as beginning for the third time in the same
lessons, and from these facts it is contended that many children
are mentally incapable of pursuing their studies.
It is not my purpose to discuss in detail the relations which
each of these dental disorders bears to the efficiency of the child
as a student at school; from whatever angle the subject is investigated the logical conclusion arrived at is the same, viz., that all
these disorders are sources of ill health and that ill health is a
direct handicap to the effective working of the nervous mechanism,
upon the normal functioning of which intellectual progress depends.
The practical question which is the necessary outcome of our
acceptance of this general major premise is, what can be done
about it? My own observation leads me to conclude that three
things are necessary:
First, education of children and parents as to the essential
facts concerning mouth hygiene to an extent that will force the
conviction that cleanliness of the mouth and teeth is essential to
health and is the best safeguard against disease.
Secondly, systematic and regular inspection of the mouth of
school children by expert dentists.
Thirdly, the organization of dental dispensaries where the
needy may obtain proper dental treatment free of charge.
It is with considerable hesitation that I suggest an addition
to the work of teachers already overburdened with the duties imposed by a curriculum which is said even now to be overcrowded;
nevertheless the importance of a knowledge of the principles of
hygiene in general, and of dental hygiene in particular, is so
evident and so fundamental in its educational relations that it
would seem to be the part of wisdom and common sense to embody
a reasonable amount of instruction in dental hygiene in the curriculum of study even to the neglect of some relatively less important
topic now required as a part of the educational scheme. I think
we would be justified in taking such ground quite apart from the
humanitarian features of the case, when we consider that all of
the evidence goes to establish the fact that lack of knowledge of
DISABILITIES OF SCHOOL CHILDREN. 223
dental and oral hygiene is the fruitful cause of health disorders
which directly inhibit the capacity of the child for study, and,
therefore, from the educational standpoint alone as a means of
improving the mental efficiency of school children, the introduction
of a fair amount of instruction in the elementary phases of dental
and oral hygiene would be more than justified. No amount of
instruction in this subject can be productive of practical results
without efficient means for putting into effect the principles taught.
This will require among other things inspection of the mouths
of public school children by experts qualified for that work.
It is a work which should not be entrusted to medical inspectors ; the curriculum of medical study does not furnish the
training requisite for the intelligent and skillful performance of
that class of work. Under present conditions, those best qualified
for the study of mouth inspection are dental specialists who by
training and experience have been properly educated for that
work; and, finally, in connection with school education in dental
hygiene and efficient dental inspection of school children, there
must be provided the means for the treatment of dental disorders
where the needy can receive the required attention free of expense.
This will necessitate the creation of a large number of free dental
dispensaries organized in principle upon the same efficient lines
that characterize the free dispensary which has been established in
your own city of Reading.
In order to secure an efficient organization of these three
fundamental factors, education, inspection and treatment, a collaboration of school boards, of municipal authorities and of the
organized dental profession must be brought into harmonious relationship.
In closing, I cannot suggest to you a better expression of the
great truth which is at the basis of this now general movement
than to quote to you a statement made by Dr. Elliott, of London,
in a report upon the subject made to the School Dentists' Society
of England in 1904. Dr. Elliott said, "The child's health, mental
and physical, is a national asset which it is the duty of the state
to preserve and foster by every possible means."
