The Reading Free Dental Dispensary
===================================

The Psychological Clinic
Cupyrig'.it, by Liglitner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. 111. No. 9. February 15, 1910.

By Geoiige S. Schlegel, D.D.S..
Secretary Reading Free Denial Dispensary Board.
The free dental clinic, apart from the clinic connected with
a dental college, is a new form of public charity. Europe and
Australia have taken the initiative in this important work. The
United States, however, is alive to the necessity for free dental
service, and at the present time movements are on foot among
dentists and dental organizations, getting information, and plan-
ning and securing the necessary funds to establish such public
charities.
The Reading Free Dental Dispensary is one of the first ten
to be established in this country and certainly the first one on
record in the state of Pennsylvania. At intervals during the past
ten years, members of the Reading Dental Society have agitated
the necessity of giving free dental service to the indigent poor
of our city. The main obstacles were the lack of suitable rooms,
and a modern equipment. To impress upon City Councils or the
Board of Education the necessity of such a charity, without some
statistics to prove our assertions, Avould no doubt have proved
fruitless. However, it was our good fortune to find a philan-
thropic citizen who volunteered to raise the necessary funds not
only to fully equip a dispensary, but to furnish the money to
supply it with materials, etc., for one year.
The members of the Reading Dental Society grasped the
opportunity at once and signed the following resolution, which
showed how eager they were to do a public service:
Whereas, We the undersigned have agreed to contribute not
less than four dollars each, towards a fund to be used for the
equipment of a free dental dispensary in Reading, Pa.;
Be it resolved, That we the undersigned promote the interests
of this Free Dental Dispensary, by giving our service gratis, to
(249)
'A-fr
1?
i ; .;"-j
a? *
?^TT' * ' '? " * '*
-fx .. ?; *
*a
? v
t
THE FREE DENTAL DISPENSARY OF READING, PA.
BEADING FREE DENTAL DISPENSARY. 251
all persons duly qualified, who report at the dispensary for any
service provided for in the rules of the dispensary. The frequency
and order of attendance of each dentist to he determined by the
Heading- Dental Society. This obligation shall remain in force
as long as any of us the undersigned are in legitimate and active
practice in Reading, Pa.
The society started the fund by subscribing over a hundred
dollars. This was made compulsory by our financier, because he
wanted us to feel that we had not only a charitable interest in the
work but also a financial interest, in other words that it belonged
to us, the Reading Dental Society.
The members pledged themselves on Thursday, January 7,
1909, and after a delay of two months to arrange details, signed
the above resolution on April 1st. The Dental Dispensary com-
mittee, which was a standing committee for years, but which never
delayed meetings with any exhaustive reports, immediately selected
a location and equipment, and 011 May 28th, Ave sent all our promi-
nent business men, school directors, city officials, and others, an
announcement that -Tune 1st would be inspection day at the Head-
ing Free Dental Dispensary. The first man reported for duty on
June 2, 1909. In less than five months with two months of una-
voidable delay, we founded, equipped and paid for this necessary
charity.
Our equipment is modern in every particular and includes
electrical engine and fan, electric water heater and atomizer, com-
pressed air outfit, hydraulic chair, dental cabinet, sterilizer, dental
laboratory bench, roll top desk, record system, and telephone. The
rooms were furnished with linoleum, rugs, clothes tree,, 'etc.,
through the generosity of local firms.
The organization of the dental dispensary will be made clear
by the following resolutions and rules adopted by the Reading
Dental Society:?
Resolved that the following shall be a standing resolution of
the Reading Dental Society,?
Sec. 1. The dispensary shall be known as the
Reading Free Dental Dispensary.
Sec. 2. There shall be a board for the manage-
? ment of the dispensary to be known as the Dispensary
Board.
Sec. 3. This board shall consist of six members
252 TIIE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
in active practice, who shall be in good standing in the
Reading Dental Society.
Sec. 4. The members of the first board shall be
elected at the annual meeting as follows:?two for one
year, two for two years, two for three years, and at each
succeeding annual meeting, two shall be elected for three
years.
Sec. 5. Vacancies occurring shall be filled by spe-
cial election.
Sec. 6. The operators shall serve in the order in
which their names are affixed to the Constitution.
Sec. 7. The Dispensary Board shall present a
written report at each annual meeting.
Rules.
1. The management of this Dispensary shall be in
the hands of the Dispensary Board of the Reading Den-
tal Society.
2. This Dispensary will be open from 1.30 to 5
o'clock daily, except Saturdays and Sundays^and legal
holidays, and such days as the Board may designate.
'5. All property of the Dispensary shall be in charge
of an assistant, who shall be held responsible to the Dis-
pensary Board for its safe keeping, and who shall dis-
, pense instruments, materials, etc., as required by the
various operators, from the reserve stock.
4. The assistant shall also keep a record of supplies
needed, and shall attend to the ordering of various mate-
rials as directed by the Dispensary Board. It shall also
be the duty of the assistant to keep records of all opera-
tions.
5. ISTo person shall receive free dental services with-
out the endorsement of the Associated Charities.
0. If any operator is unable to be present on his
appointed day, it shall be his duty to provide a substi-
tute; the said operator shall be responsible for the
appearance of the substitute.
The patients are received through the Associated Charities
from the public schools and the general public. The teachers of
the public schools are provided with blanks to be filled out by
them. The form of the blank is as follows:
READING FREE DENTAL DISPENSARY. 253
APPLICATION FOR FREE DENTAL SERVICE.
To bo approved by
Associated Charities, 539 Franklin Street.
Hours : 1) to 12 a, m>, 2 to 5 p, m.
Saturday afternoons excepted.
Dental Dispensary, 114 S. Sixth Street
Hours : 1.30 to 5 p. m.
Saturdays excepted.
Name
Address
Age   Grade
Name of Parents
Occupation of Parents
Name of Teacher
Name of Principal
or
Name of Supervisor
Location of School
Note.?Additional application blanks can be procured at the 6fHce of Associated
Cliarities.
The dispensary employs a competent woman assistant, who
makes appointments with patients, records all operations and
sterilizes all instruments; a sort of chargee d'affaires. Where
twenty-five different men operate in rotation it is absolutely neces-
sary to have some one person constantly in attendance.
The dispensary has been in operation for about seven months,
and like all new work it has taken some time to become well
known. The summer months were not productive of a great
demand for free dental service because the schools were closed.
However, taking everything into consideration the dispensary is
a success, and we hope to make a fine annual report by January
1, 1911. We are doing everything we can to bring to the notice
of our public school teachers the mental and physical improvement
which may be brought about through proper care of children's
teeth. With this end in view E. C. Kirk, D.D.S., Sc.D., Dean
of the Dental Department of the University of Pennsylvania, lec-
tured at a teachers' institute in Reading, October 30, 1909, on
"The Dental Disabilities of School Children".1
The patients who received treatment during the brief exist-
ence of the dispensary, have been for the most part of a slightly
higher grade than we hoped to reach. The very poorest class
must first be taught the value of saving their teeth, and this will
require time. However, we realize that a dental charity must be
carried out on a higher plane than a soup house. Many parents
earn enough to keep their children supplied with simple food and
1The Psychological Clinic, Vol. Ill, No. 8, p. 1*17.
254 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
clothing, but no more; to pay for dental service is entirely out of
the question. So far we have worked mostly for this class, but we
hope to reach the poorer classes later. We have also done a great
deal for children from orphanages. If the patient does not possess
a tooth brush and cannot afford to buy one, the dispensary furnishes
one together with tooth paste or powder, and the proper instruc-
tions for their use. This movement is both educational and char-
itable.
Dental inspection in the Reading Public Schools will begin
with the September session in 1010, possibly sooner. The members
of the Heading Dental Society have volunteered to make an exam-
ination of the eight grades of the public school of the city, num-
bering 10,000 pupils. All these influences must bring pressure to
bear in the direction of better teeth, hygienic mouths, and perfect
health.
In closing this article I wish to make an appeal to all educa-
tional authorities, to interest themselves in this great work. Don't
wait for the dentists to begin the work for you. Dentists are slow
to come forward in some localities, and a little urging on your
part may be productive of a vast amount of good. The public
school system is intended to develop a child's mind and body.
This cannot be accomplished as long as the child's capabilities are
constantly or intermittently reduced by some physical infirmity,
and decayed teeth are very often the causes of grave physical or
mental defects. Therefore it behooves all who claim to be edu-
cators or caretakers of the human economy to reduce every active
cause of deficiency in the individual to a minimum. Co-operation
is the keynote of this, as of every other important movement for
social betterment.
