Education of Criminal Children
===============================

The subjoined observations are based on information collected for the Belgian
Government by M. Edouard Ducpetiaux, showing the unhappy relationship
which exists between the workhouse and the gaol, and the constant dependence
of at least 50,000 children and young persons under sixteen upon the public
guardianship in the one or the other; the recent experience of the continent
was interrogated for better systems of management than the lamentable results
* "On the Employment of Farm Schools in the Education and Reformation of
Pauper and Criminal Children on the Continent," read by the late Joseph Fletcher,
Esq., Hon. Sec. to the Statistical Society, before the Society, Feb. 16.
EDUCATION OF CRIMINAL CHILDREN. 529
which we now realize in regard to these young people give us any assurance
that Ave are pursuing.
"The economy of the farm has of late years been -variously employed.
1. In free colonies or farm workhouses (fermes hospices), which have failed in
Holland, but succeeded in Belgium. 2. In colonies for the repression of adult
mendicancy and vagabondage, which have universally failed. 3. In agricul-
tural reform schools, refugees, and home colonies for young paupers, mendicants,
vagabonds, orphans and foundlings, deserted children, and those who are con-
taminated with vice, or in moral danger (moral orphans, as they are expres-
sively called), the number of which establishments is large and constantly on
the increase in Germany, Switzerland, Holland, Prance, and Belgium, while
they are but now struggling into permanent existence in England. . 4. Agri-
cultural penitentiaries, or correctional and reformatory schools, directed
exclusively to the training of children and young persons actually found guilty,
or acquitted only as having acted without knowledge, but detained for the
purpose of being brought up under wholesome discipline to a stated age. The
economical position of all such institutions with reference to society at large, was
illustrated by that of thcfermes hospices of Inlanders, which are only now coming
into general adoption as farm workhouses for paupers of all ages, generally
under the management of sceurs die charite, and for the most part springing
out of the charitable efforts of individuals and the public to rescue these
unfortunates of all ages from being sold at auction, by their several communes,
to any bidder who, for a stated term, will take and make what use he can of
them; each being knocked down, amidst the coarsest ribaldry, to that com-
petitor who required least from the commune for his or her maintenance; and
the young being thus often brought up to professional mendicancy, or worse
vices, endured many of the miseries and entailed many of the curses of slavery.
In the department of Thielt Roulers, in West Elanders, there were, on the
1st of January, 1851, sixteen of these ferw.es hospices, containing 1052
indigent persons, besides 71 "religious" persons in the management of ten
of them, and 22 lay persons in the management of ten also; four having both
lay and religious managers. The average daily cost of maintenance to the
commune for each poor person was 20 cents, or 2d. per day.
" The first step out of the horrible system of pauper slavery above described,
once common in its principal features to the whole continent, is, however, due
to the inexhaustible charity of the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland; the first
among the men of piety aud refinement who could no longer endure to regard it
with self-sacrifice being Jean Henry Pestalozzi, of Zuric, who gave his whole
life and fortune to efforts which produced great changes in the views entertained
of education generally. His work, recommenced with zeal by De Pellenberg,
at Hofwyl, in 1799, and still continued by his disciple, Vishli, at Kreutzhingen,
near Constance, has been imitated throughout Switzerland in farm schools,
chiefly deriving their origin, like the former hospices of Planders, from private
beneficence and public subscription, seconded by contributions from the com-
munes and the cantonal governments. These are commonly for children of both
sexes, from 30 to 50 and upwards in number, economically managed on the
plan of an enlarged peasant family, by a married couple, styled respectively
' housefather' and ' housemother,' the former of whom is their leader in
industry and their instructor in school. Having been carefully selected and
commonly educated for the duties of this station by the Christian originators of
each institution, simplicity, piety, order, and happiness appeared to reign in
these institutions, and from 1837 to 1840 the Swiss Society of Public Utility
commissioned Mr. Kinatli to study the best means of applying this happy dis-
cipline also to reformatory purposes. This object lie realized in the latter
year, in the establishment of the Reformatory School at Bachtaten, the most
peculiar features of which are its being for boys only, and its employment of an
enlarged proportion of moral agency by the subdivision of the young people into
M M 2
530 EDUCATION OF CRIMINAL CHILDREN.
smaller families, each under its own assistant ' housefather.' The mean cost of
maintenance and management in thirteen of these Swiss establishments was
found to be 1S5 francs per annum, or 50 cents (5d.) per day.
" Many of the States of Germany have nearly kept pace with Switzerland in
these efforts to rescue from destruction the children thrown physically or
morally destitute upon society; and, in Wurtemburg especially, the reform
schools date from 182S, and in 1811 amounted to twenty, containing 388
male and 675 female children. They now form a complete system under
the guardianship of the State, but with a tendency to overburthen each family
with numbers, the average in 1844 having increased to 56 children, of whom
33 were boys and 23 girls, supported at an average cost of 60 florins (of 2s.) per
annum. But the most remarkable German institution of this kind is the
reformatory school of Hamburgh, called the Kautren Haus, at Horn, under the
management of M. Wiehern, and from the advanced views of which Mr. Kinatli
derived the details of his plan for the organisation of Bachtaten. The c house-
fathers' here form a Protestant religious fraternity of normal school students
for similar labours and for missionary work, but it appears to be almost impos-
sible to obtain the average cost of its 86 children, with their 14 employes,
because of the great amount of gifts in kind, but on the sums actually brought
to account it is averaged by the former only, no less than 300 francs per annum,
while at the Prussian establishment at Dusselthal, with 178 children, it is
180 francs.
"In Erance and in Algeria there appear now to be 41 new colonies for
children and young persons, classed as follows:?
No.
Average of No. of Average daily cost
Land. Inmates. of maintenance.
Penitentiary colonies founded and di-
rected by private individuals . . 12 2,988 1,933 111. 18c.
Penitentiary colonies directed by the
State  4 1,052 384 0 77
Colonies of orphan, foundling, de-
serted, and pauper children ... 25 8,375 1,582 0 81
Totals .... 41 12,415 3,899 0 844-11
"If we include in the average charge per head, the interest of capital and
the rent of land, the average cost of these institutions per head per day, may
be analysed as follows :?
,T . ? ? - . Clothing, Establishm., Interest of ^
N averaged0 Food. Beddinf, Instruction,' Capital
averages. Sicknesses. & Miscel. and Rent. average.
12 Penitentiary colonies founded
and directed by individuals . 41c. 27c. 30c. 30c. 111. 28c.
4 Penitentiary colonies directed
by the State  47 30 24 1 10
12 Colonies of orphan, foundling,
deserted, and pauper children. 42 19 21 28 1 10
General results ... 42 22 26 28 1 18
" Of these 41 establishments, 18 are directed by laymen, 15 by ecclesiastics
or religious bodies, and 8 are under a mixed direction, partly lay and partly reli-
gious. Three of the establishments are specially devoted to Protestant children,
and two of these receive children of both sexes, but all the rest are exclusively
for boys. There is, however, a special establishment for young girls under
confinement near to Montpelier, under the name of the Solitude of Nazareth,
and managed by M. C. Abbd Comal.
" The oldest "of these colonies, that of Neuhof, dates from 1825, but 33 were
founded at the much later period?from 1837 to 1848?and 7 have been
EDUCATION OF CRIMINAL CHILDREN. 531
brought into existence or recognised since tlie revolution of February, ISIS.
Since this latter period, on the other hand, three colonies have been sup-
pressed."
Postponing to a future occasion an analysis of the experience of France,
Belgium, and England, in the application of farm schools to the reformation of
criminal youth, Mr. Fletcher then restricted attention to their employment in
these countries in the training of pauper and morally endangered children,
arriving at these conclusions :?
1. That the farm schools of the continent, applied to education for the
prevention of crime, hold a social position precisely analogous to that of our
own workhouse schools.
2. That for the children in those schools, as in those of the continent, a
training in vigorous, rural industry, and close domestic economy, by means of
farm schools, conducted on the principles of a Christian family, will yield the
greatest attainable moral vigour, with the least amount of indolence and self-
deception.
3. That by far the greater number of the present workhouse schools are now
producing converse results; and that we have no experience strongly favour-
able to regimenting and warding the children in large district palaces, however
pleasing their mechanism, while we have ample testimony in favour of the
farm school system.
4. That the children at a proper farm school, required to work steadily at all
its out-door and domestic duties, as well as their own mental cultivation, will
certainly not cost more to the public, if so much, as under the present system,
or that of the contemplated district asylum, while the saving in their improved
conduct for the future would be very great; and,
5. That to have good preventive schools for the training of the pauper
children is the great practical step towards obtaining good reformatory
schools, for the retraining of criminal children, if this is ever to be realized, on
principles well understood and economically applied.
