Opening Speech of Mr. James
=============================

Mr. James, Q.C., addressed the jury in a speech wliieh lasted four hours in the
delivery, on behalf of Mrs. Cumming, and with the view to show that that lady
was in a sound state of mind, and quite capable of taking care of herself and of
managing her pecuniary affairs. The learned counsel stated that the present pro-
ceedings had been instituted by the same parties?namely, the sons-in-law and the
daughters of Mrs. Cumming?who issued the commission of lunacy against her in
1846, and who then withdrew that inquiry on an arrangement being made, by which
they obtained a portion of the property of that unfortunate lady. The sole object
of the whole proceedings was to get possession of her property, and not to give
protection to her person. Her sons-in-law, Mr. Ince and Mr. Hooper, were the
prime movers in the matter. They originated tbe inquiry of 1846. By the ar-
rangement then made they consented to treat Mrs. Cumming as a person of sound
mind. It was, however, subsequently found by the friends of Mrs, Cumming, that
E 2
G8 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
an arrangement had been entered into in ignorance of the real nature of the
interest she possessed in the property, it being at the time supposed that she only
had a life estate, whereas it was discovered that she was possessed of the fee simple.
Under the advice of counsel she repudiated the agreement, and her deeds and
papers having at the time of the arrangement been given up to the other parties,
she brought an action to regain possession of them, in which action she succeeded.
In 1848 her son-in-law, Hooper, and his wife, filed a bill to compel her to elect how
she would dispose of a certain portion of her property, the result of which was, that
Hooper got 50/. a-year settled upon him. The jury would observe that in all these
transactions Mrs. Cumming was treated as a sane person; and yet in 1851 the very
same persons who had entered into these arrangements with her revived the
inquiry as to her state of mind, and obtained the Resent commission, founding it
almost entirely upon the same evidence which had failed them in 1846. The con-
dition of this lady deserved the commiseration of the jury. She was carried off to
a lunatic asylum in May, 1846, and there imprisoned till the August following;,
during her confinement her husband died, unseen and unvisited by her, while she
herself was left unvisited by either of her daughters, even to inform her of her
husband's and of their father's death. Was not this a sufficient ground of dislike
to her children ? When the inquiry of 1846 was instituted at the Horns Tavern,
Mrs. Gumming was unaided by a single friend, and had not accident brought Mr.
Haynes to her assistance, she might have been in a lunatic asylum to this hour.
Mr. Haynes had occasion to call on Mr. Barlow, who was the commissioner in-
quiring into Mrs. Cum'ming's case; and, seeing that Mrs. Cumming was without
any legal adviser, he suggested to the commissioner that the inquiry ought to be
postponed. It was adjourned accordingly; and the result was, the arrangement
which had been so often referred to. Mr. James then gave a history of Mrs.
Cumming's movements from that time (1846) up to the present hour. The only
portion of that period to which the case of the promoters of this inquiry referred was
from October, 1850, to January, 1851, during which time Mrs. Cumming was under
the control of Mary Rainey and Eleanor Hickey. The prominent ground on which
the other side rested their case was the absence of all natural affection on the part
of Mrs. Cumming towards her daughters. He admitted that in some cases that
fact would be a proof of mental disease; but if there existed a cause for such
aversion, the mere quantum of that cause was immaterial; however apparently in-
adequate it might be, it was no proof of insanity. What had been the conduct of
her children towards her? She had never liked Mr. Ince, though she was on terms
of affection with Mrs. Ince up to the marriage of her other daughter with Mr.
Hooper, which had been promoted by Mrs. Ince. That marriage gave Mrs.
Cumming the greatest possible offence, and from that time she took a dislike both
to Mrs. Ince and Mrs. Hooper. The learned counsel next adverted to the fact of
Mrs. Cumming having been apprehended for perjury, and briefly stated the circum-
stances connected with that part of the case. A Mr. Ebenezer Jones, living at
Newport, having seen in the newspapers an account of the proceedings against
Mrs. Cumming at the Horns Tavern, wrote an anonymous letter, stating that he
had known Mrs. Cumming for many years, and could prove that she was a person
of acute mind and of sound intellect, and he voluntarily made an affidavit to that
effect. Having on some occasion received a portion of Mrs. Cumming's rents, he
assumed the character of general agent to that lady, but on Mrs. Cumming making
an affidavit in Chancery in some proceedings connected with the sale of a part of
her property, it was necessary she should repudiate the agency of that person, and
she did so. This was made a ground of charge against her, and she was arrested,
at the instance of Ebenezer Jones, for perjury. It could be shown that Jones was
in communication with Mr. Ince and Mr. Hooper, and that the whole affair was a
conspiracy on their part, aided by Eleanor Hickey. The charge was heard before
Mr. Gilbert A'Beckett, the magistrate, who immediately dismissed it. Mr. Ince
made two affidavits, but in neither of which did he deny a participation in this
affair. It was true Mr. Hooper did in his affidavit deny any participation in it, but
he (Mr. James) should be able to show that that denial was false. These affidavits
?were filed on the present commission being moved for. This system of persecution
would account for Mrs. Cumming assuming the name of Cleveland, and for her eo
frequently changing her place of residence. There was reason to believe that the
object of arresting Mrs. Cumming on a charge of perjury was to put her on her
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. GO
trial at Newport, in Wales, and then to get her acquitted upon the ground of insanity;
the parties, not having succeeded in their former commission, thought they might
probably, by such a manoeuvre, get the whole of her property vested in them. The
case, however, having been dismissed, what did Ebenezer Jones do? Urged on by
Ince and Hooper, he preferred a bill of indictment for perjury at the Monmouth
Assizes against her, but the bill was ignored. Would not these proceedings account
for much of the conduct of Mrs. Cumming ? This took place on the 27th of March,
1851. Having removed from Stamford-street to Worthing, she then went to
Brighton, and there resumed her own name. She lived at Brighton in quietness
and peace, hurting no one and interfering with no one. But she was not permitted
to enjoy that state of repose long; for Mr. Turner then appeared upon the scene,
and the jury had heard in what manner this poor lady was dragged from her house
and taken to the Effra-hall Asylum, by the agency of that gentleman, instigated by
her never-ceasing persecutors, Ince and Hooper. The learned counsel then took a
review of the evidence which had been adduced in support of the commission, and,
having commented upon it at considerable length, he proceeded to state the nature
of the evidence which he intended to bring forward to rebut the charge of insanity
against Mrs. Cumming, He proposed to show what had been the conduct of
Captain Cumming towards his wife?that he was violent in temper, coarse in
language, and cruel in behaviour towards her; and that if (as unfortunately he could
not deny) she was occasionally betrayed into language and conduct unbecoming a
lady, it was to be attributed to the contamination of his society. He squandered
her fortune to pay the debts he had incurred. His moral deportment towards his
female servants was of the basest character. He had more than one affiliation
made upon him; it was therefore no delusion for this unhappy lady to say that her
property was wasted to support his bastards. Indeed, the life which Mrs. Cumming
led with him was one of unmitigated and uninterrupted misery. Having spent her
fortune, and having abused her thus, were the jury to say that it was a proof of
insanity that she should give way to violence of conduct and of language? Why,
he would ask, was she taken to York-house Asylum? She had done no wrong to
any human being; she bad committed no act of violence; she had disposed of no
property irrationally, or to the deterioration of her own rights; she was living
harmlessly in her own dwelling, and at the very hour of her being violently taken
away she was in the act of teaching a little girl her lesson. Upon the instigation
of Mr. Ince, though nominally by her husband, who, before his death, regretted
that he did not expire in the arms or the presence of his wife, this lady, so living
and so conducting herself, was, on the certificate of a Mr. Wilmot, consigned to a
lunatic asylum. The commission having been withdrawn, she went to Mrs.
Hutchinson's, a most respectable person, and, as Mrs. Cumming herself stated, her
only friend. She had been a musical instructress, and her husband was an engineer.
Her going to the Hutchinsons had been objected to; but where was the unhappy
lady to seek refuge? Her husband was dead, her home was gone, and she was
persecuted by her children; where then was she to go? She was without money;
for notice had been given to Sir Charles Morgan not to complete a purchase of a
portion of her property in Wales, which he had contracted to do, and her tenants
had been warned not to pay her any rent. From first to last her property was kept
from her. After following Mrs. Cumming to Wales and to other places, where
her conduct was uniforihly that of a sane person, Mr. James read a letter, dated
September5, 1851, addressed to Mr. Haynes by the secretary of the lunacy com-
missioners, in consequence of an application by Mr. Turner that they would
examine Mrs. Cumming. The letter was to the effect, that after considering the
evidence of Dr Barnes and Dr Caldwell, and the communication made to them by
the relatives of Mrs. Cumming, the commissioners had no reason to believe that
Mrs. Cumming was not a free agent, and therefore they did not think it was within
their province to take any further proceedings in the case. The learned counsel
next called the attention of the jury to the opinion of the medical witnesses. In
consequence of the proceedings adopted by Mr. Ince and Mr. Hooper, it became
necessary that Mrs. Cumming should take measures in her own defence; and ac-
cordingly Dr Forbes Winslow was directed by the Lord Chancellor to examine
that lady and make his report on her case. The report was made on the 8th of
December, 1851. The learned gentleman here read the report, which will be found
at the end of the trial. Without saying a word of adulation to Dr Winslow, he
70 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
could not help remarking that his report was the most able and elaborate that had
ever been filed in the Court of Chancery. The learned counsel then stated that he
should call Dr Caldwell, Mr. Hodding, Dr Hale, Dr Barnes, Dr Conolly, and
other medical gentlemen, as witnesses, who would all declare their opinion that Mrs.
Cumrning was perfectly of sound mind and capable of managing her own affairs.
In reference to Mr. Haynes, the mention of whose name he considered to be a mere
episode in the case, he should, he said, abstain from all remark. There might be a
subsidiary inquiry hereafter, and no doubt that gentleman would be quite prepared
to defend himself. He had, to the best of his ability, discharged his duty to Mrs.
Cumming, and he knew she would have her case fairly and impartially considered.
They had had the opportunity of examining that lady, and would form their own
judgment upon what they had heard and observed. They would not suffer their
minds to be influenced by mere eccentricity or a fondness for animals on the part
of the lady in determining upon the soundness or unsoundness of her mind. It was
easy to make the charge of madness against the wisest of men. " Festus said with
a loud voice, ' Paul, thou art beside thyself, much learning hath made thee mad
but he said, ' I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of truth
and soberness.'" Socrates was charged as mad; Galileo was charged as mad,
because he retired to his tower to watch the stars; and Mr. Pettigrew had told them
that to believe in the ordeal of touch was madness. The charge was easily made
against any person of eccentric habits; but he did implore them to look with
caution at the facts that were to guide their judgment, to remember that this
unfortunate lady had been literally hunted for mad, scourged for mad, whipped for
mad, persecuted as mad. But he relied on them to declare by their verdict that
she was not mad, though there were those who were anxious to make her so. It
might be of little moment, during the few last days of her life, whether they pro-
nounced her mad or not, for their verdict might be whispered into the ears of death,
yet to the public at large the question would be of vast importance. He therefore
called upon them to pause before any twelve of them pronounced this unhappy lady
to be of unsound mind, as was prayed on behalf of the promoters of this commission.
