Mental Dynamics, in Relation to the Science of Medicine
========================================================

Original Communications

A COURSE OF LECTURES DELIVERED BY M. LORDAT, PROFESSOR OF PHYSIOLOGY
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF MONTPELLIER. ARRANGED AND TRANSLATED BY
STANHOPE TEMPLEMAN SPEER, M.D., CHELTENHAM.
Lecture II.
Gentlemen?It is impossible to speak of senescence and insenescence, without
at the same time considering that of which they form an integral portion?life.
1 have already alluded to this in a general way upon the occasion of my
opening lccture, but I now shall renew the subject in a more didactic manner;
this I trust will be of service to us, not only in our investigation of the
chief object of the present course, but also in enabling us to obtain definite
notions of life itself; inasmuch as the term by which it is usually expressed, is
employed in an acceptation so vague and so arbitrary, as to become the
cause of numberless controversies. I think that it may, however, be possible
to avoid these dissensions, through the medium of an accurate definition.
What then is life, taken in its most general acceptation, and such as we see
it in all things possessed of vitality, to whatever kingdom they may chance to
pertain ?
Linnseus, in his " Philosophia Botanica," thus expresses its elementary con-
stituents, when saying that the reality of life, as it exists in a given body, is
proved by the following phenomena:?"Ortus, nutritio, setas, motus, pro-
pulsio, morbus, mors, anatomia, organismus." To define the same object, I
shall also endeavour to construct in our own language a sentence combining
the majority of the above characteristics, together with a few others which I
conceive to be of importance.
Life is a temporary phenomenon, consisting in this, that a uniting prin-
472 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
ciple, proceeding by succession from a living aggregate?primitively infini-
tesimal, inconceivable, and formative?arranges and constructs slowly, from a
variety of heterogeneous and incompatible elements, and at the same time
maintains the integrity of, a combination eminently unstable and perishable;
in which, however, it carries on a plurality of conservative functions?ex-
pands, developes itself, acquires its maximum of intensity, and at a given
period commences its retrograde coursc and consequent tendency to extinction;
a result which at length takes place, without the primitive aggregate having
lost the conditions essential to the habitation of its original principle, which
at its departure leaves its quondam tenement at the mercy of those destroying
agencies to which it is physically liable by the heterogeneous nature of its
elementary composition.
I confess, gentlemen, that this protracted definition has left me almost
breathless; but, in spite of the objections that might be urged against it on
the score of taste, I shall adopt it, if intelligible to my hearers; and to assist
in rendering it so, let me offer a few comments on each word that has been
pronounced with an intentional accent.
] st. Life is a temporary phenomenon.?It is not the permanently infinite
condition of a body. It is not a quality of matter?a property of substance?
as are the forms of crystal, or the physical and definite characteristics of any
given material. It has rather an approximative duration, the span of which
varies in different species; but is nearly constant in the different individuals of
the same species. Nor are the successive periods of this interval of time
indiscernible; on the contrary, each one may be distinguished from its suc-
cessor and predecessor, not only by its position, but by forms, functions, and
aptitudes peculiar to itself. All the known phenomena of life have been esti-
mated by their period of duration, or, in other words, by their commencement
and termination.
2nd. A uniting principle?Connecting, unconsciously as it were, its varied
operations, whether simultaneous or successive, by a process similar to that by
which we perceive certain actions to be in conformity with the preconceived
projects of the intellectual principle itself.
3rd. Proceeding by succession.?This principle is not of spontaneous cre-
ation?in other words, is not of abstract origin; nor, on the other hand, is its
formation due to general causes of a physical order. It is begotten, neither
by the laws of mechanics, of chemistry, nor yet of any imponderable cause
whatsoever; but it proceeds from a living body. We know that it is trans-
mitted from an ascertained source of parentage, or at least from an aggregate,
that enjoyed an existence either at or before the period of its birth. We
acknowledge no spontaneous generation; and if the progenitors of a living
being have not the same form that it itself possesses, the cause is to be sought
for iu this, that the vital force on the maternal side has possessed the faculty
of creating parasites?a power which is found to exist in a variety of species
belonging to the different kingdoms of nature (intestinal worms); or else that
the elements constituting the aggregate of the maternal progenitor were them-
selves the product of a parent, similar to the living object at present under our
notice (worms produced in the decomposition of animal matter). Harvey has
said, that every living being was of ovular origin (and let us hesitate before
denying the veracity of so great a man); for it is certain that we see none,
that have not their origin at least, in another living being.
4th. Infinitesimal.?I thus denominate a principle, which is susceptible of
growth, but which at its commencement is possessed of dimensions, to us
inappreciable and incomprehensible.
5th. Unimaginable, as regards its nature. We can compare it to nothing
that comes within the scope of our senses, nor yet to aught that the imagina-
tion may create. We know of it but the actual existence and causal power;
the remainder is beyond the limits of our finite understanding.
THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE. 473
6th. A plastic or formative power.?In the production of a living body
there exists a cause, which is not the power of crystallization, the power of
cohesion, nor any known or unknown chemical or physical agency. It is
plastic; that is to say, it fashions an aggregate, and models it into shape far
better than could a sculptor, inasmuch as, not content with imprinting upon it
an external configuration, it gives a form to all its internal parts. The plastic or
formative process can have no connexion with that of crystallization, since in
this the general appearance is but the result of an accumulation of elementary
shapes, all of which are identical whilst in the former the elementary
principles are amorphous, and each individual form has necessitated for its
formation a special act.
7th. The plastic principle unites and maintains in contact, elements in
themselves heterogeneous and incompatible.?Yes! these elements consist ot
atoms which no natural affinity could attract, and, as such, the intervention of
an unseen influence becomes necessary, to bring them together. I have said,
that these heterogeneous elements are of themselves incapable of association
(at the risk of being guilty of a pleonasm), only to prevent any misconception
relative to the activity of that power which retains them in one definite com-
bination, in spite of affinities recognised by the laws of chemistry. Vainly do
these atoms tend to repel each other, to form new compounds, to obey diverting
or diverging causes; an irresistible power constrains them to a forced
quiescence, and their natural and physical affinities can only be exercised, when
this same power shall have been destroyed.
Many of my auditors have doubtless read a witty satire, entitled " Medical
Art; or, The True Sccret of Success in Medicine." Probably they may have
noticed in it a remark directed against the advocates of the polypharmic system,
who pride themselves on the multiplicity of drugs they can administer in one
prescription, and value these only in proportion to the number of ingredients
they contain; although, as in the language of the satire alluded to, these very
ingredients " may curse the hand that has brought them together."
Well then, gentlemen, that which ignorance and quackery are daily guilty
of, in the money-getting department of our profession, is done by the vital force,
in order to form the crasis of its aggregate; or, to repeat the words at the head
of this last proposition?The 'plastic or uniting principle maintains in con-
tact; elements in themselves heterogeneous and mutually repellent.
8th. The creative power of vital phenomena, 'performs certain functions,
increases and develops itself; attaining finally its maximum of intensity. The
series of these functions is the continual manifestation of life, and the means of
its conservation; their interruption for a sufficient length of time producing,
not only the deterioration and extinction of the vital force, but, in addition,
the destruction and consecutive dissolution of the entire system. The func-
tions alluded to, are of two kinds:?1st. Those pertaining solely to the
integrity of the aggregate itself, furnishing it with the means of fulfilling its
destiny without being prematurely exhausted. 2nd. Those, the effects of
which are mainly directed to the welfare of the species, inasmuch as their office
is the procreation of an individual, similar to the original.
The functions included under the first head remain in exercise during the whole
of life; their activity being proportionate to the intensity of the vital force,
considered in relation to the epoch of its duration. Those pertaining to the
second series?viz., t he generative functions, are limited to a certain period of life.
The manifestation of these functions varies in the different species. In some,
that of generation begins at the time that the system has attained its full
maturity. It is thus with the silk-worm. In the salmon, the generative power
is evinced by the female, only on attaining the adult condition; whilst in the
male it comes into play, when but a few inches in length.
Diseases, again, are the expression of various fluctuating conditions of the
vital force. In one point of view, indeed, they may be regarded as functions,
471 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
since they consist of acts which tend to a useful purpose, but in the course of
which the said power may fail.
In the development of a living aggregate, two points require to be considered
separately?the process of growth and that of invigoration. It is easy to
perceive that they are distinct, although generally running parallel the one with
the other. The vigour of the system may be susceptible of daily variations;
the dimensions of the body, however, are incapable of experiencing such sudden
changes. In considering, however, the aggregate from a more general point of
view, we find the principles of growth aud invigoration to be so interwoven,
even from the origin up to the maximum of intensity of the vital force, that if
the well-being of the system be in any way interrupted, it becomes often a matter
of difficulty to determine which of the two has taken the initiative. Has a physical
impediment to the process of growth produced the diminution of strength ?
Or, has the diminution of strength rendered the growth tardy ? Let it, however,
be remembered, that after the culminating period has passed, the above relation-
ship no longer exists.
9th. After acquiring a maximum of intensity, it begins its normal down-
ward progression.?The maximum of development in a living aggregate, occurs
at that particular point of time, which divides the natural span of life into two
distinct and equal periods; the one of augmentation, the other of declension.
Its corporeal value having increased at first both in dimension and aptitude, then
gradually experiences a diminution, not indeed of dimension, but of functional
capability.
In each species there exists a definite proportion of time between the dura-
tion of development and that of degradation. In some, this proportion is about
equal; in others, the period of development is long as compared with that of
decay. Let us take, for instance, the silk-worm. Its transformation into the
butterfly must be considered as its period of apogee; but we know that this
brilliant appearance is but a speedy forerunner of death. So it is with many
annual plants. Behold the contrast between their vital existence and that of
shrubs and trees.
If, however, after that the culminating point in the career of the vital principle
has been attained, there be not invariably a diminution in the weight and
volume of the aggregate material; and if, as is even possible, there should happen
to be rather an augmentation of these properties, there is at least, and without
exception, a withering which constitutes an indisputable sign of antiquity. As
being the result of debility on the part of the vital principle, it may indeed
deceive us by manifesting itself at an earlier or later period than usual, but the
error can be but of short duration.
10th, and lastly. Disappearance of the vital principle before the aggregate
has become sensibly uninhabitable?necroptic decomposition. The reduction
of this aggregate to a cadaveric condition, must of necessity enter into the
definition of life as an essential characteristic. Those who maintain that life
is but the result of an instrumentality on the part of the aggregate, overlook
this fact. They would wish us to believe that the cessation of life is the effect
of mechanical deterioration and exhaustion. ]3ut this assertion is either an
error or a falsehood; and we know full well those cases in which the decline
of the vital principle has been accelerated, by some alteration capable of
marring its conservative functions. The truly scientific physician may well
deserve our confidence when he affirms, "That in the great majority of deaths,
whether senile or premature, the anatomico-pathological appearances are
insufficient explanations of the same."
Here, then, we have a series of ideas united in such a manner as to afford
a general notion of life in beings of every description, from the lowly moss to
the cedar of Lebanon,?from the lowest form of infusoria up to man himself.
I affirm, that a body is endowed with vitality when I see that it is the seat of
those transitory phenomena which I have just described.
THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE. 475
Certain materialists, again, would have us believe, that the gyratory move-
ments of particles of camphor on the surface of water, and also those produced
during the formation of some chemical combination noticed by M. Geoffroy-
St.-Hilaire, should be looked upon as " the rudiments of life." But I would
ask, what relation do these said movements bear, to the series of elementary
phenomena which I have just described as in truth constituting life."
Cabanis, unwilling to allow that it can be derived from any other source
but that of physical phenomena, says?"The conditions necessary to the
manifestation of life in animals are not, probably, more beyond the reach of dis-
covery than those from which result the composition and formation of water,
hail, and snow; or the production of many chemical compounds, possessed of
properties entirely different from those of the elementary principles from
which they have been formed."
The question, however, is not to ascertain whether it be more difficult
to discover the theory of life than that of the composition of water, hail,
&c. What it imports us to determine is, whether from the form, succes-
sion, and co-ordination of certain appreciable facts, phenomena of a vital and
physical order can be attributed a priori to a set of causes alike unknown to
us. The transitory nature of the phenomena of life, its hidden powers, its
faculty of uniting molecules, otherwise insociable, its progressive ascension,
culmination, and declension, its annihilation, without obvious or sufficient
physical cause, a series of conservative functions .... do these facts belong
to the same order of causes that give rise to the storm and thuuder of summer,
the snow and ice of winter P An answer is necessary if we aspire to the
creation of a science. Common sense suggests to us the propriety of
suspecting hidden agencies, by a consideration of the relationships and diversities,
which we see to exist in their effects. Hence it is that philosophy has
instituted two distinct series of causes, the one of physical, the other of meta-
physical origin. But Cabanis, an ardent materialist, admits no such distinction.
With him all is the result of blind necessity; we must not employ such terms
as why, wherefore, design. Doubtless you have hitherto been credulous
enough to suppose, that eyes were created for the purpose of seeing, teeth
for the mastication of food. It is absurd, however; these facts are as much
the result of blind necessity as the fall of an antique tottering building. But
I ask you, is this science ?
Some of the ancient writers have discussed at length what they term the
vitality of the world. Lucretius describes the phases of its existence, and
even its old age. This, however, is but the offspring of poetic licence. Does
it become you or me to speak of the life of an object of which we know neither
the origin, growth, development, decay, dissolution, or decomposition ?
What, then, shall we say of the dogma of Strabo, Spinoza, and Campanella,
that everything is endowed with life ? How is it possible to apply such a
term to this marble table, to this pulpit in which 1 stand, to those benches
on which you sit ? I see in them none of that succession of phenomena
which, in my opinion, constitute life. Let others assert, if they will, that
there exists every where an activity, a tendency to motion, well and good;
but life is something more than mere motion.
Among the numerous theories of Spinoza regarding the life of man, there is
one, which some have considered as ingenious, others, as far-fetched. ... It is
this?viz., that the vitality of the living human aggregate is but the material
aggregate itself, seen from one particular point of view; and that in man as a
living being, there lias been no diversity of causes at work.
Now, common sense tells us nothing of the kind. On the contrary, it
teaches that there really exist three causes, which it is impossible to include in
one category : 1st. The cause which brings together and retains in contact the
molecules. 2ndly. The molecules themselves. 3rdly. The principle of intelli-
gence. Neither of them is of necessity derived from the other, and they are
470 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
adventitious, each in regard to the other. The vital principle is anterior to
the formation of the material aggregate, and the principle of intelligence
depends neither upon the vital principle, nor upon the aggregate material, since a
child without brain or spinal cord may live for a certain time, though utterly
devoid of the principle of intelligence. A recent corpse can engender neither
this principle nor that of vitality. It becomes, therefore, essential to consider
a diversity of causes separately, and not one self-acting agent, regarded under
as many varied aspects as we may choose. If the assertion of Spinoza be not
a riddle, it is either a mystification or an absurdity.
But I am wrong in thus speaking; it is rather an unintelligible artificial
language, instituted merely to accustom the mind to his fundamental doctrine;
the unity of matter. When we wish to affirm that God is not distinct from
the world, it may reconcile the hearer to so startling an assertion if we first
lead him to regard any substance whatever, as matter, spirit, deity. But
again let me ask, can Science lend herself to so revolting a fiction ?
Enough, then, as regards life in general; but as you have been told pre-
viously, that the form of its duration differs in different species, which it thus
characterizes and specifies, it becomes necessary to take a bird's-eye view of
the circumstances which modify the varied features of this abstract sketch, in
order to apply it to man.
We shall not dwell long upon the early periods of life. Pliny has said,
that man at the moment of birth is the most miserable of all animals; that
which most needs the assistance of his fellows ; and we must allow it. Man
is born with 110 other instinct than that of breathing, crying, and swallowing.
How far removed is he from the foal that runs as soon as born; the chicken,
that seeks its food as soon as it emerges from the shell; or the nest bird,
which, perceiving the approach of its parents, raises its head, extends its neck,
opens its beak, chirps, &e.
We confess, therefore, that at the moment of birth, man, whose uterine
existence constitutes about the hundredth part of his natural life, is, of all
newly-created beings hi the animal kingdom, the least advanced in biologic
development.
Were we to apply to a man at birth, the term elephant, buzzard, goose,
mule, &c., we should certainly pay him a compliment; as, however, after the
lapse of twenty years, its repetition would undoubtedly be received with very
bad grace, it stands to reason, that in the interval he must have indemnified
himself to no small extent. What, then, are the advantages he has acquired ?
Man has undergone a process of development (similar to that of animals)
in proportion to the duration of time peculiar to the life of his species. As
in brutes, so in him; all those functions pertaining to his preservation and
propagation have been active. He has therefore been their equal in this
respect. But what has placed him before and above all, has been the expan-
sion of a hitherto latent principle, constituting in him a being beyond the pale
of all other living objects.
Thus, we find in the life of man two parts which it is impossible to regard in
the same light, but which require to be studied separately and in detail. The
first is that, which emanates from the vital plastic principle, and is similar to
that of all other living beings, and especially of animals. The second is the
intellect itself, the activity of which is only manifest after birth, and cannot
possibly be placed in juxtaposition with the life of these same animals. The
former consists of everything relating to the formation and maintenance of
the material aggregate, or to the furtherance of the species; the latter is the
representation, as it were, of an epic poem, the varied subjects of which are
for the most part independent of any interest in the stage on which they are
represented. And thus the life of man affords us two distinct subjects of
investigation?first, the aggregate and its preservation, which we designate,
the canvas or rough draught of the individual .... and secondly, the series
THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE. 477
of scenes represented upon it, which arc the work of the intellectual principle.
It is the comparison of these two objects which at present occupies our atten-
tion. Let us therefore first examine the proceedings of the formative or
plastic process. To this I shall apply the term zoonomic life, or that which is
conformable to the laws of the vital constitution of animals; reserving the
term, intellectual life, to that portion of human existence controlled solely by
the principle of intelligence itself.
Let it not however be supposed, that all the functions essential to the pre-
servation of the individual and his species, are uninflnenced by this latter
principle. I am well aware, that in man, when instinct is limited, the more
important functions of relation require the co-operation of the intelligence.
I do not, however hesitate, to include under the head of zoonomic life, in
man,-every function analogous to what takes place in certain animals living in
a state of nature. But I must be permitted also to comprehend under the
head of intellectual existence, those additional functions of which animals
arc incapable.
This distinction having been made, it becomes essential to compare the
intensity and progression of these two forms of elementary life. I must, how-
ever, explain the meaning I would here attach to the two words, intensity
and progression,?I have previously had occasion to institute a comparison
between the vital force and the intellectual principle, in relation to their
individual aptitudes; such comparison then has been qualitative.
But these two principles may be compared in a mathematical point of view;
in relation, for example, to the amount of activity, and to the rapidity of
successive acts, &c.; constituting their quantitative value.
Now the points of comparison which I purpose to institute, between the
zoonomic life and that of the intelligence in man, while seeking to ascertain
whether they alike undergo such changes as youth, culmination, senescence ;
belong to this latter category?i. <?., they are quantitative. I include them in
the terms intensity and progression. The former expresses the amount of
functional activity, regularity, tenacity, and endurance. The latter constitutes
the order of succession in which augmentations and diminutions of the vital
force take place.
Having advanced thus far, let us inquire as to what are the most certain
facts connected with the intensity and progression of these two divisions of
human life. We may commence with that which I have styled the Zoonomic.
1st. The Yital Principle, possessed of so little tenacity, so little power of
endurance, as to be annihilated with the greatest facility, possesses, never-
theless, a prodigious activity. In the space of nine months, or less than the
hundredth part of a natural life, it has succeeded in forming a perfect system,
the further increase of which takes place more slowlv after this period.
2nd. The development of the aggregate, both in dimensions and in aptitude,
continues up to about the middle period of life?that is, to forty or forty-five
years. It may take place at one time in height, at another in consistence, at
another in weight, but always in vigour. Formerly it was supposed that a
real vital increase took place up to this period; it was, however, but a con-
jecture. Now, however, and since the laborious investigations of De Parcieux
on the mortality of the human race at different periods of existence, it has been
shown by Barthez, that towards the middle period of the normal duration of
life, there is in reality a true increase of vital capacity and aptitude, evinced by
its augmented powers of endurance and tenacity.
3rd. After this epoch there ensues a declension, the course of which is
analogous to the previous progressive ascension. It has been remarked that
there not unfrequently occur irregularities, which mar the otherwise continuous
course of progression and retrogression.
4th. Cases of longevity usually present an equality in this particular; if
retrogression be slow, progression has been so likewise.
478 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
5th. True senile death, consists in a simple extinction of life without disease;
such as that of Fontanelle, who merely felt, when at his last gasp, the difficulty
of continuing to exist. This termination, however, is rare; more generally it
is accelerated in a greater, or less degree by some disease, which, however
trifling, proves sufficient to occasion a premature and hurried retrogression.
6th. At any period during the course of life, its phenomena may be suppressed,
whether by some violent disorganization of the system, by the suspension of
one of those functions denominated vital by Galen, or by an accidental
encounter with certain destructive influences, as of poisons, or of deleterious
miasmata, &c. This sudden termination of existence is too common to need
particular notice.
7th. One thing, however, I must press upon your attention, which is, that at
any period of its course the vital principle may undergo a fatal retrocession,
tending, indeed, to abridge the natural duration of life, but not to be regarded
or confounded with violent or sudden death. The system at the time may be
in full vigour; but from some' constitutional peculiarity, or from the super-
vention of some malady, a premature retrogression of the vital powers takes
place and proceeds with more or less rapidity. The ordinary functions become
feeble, imperfect, at length cease, and the vital force itself is prostrated and
finally extinguished.
This irrevocable declension on the part of the vital principle may always be
looked upon as an old age more or less accelerated, whether it occur by anti-
cipation, or at the legitimate epoch. Thus the majority of acute and chronic
diseases terminating fatally, but lasting a considerable time without rendering
the vital organs utterly inadequate to perform their necessary functions, are
cases of accelerated senescence.
As most of these facts may be considered as quantitative comparisons, it is
not very difficult to express them somewhat geometrically, by lines and figures.
You are aware that algebraic and chemical truths have been thus usefully
demonstrated. Let nie, therefore, employ the same means, to fix in your
memory the physiological truths which I wish to establish.
The figures 1 propose to employ, are imaginary solids. I show you, however,
merely their outline.
The temporary duration of life may be represented by the figure of a spindle,
one point of which stands for the first moment of existence; its gradual expan-
sion corresponding to the periods that succeed, up to the full development and
culminating point of the vital force: while the gradual tapering of the spindle,
from its centre to the opposite extremity, represents truthfully the different
phases of old age, and its termination in a point, similar to that which served
to mark its commencement. A
To render this simile more / \ exact, it is better not to employ the
mathematical spindle, thus? /?\ composed of two pyramids united at
their respective bases, the out- \ / line of which would represent a
rhomb. \j
In such a figure the culminating period would be indicated by a mere line.
But this same period is not thus indivisible; it is, on the contrary, of some
duration, and may leave us for some time uncertain as to whether the vital prin-
ciple is approaching or departing from its meridian. To imitate this uncertainty
in a figurative point of view, it were preferable to employ the outline of an a.
ordinary spindle, made so that sections of the central part shall afl'ord a num- / \
ber of circles, scarcely larger the one than the other. This figure, then, [ |
bear in mind, not only affords a type of the duration and progressive \
tendency of life in a zoonomic point of view, but accurately corresponds \ J
iu its central part, to that somewhat uncertain period at which culmination
takes place.
Another remarkable circumstance connected with this phase of existence
might be graphically represented. I allude to the variations which take place
THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE. 479
in the vigour of the creative powers, without altering the general form of the
collective phenomenon. At all ages diseases may occur, and during their
manifestation there is not unfrequently a diminution in the intensity of the
vital principle; but when such diseases have terminated, then follows a period
of convalescence, and often, of increased health and vigour. As a rule, however,
these alternations have but little effect on the general course of existence; the
retardations which it may experience in youth, do not prevent an onward pro-
gression up to a stated period, while the reinforcements it may perchance
receive during its declension are insufficient to obviate the tendency to final
extinction.
The expression of the above fact may be figuratively represented by the
varied ornaments carved a upon a spindle by means of a turning lathe.
However profusely de- / S corated, you may always recognise the two
extremities and the cen- j S tral expansion, and if the plan of such a
body be represented on Cl ,-S) paper, the outline will be more or less scol-
loped; but the general ?? form of the polygon will always be that of a
curvilinear rhomb; thus, V
With regard to the premature senescence mentioned by Galen, no-
thing can be more easy than to represent it. Draw a diangle, thus?
which in its general outline, A B C D, shall represent the normal
zoonomic life, and note especially the period of culmination, B D.
Erom the point A, draw two curved lines up to the point at which
the vital principle begins to decline, B D, and continue them up to
the point C, representing the period of extinction. In the area of
the polygon draw lines indicating the moment at which the vital principle
deviated from its natural course, and unite them at the points E E.
Below the line whiclx represents the culminating period B D, you perceive
parallel lines G II I K indicating the individual culmination of premature
senescence in different instances. Under this head you may reckon those who
have died before the age of forty, not from any violent cause, but from some
disease which the vital principle has been unable to overcome. Such were the
learned Pic de la Mirandole, to whom a passionate love of study proved fatal;
the gentle Raphael, whose devotion to ttle art of painting shortened his exist-
ence; the wise and precocious Yauvenargues, prematurely hurried to the
grave at the age of thirty-two; and the delightful Mozart, whose untimely end
at the early age of thirty-six might have been easily predicted.
The transverse lines above that of the normal culminating period, will call to
mind those men, who, having attained this period, arrived at the close of their
existence in a disproportionately short space of time; in other words, the
second half of their vital career underwent curtailment. Such were Bacon,
Descartes, Racine, Barthez, De Candolle, and many others, whose primitive
constitution promised an equal duration of existence on either side of the
culminating point, but of which the declining period was unexpectedly
shortened. Here, then, we have three forms of which the zoonomic life is
susceptible; one representing its natural course; the second, the variations
which man often undergoes in regard to health, and in which certain compen-
sations take place, permitting the individual (in spite of suffering and danger)
to arrive at the natural term of life; and the third, in which the early period
of life follows a natural course up to a certain epoch, while
the remainder undergoes a declension so rapid and sudden,
as to bring its terminal point on a level with the normal period
of culmination. The first of these figures being that of
an ordinary spindle; the second, that of a carved or scolloped
spindle; the third, that of a spindle with a head; thus?
I purpose now, to submit the intellectual career of man to a similar geometric
configuration, in order to ascertain what may be the outline of such an.
imaginary solid, as compared with those which I have just described.
NO. XX. I 1
A
480 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
In doing this, I shall confine myself to the same points which have been
considered in relation to animal existence, namely, the intensity of action
and its progressive career. I embrace the entire range of the intellectual
principle, just as in the case of the vital force, including the respective attri-
butes of both, and shall proceed to institute a comparison between them. I
may eventually be obliged to request you to omit one of the intellectual
functions, the operations of which take place frequently with the co-operation
of the vital principle: I allude to the memory. During the past year I insisted
strongly on the part which the vital force performs in the exercise of this
faculty. You will remember how I showed that imperfections occurring in the
operations of the memory, by no means imply an enfeebled condition of the
intellect.
Previous to examining the career of the intellectual principle after the
culminating period of the vital force, it may be useful to compare the relation-
ship which exists between the two, during the first half of existence.
1. The first point to be noticed, is the fact that the initiatory date of
intellectual capacity is not the same as that of the vital principle. This last
commences its operations immediately after conception, without losing any
time; every minute is registered, inasmuch as if the birth be premature; the
foetus gives well-marked indication of how much was wanting to complete the
full term.
It is not thus, however, with the principle of intelligence. Its activity
would appear to commence but at the moment of birth. Not that there is any
reason to believe that the formation of the human dynamism has been instituted
at two distinct periods. The formative or vital principle, together with that
of the intellect, must have started into being, simultaneously; but while the
former has at once entered upon a career of activity, the latter has remained in
abeyance, until the period at which the aggregate should manifest itself to the
external world. We might be led to imagine that the intellectual principle
remains latent and inactive, simply from not being liable to the impression of
objects, capable of eliciting sensations and affording it an opportunity for the
formation of ideas. Experience, however, proves that this is not the case;
and that by a primordial disposition, the principle of intelligence remains as it
were in seclusion, until the natural term of utero-gestation be accomplished.
Should an unforeseen accident induce the premature expulsion of a viable
infant, such precocious birth will profit the intellectual principle but little.
The child exists much as it has already done during the seven or eight previous
months in its mother's womb, unconscious of the external world, except as
regards the air it breathes?lulled into a species of continued sleep?generally
motionless, or moving its limbs merely by instinct. In the Gazette Medicate
de Paris, there appeared lately an account of an infant that for the space of
six weeks led an intra-uterine mode of existence, while in its swaddling-clothes
and cradle. The dawn of the intellectual principle becoming manifest only at
the period when natural delivery should have taken place.
In reducing, then, the modus operandi of the human intellectual principle
to a figurative representation, it should be borne in mind, that it is not con-
temporaneous with that of the vital force, and that its activity begins at a later
period; while its original cause has nevertheless remained in abeyance from the
first.
2. It is no easy point to determine the moment at which intellectual
activity commences. Its date of birth would appear to be simultaneous with
the conversion of sensations into ideas, or with the first evidences of co-ordina-
tion and combination in such ideas. Even in a practical point of view, it is
impossible to point out the first act of the will, and consequently the first con-
sciousness of intellectual motive, inasmuch as the effects of instinct are for a
long time confounded with those of reason. What a contrast, then, between
the primary acts of the intelligence and those of the vital principle; the
THE SCIENCE OF MEDICINE. 481
former, as it were, ignorant at birth, feels its own way slowly and uncertainly.
The latter requires no such apprenticeship; its first efforts are masterpieces.
3. The intellectual principle having once conceived an idea and exercised the
power of thought, becomes gradually stronger and stronger. Thus the vital
principle and that of the intellect mutually strengthen one another?as Lucre-
tius says?
"... Ubi robustis adolevit viribus actas
Consilium quoque majus, et auctior est animi vis."
" Age, in strengthening the limbs, ripens the intellect, and augments the
vigour of the mind." But Lucretius here tells us only half the truth, and he
has good reason for concealing the remainder. He leaves us to imagine that
the two principles increase in like proportion, and this is not the case. Tor it
so happens, that in conformity with certain primitive peculiarities, and accord-
ing to different circumstances, the mode of progression varies in different
individuals. If there be some in whom the two divisions of the human
dynamism are alike perfect, there are far more, in whom one or other principle
dominates and flourishes at the expense of its coadjutor.
