Medical Evidence in Support of the Commission
===============================================

Mr. George Cornelius Johnson, examined by Sir F. Thesiger.?I am a general
practitioner. I have known Mr. Ince for thirty-four years. In the latter part of the
year 1845, and the early part of 184G, I attended Captain Cumming in Belgrave-ter-
race,?that is, from tlie 10th April to the 30th April, 1845 ; also in the months of May
and June, and in April and May, 184G. Captain Cumming was in a state of great
bodily weakness at that time. He was suffering from low fever?that was the specific
complaint for which I attended liim. ? Q. Had he other complaints. A. He had a
disease of the prostate gland, and as the result of that he had considerable difficulty in
passing his water at times.?Q. Independently of his advanced age, would you not
consider that as quite sufficient to prevent the possibility of any sexual intercourse ?
A. I do not hesitate to say that it would be quite impossible for liim to have sexual
intercourse. ? Q. What was the conduct of Mrs. Cumming towards Captain Cumming
in general, as far as your observation went. A. It varied very much. At times she
?was kind and attentive to him, and apparently anxious about him?anxious that I should
do everything which my art enabled me to do to restore him to health. At other times
it would be very violent, and her language would be violent?she would address him
in an angry tone, and would exhibit great indifference as to the result of his illness.?
Q. You say that she would be very violent at times towards him?would she in your
presence exhibit that violence ? Ar In language and occasionally in gesture; it was
never carried beyond that. There was never any personal violence.? Q. Are you
able to say whether she attended to his wants, and supplied him with those things which
he required ? A. There were times, and they were very frequent indeed, that I had to
complain of the want of attention. You must understand that at this time he was in
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 31
a perfectly helpless condition; be was confined to liis bed. ? Q. Was that during the
wbole of your attendance upon bim? A. No?during tbe early part of it. He was
prostrate with fever.?Q. And was it during this period tliat she exhibited this variety
of conduct towards bim ? A. Precisely.?Could you observe wbetber Captain Cum-
ming bad given ber any particular provocation ? A. Not in my presence. ? Q. Did she
ever speak to you anything about her husband? A. I am afraid at this distance of
time I cannot charge my memory with that sufficiently to state on oath. I am anxious
to be very careful and very correct.? Q. Did she state any other matters to you at any
time that excited your attention? A. Ob yes ! She stated frequently, in reference to
ber daughters, and also more especially towards her daughter Mrs. Ince, and also-
against her son-in-law. I made an observation to Mrs. Cumming that I thought it
strange that another medical man should have been called in to tbe family when she
bad a son-in-law, an experienced man in the profession. That observation I repeated
from time to time, and it always originated the same remarks from her?that the reason
she did not employ ber son-in-law was, that he was a thief, and that be, in fact, would
lay bis bands upon anything. On my remonstrating with ber upon my feeling that it
was impossible that a man in bis position and character should be guilty of anything of
tbe kind, she said, " Oh, yes; be lias done so, and I can give you an instance; he has
stolen from me a silver bread-basket or basket." ? Q. You say that Mrs. Cumming
stated this upon several occasions with regard to Mr. Ince ? A. Several occasions.
? Q. And you endeavoured to dissuade her from entertaining any such notion. A. I
did so. ? Q. And could you prevail upon ber? A. No, indeed I could not. ? Q. "What
did she say about Mrs. Ince ? A. She spoke of her as a person totally unworthy of'
ber affection. ? Q. Did she give you any instances?did she say in wbat respect she
was unworthy of her affections ? A. That she bad been unkind to ber. I can hardly
again charge my memory with any special observations which she made in reference to
that matter. I have beard a greal deal, but of course that does not come under my
cognizance. ? Q. Did she appear to have any antipathy to her daughters ? A. She
seemed to have a perversion of all natural feeling, I thought, towards her children. ?
Q. Did she speak to you about Mrs. Hooper? A. Very likely?I do not remember
that she did particularly?tbe observations were general; but there were instances in
which she particularly alluded to Mrs. Ince..? Q. Had you any opportunity of seeing
wbat state Mrs. Cumming's room was in? A. No; I was never admitted into that
room, I think, but upon one occasion.?Q. What was your opinion, from the opportunity
you had of seeing Mrs.C umming, as to lierstate of mind ? A. That she was of unsound mind.
By tbe Commissioner.?When did you first come to that conclusion? A. Cer-
tainly within the first week of my attendance.
By Sir F. Thesigeh.?And as your acquaintance with Mrs. Cumming advanced,
and your opportunities of observing her continued, did you come to that conclusion
satisfactorily in your own mind ? A. My first impressions remained entirely unaltered.
? Q. I believe that you signed tbe certificate by which she was confined in York
House ? A. I did. (The certificate runs as follows :?" I, George Cornelius Johnson,
being an apothecary legally qualified, hereby certify that I have this day, separately
from any other practitioner, visited and personally examined Mrs. Catherine Cumming,
the person named in tbe accompanying statement and order ; and that the said
Catherine Cumming is a person of unsound mind, and a proper person to be confined ;
and that I have formed my opinion from the following facts :?viz. delusions as to the
character of ber near relations; delusion as to being robbed by them and others;
violent conduct towards her husband; and unfounded antipathies towards her chil-
dren.")? Q. Upon your signing this certificate, did you examine Mrs. Cumming,
and find that these delusions were operating upon her mind? A. Yes.?Q. Have
you seen her since that time ? A. I saw ber during tbe late commission at tbe Horns
Tavern, and have never seen ber since until the present investigation. ? Q. Probably
you will be able, from your experience, to tell us whether a person of an advanced
period of life whose mind labours under delusions of this kind is likely to be restored,
or so likely as a younger person? A. Not within my experience.
Cross-examined by Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Q. Have you had much experience in
diseases of the mind ? ? A. I have had the average which usually falls to men in
general practice. I have not had any great experience in matters of this kind. It is
quite due to you that I should admit that. ? Q. During the times that you visited
Captain Cumming, had you frequent conversations with Mrs. Cumming? A. Yes, I
bad. ? Q. Long conversations? A. Not long.? Q. Were you aware at that time
32 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING.
that she was addicted to habits of intemperance? A. I never saw her so. ? Q. You
have stated that her conduct varied very much. Supposing that to he so; that she
was in the habit of indulging in strong drinks, would you be at all surprised to find
that the case? A. Certainly not: both states would lead to the same results.?
Q. You have stated that in your opinion Captain Gumming would be incapable of
?sexual intercourse? A. That is my opinion.?Q. First of all, let me ask you,
although there might be incapability of intercourse, is there any impossibility that the
desire should exist? A. No, I should say not. ? Q. What induces you to suppose
that the sexual intercourse was impossible? A. The disease of the prostate gland,
.and the organs of generation generally?I should say it would be physically impossible.
? Q. You say as to the organs of generation generally. Was there any other indica-
tion of disease but that of the prostate gland ? A. It did not fall within my observation.
? Q. Did you notice at times when you visited Mrs. Cumming, that she appeared
more excited than at other times ? A. Yes. ? Q. Can you tell me as a matter of fact,
from your own knowledge of the operations of the mind, is not the mind, generally
speaking, much more prone to brood over past wrongs under the influence of drink
than at other times ? A. I am not quite clear that your position is right. On the
contrary, I think rather differently.?Q. Do you remember a casein which a man lately
destroyed a child ? A. Yes, you may cite isolated cases ; but I think as a principle it
is not the fact. ?Q. But there are isolated cases ? Was it not when she was in that
excited state that she spoke of the family in the way you have described? A. No.
? Q. You have assumed that all those impressions on her mind were delusions ? A. I
tlid so at the time, and I think so still.?Q. And under that impression it was that you
came to the conclusion that she was insane? A. It was so.? Q. An insane person
may argue shrewdly 011 non-existing facts, may he not ? A. Yes. ?Q. And it is the
non-existence of the premise that induces the belief of unsoundness of mind, there
being no real cause ? A. No real cause. ? Q. You would not call imperfect reasoning
a proof of insanity ? A. Imperfect reasoning ? Do you mean in points submitted for
general argument ? ? Q. No. Supposing, for instance, that there may have been some
very trifling circumstance which may have existed upon which one may attach very
important consequences, would you argue that as a proof of insanity ? A. Well,
generally I might not, but individually I might. ? Q. That means nothing. A. That
is just what I wish it to mean; because it is a position which will not admit of
?explanation. ? Q. For instance, supposing that I have been wronged by some person,
and I am, as many people are, much more prone to suspicion than others?and sup-
pose I afterwards bring my mind to believe that that person would wrong me in much
greater particulars, would you say that that was a proof of insanity ? A. On the con-
viction that that party, to my own knowledge, or as far as I had an opportunity of
forming an opinion, had not done any injury. ? Q. You must take my entire hypo-
thesis. I ask you this?supposing some person has done me a slight injury, would
you say, because I afterwards suspect that person of greater wrong that therefore I am
insane ? A. Certainly not.?Q. You talked about perversion of natural feeling, and not
antipathy under consciousness of wrong?unnatural feeling? A. Yes.? Q. And may
not that antipathy, even in the case of mother and child, proceed to estrangement and
dislike? A. It is quite possible, but not to the expression of such opinions as Mrs.
Cumming gave utterance to. ? Q. You say there was a perversion of all natural feeling
towards her children?in what way did she show her antip'athy to Mrs. Hooper? A. I
Jiave already explained that; I cannot charge my memory with any particular explana-
tion with respect to Mrs. Hooper, but she generalized them as her children, and spoke
of their cruelly unkind conduct to her. ? Q. Will you be kind enough to furnish to
the jury your definition of unsoundness of mind ? A. It is a very extensive question.?
?Q. I wish to have a definition, if you please. A. My impression is, that unsoundness of
mind involves acts which are naturally contrary to reason, and altogether at variance with
the circumstances and the condition of life of the party?-peculiarity of habit, manner, and
conversation inconsistent with the ordinary circumstances of life.?Q. Now will you be
kind enough to tell me what it was that induced you to believe beyond what youhave stated
in your certificate, if there be adjthing, that Mrs. Cumming was of unsound mind ? A. I
should first mention the fact of my impression concerning the delusion of her children
having robbed her?that appeared to me to be inconsistent?the peculiarity of her own
person, manner, and habits. ? Q. Will you statewhat that peculiarity was ? A. In the
first place, I should tell you my visits were made at different' times of the day?tfiat she
-was always wrapped in a loose dressing-gown, and otherwise in appearance very different
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUM MING. 33
from what one would have expected from a person in her position in life. Again, the
general appearance of the house showing either that she had no power, or having the
jiower, did not choose to exercise it, in the arrangements of the house?the wretched
condition of the room in which my poor unfortunate patient was placed, totally incon-
sistent either with the character of such a case of illness, and without any of the com-
forts one would naturally have expected to have found in the house of a person having,
as I presumed, the fortune of Mrs. Cumming. ? Q. Are those your eutire reasons?
A. The generally offensive character of the house. ? Q. Did you know that she was
complaining of illness ? A. She never did to me; she once consulted me, but that
was about some affection of the eyes. ? Q. Do you know that she was at that time
attended by some medical man herself? A. I am not aware of it. ? Q. You have
spoken of the mean way in which her house was furnished?were you aware that her
furniture had some time before been seized to pay a gambling debt of her husband's ?
? A. No. Had I been aware of that, it would have been an excuse to me that the
house was in a bad state. ? Q. Did you know that after her marriage with Captain
Cumming he had children affiliated to him ? A. No, I did not: it may be as well to
state to you that I do not know that I had even heard the name of this family until I
had been called in.
Re-examined by Sir F. Thesigee. ? Q. You have been asked as to certain general
principles as to unsoundness of mind. Is it your judgment thatthose general principles
can be applied to my case, or must each particular case be judged of by its own cir-
cumstances ? A. I should say upon its own merits.
By the Commissioner. ? Q. You saw this lady once in her own bed-room?
A. Only once ; it was during my attendance. I do not know whether you would call
it a bed-room; it was a wretched place, and the odour was so insufferable that I was
very glad to escape from the short interview I had with her.
A Jubymax.?Her bed was in that room ? A. I cannot charge my memory with
that. ? Q. You did not go over the rest of the house? A. I never went over it.
Mr. Thomas Wilmot, examined by Mr. Petersdouff.?I am a surgeon, residing
in Chester-street. I have been about fourteen years in practice. I first saw Mrs.
Cumming in York House Asylum, on the ,14th May, 1846. For the first ten minutes
I saw her with Dr. Millengen, the owner of the house ; he then left us. I asked her
how it was she was there ? She entered into the subject, and complained very invete-
rately of her husband and children. I thought that, under existing circumstances,
only natural. ? Q.I think it would be desirable that you should give us the conversa-
tion as nearly as you can recollect, what you said to her, and she to you? A. I
asked her the age of her husband. She had spoken in most disrespectful terms about
her husband, and then raved on with violence, which, as I did not think it extraor-
dinary, I did not pay much attention to. She told me her husband was an old man,
79 or 8!), I forget which. I asked her by what particular facts she had to complain of
her husband's conduct ? She answered me that he was a whoremonger, and that he
had connexion with every nurse who came near him. She rather dwelt upon this con-
versation. She stated to me that she had caught her husband lately in the fact. I
tried to disabuse her mind, having learned from her that he had disease of the gene-
rative organs. I questioned her about her daughters. She said that Mrs. Ince was a
prostitute, but did not assign any reason on my asking her. She stated that Mr. Ince
had murdered, I think, three children. I am positive to two?two of his own, and
one nephew or niece. One of his own, she said, was done for?murdered by him;
and subsequently after its death " glazed" over. She told me that Mr. Dangerfield had
robbed her of plate and property to the amount of 300/. She could not, or would not,
afford me any explanation of it. She referred me to Mr. Johnson as her medical
attendant, who would speak to her sanity. That is all I remember. The interview
lasted about an hour and twenty minutes. I think she said Mr. Cumming was a
confirmed drunkard. I considered that she was labouring under delusions as to most
of those points; that she was a person incapable of taking care of herself; that she
was unsound or incapable of taking care of her property. She said her house was in
perfect order. I went immediately to the house in Belgrave-terrace. I saw Captain
Cumming. He was in the front parlour. His room was scantily furnished; the bed
and everything was very unpleasant. His disease would tend to make it unpleasant.
I foun<Lhim a person totally incapable, in my opinion, of having any desire for the
other sex. The poor man was some three minutes before he could pass off a tea-
spoonful of water. I went over the other part of the house. I found it in perfect
c
34 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
disorder. Tlie upper rooms were devoted to the pigeons, the lower ones to the cats.
I afterwards attended Captain Cumming, and Mr. Ince saw him occasionally. He
died on the 10th of July. I never saw Mrs. Gumming again till she was at the Homs
Tavern. I had no conversation with her then. I signed the certificate after seeing
the house.
Cross-examined.?I did not sign the certificate until after she was removed to the
asylum. At that time Mr. Ince had attended patients for me in my absence, and we
were on a friendly footing. I think Mr. Ince knew nothing of Dr. Millengen at that
time. ? Q. When you first went, did you not find her in a great passion ? A. Perhaps
I put her in a great passion.? Q. When you say she said that Mrs. Ince was a prosti-
tute, was the word "whore," or " prostitute," used ? A. "Prostitute:" she used the
word " whore," over and over again, in connexion with her husband and Mrs. Ince
both?Q. This was at the time when she was in this state of passion ? A. Oh, no.?
Q. Was she cool then ? A. Oh, she did so, but I did not form my opinion on anything
she said until she had quieted herself. I considered that she had been removed from
home, and that it was likely that she would be excited. ? Q. When she complained of
the disease, I believe you say she stated that the captain had disease in the generative
organs? A. Those were not her words; but she said that in effect.? Q. Did she
attribute this to his early excesses ? A. No.?I have seen children who have died of
scarlatina. It is not in my experieuce the case that, generally speaking, after death
they present a sort of glazed appearance of the skin. ?Q. Will you be kind enough,
if you please, to give us your definition of insanity? A. Upon my word I have never
seen or heard any definition of insanity that was satisfactory to me. ? Q. But are there
no general rules ? A. None that are satisfactory to me.? Q. Then what induced you
to pronounce Mrs. Cumming unsound? A. I have already given you my reasons.?
Q. You have given us a conversation; I want to know what your reasons are ? A. I
considered she was labouring under delusions. ? Q. Did you ever take the trouble to
ascertain whether they were delusions or not. A. I took the trouble of going to the
house, and having a conversation with Captain Cumming, before signing the certificate.
? Q. To anybody else? A. To no one else.? Q. Did you expect Captain Cumming,
if he had been inconstant, would have confessed it to you ? A. I did not ask him if
he was inconstant?it was absurd. I had seen the man try to make water. ? Q. Then
you think, do you (reflect for a moment), because a man might have difficulty, extend-
ing even to agony, in making water, that would forbid the existence of sexual desire ?
A. I think the difficulty he experienced would?he might have it mentally, but not in
the generative organs. ? Q. Desire in the organs; 1 never heard of the affections
being placed in those organs before. I ask you whether the affection of desire itself
might not exist. A. I do not hear what you say, (The question was repeated.) A. I
do not now understand; if you mean that he had the desire, I do not believe that it
did or could exist. ? Q. Do you not know, as a medical man, that one of the greatest
curses attendant on that disease (stricture, disease of the bladder) is, that desire will
exist, and beget the greatest agony ? A. My experience is the contrary. I had never
more than one interview with Mrs. Cumming. I have not, perhaps, had above six or
seven cases of lunacy under my own treatment: under the treatment of others, forty or
fifty Q. Have you signed certificates for some six or seven? A. Yes. ? Q. Upon
each of those occasions did you sign certificates upon one interview ? A. Oh, no. ?
Q. Was this the only case in which you signed a certificate on one interview ? A. I
cannot say that. I may have seen the patient only once. I never signed one without
the evidence convinced me 1 ought to sign it. ? Q. Your recollection is that, except in
this case, you never signed a certificate on one interview ? A. If I had not done so
before, I have since.
A Juryman.?Have you seen Mr. Ince this morning? A. I have.? Q. In what
state is he? A. He is in nearly the same he was on Saturday. He is threatened with
paralysis. ,
Mr. Serjeant Wilkijts.?Will you allow me to ask what are the symptoms which
you say threaten paralysis ? 5. Amaurosis: he has partially lost the sight of one
eye ; he has numbness in his hand; and had giddiness in getting out of his carriage a
day or two ago, before he consulted me.
At this stage of the proceedings, the Commissioner, addressing Sir F. Thesiger,
asked him if he considered the examination of the lady as a part of his case. ?
Sir F. Thesigeb.?I have always understood that those who support the commis-
sion should produce the lady.
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 35
The Commissioner.?Tlie usual course is, that the lady is examined at the end of
the plaintiff's case, and again at the end of the defendant's case; and when the jury
think fit.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins proceeded to examine the witness as to the number of certi-
ficates in lunacy lie had signed. He considered thirty was the limit.
Mr. William Bloxam was called. Is the present medical officer of York House
Asylum, Battersea: knew Dr. Millengen, the former proprietor, who is now dead.
The witness produced the book kept by Dr. Millengen during the time Mrs. Cumming
was an inmate in that as\rlum.
Sir F. Thesiger proposed to offer the entries made by Dr. Millengen of Mrs.
Cumming's case as evidence. Mr. Serjeant Wilkins objected: and a long discussion
ensued. Sir F. Thesiger relied on the 00th sect, of the 8th and 9tli Vict., c. 110, of
the " Lunacy Act," which directs that "there sball be kept in every licensed house,
&c., a book, to be called a case book, in which the physician, &c. shall make entries of
the mental state of each patient, together with a correct description of the (treatment)
of his disorder," &c. He contended that the book so kept, under the Act of Parlia-
ment, and which the keeper was bound to allow the Commissioners in Lunacy to have
access to, was as much a public book as the books of the Stamp Office, or of the India
House, which are admitted as evidence as public documents. Sir Frederick also cited
cases in support, especially Hyam against Ridgway, a pedigree case, in which it became
necessary to establish the time when a particular person was born. A gentleman had
attended the mother of the claimant in her confinement, and had made an entry of the
fact of the birth in his book; and he being dead, the book was admitted for the
purpose of proving the pedigree.
Mr. Petersdorff followed on the same side, and quoted the authority of Mr.
Roscoe, who laid down the rule that where an entry or declaration is made by a dis-
interested person, in the course of discharging a professional duty, it is in general
evidence after the death of the party making it. Mr. Petersdorff cited the instance
that a notice endorsed by a deceased clerk in an attorney's office is evidence of the
service of the notice after the death of the party.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins contended that his objection had not been met. Firstly, as
to the book kept by Dr. Millengen being a public book; the only object of it was that
it might serve as a check upon himself; and in order to obviate the abuses liable to
occur in private lunatic asylums; it was to satisfy the commissioners in case any
complaint should be made. The cases referred to by Mr. Petersdorff were not
applicable. It was true that an entry of a notice by a deceased clerk was held to be
evidence; but evidence of what? of the service of that notice, and not evidence of the
contents. Suppose the case put by Sir F. Thesiger, where a medical man had attended
a lady during her confinement?had he thought proper to insert in his book, not only
that she had been delivered of a child, but that she had been delivered of a bastard,
would that have been evidence of the bastardy ? So the learned Serjeant did not object
to the book being admitted as proof of the fact of this lady having been an inmate in
this asylum; it was not evidence of anything more. In the cases quoted, also, the
parties were disinterested witnesses ; and no witness could have a stronger interest in
keeping this lady in his lunatic asylum than Dr. Millengen.
Mr. Southgate followed on the same side. He argued that it was simply a
question of law. He contended, like Mr. Serjeant Wilkins, that all the cases cited oil
the other side went to show that if in a public document made by a man in the
ordinary course of his duties, you find an entry made as to a particular fact done by
him, that is evidence of that particular fact, but it is not evidence of any matter in any
way collateral to that fact. It did not follow that because a book is directed to be
kept by Act of Parliament, that it was therefore evidence?if so, what would be the
use of inserting in Acts of Parliament a clause directing that certain books shall be
evidence? Was there any such clause in the Lunacy Act? Certainly not. The book
kept under that act was a private return made by-the keeper of the asylum to the com-
missioners, who were sworn to secrecy; therefore they who sought to put that book in,
sought to do that which the commissioners themselves could not disclose without
violating their oaths.
Sir F. Thesiger here said?Dr. Prichard, who was himself one of the commissioners,
was examined in 1S46 under this very commission.
Mr. Southgate replied that Dr. Prichard was examined to prove that he saw Mrs.
Cumming, and that such and such things took place between him and Mrs. Cummiug,
c 2
3G THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
but be could not be examined as to any fact which had been told him Jby Dr. Millengen.
Mr. Soutbgate illustrated the inadmissibility of entries made by deceased parties as-
evidence of any collateral fact more strikingly and appositely, by stating that, in
the pedigree case, the apothecary had entered in his book the fact that he had
attended a lady upon the birth of a child?that book was held to be evidence of the
fact that he had attended the lady; but, suppose that he had entered that at the time
the child was born the lady was insane, would that be evidence of the insanity of that
lady ? He also observed that in pedigree cases evidence was admitted which was not
admitted in other cases?such as entries in family Bibles. Mr. Soutbgate, lastly, urged
that the book was only evidence of the fact that there was a patient in the asylum of
the name of Catherine Cumming, and submitted that it was not evidence of anything
more, and more particularly as it was impossible to cross-examine as to the reasons for
the conclusion to which Dr. Millengen might have come.
The Commissioner did not think the book evidence, as a book, but thought it
evidence as the evidence of a medical man who had the charge of Mrs. Cumming at
that time. ]t was open to the observation that you cannot cross-examine him; and
also that he was the person in whose legal control she was, and therefore it might be,
to a certain extent, a book to justify his own acts.
The Report was then put in, and read from the book kept by Dr. Millengen, and
produced by the witness.
There was no entry in it of the visit of Dr. Conolly or Dr. Webster.
Sir F. Thesiger, to the witness.?When the Commissioners of Lunacy attend, do
they examine the patients ? A. At their discretion.
The Commissioner.?Of course they cannot go minutely into every case?you
must not take that entry as evidence of their having gone minutely into the case, but
prima facie evidence that they see no reason for their discharge.
Sir F. Thesiger then put in the report of the commissioners to the chancellor,
produced by the secretary, Mr. Lutwidge, dated July 1st, 1840.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins inquired whether Dr. Millengen was not a writer of
romances. The witness could not tell.
Sir Alexander Morison sworn, and examined by Sir F. Thesiger.?Q. You are a
physician. A. I am.?Q. And I believe you have been so for a great number of years ?
A. Yes, a great many years. ? Q. And you are a lecturer upon diseases of the mind ?
A. Yes I am, and have been for a great number of years. ? Q. I believe you are also
physician to Bethlem Hospital. A. Yes. ? Q. Are you physician also to the Surrey
County Lunatic Asylum. A. Yes. ? Q. And I believe you were also the consulting
physician to the Middlesex County Asylum ? A. From 1831 to 1848. ? Q. And you
are author, I believe, of several treatises on mental diseases? A. Yes. ? Q. Have
you made the subject of diseases of the mind your study for a great number of years ?
A. I have tried to do so, at least. ? Q. In the year 1840, did you, at the desire of Mrs.
Cumming's family, visit her in the York House Asylum? A. I did. ? Q. Do you
recollect the day on which you went? A. To the best of my recollection I went on
the 18th and on the 19tli of May, and about the 19th or 20tli of August. ? Q. Upon
the first occasion of your seeing Mrs. Cumming, how long do you think you were
with her altogether ? A. It was not very long the first occasion: she was engaged with
two gentlemen?a Mr. Farrer, a solicitor, I think, and his brother. The next visit,
which was the next day, I was with her, and should think about an hour.
Mr. Serjeant Wil kins.?Did you say the gentleman's name was Farrer? A. I was
told so.
Sir F. Thesiger ?I suppose before you saw Mrs. Cumming you had endeavoured
to make yourself acquainted with all you could learn of her state of mind ? A. Yes I
had. Mr. Ince then called upon me, and stated  Q. He had called and com-
municated to you particulars which it was necessary for you to know? A. Yes, and
previous to going to York House, I had gone, by his desire, with Mr. Johnson, a
surgeon, on the 11th of May, to Mrs. Cumming's house, in Belgrave-place, and after
knocking and ringing several times, he was admitted, but came out and said the lady-
would not see anybody.? Q. Was that prior to her being removed to York House ?
A. Yes. ? Q. So that you were unable to see her before she was removed to the
asylum ? A. I was unable to see her. ? Q. Did you also have conversation with Mr.
Johnson as to this lady?did he communicate with you ? A. Yes.?Q. I suppose your
experience would tell you it was necessary you should be possessed of this previous
information? A. Of course, to know upon what points to examine the patient. ? Q.
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 37
On tlie 19tli of May you saw lier, and had an interview with her for an hour ? A. I
should think so?a long interview. ? Q. Were you there, in your judgment, suf-
ficiently long to be able to ascertain the state of her mind? A. I was. ? Q. What
was your opinion of the state of her mind at that time ? A. That she was not of
sound mind ; that she laboured under what I conceived delusions, both with regard to
her children and property.? Q. What, in the course of that interview, did she state
about her children which you characterize as delusions? A. She stated that they had
fobbed her, and that her son-in-law had destroyed one or two of her grandchildren, that
after death he had varnished over the face of one of them. ? Q. Will you allow me to
ask which of her sons-in-law had destroyed the children ? A. Mr. Ince, I think ; that
he had destroyed one of Mr. Hooper's, one of the grandchildren. ? Q. That her soli-
citor, you were going on to say. A. That her solicitor had also robbed her, I think
?she said as to 300/. I am not certain as to the sum, but I think it was that.? Q.
Did she state anything to you about her husband ? A. Yes, she stated that he was of
loose habits, and the nurses went to bed with him several times. ? Q. Did you know
of his being at that time a gentleman very far advanced in life ? A. I have seen him;
I went to the house to see him, and saw him on that occasion. ? Q. Did you go after
this interview ? A. I went before I went to York House. ? Q. What did she say upon
the subject of her property? A. That she had been robbed of her property. I asked
her what her property consisted of, and she seemed to have some tolerable notion of
that; she said she had about some 500Z. a year, that it would be 1500Z. if the railroad
went through it. ? Q. In what state was she as to her dress when you saw her? A.
When I saw her at York House she seemed very well dressed, and walked about; no
appearance of anything like palsy; she exhibited a great deal of shrewdness. ? Q. Do
?you find, from your experience, that persons who are labouring under what are called
monomania, or delusions, are cunning enough to conceal them ? A. Oh yes, to
-conceal them completely, sometimes. ? Q. Can persons in that state at times be
tutored to conceal their delusions ? A. I think so. I have occasionally advised my
patients in Bedlam Hospital that such and such delusions would prevent their being
liberated, and that they ought to try to get rid of them. They have occasionally
tried to get rid of them, and after a while they have returned. We had a remarkable
instance there lately of a poor woman who destroyed herself. After a time she got
rid of her delusion, so that I put her down in the convalescent list, and soon after she
?committed suicide.? Q. They are capable of repressing the exhibition of delusions
for some time, but they will return? A. Particularly if they are spoken to, and told it
injures them their talking of them Q. From the interview you had with Mrs.
Cumming on that occasion, what was your opinion as to her state of mind? A. I
mentioned that I considered her to be of unsound mind. ? Q. And I believe you
signed a certificate to that effect ? A. Perhaps I did; I do not recollect. I did not
sign the certificate for her being conveyed to the lunatic asylum. Perhaps I may
have been asked my opinion at that time.? Q. Did you attend the inquiry at the
Horns Tavern ? A. The whole of it; and a wearisome job it was, something like
the present. ? Q. Was Dr. Pritchard there. A. He was. ? Q. Was he examined as a
witness? A. He was.? Q. You heard him examined ? A. I heard him examined.
? Q. Were you examined as a witness yourself? A. I was. ? Q. Was Mr. Millengen
examined? A. He was.?Q. Was it while the commission was pending or before the
commission that you saw Mrs. Cumming again, in the month of August? A. Before
the commission.? Q. When you saw her in the month of August, did you converse
with her so as to endeavour to ascertain the state of her mind ? A. I did. ? Q. Were
you alone with her on that occasion? A. I could not burden my mind, but I think I
saw her alone for a certain part of the time. ? Q. Upon that occasion did the same
delusions, as you have called them, prevail as upon the former occasions? A. They
did; the same ideas prevailed. ? Q. And upon that, upon your interview with her, you
gave your evidence before the commission upon the former occasion? A. I did, and
on hearing the evidence that was brought forward before my examination, a great deal
of which was given before the examination of the medical men
Sir F. Thesigee.?We are both agreed as to this; it seems to have been laid down
on high authority that it is not competent to ask the medical gentlemen?having heard
the whole of the evidence, what is your opinion as to the state of mind of this party ??
because that is a question for the jury, which will account for my abstaining.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?It is the province of the jury.
Sir F. Thesiger.?That is my impression, and that is why I abstain.
38 THE CASE OF MES. CATHEEINE CUMMING.
The Commissioner.?You Lave a right to ask a professional man his opinion on a
particular case. You can state a case to a professional man, but you have no right to
ask him generally his opinion on what be has heard, that is putting him in tbe position
of the jury. If you pick out particular facts in a case, you may ask his opinion on those
facts; and that was laid down by tbe lord chief justice.
A Juryman.?But the party may ask a medical man his opinion derived from his
own knowledge ?
Sir F. Thesiger.?Certainly, I will just put this by way of illustration of the course
nvhich is open to us.
The Commissioner.?It used to be always done.
Sir F. Thesiger (to the witness).?Suppose a person has placed his affairs in the
hands of an attorney who has conducted himself with tbe strictest propriety and
integrity, and who has from time to time received money, and rendered due and proper
account of the money, which has been sanctioned by the person by whom the attorney
was employed, and tbat person should afterwards represent, on several occasions, that
the attorney had robbed her or him, I will put it, had left him penniless?had rendered
no account whatever, and was rolling in luxury upon the property he had so acquired?
would you consider that delusion or not? A. I would consider it delusion, cer-
tainly. ? Q. In the month of October we hear there was an order from the Lord Chan-
cellor to yourself and Dr. Monro to go down to Brighton to examine this lady? A.
There was. ? Q. And to take any person with you, and pursue any course of examina-
tion you thought proper ? ? Q. Yes, to go together or separately, as we thought proper.
We were to have gone together, but Dr. Monro was seized with erysipelas, and was
laid up. ? Q. When you went down to Brighton, did you desire to have the assistance
of another medical gentleman? A. Yes. ? Q. And I believe Dr. King was determined
upon ? A. Yes, Dr. King. ? Q. From what you had heard, did you think it necessary
to have some of the police with you when you went to the house ? A. Mr. Turner
met me there, of course. I went there to see the patient; I had nothing further to do but
to be introduced to the patient. In what way 1 left to others, I could not direct that.
Q. Having been admitted to the room, did you address Mrs. Cumming. A. Yes. ?
Q. Did you tell her for what purpose you had come ? A. Yes, I told her the Lord Chan-
cellor understood that she had been unhappy, or some expression similar to that, and
that he had wished us to come down and inquire into the state of matters, and I think
she said she was not insane. ? Q. Mr. Turner was in the room?you wished to have
some one there ? A. Yes Did Mrs. Cumming, when you went into the room, appear
to you to be alarmed? A. No, I cannot say so much; she seemed very much as you
saw her the other day. ? Q. Quiet, was she ? A. Yes, she did not rise out of her chair,
or make any particular noise, except when her daughter, Mrs. Ince, who was there,
wished to come in, and she said " no, never," in an angry tone.? Q. Will you be good
enough to state what questions you put for the purpose of ascertaining the state of her
mind ? A. There were some questions I was led to put which I thought would throw
light upon the state of her mind. In particular I asked her, " When you were in Herbert
Villa, what was it made you call out at midnight for the police?" Her answer was,
"It was because my daughter was strangling me." That was one question. ? Q. Did
you ask anything else? A. Yes, I asked her something else. I asked her if she had
seen her daughter, or if she did not wish to see her daughter? and she told me she had
not or would not. ? Q. Did she say why ? A. I do not think at that time. Then I asked
her why she had left her house in Queen's-place, or terrace ? I think she said, " Because
they wished to poison me. They put poison in my tea."? Q. Did she say who it was
who wished to poison her? A. No, she did not. ? Q. Did you ask her why she had
moved from place to place? A. Perhaps; I do not recollect. There was another
question I asked her, by-the-bye. I asked her, first, who had advised her to depart from
the compromise of 184G ? She said it was her lawyer's advice. I then asked her if she
had made a will? and she said she had. I asked her if she had left anything to her
daughters ? She said no; she was very angry, and expressed great anger against them.
Well, since your grand-daughters have not offended you, have you left anything to them?
No, I have left it to those who deserve it, or who have befriended me. I asked her
who they were ? She would not name them. I asked her several questions as to her
property, but she either would not answer or could not. Had she sold any of her
property? What did her property consist of? and several questions of that kind. ? Q.
You put, for instance, the question to her, "Have you sold any of your property?"
A. Yes. ? Q. What did she do or say upon that? A. She did not give any answer.?
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 39
Q. She was silent ? A. Yes. ? Q. Have you asked her what her property consisted
of? A. Yes, I asked her what her property consisted of, who her tenants were, and
several questions of that description; to all of which she gave me no answer. She
asked me, on one occasion, " Am I obliged to answer that question?" I said, No, you
are not obliged to answer any question, but such questions as you do not answer, I
shall be obliged to state to the Lord Chancellor. ? Q. Was she during the time ex-
cited ? A. I do not know exactly what to call excited; if any, she was uncomfortable,
and did not like to be questioned in that way, but she did not show any violent excite-
ment, not such as 1 am accustomed to sometimes.? Q. Was it your opinion upon that
occasion that she was a person of sound or unsound mind ? A. I was of opinion she
was of unsound mind. ? Q. Did it appear to you that the same delusions which she
had displayed in the year 1846 continued at that time ? A. With some variation.
That unnatural antipathy towards her children and grandchildren continued, and that
disposition to delusions continued. For instance, supposing her daughter, who was
miles off, strangling her at the time she called for the police. These appeared to me
decisive marks of unsound mind. ? Q. Is that a common form of insanity, persons dread-
ing that they are to be murdered ? A. Almost in all recent cases that is one of the in-
dications. ? Q. Is the destruction of the natural affections a common form of insanity ?
A. A very common form; it is one of the most common forms that people's affections
have changed; and one of t)je most decided signs of returning sanity is a return of the
natural affections. ? Q. Do you find, when insanity prevails in persons advanced in
life, they are more or less likely to recover than in the case of younger patients. A.
Much less likely.? Q. From what you have seen and know of Mrs. Cumming, you
think she is a person who could be tutored to conceal her delusion for a certain
period ? A. From the shrewdness which she had sometimes exhibited, I should think
something might be made of her in tbat way, if you visited her a dozen times, day after
day, repeating a story in the way you wish to have it done. ? Q. You think it would
impress it on her ? A. I think she is a subject for that, or to alter the character of
the delusion. For instance, I think she might be made to alter the delusion of being
strangled by her daughter, or she might be made to say that was a dream, or something
of that kind. 1 think she is a person who might be worked upon in that way. ? Q. Is
it your present opinion that she is a person of unsound mind, and incapable of taking
care of herself and her property ? A. It is decidedly.
Cross-examined by Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Q. Is your recollection very distinct
of what took place at Brighton ? ? A. Not very distinct, but quite distinct as to that
delusion, perfectly distinct. ? Q. You say you asked her why it was that she called
for the aid of the police on that night ? A. Yes. ? Q. And you said she told you one of
her daughters was attempting to strangle her? A. Yes. ? Q. May it by possibility
be that you have made a mistake, and that what she said was, that one of her servants
was trying to strangle her ? A. Certainly not; she said one of her daughters?her
daughter. ? Q. Your first interview was in May, 1840, I think you say? A. Yes.?
Q. Had you, before seeing her in 1840, received a statement from Mr. Ince ? A.I had.
? Q. A somewhat lengthened statement, I think ? A. I cannot say that at all. I
do not think it was a lengthened statement. He had called upon me, and told me
certain circumstances respecting this lady. ? Q. And told you some of the .delusions
under which she laboured ? A. Yes ; told me she had accused him of robbing her,
and those other circumstances. ? Q. Did he tell you that she had accused him of
robbing her of a silver bread-basket ? A. I do not recollect that. ? Q. Did he give
you a history of the transaction respecting the silver bread-basket and some silver
salt-cellars? A. 1 do not recollect. I heard it at the trial.?Q. You also had an
interview with Captain Cumming before you went, had you not? A. Yes. ? Q. Had
you a conversation with Mr. Johnson before you went to the Asylum? A. No. I
do not think it, before then; when I went with him, on the 11th of May, to the
house. I do not think I saw Mr. Johnson after that. ? Q. You say that she told
you her income was 500Z. or 600Z. a year, but that it would be increased to 1500/. if
the railway was carried through her property? A. Yes. ? Q. Did she not state that
the fact of the railway passing through her property would so enhance its value as to
raise it to that amount ? A. No, I do not think she did, but it came to that in round
terms. ? Q. My learned friend, Sir F. Thesiger, asked you just now, supposing her
attorney to have acted with strict propriety, and that the client should afterwards
think that that attorney had robbed her, (which was in effect what my learned friend
said,) would you call that a delusion, and your answer was, you would? A. Yes. ?
40 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
Q. Supposing her naturally of a suspicions disposition, and stingy in her money
transactions, and suppose that attorney during the whole of his transactions with
her estate had only rendered her one written account, and suppose that attorney
to he on intimate terms with her son-in-law, who she suspected to have robbed her,
would you have treated her impression as a mistake or as a delusion ? A. That is
a hypothetical case. ? Q. I put it to you as a hypothetical case. My learned friend
Sir F. Thesiger put a hypothetical case to you, and that is my hypothesis. A. I
would require to make particular inquiries myself, not exactly as you state it. I should
wish to inquire whether it really was true that this attorney had done any wrong to
her. ? Q. "You are to assume that?you are to assume that the attorney (I do not
say that he had done any wrong) but you are to assume that that attorney had the
management of her affairs for a considerable length of time ; that he received her rents;
that he had advanced her monies; that all her money transactions passed through his
hands; and that he never gave her more than one written statement of the accounts
between them, and that before the accounts concluded; supposing all that ? A. It
depends upon the length of time the account was standing, for it might not be a very
long time. ? Q. My hypothesis is quite as tenable, and quite as answerable, as that of
my friend.
Sir F. Thesiger. It is a very long one.
The Witness. It might be a mistake in the woman, but as it was stated to me, it
appeared to be delusion.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins. Have you not found among sane persons a great many
persons who are of a very suspicious character ? A. I do not know that I have found
many among sane persons. I have not had intercourse with many persons of suspi-
cious temper. I do not know many persons of a suspicious temper; very few indeed.
? Q. You are a very happy man : you do not know any ? A. No; I cannot say I am
acquainted with any of what I would call a suspicious temper. ? Q. Would a
proneness to suspicion be an index or a symptom of insanity ? A. Not without other
symptoms. ? Q. Did you make any inquiries at all as to the moral character of
Captain Cumming? A. No, none at all. ? Q. Did you make any inquiries as to whether
upon the night in question, who had attempted to throttle or strangle her when she
called for the police? A. No; certainly not. ? Q. Did you make inquiries as to
what were the grounds on which she suspected her son-in-law of robbing her ? A.
Mrs. Cumming herself? ? Q. Yes, or of any other person. Did you take any pains to
ascertain whether there were any grounds for this charge or not? A. No. ? Q. In
fact, you assumed it to be a delusion ? A. I assumed it from the manner of the
patient, and other circumstances.? Q. Would you call this species of insanity mono-
mania ? A. Yes; I would; monomania founded on unnatural hatred of her children,
leading to a great variety of delusions. ? Q. Would you think that hatred of offspring,
per se, is a proof of insanity? A. If it extends to children and grand-children, I
should think it a strong symptom of it. I will tell you; there is a case lately decided
in Scotland; but perhaps you will not go so far north?? Q No; I would rather
have your opinion in England. A. But I may mention that, in that case, the hatred
of the parent was considered sufficient to do away with the will. ? Q. That is the case
of Dew and Clarke, is it not ? A. No; that is the case of Fraser. ? Q. That case has
nothing to do with this, has it ? A. No ; but I mention it to show you that unnatural
hatred alone has been held to be sufficient. ? Q. Never mind about that. My ques-
tion to you is this, do you think that the hatred of offspring, and of the offspring of
offspring, is proof positive of insanity ? A. I think it is. ? Q. Do you think that
ingratitude and a perseverance in cruelty and neglect would be unnaturally productive
of hatred ? A. I think it would naturally produce hatred. ? Q. In the mind of a
sane person ? A. In the mind of a sane person, yes. ? Q, Had you ascertained that
Mrs. Hooper had married very much beneath her, and against her mother's consent ?
A. I have heard so.? Q. Had you heard that at the time ? A. I do not recollect. A
great many things appeared upon the trial that I could not now separate from what I
had heard before. ? Q. Had you heard of the marriage which she opposed ? A. I had.
heard that she opposed the marriage of one of her children, Mrs. Hooper Q. Did
you hear also that Mrs. Ince aided and assisted in that marriage. A. I heard Mrs.
Ince state it yesterday here ; I did not hear it before. ? Q. When Mrs. Cumming ex-
pressed her dislike to Mrs. Ince, did she put that case ? Did she not refer to
her alliance hvith her sister, in disobedience of, and frustrating, her wishes ? A. She
might.
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 41
Sir F. Thesiger?I think you do not understand the question.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?The question was, whether Mrs. Cumming referred to
Mrs. Ince having assisted Mrs. Hooper in the marriage, as a ground of her objection?
By the Commissioner.?Did Mrs. Ince give any reason for her aversion to Mrs.
Hooper? A. She does give that ground, but I do not remember when she did give it.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Did she not complain of their repeated acts of cruelty in
seeking to confine her, and treat her as a lunatic ? A. She has since, but not prior to
that hatred.? Q. Did she not then ? A. No. ? Q. Prior to what? A. Prior to her
being sent to York House. ? Q. Prior to your being sent to Brighton ? A. No ; she
never complained to me. ?Q. You could hardly call a decay of intellect insanity, would
you? A. We call imbecility insanity, unsound mind. ? Q. Would you call a decay
of intellect from age insanity? A. We call imbecility, and unable to manage her
affairs. ? Q. In old persons? A. If unable to manage affairs. ? Q. Do you call the
ordinary decay of mental faculties, the necessary result of age, such imbecility as to
render a person unfit to manage his affairs? A. Certainly not; not until it amounts
to senile imbecility. ? Q. That is second childishness and mere oblivion. Did she
complain to you of the cruelty of her children in their constant efforts to confine her ?
A. No.? Q. On no occasion? A. Not to my knowledge?not to my recollection.
More of robbing her and wishing to destroy her, not of confining her.? Q. Did
you take any pains at all to inquire into the case of poisoning? A. Not further than
hearing what she said. ? Q. Did she not tell you Dr. Barnes had analyzed the poison?
A. No ; she did not. I have heard that since, but she did not tell me. ? Q. Did she
tell you that poison was given in a cup, but being analyzed by Dr. Barnes, four years
ago, was ascertained to contain oxalic acid ? A. No ; she never said a word about it.
? Q. There is your own report, " My Lord, having visited Mrs. Cumming, for the
purpose of ascertaining the state of her mind, Edward Thomas Munro on the Cth or
8th instant, and Sir Alexander Morison on the 27th, we are of opinion she is of unsound
mind, on the following grounds, namely, that she believed her daughters to be her
enemies, and plotting against her; that she has every reason to believe that one of them
attempted to strangle her, and that poison was given her in a cup, which had been
analyzed by Dr. Barnes, five years ago, and was ascertained to contain oxalic acid,
and of which a fowl was afterwards killed, &c.?" A. That about the poison is Dr.
Monro's altogether. She said nothing to me about poison. ? Q. Did you see that
report? A. Yes.
Sir F. Thesiger.?You are not regular in introducing it in this way, for it states
that Dr. Monro visited her on the 8th, and Sir Alexander Morison on the 27tli, and
this is the joint report of these two gentlemen.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?The interruption is as unfair as it is irregular, and does not
explain away the difficulty, and I again ask Sir Alexander Morison if he put his sig-
nature to that certificate. A. I did, and Dr. Monro will explain it to you. I have
explained it to you. My explanation is, that she stated to me that poison was attempted
to be given to her. It was explained to Dr. Monro, and that is in our joint report.?
Q. Is this the instance of poisoning which she explained to you ? A. I cannot tell; she
said she had been attempted to be poisoned. ? Q. Is this the instance explained to you?
A. I cannot tell; I suppose it is. ? Q. Did not you ask for any explanation as to this
circumstance of the poisoning, and under what circumstances? A. No; I did not.
The Commissioner.?Were you present when Dr. Monro was present at the ex-
amination ? A. No.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Did she say to Mr. Turner in your presence that the
poison was put in a tea-cup, and that she could prove it by medical men ? A. I do
not recollect proving it by medical men. I recollect she said she was attempted to be
poisoned in her tea, but I have no recollection of proving it by medical men.? Q.
Did you make any inquiry at all as to the nature of the poison? A. No.
Dr. William King, sworn, and examined by Mr. Petersdorff.?Q. I believe you
are a practising physician at Brighton ? A. Yes. ? Q. Have you practised there a
great number of years ? A. Yes. ? Q. Are you now, or were you at one time, the
proprietor of Ringmer Lunatic Asylum? A. Yes. ? Q. You have had, I believe, a
great deal of experience in cases of lunacy and unsound mind ? A. Yes, for a man
?who does not profess that line of practice, 1 have had a good deal of experience. ?
Q. Do yon remember, in the month of October, an application being made to you as
to seeing Mrs. Cumming? A. On Monday, the 27th of October. ? Q. Was any
explanation given to you respecting the order from the lord chancellor for that
42 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
purpose ? A. Yes; Mr. Turner called upon me and explained why lie wanted me, and
by what authority lie was acting.? Q. Did you see Sir Alexander Morison at that
time ? A. Yes. ? Q. Had you any conversation with Sir Alexander Morison before
you saw Mrs. Cumming, as to her state of mind ? A. Not particularly. ? Q. Did you
go to Mrs. Cumming ? A. Yes. ? Q. Was the door ultimately forced open by the
police ? A. Yes, by Mr. Chase.? Q. Did you go into the room as soon as the door
was forced open ? A. No; Mr. Turner and Sir Alexander Morison went in first of all.
? Q. Did you go into the room or not during the time they were there? A. Not
while they were in the room, not till Sir Alexander Morison came out. ? Q. And when
Sir Alexander came out you went in ? A. Yes; there was great opposition made.?
Q. Great opposition for anybody to go in ? A. Yes; for Mr. Chase was nearly thrown
down stairs, and might have been killed, and a more infamous piece of business never
was. ? Q. Did you see a Mr. Jones there, or James, at that time ? A. Mr. James I
did; it was Mr. James who grappled with the chief officer, who was nearly being thrown
down and breaking his neck, and that is the consequence of having orders of the
lord chancellor, and if that is not a crime, I do not know what is. ? Q. You say,
at last, you got in? A. Yes, when Sir Alexander came out I went in. ? Q. When
you went into the room, there was Mr. Turner, Mrs Cumming, and anybody else? A.
Mrs. Watson?the four.? Q. Now state what passed between them and Mrs. Cumming
in your presence ? (The witness refers to a paper.) A. I began, first of all, asking
her about those delightful cats that have been mentioned. ? Q. What did she say
about the cats ? A. She said she was fond of cats, and I asked her if she kept them
in her room ? She said she never kept them in lier room?always in the kitchen ; and
I said, was your own clean and comfortable ? she said, always very clean and very
comfortable. Then she said she took them in a carriage with her, and made use of a
general expression?two or three dozen at a time, and that they were fed in her room?
not fed in the room?not kept in the room?and the room was always clean, and the
cats were always kept in the kitchen; then I asked her about her daughters, and she
said she had a great hatred to them because they had attempted to poison her, or
strangle her, and that Mrs. Ince carried her in her arms, and attempted to strangle
her. She did not say definitely which it was that attempted to poison her, but that
they had attempted to poison her; and I asked what proof she had of that: she said
they put poison into her tea?that this was given to the cats?that the cats would not
touch it, and that it was given to a fowl, and that the fowl died of it: she said her
daughters had treated her disrespectfully, and that they had married below their rank; she
did not say that the one had married below rank, but they had, and that was her reason
of hatred to them; and then I endeavoured to pacify, and to make her mild upon that
point, and asked her to see her daughter, and whether she would provide for her in
her will after what had happened; she said at first she would, and after that she
would not. There was a certain incoherence and indefiniteness about her: she also
said that it was her daughters that induced their father to send her to an asylum
during his lifetime: she laid the blame upon them. Then I asked her about her
husband, what sort of a person he was, and whether he was kind, and so on, to her ;
she said that he was a gentleman, and a man of character, and that he was very kind
to her, and treated her well; but, after some little time, she began to abuse, aud to
accuse liim of what has been mentioned in evidence so often, accusing him of having
had intercourse with her servants, and that 011 one occasion she had caught him in
the fact. Then I asked her something about her grandchildren, and she said she had
some grandchildren, and that two of them had died; but she professed ignorance as to
the nature of their diseases, or the cause of their death. I then asked her how she
came to Brighton?whether she came by rail, or in what way she came; she said, at
first, she came direct from London in a post-chaise, and not by rail; but afterwards,
in the course of conversation, she said she had been at Worthing before she came to
Brighton, and she said she had seen Dr. Barnes at Worthing?Dr. Barnes from
London?she did not enter into particulars then. I asked her about Mr. Thorn, the
solicitor, how it was she dismissed him; and she said it was because he did not attend
to her. I asked her if she was aware that he called upon her, and had been refused
admittance; she said not. I asked her how long her servant, Mrs. Watson, had lived
with her, knowing that she had seven weeks ; then I asked her a few questions about
her property, whether she knew what property she had, and what had been done with
it; and she said no, she did not know what her property was?she did not know what
had been sold?when it had been sold: on asking her about signing papers and so on,
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING. 43
she said slxe had signed papers, but she did not know their contents?that is the
substance of the conversation I had with her on different points. Then, in judging of
the state of mind of persons, you take into consideration the whole manner, and tone,
and expression, and particularly the expression of the eye, and the mode in which they
make their answers, and their general gestures and behaviour; it is not simply what
they say, but how they say it Q. What was the conclusion at which you arrived
from your observation ? A. My conclusion was that her mind was not sound, and
that knowing nothing at all about her property, what she had sold or not, or what the
contents of the papers were that she had signed, that she was not competent to
manage her property. ? Q. Was your attention directed, or did you make inquiries
with respect to her bodily health at that time ? A. I was not requested to do that, but
I called on the Wednesday for that purpose. I understood she was infirm; she was
sitting in a chair at the bed, with her face towards the bed, her back to the wall, and
the fireplace on her left-hand side. As to those particular points about the cats and
the papers, and her daughters, a good deal would depend upon the facts, whether they
were true or not, as to whether she was telling lies, or whether she was under a delu-
sion.? Q. You said you went on the following day?I asked if you had ascertained
the state of her bodily health? A. No; this was on the Monday. I was going to
slate that I went 011 the Wednesday; this was on the Monday; I considered that my
office was over. ? Q. Did you, on the Wednesday, ascertain the state of her health ?
A. I went into the house and walked up stairs.
Mr. Petersdorff.?Now, on the Wednesday, what took place? A. On the
Wednesday I called in the afternoon, and then I found a person who would not give
me his name, and who afterwards proved to be Mr. Ellis, and I requested to see her.
The door was locked, and they would not admit me, and I said I came from the lord
chancellor, or by the authority of the lord chancellor, which I considered to be the
case, and I then said, " Well, I have done my duty. I have done what I think right,
and you have done what you think right, and as I cannot see her I shall walk out of
the house.? Q. You did not see her on the Wednesday, then? A. No. ? Q. Did
you, at anytime afterwards, see her to ascertain the state of her health? A. No, not
to ascertain the state of her health. I saw her on the Thursday, but I am sorry now,
from what I have heard since I came up here, I did not see her and ascertain the state
of her health; I was not aware that she was paralysed, or semi-paralysed, in the legs,
otherwise on the next day, Thursday, on which she was carried away, I should have
wished to be aware of that circumstance : but it has been stated she went out in her
c arriage every day, therefore if she was put into a common carriage, and it might be very
improper to carry her from London in that state, without any proper motive for it;
but to carry her to London from Brighton, under the eircumstances, was quite another
question. Then, on the Thursday, I went and called on Mr. Turner, at his lodgings,
and told him what had passed. ? Q. That was after you had been refused ? A. Yes,
on the* Wednesday, after I had been refused entrance, I went and informed him of the
circumstance, and we went together to Mr. Verral, the clerk to the magistrates.
Sir F. Thesiger.?You need not go into that case.
The Commissioner.?You were refused on that occasion? A. Yes; then, on the
Thursday morning, I went to Mr, Chase. I had a note from Mr. Turner, to say that
he was going to London, and I understood that they would not allow the nurse to
take her away who was sent down from London. I therefore went to Mr. Chase, the
chief officer of police, and I said this is a very peculiar case ; here the lord chancellor
has sent down to examine this woman?she is pronounced to be insane, she ought
therefore to be removed to an asylum?the nurse has authority to remove her, and we
may consider that authority as coming from the lord chancellor. There are people in
the house who will not allow her to go; and I said, will you go up to the house, and
stand by, and keep the peace while the woman performs her duty, for Mr. Verral, the
clerk to the magistrates, had told us she was authorized to do so; he took the act
down to consult it?perhaps I was a little out of my line there, but I did think it was
abominable. ? Q. What did you do ? A. Then Mr. Chase and I went up together,
and went into the house, and called all the people in the house together, and there we
found the nurse from the asylum, with her brother, older than she was. The nurse was
a very sensible, quiet, judicious woman?we called them together, and Mr. Ellis and
Mr. James into a lower parlour, and then I said this woman has got authority to take
poor Mrs. Cumming away from this house; Mr. Chase, an officer of the police, is
come to protect her in so doing, and she will give her orders as to what is to be done,
44 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
?and bow it is to be done. Well, tben we went up stairs, and found the door again
fastened inside, and they spoke; this woman spoke to tlie persons inside to desire tbem
?to open the door, and they refused to do it?at least they did not say anything?the
door was not opened, and, after waiting a certain time, she then desired Mr. Chase to
open the door. Mr. Chase put his back against the door, and opened the door, and
then it appeared to him tbey had put on a very strong bolt, and in breaking open the
door the architrave was torn away, from the force used ; there we found Mrs. Watson
and another woman, who would not give her name; but it appears since it was Mrs.
Hutchinson; then the nurse said she was come to take her away, and she should do
?so. They did not otl'er any physical resistance, but said she was not fit to go?that
she wanted to be dressed, and so on; and I said, of course they will dress her properly
for the journey; and I made some observations as to Mrs. Hutchinson being in the
room. She said she hoped they would not turn her out of the room, because she was
a. friend and an acquaintance. I did not know who she was, and I thought, out of
feeling of delicacy to this poor woman, there was no occasion, provided she did not
obstruct ; and then I went out of the room, and looked in occasionally, to satisfy myself
whether she was obstructing or not; however, they were a long time dressing her,
partly from her infirmity of body, and so on; and then at last it was done, and Mr.
Chase said, there will be no more obstruction; I shall go, and 1 will send an officer
down to the station to go to London with them, and I will telegraph to London that
she is coming by this train, at a quarter to two ; it was the first train, and that was
done, and a cab was got, and they went down. She was dressed, and her brother and
Mrs. Gumming and the policeman were put inside the fly, and one policeman went
outside the fiv, and they set off?there was no room for me, so I thought it my duty
to see them safe out of town, and I went down in another fiy; and when I got to the
station, I found them upon the platform and the train was just going to start; and the
?nurse said her brother was going to start, and that he had gone for the tickets. She
had not got the tickets?the train would start without them?aud wanted to know what
was to become of them. ? Q. At this time, did Mrs. Cumming appear to be in sufficient
bodily health to perform the journey without injury? A. I should say so, certainly,
but I would make the distinction I did before; I had been consulted as to the neces-
sity of sending her unnecessarily out of London, that would have been one thing, but
the sending her back to London would be another; and then 1 found the police officer
who went up witli them.
Cross-examined by Mr. James. ? Q. In whose presence did you examine her ?
A. In the presence of Mrs. Watson and Mr. Turner.?Q. Did Mr. Turner examine her ?
or perhaps a more proper expression would be, did he cross-examine her in your pre-
sence? A. No; he asked her some questions about her property. ? Q. This long
statement that we have had of questions and answers, did they transpire in your pre-
sence ? A. Not the whole of it, because part of it occurred in Sir A. Morison's pre-
sence. ? Q. While you were examining her, did Mr. Turner put questions ? A. He
put questions at the latter end of my examination.? Q. So that I mean she was
undergoing examination by you and by Mr. Turner at the same time in the course of
the same interview ? A. In the same interview Mr. Turner asked some questions
about her property which I could not have asked her about. ? Q. Were you aware
that she had stated to Sir Alexander Morison that her property, her rental, was four
or five hundred, or five or six hundred a-year, and that she expected her property
would be wanted in the event of the railway passing through it, and that it would be
1500/. a-year if the railway went through it? A. I was not aware of that. ? Q. Had
you any conversation with Sir Alexander Morison before you went in, and subjected
her to examination ? A. No.?Q.Mr. Turner stated that she felt an indignation at you
when you went in ? A. No indignation, but about my saying that her fondness for
cats was rather strange. ? Q. Is it strange for a person to be fond of cats? A. I
think so?to that extent it is a matter of degree. ? Q. Is it strange to take a cat for
n drive ? A. Not a cat. ? Q. Did you ever know ladies taking poodle dogs out with
them ? A. Yes, but not cats. ? Q. Then you think the distinction is between taking
a dog for a drive and taking a cat ? A. I think there is a great distinction. ? Q. That
which might be evidence of soundness in taking a dog for a drive would be evidence of
unsoundness in taking a cat for a drive ? A. You know that a cat will not follow. ?
Q. Perhaps that is the reason for taking her in the carriage : you would make that dis-
tinction? A. I think taking a dog is a very great distinction. ? Q. You have given
jour opinion that there is a distinction as to sanity between taking a cat for a ride and
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 45
taking a dog for a ride ? ?A. There is a distinction; we will not say wliat. ? Q. There
is nothing strange in taking a dog for a drive? A. No. ? Q. What should you say
of taking two dogs ? A. That is a matter of arithmetic Q.I ask you, what should
you say of a lady taking two dogs ? A. I say that it is a matter of arithmetic. I should
not say anything; that is no business of mine.? Q. Supposing you were called in to
examine a lady upon a commission as to her sanity, it being stated that she had taken
out two dogs for a drive, what should you say ? A. That she took two dogs. ?
Q. Would you say it was strange? A. No, I should not. ? Q. What do you say as
to three ? A. It would be approximating Q. Do you think that would be strange 2
A. That would be very unusual, three dogs.? Q. What would you say as to four ?
A. That would be still more unusual. ? Q. Would it be strange? A. 1 think four
would : a thing is strange which is unusual Q. You think a person may not have
so much affection for a cat as for a dog in a sound state of mind ? A. To be sure
they may. ? Q. You think they may. How many lap-dogs have you known kept by
ladies in a drawing-room ? A. I never knew of more than one lap-dog kept by a lady.
? Q. In speaking of cats, do you not know that at Brighton she had not the cats in
the bed-room, and that they had been kept in the kitchen? A. I know nothing about
it.?Q. Did you find any cats in the bed-room? A. No.?Come, Dr. King, I ask you
to give me a candid answer. Have you not since ascertained that at that time what
she stated was quite correct, that she kept the cats in the kitchen? A. No ; I know
nothing about it.?Q. Did you see any cats at all? A. No.?Q. You bad not ascer-
tained that she did not in this case keep them in the parlour, but that she had kept
the cats in the kitchen? A. No, I do not know that; but her assertion to me was, that
she never had kept them in her bed-room.? Q. I ask you, did you not point her
attention to the circumstance? A. Not a bit.?Q. Did you not put the question?Do
you keep cats in your bed-room ? A. No, I did not. ? Q. What did you say ? A. I
asked her if she was very fond of cats, and whether she had not kept cats, and whether
she had kept them in her bed-room; it was in the preter-pluperfect tense.? Q. You
did not apply the question to the present tense at Brighton ? A. No. ? Q. That you
then put down as strange? A. Yes.?? Q. Do you think that if a lady at her age,
without society, and perhaps with some suspicion about her servants?do you think it
a test of insanity that five cats were kept in her bed-room ? A. I think it a very sus-
picious point, but one point alone will not prove insanity. ? Q. Suppose you were
called in, and a lady had done nothing more than keep five cats in her room, would
you say that she was unsound? A. Not upon that point alone.? Q. I am putting an
hypothetical case ? A. It is no use going into hypothesis, we are upon matters of
fact.?Q. 1 am asking you, if you were called upon to attend a lady to give an opinion
of the soundness of her mind, at her age, without society, kept to herself, having sus-
picions of her servants, perhaps?I ask you, if you would say it was a test of insanity
that she kept five cats ? A. She was not a woman without society.? Q. Had you
known her from 184G to 1851 ? A. No, I had not. ? Q. Be kind enough to answer
my question. Assuming a lady of her age, without society, and not liking to trust her
cats to her servants, would you give it as your opinion that that was a test of insanity
that she kept five cats in her bed-room ? A. I think it would be a very suspicious
circumstance. ? Q. Would you say it was a test of insanity ? A. No, not by itself.?
Q. You have spoken of her children ? A. Yes. ? Q. And her aversion to her children.
I think you said she spoke in disrespectful terms of her children, and treated them
disrespectfully? A. Yes. ? Q. Have you known instances of the soundest people,
where a son has married beneath his rank, or a daughter, that both the father and the
' mother had refused to see either? A. I have known an instance of a man marrying
beneath his rank, aDd his father and mother wishing to see their child. ? Q, Have
you known the other? A. Never. ? Q. It has never occurred in your experience?
A. It has never occurred to me. ?Q. Not to you personally. I am not assuming that
you married below your rank, or that any of your sons or daughters have done so.
A. That is what I mean, that generally I am not acquainted with such a fact. ?
Q. Would you say that dislike to a child, or a desire never to see her, or even to leave
property to her, was a test of insanity, where a son or a daughter had married below
their rank ? A. Not a test independently.?Q. What would you say of that parent, 7;}
years of age, who told you that she would never see her child, because she married
below her position in society, and would not leave her a farthing, would you say that
person is insane? A. I would say that they were unsound to have such a mind and
disposition. ? Q. I am putting the case of parents who said they never would see a
46 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
daughter wlio had married below her condition in life, and would not leave her any
property. A. That by itself is by no means a proper sentiment, certainly. ? Q. Would
it be a test of unsound mind? A. It would not be a test of unsound mind ; it might
be a crime, and crime is not insanity. ? Q. What crime ? A. 1 should think it a great
crime, but still not an insane act.? Q. Do not insane persons entertain much more
strong feelings than others, and manifest aversion in a different manner?is not that
so ? A. Yes. ? Q. Might not that which would produce aversion in the mind of one
person of sound mind not produce it in the mind of another? A. Yes.?Q. Then if a person
says, " I will not leave my daughter anything," does not that manifest an aversion, and
is it not consistent with a sound mind ? A. Yes. ? Q. Perfectly sound ? A. That
might or might not, but it would be 110 test in itself. ? Q. Might it not be perfectly-
sound? A. Yes, because it would be the act of a villain.? Q. And what ? A. An
unprincipled man.? Q. But every villain is not insane, do you think? A. No, I
say there is that difference. ? Q. Might a sound person, of thoroughly sound mind,
entertain an aversion to his child, and say he will never see his child, or leave
him a farthing, because he has married below his rank? A. Yes; because
he might be an unprincipled man, it would not follow that he was insane for that.?
Q. Do you think the mere unforgiving spirit to a child having married below her
rank is any test of villanv ? A. It is a test of an improper principle in the mind of a
person. ? Q. I suppose you have heard of parents' wills, and cutting off their children
with a shilling? A. Yes. ? Q. From causes more slight-than marriage below their
position? A. Yes. Q. Now we will take the poison. Have you taken any pains
to ascertain whether there was any truth in the statement about the fowl? A. No; I
do not see how the stuff is to be got into tbe mouth of the fowl. ? Q. Fowls have
mouths, have they not ? A. Somebody must have taken it, and poured it down the
fowl's throat. ? Q. Will fowls pick up sugar of lead with their food ? A. Yes; but this
was lead solution.? Q. Does oxalic acid very much resemble Epsom salts? A. The
crystal is different. The one has been sold for the other. ? Q.I suppose oxalic acid ?
thrown down, if a fowl takes it, will kill it? A. Yes, if he had enough of it? ? Q.
You have taken no trouble to ascertain whether there were any facts upon which
that statement of hers was founded? Did you ever see Dr. Barnes upon that? A. No.
? Q. She stated to you that Dr. Barnes had analysed it? A. Yes. ? Q. Did you
ever see Dr. Barnes before you pronounced it a delusion? A. No. ? Q. But you
pronounced it a delusion at once without any inquiry? A. An improbability of that
kind does not require to be inquired after. This court is tbe proper place to ascertain
tbe facts. They will hear the pros and cons, and the facts and the opinions.? Q. You
found that a delusion, without making any inquiry into the existence of the facts ? A.
Yes, I tried to ascertain the fact. She gave me no evidence to go upon. ? Q. Did she
not tell you Dr. Barnes had analysed it ? A. No. ? Q. Do you mean to state that ?
A. I do not remember it. ? Q. Will you say she did not? A. I speak to tbe best of
my memory. I do not remember that Dr. Barnes saw her at Worthing. ? Q. Have you
a sufficiently accurate recollection to enable you to state that Dr. Barnes had analysed
it? A. I do not remember that. ? Q. Did she tell you her medical man had analysed
it ? A. I do not think she did; she merely stated that a fowl had been poisoned by it.
? Q. Is Mr. Turner's statement correct?he states that? A. He may have recol-
lected, and I may not. ? Q. You say that you were not aware of her physical infirmities
at the time you first saw her? A. No. ? Q. When did you become aware of them?
A. Not till I entered this house. I did not know she had paralysis of the bladder, nor
did I know that she had paralysis of the lower extremities. ? Q. Did you make an
affidavit, in which you stated that, from your examination of the said Catherine Cumming,
it appeared to you that she might with propriety and safety be removed to Loudon to
an asylum. Did you make that affidavit ? A. So sbe might. ? Q. Did you make that
upon your first interview? A. I do not know when that affidavit was made. ? Q.
Just remember. Did you not state that before you were aware of her physical infirmities?
A. Yes; there was nothing, in my opinion, that I was aware of, that could prevent her
being removed to London. ? Q. You became afterwards aware of her physical in-
firmities ? A. Yes. ? Q. Did you assist the parties in putting her into the fly ? A.
No. I was there; I was present, but I did not assist.?Q. Who were putting her
into the fly?the policemen ? A. The nurse and her brother, and one of the policemen
assisted. ? Q. Did you push the poor old lady behind, and say, "You men do not know
how to put a woman into a fly ?" A. I believe I did say something of that kind, because
I thought she ought to be lifted in, ? Q. Was she screaming from pain at the time?
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CCJMMING. 47
A. Sbe did complain, now you mention it. ? Q. Did slie scream ? A. I do not know
whether I may call it a scream. ? Q. You kDow what a scream is ? A. She com-
plained?tbe nurse ought to have told me she was in that state. ? Q. Did you push the
old lady behind and say, " You do not know how to put a woman into a fly ?" A. I
merely protected her. ? Q. Did you say that? A. It is very possible I might have
said it, because I thought thev were very stupid, especially the nurse's brother. ? Q.
Did you use that expression," You men do not know how to put a woman into a fly"?
A. I dare say I might; 1 think it very likely I did so. ? Q. She expressed a desire, did
she not?an entreaty, iufact, not to be sent by the railway ? A. No ; but Mrs. Hutchin-
son did; she said that being a lady, she ought to be sent like a lady.?- Q. Did she
say she had never been by a railway before, but always travelled by-the road ? A. I
am not quite positive; but now you suggest that idea, it is possible she might have
said that. ? Q. What authority had you under this order? A. I had 110 authority, and
did not give any commands; it was the nurse that did it all. ? Q. What did you find
she was labouring under, or what did you ascertain to be the extent of her physical
infirmity, when you did ascertain it?on the third day ? A. 1 did not ascertain it. ? Q.
Do you not know now ? A. No; only from what I have heard since I came here. If they
had gone about the thing properly, and given us proper information, we should have
known what to have done. ? Q. Did you not swear that it appeared from your examina-
tion of her that she might with propriety be removed to the lunatic asylum ? A. I saw
no objection to it. ? Q. Did you examine her? A. I did not examine the state of her
bladder, nor the state of her lower extremities; but I was convinced that she might be
safely removed; and she was safely removed. ? Q. You say, from my examination?
did you examine her ? A. Yes?so far tbe word examination has very different mean-
ings. I did not inquire into the state of her lower extremities. If they had allowed
me to see her on the Wednesday, this might have come out, and then I should have
known. ? Q. Did she request you to leave the room while she was dressing? A. I
think she did, and so did Mrs. Hutchinson. I do not know whether it was a request,
but I left the room immediately. ? Q. Did not Mrs. Cumming request you to leave
the room while she was dressing ? A. I believe she did. ? Q. Did she not appeal to
your delicac/: did she not beg you to leave the room? A. And I did leave it. ? Q.
Did she not appeal to you ? A. She did. ? Q. I believe she appealed to you more
than once before you did leave the room. A. No; I do not think that. ? Q. Did
she not appeal to you more than once? A. I did not leave in consequence of the
repetition of it, but I left as soon as I found the persons there were beginning to dress
her. ? Q. Did you examine her on the Wednesday? A. They would not let me.?
Q Did you see the certificate of Dr. Hale that she was not in a fit state to be removed ?
A. No. ? Q. Were you not informed that he had given a certificate that she was not
in a fit state to be removed to a lunatic asylum? A. I was informed that somebody-
had. ? Q. I must press the question. Were you not informed that Dr. Hale ? A. I
thought it was Dr. Barnes. ? Q. Were you not informed before you assisted her into
that fly, to be taken to the railway, that Dr. Hale had given a certificate that the lady was
not in a fit state to be removed? A. No; but when the nurse was going to remove her,
Mr. Ellis said, "Now you will recollect you do all this at your peril." ? Q. You state
you thought it was Dr. Barnes; were you informed of the fact of some medical man
having given a certificate ? A. I understood that some person had been to see her, and
said that she was not in a fit state to be removed. ? Q. You' said you thought it was
Dr. Barnes ? A. I had an idea that it was so. ? Q. Was not that stated to you before
you lifted her into the fly? A. No. ? Q. When was it stated? A. I do not know;
I think it was Mr. Turner who mentioned it. ? Q. When? A. If he mentioned it, it
was on the Wednesday afternoon. ? Q. Now I am sure you wish to state what is
accurate?I ask you whether before she left Brighton, and before the fly left the door to
take her to the railway to the lunatic asylum, you had not been informed that a certi-
ficate had been given by a medical man that she was not in a fit state to be removed ?
A. I don't know who informed me of it; I understood there had been such a certificate.
? Q. Was not that before she left Brighton, before you got her into the fly ? A. So
I understood. ? Q. Did you know to what lunatic asylum she was going to be taken ?
A. No, I did not. I did not know whether she was going to be taken to this Effra
Hall, where she did go to, or whether she was going to the other asylum. ? Q. Who
gave the direction to take her to Efi'ra Hall? A. I know nothing about all that.?
Q. You knew she was going to be taken to a lunatic asylum? A. Yes. ? Q. What
necessity was there for taking her to a lunatic asylum at all ? A. What necessity ?
48 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
? Q. Yes, -what necessity ? A. If you will allow me to go into that. ? Q. I will, you
may go into that. A. In the first place, I considered she was unsound in mind, and a
proper person to be in a lunatic asylum : in the second place, I considered, according
to the information 1 had received, that she was living in a state of great discomfort, and
that she would be, on the contrary, in a state of comfort. Do you want to know more ?
? Q. Who gave you that information ? A. Besides that, I have every reason to
believe there were people robbing her of her property, under the weak state of health
she was in, and that she was not able to protect herself. ? Q. Who gave you that
information? A. Mr. Turner. You asked me why I thought she should go to a
lunatic asylum, and those are my reasons.? Q. Who consulted you first upon this
matter? A. Mr. Turner. ? Q. Have you known him before at all? A. No.?
Q. When you went into the room, did she appear to be alarmed at all ? A. Not when
I went in.? Q. I believe she screamed very much when the door was broken open?
A. She might; I did not hear that. I was not near the door; I was in the drawing-
room. ? Q. It was broken open the second time when you went, was it not? A. Yes.
? Q. You broke it open yourself, did you say? A. Did I say so? ? Q. Who broke
it open ? A. Mr. Chase. ? Q. Mr. Chase was the man with whom the grappling was?
a man grappling with him? A. Yes, a very proper way of treating the representative
of the Lord Chancellor. ? Q. You do not mean to say that Mr. Chase represented the
Lord Chancellor? A. Yes, he did. ? Q. That little man (pointing to Mr. Turner),
do you mean to say that he represented the Lord Chancellor? A. Certainly, as an
officer of justice, of course he did. ? Q. And represented him when the policeman took
her away ??you all represented the Lord Chancellor ? A. Yes ; we should not have
gone there on a fool's errand. ? Q. Tell me what authority you had to take her away.
A. I did not take her away. ? Q. But you assisted ? A. I stood by. ? Q. You took a
fly to see her off? A. Yes, to be sure I did; I wanted to see an end of the tragedy.
? Q. The end of the tragedy which you laugh at? A. You make me laugh: you
have got the order of mirth, you know. ? Q. You wished to see the end of the tragedy,
and this is the last act, I suppose ? A. It is to be hoped so, for all parties.
Re-examined by Mr. Petersdorit.?Q. Now you have been asked some questions
by my learned friend Mr. James, whether keeping one dog or one cat in a room is a
strange thing, and you said, No ; or driving one dog or one cat in a carriage, and you
said, No. Now I ask you, would you call it a strange thing if a lady were to have three
dozen cats in her carriage as her constant companions ? A. Yes, I should. ? Q. You
have also been asked by my learned friend whether keeping five cats would indicate a
state of unsoundness. Now supposing a lady who keeps five cats were to have a clean
table-cloth laid for them and clean plates, and each of them a separate cup for milk,
and were also to administer wine to them, and in addition to that, were to allow them
to perform all the offices of nature in the same room in which she sleeps, and ate and
drank, and never allowed the dirt they made to be cleared away, nor anything done to
clean the room, what would you say to that ? A. All these circumstances put together
indicate unsoundness of mind. You must not go any further than that a person may
be sound upon one point and unsound upon a dozen others. ? Q. Now you have been
asked about parents having had strong feelings of hatred against their children. Suppose
an instance in which a daughter marries without the consent of her parents, and a year
or two intervenes, and then they are perfectly reconciled, and live on happy terms
together for many years; after that, the parent imbibes a feeling of hatred against the
daughter without any apparent cause, would that, in your opinion, be insanity? A.
Yes, I think so, undoubtedly.
Examined by the Commissioner.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?There are one or two questions I would be obliged to you,
Sir, to ask. Will you ask, first of all, whether it was not requested, particularly,
by Mrs. Camming herself, that either Mrs. Watson or Mrs. Hutchinson might go
with her ?
The Commissioner.?Q. Did she state, or express any wish, about any other person
being allowed to go with her? A. I think she did ; but I am not quite sure about that.
The Commissioner.?Q. Was the request made, and was it refused ? A. That ques-
tion makes me think there was a request made of that kind, and that the request was
not acceded to.
Q. I think on the first day you signed what is commonly called a certificate ?
A. Yes; in the evening after the Commission. ? Q. As a medical man? A. Yes.?
Q. Was that a certificate that she was a person of unsound mind ? A. It was. ?
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 4D
Q. Did you see any one else sign that but yourself? A. Yes, I saw Sir Alexander
Morison sign it. ? Q. Anybody else ? A. And I think it was carried to Mrs. Ince
afterwards. ? Q. You have reason to believe that she signed it ? A. I think she
signed it afterwards. Q. You could give no authority for her removal, of course ?
A. Mrs. Ince may have signed it afterwards ; only I and Sir A. Morison signed it at
the time. ? Q. She was removed away by the authority of Mrs. Ince, in fact ? A. Yes.
? Q. Did you see her off by the railway carriage ? A. Yes. ? Q. What carriage did
she go by? A. First-class. ? Q. Was she by herself in the carriage ? A. No; the nurse
and the nurse's brother, and one of the superintendents of police were with her.?
Q. In the same carriage with her? A. Yes. ? Q. They were by themselves ? A. By
themselves; I do not think any one got in afterwards. ? Q. You were asked by the
learned counsel, if it was any test of insanity that she was in the habit of taking
cats in her carriage? A. I saw that it was a sort of a random thing of hers; I took
it from her that sbe had two or three dozen cats in. her carriage.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?I would ask Dr. King whether, when she said she took
two or three dozen cats out with her, whether she was not joking? A. She was not
laughing; but she said, " 0 yes, two or three dozen."
Dr. Monro, called and sworn ; examined by Mr. Petersdorff.?Q. I believe you
are consulting physician to Betlilem Hospital and the Bridewell Hospital ? A. Yes,
I am physician to Bethlem Hospital, not consulting physician; I am senior physi-
cian to Bethlem Hospital. ? Q. When did you first see Mrs. Cumming? A. I was
to have gone to Brighton under the order of the Chancellor, but was prevented by
illness. ? Q. I will just draw your attention to the time when you actually saw
her, and where you saw her ? A. I saw her on the Cth and 8th of November, at
Effra Hall, Mr. Elliott's asylum; and I saw her once more last Tuesday, on the
Cth of January. ? Q. Be kind enough to direct your attention to what passed between
you and her when you saw her on the Oth of January? A. I found her in bed at
Effra Hall, and we remained together something like an hour. ? Q. Were you alone
with her, or was any one present ? A. The matron came up ?with me, and I think
remained with me the greater part of the time; I am not quite clear of that; there was
also a nurse standing near. Before I left, Mr. Turner came into the room, on the first
occasion. ? Q. Will you be good enough to tell us what passed, the inquiries you
made of her, and what she said to you ? A. I spoke to her of her daughters, and
asked whether she had seen them. She exclaimed, " Don't mention them ; they are the
greatest enemies I have iu the world; their only object is to rob and pilfer me of all
that I have, and having obtained that object, I shall be free." She stated that Mrs.
Ince, on one occasion, also attempted to strangle her. I questioned her further upon
that, and she said she had every reason in the world to believe that that was her
intention; she said that they had also attempted to poison her. The main topic of her
conversation was strangling, and poisoning, and robbery, all of which she attributed
to her daughters. I put some questions to her with respect to other points which I
had heard of before, and she denied that she had ever accused Mrs. Ince of murdering
her sou. She also denied one or two other points of more importance; she told
me she had never made a will; she could give no account of her property to me; I
asked her the nature and amount of it?I could get no information at all. She stated
that Mr. Haynes was her only friend in the world, and that Mr. Tliorne was an
enemy. She mentioned those facts which have been spoken of to me about the
administration of milk to her, which Dr. Barnes had analyzed five years ago, and that
then oxalic acid had been discovered; that it had been administered to a fowl, and
the fowl had died. It is just possible there may have been by Some chance oxalic acid
in the milk, and Dr. Barnes may have analyzed it. I know nothing of that, but the
main point, as it seems to me, was this, that she apprehended and feared that her
daughters were going to poison her. I do not remember any other facts that passed;
her mind was filled with apprehensions respecting her daughters robbing and poisoning
her, and that was the main point which occupied her whole mind. I remained nearly
an hour, and I left her on very good terms. She had only arrived a day or two from
Brighton, I think. ? Q. You say you saw her again ? A. Yes, I saw her again on
the 8th; she was then sitting up. Mr. Turner was not there on that occasion. I
think the nurse was in the room, as far as I recollect; I stayed there not quite so
long, perhaps forty minutes; I went over all the same points, which she confirmed in
the same terms as she had stated them before, and I did not elicit any further facts.
When I saw her on the Ctli of January, last Tuesday, it was at her house, Gothic
D
50 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
Villa, Qucen's-i-oad, I then saw lier in the presence of Mrs. Moore, and slie received
me in a very friendly way, and I had a good deal of conversation again upon the same
points. I said, have you seen your daughter; surely you must have seen them?
" Never mention them, never mention them ; my bitter enemies." I asked her again
ahout tier property ; I asked her whether she had 500/. a-year; she said, "Oh, no;
nothing of the sort." I asked her whether she had 300/. a-year, she said, " Yes, it
might be 300/. a-year." That was all the information I could get as to the nature
and amount of her property. ? Q. Did you ask her about what she had done with
it ? A. She said she had never made any will. She was quite confused as to any
notion of the amount or value of the property; I gained, in fact, no information at all
npon it, excepting what I told you about the 500/. and the 300/.? Q. From all the
interviews and the opportunity which you had of observing her, did you form any
opinion as to the state of the soundness of her mind ? A. I cei'tainly consider her
of unsound mind; I certainly feel that this bitter feeling, with reference to her
daughters, would influence her in every act of her life, and in the devising of her
property. ? Q. Could you form any opinion as to her capacity to manage her property?
A. I have looked upon her as an imbecile; there is a good deal of playful shrewdness
about her in some respects. She has powers of conversation upon many topics, but
she, in my judgment, is an imbecile; she appears to me to be under the control of
anybody that approaches her, as far as I can gather.
Cross examined by Mr. James.?Q. Are you aware, Dr. Monro, of the fact of the
former commission ? A. I am aware of the fact, because I remember, upon the occasion
of the former commission, Mr. Ince called upon me, stating that he might require my
professional services on that occasion, but it did not appear to be necessary afterwards,
and I was not consulted. ?Q. Were you aware, before you had this conversation with
her, of the arrangement which was made, by which part of her property was given up
to her daughters ? A.I did hear it from Mr. Ince, or from Mr. Turner, I forget which,
? Q. As to this feeling about her daughters, did you ask her the particulars, or the
reason why she had that feeling; the expression you used was, that she said, "They
were the greatest enemies ; that their object was to ruin her, and to obtain all she had ?"
A. Yes; I asked her why. I think she said, they were disposed to ruin her, or do
her persona]'violence in some way. ?Q. Did she state, that by that arrangement they
had obtained a considerable portion of her property ? A. No; she did not. ? Q. She
did not allude to that ? A. She did not. ? Q. Now, as to this poisoning, did you make
any inquiry to ascertain whether there was any foundation for that ? A. I had no
means of making any inquiries.?Q. Did you mention Dr. Barnes' name? A. Yes.
? Q. In the report, you say that poison was given in a cup at that time by her daughters,
which, upon being analyzed by Dr. Barnes, five years ago, was ascertained to contain
oxalic acid, by which a fowl was killed. A. Yes; those were the words.? Q. She
repeated that? A. Yes; on two or three occasions.?Q. This, perhaps is the accu-
rate statement? A. Yes; I think those are the very words. ? Q. You were very
accurate in making the report to the Chancellor? A. Yes. ? Q. You did not inquire
to ascertain as to whether there was any foundation for that? A. No.? Q. You have
made none at all? A. I may have mentioned it to Mr. Turner. I forget whether I
have. I do not know Dr. Barnes ; I never saw him that I know of. ? Q. Did she
mention one daughter more than another? A. She mentioned Mrs. Ince as the most
hostile. She particularly specified that strangling; she attributed that to Mrs. luce.
? Q. Did she tell you the circumstance, that she entered the room suddenly, and put
her arms round her neck? A. It was in the bed room, and in her bed. I urged upon
her the improbability of such an event, and she said, she had every reason in the world
to believe it?the same expression she repeated last Tuesday. ?? Q. Do you remember
her saying that she entered her room suddenly, and threw her arms round her neck ?
A. No, I do not recollect that; it appeared to me to be perfectly absurd. ? Q. Did she
not mention that fact, cf her entering the room suddenly and throwing her arms round
her neck ? A. She stated that she put her arms round her neck ; but I do not remem-
ber anything about suddenly. ? Q. When did she say it happened? A. I forget in
which of the villas it was; she removed several times; but I think it was at Maida-vale.
? Q. You did not have much conversation with her about the cats ? A. I did men-
tion the cats, but I did not lay much stress upon the cats. If I am to speak of what I
have heard in this place, I should say a good deal. ? Q. But you said nothing to her
about cats ? A. I may have mentioned the subject of cats to her, but I did not push it
to any extremity; I merely elicited that fact which was remarkable. ? Q. Now, you
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 51
say that upon that occasion she thought her income was about 300/. a-year? A. Yes.
? Q. Did she tell you how it was derived? A. No. ? Q. Did you ask her? A. I
may have asked her. ? Q. Did she tell you ? A. I do not remember the source from
which it was derived; I spoke of her houses to her. ? Q. Did she speak of her houses
to you ? A. Not before I mentioned it to her. ? Q. Did she not mention to you how
her income was derived ? A. No; I think not; but I will not be clear upon that point.
? Q. You did not ask from what source her income was derived? A. No. ? Q. How
long did the conversation last? A. I should think about half an hour; it was up
stairs in her bed-room, and Mrs. Moore was present.? Q. Is that the nurse who is
with her now ? A. I do not know that she is the nurse ; she seemed more like a com-
panion. ? Q. I believe she is the wife of some physician, and a person who was named
by the Chancellor to be present ? A. I know nothing of her; I saw her once, and
I have seen her since with Mrs. Cumming. Q. She is the widow of a physician, and
named by the Lord Chancellor, is she not ? A. I do not know; but she seemed a very
respectable person. ? Q. She is the widow of a medical man, who was appointed by
the Lord Chancellor to remain with her? A. Yes ; she may have been.
William Vesalius Pettigrew, Esq., M.D., examined by Mr. Petebsdorff.? Q.
You are the medical officer of Effra Hall asylum ? A. Yes; I wish it to be particularly
mentioned that I am a medical officer, not a proprietor; I wrote to the Times, it having
been stated so, but they did not put my note in. ? Q. You are the medical officer of
that establishment ? A. I am. ? Q. How long have you been the medical officer of
the asylum ? A. I have been the medical officer of those patients that were at another
asylum ; previous to this it was all one asylum?a male and female asylum?for seven
years, but now the female establishment is conducted at Effra Hall, and the other at
Fulham.? Q. Still you have the experience of seven years? A. Seven years ; there
were forty patients at one house and twenty at the other. ? Q. Do you remember Mrs.
Catherine Cumming being brought to Effra Hall? A. I do. ? Q. What day was it
she was brought there ? A. It was October the 30th, 1851. ?Q. On her arrival, did
you have an interview with her? A. I did.? Q. Did the interview between you and
her take place when you were alone together, or were there other persons present ? A.
I think there were other persons present. The individual who brought her was
present, and Mr. Elliott, the proprietor, who also, I believe, came from the station with
her, he was there, and a sergeant of the police, I think, in plain clothes. ? Q. Now will
you state, as nearly as you can, what passed at the interview you had with Mrs. Cum-
ming on her arrival ? A. I said very little to her on her arrival; of course she was a
little agitated ; I happened to be there, it was a mere accident my being there. ? Q.
You say she was a little agitated? A. She was a little agitated; I asked the nurse
who she was, and she stated that she was Mrs. Cumming, a relative of Mr. Ince's, and
as I suppose, unfortunately, I avowed it at the time, as perhaps tending to increase the
excitement, I said to her, " Oh I happen to know Mr. luce very well," thinking to
calm her by that as knowing some of her friends. ? Q. What was the effect of that ? A.
She said directly, " Do not mention him! do not mention him! I have nothing to do
with him." So I thought I had got into a scrape. Mr. Elliott stated that Mrs. Cum-
ming was under the impression that her daughters and family had ill-treated her; upon
which Mrs. Cumming'said, " And so they have, and they want all my money; I will have
nothing to do with them." I did not choose to enter into any conversation about that
at that time, and I asked her if she was fatigued? she said yes, she was fatigued. I
said, " Where do you come from ?" She said, " From my own house." " Where is
that house ?" " In London, to be sure." I said, " Are you not aware you have come
from Brighton?" "No, I have come from London." I then asked her if she would
have some refreshment?if she would have a little wine. She said she should prefer
a little brandy and water, which I immediately ordered for her, and left her. She was
unexpected. ? Q. Did you upou the average see Mrs. Cumming twice a week? A.
Yes, more. ? Q. Had you, then, on those occasions conversations with her from time
to time? A. On each time. I never saw her without having conversation with her
of various length. She went away about the end of November. I do not know the
date. I had an opportunity of seeing her from time to time?ten to fifteen times,
perhaps ; scarcely so much as that?ten to twelve times, perhaps. ? Q. I do not wish you
to go through each interview. A. I could not go through each interview; it was all
pretty much the same. On the first of November I made these few notes, and this is
pretty well the conversation, at least these are pretty well the substance of the con-
versations at most times. ? Q. Will you state to the jury the topics of the conversa-
D 2
52 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING.
tions? (The witness refers to a paper). A. Tbis was two days after slie came in;
she said she knew she was in an asylum. ? Q. This is the 1st of November ? A. Yes,
two days after her arrival. Knows she is in an asylum, and says she came here from
her house in London. ? Q. Sbe repeated that on the 1st of November, did she? A.
Yes; that was the reason I asked her again, to see whether the same impression still
remained. Does not know where her house is situated in London. Came by the
railroad, and had never come before by a railroad. She said her daughters were plot-
ting against her. Some one endeavoured to poison her by drugged milk. On subse-
quent occasions, she repeatedly told me it was her daughters, and more frequently
mentioned Mrs. Ince's name than anybody else's. I asked her how she knew the milk
was drugged, and she said her cat refused to drink it; when it was put to her cat the
cat refused to drink it. I asked her what made her give it to the cat; she said she
had no particular reason, but the cat refused to drink it. I asked her what became of
it; she said some one did it, at that time, but afterwards she said that Mrs. Ince had
done it, and that her daughters had. ? Q. First that some one, then Mrs. Ince, and
then her daughters ? A. Not at the same meeting. I may mention, that on subse-
quent occasions, on more occasions than one, I said to her, what makes you state that
your daughters drugged that milk, had your daughters any communication with the
milkman, or were they plotting with your servants against you ? No, they had not, but
she had done it, and it was done, and Mrs. Ince had done it, and it was poison. I
asked her how she was certain the milk was drugged, and she stated tbat she had sent
it to a chemist to be analyzed. I asked her what chemist ? she did not know his
name?but to the usual chemist, where she had her drugs. Subsequently to that, on
two or three occasions, she told me she sent it to Dr. Barnes, who analyzed it. I
asked her if she had no further proof that it was poison? She said yes, it was thrown
into the fowl-house, and a chicken was poisoned by it. I asked her what poison it
was ? and on every occasion on asking her that, she told me that oxalic acid was found
in it; and on two occasions she said that grains of arsenic were found in it. I men-
tion this particularly, because she said grains of arsenic; but not on more than two
occasions she said grains of arsenic; she always said oxalic acid ; but on two occasions
stated that grains of arsenic were found in it.? Q. Was anything said about tea, do
you recollect ? A. No, I do not recollect her saying anything about tea, it was milk;
because I put the question to her then, that the milkman must be in collusion with
Mrs. Ince; but she did not seem at all capable of reasoning on that or any such matter.
? Q. Do you recollect any other conversation, I do not wish to lead you? A. Since
that time, her cats had frequently refused to drink poisoned milk. I had heard of the
statement about the c.its, but I did not trouble much about that. I asked her if she
was fond of cats? and she said yes, she was very fond of cats. I told her I was very
fond of cats, too; however, I did not enter into much conversation about that.
The Commissioner.?Was that the expression, that they refused to drink milk, or
poisoned milk ?
Mr. Petersdorff.?Q. What was the expression as to milk? A. Frequently refused
to drink poisoned milk, that was her expression. ? Q. Anything else ? She also
stated, Mrs. Ince called to see her, and endeavoured to strangle her. I asked her
where she lived at that time ? and she stated at that time Mr. Ince was plotting against
her liberty, aud this occurred at Howley Villas. I know nothing about Howley Villas,
but here is the expression she used. I asked her in what house it was? She said she
was sitting at dinner, and her daughter came up and put one arm round her neck, and
attempted to strangle her, but that she halloed out.? Q. Did you converse with her
at all about her property. A. Very little. I asked her several times what property
she had, and she did not know. When she came, I asked her if she had got any money
in her pocket; no, she said, not a penny. I asked her if she knew anything about her
property? No, sbe did not know anything about it; she had houses, but she did not
know anything about them, or about their value.? Q. Did you ever talk to her at all
about a will, or about making arrangements as to the disposition of her property on
her death, or anything of that sort? A. No, I did not talk about that; I did not like
to excite her, my habit is always to keep the patients as quiet as possible. ? Q. With
respect to her gesture, manner, and demeanour, was there anything remarkable ? A. I
have not the slightest doubt of it. The peculiarity in answering questions, the way in
which she moved her arms about, and so forth.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Q. Not the slightest doubt about it? A. About her pecu-
liar gestures, that I considered the peculiarity of gesture similar to that which persons
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 53
of unsound mind use; her ?way of answering of questions?there was a peculiarity
about it.
, ^r* 1'r.TEnsDORFF.?In speaking of lier daughters, what was her manner, mild, or
violent, or what ? A. She was, when speaking of her daughters, generally excited;
m fact, always excited to a certain extent. ? Q. From the opportunity that you had
of observing her and conversing with her, what is your opinion as to the state
of her mind? A. I have no hesitation in saying, that she was decidedly of unsound
mind. ? Q. Have you formed any opinion as to her capabilities of managing pro-
perty? A. No person labouring under such delusions, if they are delusions, with
respect to her daughters, can possibly be able to manage her affairs, her money affairs,
property affairs. ? Q. What was the state of her bodily health during the time she was
there? A. Her bodily health improved while she was there.? Q. Is she capable of
moving about, walking about ? A. She wa3 capable of moving, she laboured under
paralysis of the bladder, but the same night she came, the fire not being lighted in the
room where she was, we asked if she would come down into the library, where the books
are, it is called the library, and she walked down stairs with the assistance of a nurse.
I am quite certain there must be twenty stairs, with a good wide staircase, but she
walked down stairs, with the assistance of a nurse, and had her tea. ? Q. Did she con-
tinue the whole time she was in the establishment walking and moving about? A. I
never saw her moving about; when I went to visit her, she was either dressed and sitting
on her bed, or else sitting in a chair near the fire.
Cross-examined by Mr. Serjeant Wilkixs.?Q. Ifl understand you clearly, sir, you
made known to Mrs. Cumming that you were a friend of Mrs. luce's almost immediately
on your introduction ? A. I did. ? Q. Were you aware at that time of her dislike to
Mrs.Ince ? A. About two years previously Mrs. Ince had asked me to go and see Mrs.
Cumming. ? Q. Will you be kind enough to answer my question ? A. I must explain
it. ? Q. Answer the question, yes, or no. Were you at the time aware of the fact,
that Mrs. Cumming entertained a strong dislike to the Inces ? A. Not at that
moment. ? Q. Not at that moment? A. No.? Q. What do you mean by that? A.
I mean this, that I had been aware there was some aversion two years previous, but
at that moment I had forgotten the circumstance; I was perfectly unaware of Mrs. Cum-
ming coming into the place.? Q. Have you attended Mrs. Ince yourself? A. I think
I saw her once for a bilious attack, about a year and a half ago. ? Q. Did you see lier
only once ? A. As far as I am acquainted with that, only once for that bilious attack,
but I have seen Mr. Ince several times.? Q. Have you any interest in this Efi'ra
Hall ? A. Not a particle; I have less interest in it than any medical man had in any
institution whatever. ? Q. Do you think that violence and undue gesture indicates
insanity ? A. I do. ? Q. Then be a little calm, please. A. I will; and hope I shall
not have to retaliate. ? Q. Were you connected with this establishment in the year
1847. Do you happen tokuow at that time the Commissioners intimated their intention
to withdraw their licence from Effra Hall ? A. I was not there at that time. ? Q. Not
in 1840. A. Not at any time that any intimation of the licence being taken away
from that house had I been there, it is since that time that I was appointed.?Q. I
thought you said that you were there seven years. A. About seven years ; I do not
know the time I did go, it was after that time. ? Q. If you were seven years, I should
think you would have been there on the 4th of February? A. It was in 184G I
went, but it was later than February, decidedly. ? Q. Will you be kind enough, if you
please, to give the gentlemen of the jury a definition of the word delusion. A. That
which is stated and does not exist. Q. That which is stated and does not exist? A.
As having occurred, and never did occur. ? Q. Then you think if a person were to
state something as having occurred which never did occur, that that would be, in your
sense of the word, a delusion ? A. Yes; with this addition, that when on being argued
upon, and shown it could not have occurred, they still adhere to the same delusion.? Q.
Suppose a person were superstitious ? A. Then he is a person of unsound mind.?
Q. Then you mean to say, that a superstitious person would be of unsound mind ?
A. Yes. ? Q. Superstition argues an unsound mind, you say ? A. In a certain degree?
Q. Then our forefathers were all mad ? A. It may have been, there are very few who
are not mad. ? Q, Then at ,the time of the trial by ordeal, our forefathers were all
insane ? A. No doubt of it. ?Q. Now I give jou an opportunity of thinking, for your
own reputation, think before you repeat that answer; you mean to say that supersti-
tion argues unsoundness of mind. A. Yes, I do.? Q. Then you believe that a man
who believed in the trial by ordeal, which is called the ordeal touch, you believe that
51 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
man was of unsound mind? A. Yes, I do ; just as mucli as I should believe a man
had not got his stomach right if he had a pain in it. It was not a healthy condition
of mind, and it is not a healthy condition of stomach to have a pain in it. ? Q. I
think I can give you a definition, if I may be allowed to do so, without profaneness,
which in my opinion is the best definition of a delusion, and I find the great Apostle
of the Gentiles giving this definition of a delusion, and you will tell me whether you
agree with it?" For they shall believe a lie." Do you believe that to be a good
definition of a delusion ? A. Yes ; because they are made verily afterwards to com-
prehend it that it was a delusion. ? Q. Who are made ? A. Those to whom it was
sent. ? Q. I heard of incoherence. A. Perhaps, then, you will be kind enough to
read your passage again, ? Q. "For this cause God shall seud them a strong
delusion." A. What was your cause ?? Q. No matter what the cause was, pray do be
serious. A. I am serious. ? Q. "For this cause God shall send them a strong
delusion that they should believe a lie." I sought for some hours among different
authors for a definition of the word " delusion," and that struck me as being the
best I could fiud. Do you believe that to be a true definition of a delusion, " that
they should believe a lie?" A. Yes, because it should be proved to be a lie after-
wards.? Q. Because it would prove to be a lie afterwards? A. Yes, they should be
cognizant that it was a lie. ? Q. Is it a delusion to believe a lie ? A. No, not a delusion
to believe a lie. ? Q. Is it a delusion to believe in the existence of that which has
no ground ? A. Yes, I should say it was ? ? Q. Supposing the foundation not to jus-
tify the superstructure, if I may use such a phrase, would that be a delusion ? A.
Well, I decline answering these questions in that way. I will not enter into what the
definition of a delusion is. ? Q. But indeed you must; you have come here to instruct
these gentlemen upon this point. A. No ; I do not come here to instruct you what a
delusion, more than what insanity, is. I should like to see a man who could give a
definition of insanity.
A Juryman.?You can give us your opinion, you know.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?My questions are not only regular, but they are necessary.
A Juryman.?Quite so.
The Commissioner.?The questions are right enough, they are quite regular.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Q. Do you refuse to answer them ? A. I refuse to enter
into any argument on any scriptural affairs in this case.? Q. I do not want you to
enter into any argument on scriptural affairs. I quoted from Scripture, and I said it
without pretence, because I believed it to be the best definition I have ever seen. I
quoted from Scripture the definition of a delusion, and I ask you, whether you think
believing in a lie constitutes a delusion? A. If I consider believing in a lie constitutes
a delusion ? ? Q. Yes ? A. Believing in a lie to be a delusion ? ? Q. Yes, believing
in that which does not exist, which is not true. A. If you know it to be a lie, it
cannot be a delusion; he cannot believe in it if he knows it to be a lie.?Q. Then
does believing in a lie constitute a delusion ? A. No, certainly not, if he believes it
to be a lie.? Q. How can he believe in it if he knows it to be a lie? A. If a
man believes in a lie, and cannot prove it otherwise, until it is proved to be otherwise,
you may consider it a delusion. ? Q. I ask you if imperfect reasoning on pre-existing
facts will constitute a delusion?imperfect or erroneous reasoning on existing facts,
will that constitute a delusion ? A. Will you repeat your question ?
The Commissioner.?Q. Is imperfect reasoning on existing facts a delusion?
No answer.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Q. Improper reasoning, or erroneous reasoning, on existing
facts, is that a delusion? A. No.? Q. You know you stated just now, in your
answer, which you gave us much more confidently than any other medical gentleman, we
have had your opinion; you have said, there is no doubt but that she is decidedly of
unsound mind? A. So I believe.?Q. Now, why? A. Because she has the same
impressions on the same delusions, and it is continued whenever you speak to her
about it. If the lady was here, I would show you in five minutes. ? Q. You believe
her to be insane, because she entertains delusions ? A. Yes. ? Q. Which is the delu-
sion to which you refer? A. The poisoning of the milk by her daughters. ? Q. In
the first instance, she told you that somebody had put poison in the milk ? A. Yes. ?
Q. Did she not tell you that Dr. Barnes and another gentleman had analyzed it ?
A. Yes.? Q. Did you take any pains to ascertain that that was true? A. Yes, I did.
? Q. From Dr. Barnes ? A. No, but from head quarters ; she told me her daughters
had done it, and I consider her daughters as good testimony as Dr. Barnes. ? Q. You
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 55
say she told you somebody had put poison in the milk? A. Yes; that was the 1st of
November. ? Q. She also told you Dr. Barnes had analyzed it ? A. Yes. ? Q. Did
you go to Dr. Barnes? A. No; to her daughters. ? Q. Was any person present at
any of these conversations to which you refer ? A. The nurse. ? Q. When she
mentioned the daughters? A. The nurse always. ? Q. Is she here? A. I do not
know; I have not seen her. ? Q. What is her name ? A. I do not know her name.
? Q. Either of her names ? A. I do not know either of her names. ? Q. You know
her when you see her ? A. Perfectly. ? Q. But you have not seen her here ? A. No.
? Q. Is not she the very same person that is now attending Mrs. Gumming at her
own house ? A. I believe she is. ? Q. Did you regard her angry displeasure towards
her children as a delusion? A. Yes; I said I thought it unnatural. ? Q. Have you
taken any pains to inquire into the history of their proceedings and dealings with
their mother ? A. Yes, I have; I took great pains about this case altogether. ?
Q. Were you aware that at one time during the mother's illness they never came near
her for three years ? A. No, I was not aware of that. ? Q. Were you aware that they
had confined her before in a lunatic asylum ? A. Yes, I. understand properly upon
certificates. ? Q, Were you aware she was taken away under the surveillance of
a policeman, with a strait-jacket on? A. At what time? ? Q. During the lifetime of
their father? A. No, I was not aware of that; but she might have needed it.?
Q. Were you aware of the fact? A. No; but she might have needed it. ? Q. That
may be, and she might not ? A. She might not. ? Q. Are you not aware, whatever be
the real facts of the case, that she herself is under an impression yet that she did not
need it? A. I suppose she is; I never knew an insane person that was not under
the same impression Q. Were you aware that in 184G they presented a petition for a
commission ? A. Yes.? Q. Were you aware that that extended over the period of eleven
days? A. No; because I am not aware of the particulars of it. ?Were you aware
that there was no verdict, and that her daughters consented to the liberation, on a
portion of the property being assigned to them? A. I was aware of that, through the
Times newspaper, the other day, ? Q. Did you not know it before ? A. No. ? Q. Were
you aware, that in 1851, the very same persons presented a petition to deprive her of
her liberty ? A. This last November. ? Q. Taking all these circumstances together,
with her impression she is a sane person, do you think it unnatural she should enter-
tain feelings of dislike and anger towards the persons who had caused all this ?
A. Taking all things into consideration, taking into consideration what I have read in
the Times newspapers? ? Q. No, do not; consider the facts I have laid before you; do you
think it unnatural or unlikely she should entertain a strong feeling and dislike towards
those persons ? A. It depends upon whether she knows what the cause has been of
it. ? Q. I told you just now, you stated to me, in answer to a question from me, that
she believed herself to be sane; under that impression, believing herself to be a person
of sound mind, do you marvel that she should entertain a feeling of dislike towards
the persons who sought to confine her, and allowed the jury to leave her at liberty on a
division of the property? A. No; because many unsound persons have the utmost
antipathy to their best friends. ? Q. I ask if you mean to give that as a reason for
their dislike ? A. Of course, she would have a dislike to it; she is labouring under
delusions altogether with regard to that. ? Q. So you say; but I will show that she
is not labouring under half the delusions that you are. I ask again, do you marvel
at a person, tried as she has been, believing herself to be of sound mind, do you marvel
that she entertains one reason ? A. Believing her to entertain opinions that she is
not insane, I do not marvel at it. ? Q. What is your answer ? A. Considering that
she believes she is not insane I do not marvel at it. ? Q. Should you think it unna-
tural that she should entertain feelings of dislike towards persons so treating her ?
A. Yes ; because the circumstances could not take plaee. ? Q. You might take my
hypothesis entire. Supposing that that person always entertained a feeling of strong
dislike towards the person so treating her ? A.I think it impossible a person of sound
mind could be so treated. ? Q. You might take my hypothesis as I put it ? A. I will
allow your hypothesis, then. ? Q. Supposing that true, should you wonder at a
person of sound mind entertaining feelings of strong dislike towards a person irritating
them ? A. No ; I will allow you your hypothesis. ? Q. Did she not say, that when
Mrs. Ince came up to the room, and put her arms round her neck, her daughters and
her family at that time were plotting against her? A. Yes. ? Q. Did she ever com-
plain to you of the marriage of Mrs. Hooper? A. No.
Re-examined by Mr. Petersdobff.?Q. My learned friend asked you some ques-
56 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
tions with respect to the withdrawal of the licence of this establishment, do you.
know whether the parties who are now the proprietors of it, are the same parties?
A. No; they are not the same parties.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Was he one? A. I believe he was, but it was on
account of some family quarrels.
Mr. Petersdorff.?I understand you to say, these are not the same proprietors ?
A. No.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?But Mr. Elliott was one of the proprietors? A. Yes;
and there was a separation of partnership owing to some family quarrel, and the
licence was restored; I was not the medical man at that time.
Mr. Petersdokff.?I asked you some questions of rather a medical character,
but in what sense did you understand the word "superstition," when my learned
friend used it ? A. As a person superstitious. ? Q. Superstition may exist with
respect to a variety of facts. What construction did you put on that? A. A per-
son believing in unnatural causes, defending a proposition on unnatural causes. ?
Q. W hen you speak of unnatural causes, do you mean physical failings, or mental
theories, or what? A. I will give you an instance the Serjeant himself mentioned,
by trial of touch. ? Q. You would say that was superstition ? A. Yes.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?He said that was evidence of an unsound mind.
Mr. Petersdorff.?When you were answering questions as to what would con-
stitute insanity, with respect to erroneous belief, will you explain what you think
erroneous belief, so as to constitute insanity ? A. A person who is impressed that
a certain fact has taken place, or that something has taken place, and on arguing
with them, and showing that it is utterly impossible that such can be the case, still
he continues in the belief. ? Q. I presume you would not apply the same doctrine
to mere matters of theory, or doctrinal matters, on which differences of opinion
might exist? Certainly not. ? Q. Your answer applied to real demonstrable facts ?.
A. Real demonstrable facts. ? Q. Supposing the same dislike of the daughter had
existed on the part of Mrs. Cumming prior to 184G, and before any attempt at all
to prosecute the Commission, what would be your opinion then as to the state of
her mind? A. I should say it was just the same.
Hugh Welsh Diamond, M.D., sworn, examined by Sir F. Thesiger.?Q. I
believe you have been for a great number of years accustomed to the care and
treatment of insane persons? A. I have. ? Q. For how many years? A. I
should say for thirty years; as a child, my father had an asylum iu which I was
brought up, and I was his apprentice. ? Q. I believe at the present you are a
physician to the Surrey Lunatic Asylum ? A. I am the resident medical officer on
the female side. ? Q. How many patients have you under your care ? A. I have
at this time 434; I have also an opportunity of visiting the males, amounting
altogether to upwards of 800 patients. ? Q. Your attention has been devoted for a
great many years, has it not, to the consideration of the treatment of insane persons?
A. It has. ? Q. Were you requested to visit Mrs. Cumming in the course of last
year, and did you see her? A. I was asked to see her one day in November, and
I could not conveniently do so until the 16th. ? Q. I believe you saw her in EfTra
Hall, in November, in the asylum ? A. I saw her in November at Elfra Hall. ?
Q. And in the following month of December, I believe you saw her at her own
house, where she is now ? A. I did. ? Q. Now upon the first occasion of your
seeing her, did you see her alone, or was there anybody in the room? A. There
was a female servant; there were several on the second occasion. ? Q. How long
did your interview with her last upon that occasion ? A. It was an hour to an
hour and half. ? Q. Had you been previously acquainted with the nature of what
were called her delusions? A. Very imperfectly so. ? Q. But so as to enable you
to apply tests, if I may use the expression, to her mind ? A. I might have learned
more, but I thought I had enough to obtain any delusion or insanity if it did exist.
? Q. Upon that occasion, did you find that she stated things which you considered
were delusions? A. When I first went into her room, she declined to speak to me-
She was eating her dinner. She had a breast of fowl, and was sitting at the table.
I asked her to proceed with her dinner, while I wanned my hands a little. She
then asked me what brought me there. I told her (I thought it better to be candid
with her) that I wished to ascertain the state of her mind. She then seemed
irritable, and said she had convinced a jury of her country already that she was of
sound mind. I then said to her, I believe you have some daughters, Mrs.
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 57-
Cumming. And she said, Do not mention them." I said I had forgotten the
name of the other daughter, but I recollected the name of Mrs. Ince, is she your
daughter or your daughter-in-law? And she said, "You have spoken a true word;
she is indeed a daughter-in-law, and not a real daughter." She told me her
daughters were vile wretches (I think that was the very word or a similar word)r
and they had treated her very ill. I told her I had heard they had even gone as
far as to attempt to poison her. And she said they had. I asked her to explain
to me how that was accomplished. She told me Mrs. Ince had put some poison in
her cream.
The Commissioner.?Cream? A. Cream. I asked her how she had done it,
and she did not reply. I said, how did you know poison was there ?" She
said, " I saw it." I said, had you any reason to suspect it ? And she replied
again, " I saw it." I asked her if it was curdled, that she saw it. She said, " No; it-
was not curdled." I said, how do you know it was poison then. And she said she
sent it?I do not know whether she took it, because I do not know that she would
walk, but my impression is, that she said she took it to a chemist, and that he had
analysed it^ and pronounced it contained oxalic acid, and that he was right was
proved by its having poisoned a fowl to which it was given. I asked, what did
Mrs. luce mean by putting this poison there? She said she could not answer that..
I asked her whether she was always in the habit of taking cream, or whether this
cream had been sent her as a present from Mrs. Ince. She told me she always
took cream, and not milk. I asked her very closely whether the milkman had-
any hand in it at all; and she intimated that I could know something about it. She
said, " Perhaps you know." I then said, it is a very serious thing for any one to
attempt to poison you. She said, " Oh, they would do it again; at this time they
would do it if they could." I said no more upon the subject of the poison, and I
asked her how long she had been there. And she said, " Oh, a few days." I asked
her where she came from, and she could not tell me. ? Q. You say she could not
tell you?what did she say? A. She looked confused, and could not reply at all.
I said, do you know where you came from ? And she did not reply a second time.
? Q. You asked her where she came from, she looked confused and did not
answer you? A. Yes, she did not answer me. ? Q. What next ? A. I said, you
are a person of property; could you tell me anything of the nature of your property ?
She said, " I cannot answer you. You will answer, I am mad. I will answer a
jury of my country," she said. ? Q. Was there anything else? A. I do not
remember anything else important. She said something about a will. I asked her,,
and she did not answer me distinctly. And she said, if she was only sure she had
?150 a-year for her, she would be a happy woman?something to that effect?I
know, she said that 150/. a year would make her a happy woman.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Did I understand you to say a clear 150/. ? I thought
you said a clear 150/. a-year. A. No; I do not remember the word " clear."
Sir F. Thesiger.?You say this interview lasted about an hour and a half?
A. From an hour to an hour and a half. I went in a fly, and kept the man waiting
about that period. ? Q. Did you find that it was easy for you to obtain these
statements from her, or had you any difficulty? A. At first I thought she was
irritated at my disturbing her from her dinner, but she afterwards was in a good
humour and appeared agreeable, and wished ine good day and so forth. I could
have obtained any lengthened statement from her, but I was not aware of all
this inquiry. I could have obtained any length of statement from her, and she
would have given to me freely, but that fact of what I considered so palpable a
delusion about seeing the poison, that I did not think it necessary to go further.-
? Q. What was the impression that that interview left upon your mind as to the.
state of Mrs. Cumming's mind? A. That she was a person of unsound mind. I
would upon examination have signed a certificate that she was a person of unsound
mind. ? Q. And you entertained, of course, no doubt upon the subject ? A. None
whatever. ? Q. Was there anything in her appearance or manner which struck
you ? A. Quite so. She was very much excited at a trifling thing, holding up
her hands, and an uncertainty about her which you do not see, I think, in a person
of sound mind. In speaking of her daughters the bitterness against them seemed
to be great. ? Q. You saw her afterwards at her present residence, Gothic Villa,
I understand. A. Yes. ? Q. What day was that? A. On the 29th. ? Q. What
persons were present at the,time of that interview? A. I accompanied Dr. Davey.-
-58 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
? Q. And were there other persons in the room daring that time ? A. There
was a lady whom I saw here during the first day of the inquiry with Mrs. Cumming,
I think Mrs. Moore; and there were two or three other attendants standing about
the room. ? Q. How long were you with her upon that occasion ? A. I should
think about an hour, a short hour. ? Q. Did she know you again at Effra Hall ?
A- She did. I said to her, you have seen me before, Mrs. Cumming. She said,
"Yes, I did; I saw you at the madhouse." ? Q. What did you say upon that
occasion to her ? A. I said very little to her. Dr. Davey spoke to her principally. I
occasionally made some observations, but she declined. ? Q. Do you recollect what
passed with Dr. Davey and the lady? A. She declined to answer nearly every-
thing which Dr. Davey put to her. She declined to answer, and then she became
excited and would not restrain herself from answering relative to her daughters'
ill-usage, and so forth, Mrs. Moore, who was present, said, " You are too
weak, Mrs. Cumming, to answer, you will excite yourself," and so forth. And
then Mrs. Cumming, in a low voice, said, " You are of the opposite party."
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Who did she say that to?you ? A. She said to me,
?that was in reply to an observation I made, which was this, I said, "You seem,
Mrs. Cumming, to be quite as well as when I saw you at Effra Hall, and then you
answered me without any hesitation; and then she said, "You are of the opposite
party." I also said, I have heard it stated that Dr. Conolly and Dr. Winslow had said
you have partial paralysis of your legs; and she said, " They are too great gentlemen
to tell a lie;" and she was very vehement when she made use of that expression, she
held up her hand with great emphasis. ? Q. As I understand Dr. Davey put various
questions to her, did she say, I decline to answer, or was she silent? A. She
declined to answer. ? Q. Did she say, I decline to answer, or was she silent ? A.
She said, " I decline to answer," and of some she took no notice, but she frequently
said, " I will answer that in court." Dr. Davey, I may say, was very frequent in his
questions, and more than once, I may say, was very persevering in his questions,
and more than once, I may say, Mrs. Moore said," Dear Mrs. Cumming, you are very
much fatigued, or in a very weak state."?Q. Did it appear to you or not, that Mrs.
Moore was checking her from answering ? A. It certainly did. ? Q. Had you an
opportunity of judging whether Mrs. Moore had appeared to have influence ever
to prevent her answering? A. Undoubtedly she looked to Mrs. Moore; she cast
her eyes to Mrs. Moore, and Mrs. Moore left off sowing, she looked up. ? Q. Did
she answer any questions? A. She did, with great excitement relative to the
treatment of her daughters. ? Q. Was that after what you stated? A. She could
not restrain herself. ? Q. And what did she say upon the subject of her daughters?
A. I do not know that she entered into anything very particular, but she screwed
her teeth together, and quite intimated they were unfriendly with her. ? Q. She
manifested her feeling against her daughter? A. Very much so. Dr. Davey said
to her, " Have your daughters really ill-used you ?" and she said, " Look to the
papers, look to the courts, and there you will see it all detailed." ? Q. Did she say
anything more ? A. I do not remember that she did anything that would impress
me specially. ? Q. Did it appear to you from that interview, from what you stated,
that Mrs. Cumming was a person who was capable for a time of being controlled
so as to prevent her delusions being shown? A. It did. I do not believe she
could do it for any length of time ; she would not be able for a dozen hours, or a
less time than that. I should say if she was under free control for action a dozen
hours in an asylum, anybody would obtain all the ideas from her. ? Q. If she were
left without any controlling influence for twelve hours, anybody even to have to
see her, she would exhibit these delusions ? A. I believe she could. I believe she
could not be in one of my wards for twelve hours without anybody doubting her
sanity. ? Q. Do you consider that, from the interviews you have mentioned, you
had a fair opportunity of judging of her state of mind ? A. I do- ? Q. And is it
your opinion that she is or is not in a sound state of mind? A. I think she is in
an unsound state of mind. ? Q. Do you consider she is capable of governing her-
self and her property ? A. I do not.
Cross-examined.?I am a Doctor of Medicine and Surgery, of Kiel, in Denmark.
I am the only person in this country who possesses that degree, I believe. I think
it a very honourable degree. I obtained it after writing a thesis on insanity.? Q.
You have assumed, I presume, these impressions on her mind, with reference to the
poison and with reference to the children, are delusions? A. I do. ? Q. I do not
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 59
think ycm will find it very difficult to give me the definition of the word "delu-
sion." Will you give me your definition of a delusion ? Such a delusion as con-
stitutes mental unsoundness? A. A delusion is that where a person imagines a
thing which really does not exist. ? Q. But supposing a person under the stress of
cirumstances to reason unsoundly or erroneously upon existing facts, you would
not call that a delusion, would you ? A. In this identical case she did not argue
from facts. ? Q. But answer that question if you please. Supposing a person,?
because persons reason as their minds are disciplined, or according to their capacity,
or according to their education,?supposing a person to reason erroneously on exist-
ing facts, that is, to draw unjust conclusions which a man of good reasoning
powers would immediately discover to he a fallacy, would you call that such a
delusion as to exhibit unsoundness of mind ? A. If those facts are so far from the
truth, I may say, or to ordinary belief they do not exist. ? Q. For instance, sup-
posing an untutored person on a dark night to have seen, for instance, a white
horse in the distance, and to have brought his mind to believe that what he
saw was an apparition, would you think it a proof of unsoundness of mind?
A. Certainly not.? Q. Do you agree ?with the last witness, that a belief in the
ordeal by touch would constitute unsoundness of mind? A. No, I do not. ? Q.
Supposing the lady to have been treated in the way that the papers to which she
referred you would disclose?supposing her to have been taken from her house by
two women and a police officer, in a strait-waistcoat?supposing her to have been
confined for four months in a lunatic asylum?supposing afterwards a commission
of lunacy to be taken out against her, and the jury to be discharged with the consent
of the petitioner?supposing that during all that time, for ten days, she is subject
to the gaze and questioning of various persons?supposing that time after time
persons are sent to cross-examine her as to her state of mind?supposing that the
detective police are sent in pursuit of her, and all these facts are brought to her
knowledge, and she has ascertained this has been done by the sanction of her
children, should you think her dislike of her children, under those circum-
stances a proof of insanity? A. Not alone, I do not.? Q. Now, supposing
this?suppose that on a certain morning three of her fowls are found dead, and.
upon the same morning, at the bottom of a tea-cup, in some milk, she found some-
thing that looks very much like oxalic acid?that afterwards the contents of the
crops of these fowls are analyzed by a physician, and are found to contain poison,
and she came to the conclusion that what she saw in the cups on the same morning
"was oxalic acid, should you think that such a delusion as to constitute unsoundness
of mind ? A. I do not; but that is not the fact, as she represented it to me. ?
Q. I am taking this hypothesis?she said there was poison in the milk ? A. She
told me so, and told me she saw it. ? Q. Supposing when the milk was turned out
it was found there was Epsom salts at the bottom of that cup, do you think it would
argue unsoundness of mind, three of her fowls having been poisoned that morning,
if she thought Epsom salts was oxalic acid? A. I think with a weak-minded
?woman it would not be so ; the way you state it to me is very different from the
?way she did. ? Q. Would that argue unsoundness of mind? Supposing you
should find, for several years one of her children had absented herself from her,
and should rush into her room unexpectedly, and embrace her mother very
tightly round her neck, the mother at that time believing her family were in
league against her, and she came to the conclusion that her daughter was attempt-
ing to strangle her, and afterwards she was convinced she was wrong, would you
think that would argue unsoundness of mind? A. No; that was an erroneous con-
clusion, certainly, if it was so.
Re-examined by Sir F. Thesiger.? Q. Her daughters had not been as atten-
tive to her as daughters ought to be, and did she come to the conclusion that they
?were endeavouring to take away her life by poison, should you consider that that
argued soundness of mind, or unsoundness? A. Unsoundness.? Q. Now sup-
posing there may be a fact existing, but that fact to be considerably exaggerated
in mind, and from a fact so exaggerated false conclusions to be drawn, should you
consider that to indicate soundness or unsoundness of mind? A. I think in an
extreme degree it would produce unsoundness of mind ; and I think in this indi-
vidual case the feeling is so strong against the children, so palpably strong, that
it constitutes unsoundness of mind.
Examined by the Commissioner.?Q. You say you saw this lady in December
GO THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
last ? Yes. ? Q. There were other persons present ? A. There were; there was
Dr. Davey, Mrs Moore, and I think three attendants and women standing opposite
to me; and I saw two standing behind the bed-curtain. There is a bed in the
room, and two stood behind the bed-curtain, as if to hear what passed. There was
a bed-curtain came along, and I saw two persons stand close behind the bed-curtain
in the room. ? Q. Mrs. Moore is a lady, I suppose ? A. I do not know. I did
not know her until I saw her in this room. ? Q. Was she near Mrs. Cumming ?
A. She sat behind Mrs. Cumming?just behind her, if I may use such an expres-
sion. I should say with rather a Jewish cast of countenance. ? Q. She was there
in the room? A. Yes.? Do you think you had a fair opportunity, on that occa-
sion, of judging of Mrs. Cumming? A. It would have been a very different thing.
Yes, I am sure of it. She more than once said, "Dear Mrs. Cumming, you are
very weak;" and then Mrs. Cumming immediately said, " You are of the opposite
party." ? Q. That was in answer to a question you put to her, that you had seen her
atEffraHall? A. No; that observation was at 59, Queen's-road? ? Q. Butlthink
you said, she said you had seen her before? A. Yes she did at the mad-liouse. She
told me she had seen me before. ? Q. Did you in any way remonstrate with Mrs.
Moore? A. I did not. ? Q. Did she know you were a medical man? A, She
did. We were not allowed to see her until we respectfully sent our names in to
her. ? Q. She knew who you were? A. Yes ; we were asked in a lower room ;
after waiting some five minutes, we went up stairs. ? Q. And found her in her bed-
room ? A. With Mrs. Moore. ? Q. It was after twelve o'clock in the day ? A.
It was about half-past one or a quarter to two. ? Q. Mrs. Moore seemed to know
who you were? A. Yes she did. ? Q. You did not remonstrate with her? A. I
did not. Dr. Davey was holding the main conversation I would say. ? Q. He
kept up the main conversation; but you asked her a few questions ? A. Occa-
sionally I put in a question. ? Q. Did ,you attend her as a professional man ? A.
Yes. ? Q. So that you did not have what you consider a fair opportunity of
examining the lady. A. I certainly do. I consider it would have been a very
different examination had she been left alone.
A Juryman.?In what sort of state was the room? A. A very clean and com-
fortable room, and so it was at Effra Hall.
The Commissioner.?You say Mrs. Moore was there, and three other persons ?
?two behind the curtain. Do you know the person we have talked of is the
nurse from the asylum ? A. No, I did not; I do not know any of them ; I could
not specify any of them, only Mrs. Moore. There were three other persons
present. I could not tell who they were, and I should not know them if they were
produced to me.
James Georgi Davey, M.D., sworn.?Q. You are a physician, I believe? A. Yes,
I am. ? Q. Are you resident medical-officer of the Middlesex County Lunatic
Asylum? A. Resident physician of the Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum.? Q. How
long have you held that office? A. Since July last, the opening of the establish-
ment.? Q. And I believe you were formerly one of the medical-officers at the
Han well Lunatic Asylum? A. I was, some years, one of the assistant-physicians
at Hanwell, under Dr. Conolly. ? Q. I believe you have written a treatise on
mental diseases? A. I have done so. ? Q. I presume you have had great expe-
rience in such cases? A. For the last ten years of my life I have had very great
experience in mental disorders. ? Q. How many female patients have you under
your care now ? A. This moment I think I have 640, something like that?I will
not be quite sure. ? Q. Do you remember in December visiting Mrs. Catherine
Cumming? A. I do. ? Q. What day was that? A. It was yesterday fortnight.
? Q. Was it upon the same occasion that Dr. Diamond has spoken of? A. It was.
? Q. About what hour was it you went in the morning? A. It was between one
and two, I think. ? Q. In the afternoon? A. In the afternoon. ? Q. Did Dr.
Diamond remain in the room during the whole of the time that you were there ?
A. He did. ? Q. Were any other persons there besides you and Dr. Diamond?
A. There were three other persons present, a lady, I presumed, and two servants.
? Q. You do not know the name of the lady ? A. I have heard her name men-
tioned in this room. ? Q. What was her name? A. I have heard it just now, but
I did not pay much attention to it. ? Q. Will you state, as nearly as possible, the
conversation you had with Mrs. Cumming, and her manner and demeanour?
A. On entering the room I saw Mrs. Cumming sitting on the right-hand side of
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMIN6. Gl
the fire place, looking enfeebled and in delicate health, with her lower extremities
?wrapped about with a blanket; and opposite to her sat a lady, and I took my seat
on the left-hand side of that lady. I first of all said to Mrs. Camming?I believe
you are aware of the object of my visit, and I am a medical man; and she gave me
to understand that she was quite aware of the object of my visit. I think I com-
menced my conversation by asking her if she had not lately been in the private
asylum of the late Dr. Millengen, at Battersea. She hardly cared to give me an
answer; but she did at length confess that she had been there in that establishment.
I made some inquiries of Dr. Millengen, having some knowledge of him?some
identical knowledge of him?and I asked her how long she had been there. She
told me either five or two months, I forget which, but purposely I took the oppor-
tunity of putting the same question to her a second time. She made a different
reply, on the second occasion, to that she did on the first. She told me, on one
occasion, that she had been there five months; on the second occasion she told me
she had been there two months. I immediately pointed out that discrepancy in her
statement, and she seemed annoyed at my having done so, or rather seemed
annoyed at her own imbecility of mind. I spoke to her also concerning Dr. Barnes.
I asked her if Dr. Barnes had not been, or was, her attendant. She did not like to
reply to that; she fixed her teeth firmly together, and looked angrily at me. I
then asked if Dr. Barnes had not been required to analyse some fluid which she sus-
pected to contain poison. She did not reply to me?she would not reply to me.
To my repeated questions on various subjects, she said?" I shall not speak to you
and shall not notice you; you came here intruding on me, and speak in an irritating
manner; I shall make all my replies when I am in court." I also asked her if any-
other gentlemen had been to visit her?medical men. She would not reply to that
question. 1 personally asked her if Dr. Winslow had not been to see her. She
said he had; I think she said several times. I put some questions to her having
reference to a conversation which Dr. Winslow may have had with her. She would
not allow me to know what conversation had passed between that gentleman and
herself, but merely said Dr. Winslow was a gentleman. I spoke to her also of her
late husband, but she would give me no answer to any question I put to heron that
head. I should say, throughout my interview with her, she treated me rudely, as
no ladyr may be supposed to do, and gave me to understand that, if it were no't for
the common courtesies of life, I should be very soon shown the door. ? Q. Were
there any further topics to which you directed her attention ? A.I did. I spoke
to her about her daughters. I said I believed she had daughters. She did not
reply to me then. Then I spoke to her again about her daughters. She was silent,
and I said to her, at last, have your daughters been guilty, at any time, of acts of
cruelty towards you? any acts of unkindness or cruelty, I think, were the words I
employed; and she looked at me a moment, and I saw she was becoming influenced
by what I said to her, and she was anticipating. She raised her left hand on high,
and exclaimed, in a loud, sonorous voice, " Look at the papers and courts,"?I think
were her words. It was either "look at the papers and courts," or " read the papers
and courts." Throughout the interview she gave me abundant proof of being very
imbecile in mind, and also of her being possessed with a variety of vague and
unmeaning suspicions of everything and everybody. She was full of apprehension.
? Q. Do you remember any particular statement she made with respect to sus-
picions? A. She had been so well tutored I thought that she was not allowed.
Mr. Sergeant Wilkins.?Really we cannot hear that.
Mr. Petersdorff.?You say there were three persons in the room besides
you and Dr. Diamond? A. There were. ? Q. Had you any opportunity of
noticing whether any communication or influence was apparently exerted over her?
A. Constant communications were being telegraphed from one side of the room to
the other, and remarks made. ? Q. From whom did these communications seem
to come ? A. More particularly from the lady on my right hand.
The Commissioner.?She was seated on one side of the tire? A. Mrs.
Cumming was seated on the right-hand side of the fire-place, and the lady on the
left-hand side of the fire-place, and I was sitting on the lady's left hand; Mrs. Cum-
ming was opposite to me. ? Q. You were opposite Mrs. Cumming, and the lady
was opposite Mrs. Cumming ? A. Exactly.
Mr. Petersdorff.?You said you had a difficulty in obtaining an answer
from her to the questions you had put? A. I had. ? Q. Did anything occur to
62 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
enable you to say why you did not obtain these answers? A. I considered, from
the influence which was exercised upon the mind of Mrs. Cumming by those pre-
sent. ? Q. Did you talk to her at all about her property? A. I did not?I think
I did not. ? Q. Or about the will? A. No, I did not. ? Q. Was there anything
else that you remember passed at this interview ? A. I do not remember anything
else. ? Q. From what you heard do you think you had an opportunity of forming
an opinion as to the state of her mind? A. I conceive that I had an abundant
opportunity of forming an opinion. ? Q. And what is the result? A. My opinion
is that she is decidedly of unsound mind. ? Q. Could you form an opinion as to
whether you think her capable of managing her property and her own affairs?
A. I am perfectly convinced that her imbecility of mind must prevent her from
managing any affairs of any kind. ? Q. I believe you did not call again? A. I
did not.
Cross-examined by Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Q. Are you a contributor to a work
called the " Zoistf' A. Iam.? Q. Do you believe in mesmerism? A. Most cer-
tainly I do, and so do all right-thinking men. ?Q. Then every man who does not
agree with the notion of mesmerism, is not a right-thinking man ? A. He either does
not think sufficiently, or he is very prejudiced. ? Q. Do you believe in clairvoyance.
A. I do. ? Q. Do all right-thinking men believe in that? A. All those who have
investigated the question ; but I do not see what relation that has to the question
at issue. ? Q. You do believe in clairvoyance? Pray have you stated that you
have cured insane persons by the influence of mesmerism? A. I have cured three
persons by mesmerism. ? Q. What is your definition of a delusion ? A. A belief
in that which does not exist. ? Q. You think that is a perfect definition of a
delusion? A. No, I do not pretend to give a definition of it?in a general sense
perhaps. ? Q. For instance, I am not a right-thinking man, for I do not believe in
the existence of clairvoyance? A. Because you have not had sufficient opportunities.
? Q. I beg your pardon. Nevermind whether I have had sufficient opportunities;
I do not at all object to break a lance with you, physician as you are; but do you
say that the fact of my assertion that clairvoyance is nonsense, argues unsoundness
of mind on my part? A. To a certain degree.? Q. I am very glad I got that
answer?it is what I anticipated. Then you would say, every gentleman in the
room who asserts the same thing, is, to a certain degree, unsound in mind ? A. His
mental state is to be pitied ; he does not know what is true. ? Q. How the gentle-
men of the jury will eat their lunch after that I do not know. Allow me to ask this,
dops the " consciousness of one's imbecility or weakness of mind"argue insanity?
A. Yes.? Q. Suppose, for instance, I were bowed down with my consciousness of
my own ignorance and my own unsoundness of mind, would that conscious-
ness argue insanity? A. Many insane persons are conscious of their insane
indications. ? Q. That is not an answer to my question. Does the consciousness
of weakness of mind argue insanity ? A. Why it may or it may not; it would
depend on circumstances. ? Q. Would you not rather say, that the wisest men are
those who generally smart the most under the consciousness of their own inca-
pability? A. They are wise men who do so. ? Q. What do you term imbecility ?
A. Intellectual incapacity. ? Q. Intellectual incapacity ? A. A feebleness of intel-
lectual powers. ? Q. Feebleness of intellectual power is imbecility?what extent of
feebleness ? A. That would depend upon age, sex, and other circumstances. ?
Q. Feebleness of mind in a person of the age of seventy, is that imbecility? A. It
may or it may not be, according to collateral circumstances. ? Q. Then will you
give me such a definition as I can make use of and rely on ? A. It would depend
upon the temperament of the individual, and the previous history of the individual,
and the state of his general health. ? Q. Well? A. Every case must stand on its
own merits, I take it. ? Q. I do not know that exactly ; there are some cases that
may be tested by general rules. Now I want to know, for the information of the
jury, what you mean by imbecility ? A. A feebleness of mental power. ? Q. Will
you be kind enough, if you please, to explain to the learned Commissioner and the
jury, what you mean by persons telegraphing in the room? A. Why I meant by
that, that the lady sitting on my right-hand looked more to Mrs. Cumming than
she need have done, had she not been anxious to restrain her from the expression
of feelings which may have gone far to prove her insane. ? Q. Is that what you
mean by telegraphing? A. That is what I mean by telegraphing?looking fre-
quently towards her and at her. ? Q. As you can interpret looks so well, did not
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 6a
Mrs. Camming several times look most beseechingly to that lady ? A. I saw her
look frequently towards that lady. ? Q. Bat you interpret her looks. I ask you if
Mrs. Gumming did not look beseechingly to that lady? A. She looked at her fre-
quently, and it appeared to me she looked at her lest she should commit herself. ?
Q. I ask you if she did not look beseechingly at that lady ? A. I am not aware
that she did. ? Q. Did you press her? A. Yes, I admit that I did.? Q. I should
presume, then, that if you saw any interruption, knowing the authority -with which
you were clothed, I should presume that you reproved those parties whom you sus-
pected of telegraphing? A. Most certainly I did not, for the best of all reasons?
I wished to understand exactly the position in which they were placed towards
each other. I wished to understand what it all meant.? Q. What what meant ?
A. This telegraphing. I wished to find out the real state and condition of this
lady. ? Q. Can you give any other instance of that which you call telegraphing,
beyond that you describe ? A. No. ? Q. Your answer to my learned friend was,,
that they were telegraphing about the room?I have not taken down the exact
answer? A. I think it was across the room. ? Q. How many persons telegraphed?
A. The lady on my right-hand I saw particularly engaged in it during the whole
of my interview. ? Q. What is that ? A. This telegraphing. ? Q. Looking, is
it ? A. Looking in a peculiar and significant manner from time to time. ? Q. Did
you complain at all before you left the room of any telegraphing ? A. No, cer-
tainly not? I had no reason to do so. I did not wish to do so.
Re-examined by Sir F. Thesiger?Q. You say you made no remark with
regard to what you call the telegraphing? A. No, I did not. ? Q. You have
given us the reason, that you wished to see what was the position of all parties ?
A. Certainly. ? Q. I suppose your object partly was to see whether she would be
influenced by those who were about her? A. That was exactly my object, to
observe the strength of her volition. ? Q. Now, you have been asked for various
definitions by my learned friend, is it your judgment that there can be any general
definition given of insanity or unsoundness of mind ? A. I think there cannot.?
Q. From your experience, are you able to say Avhetheryou can apply general rules
unerringly, or whether each case must not depend on its own facts and circum-
stances? A. I think each case must depend on its own facts and circumstances.
? Q. You have been asked particularly, with regard to imbecility, what is your
definition of imbecility, Would you ascribe the appearance which you have
represented the state of Mrs. Cumming's mind, would you ascribe that to imbe-
cility, the sense in which you have given your definitions ? A. Most certainly.
? Q. Or to old age? A. Decidedly not to old age; it was an imbecility, a
disease, which I saw in Mrs. Cumruing.?Q. I will not enter particularly into the
question of mesmerism and clairvoyance, and tell you how far I believe or disbe-
lieve in it; but I believe there are persons of very considerable eminence who
believe in clairvoyance and mesmerism ? A. Of the highest eminence in all parts
of Europe and America.
Examined by the Commissioner.?Q. Did they understand in the room that
you were a medical man? A. They did. I made it a point of mentioning the
object of my visit when first I entered the apartment.
A Juryman.?You did not consider that you possessed power to order them out
of the room ? A. 1 did not wish it. ? Q. Did you possess the power ? A. I am
not aware that I did.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Certainly.
Witness.?I did not wish to do it.
A Juryman.?Were you aware you possessed the power? ? A. I was not
aware of it.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Is this asylum of which you speak at Colney Hatch?
A. Yes.? Q. I believe'it is for incurable patients, is it not? A. No, it is the
sister asylum to Han well.
Charles Javies Berridge Aldis, Esq., M.D., sworn, examined by Sir F. Thesiger.
?Q. You are a physician, I believe ? A. I am. ? Q. And a fellow of the Col-
lege ? A. I am. ? Q. And are you a lecturer on medicine at the Hunterian
School ? A. I am. ? Q. I believe you have not devoted yourself exclusively to
cases of insanity? A. No. ? Q. But in your general practice they have come
within your knowledge ? A. They have. ? Q. Have you had considerable prac-
tice in those cases? A. I have had a fair share of experience. ? Q. Were you
?04 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
requested to visit Mrs. Cumming, and did you do so, and -when? A. I was
requested to do so, and I visited her at Effra Hall on the 16th and 17th of
November. I visited her again on two occasions at Gothic Villa, St. John's Wood,
on the 28th of November and on the 3rd of January.?Q. Upon the first occasion
of your visiting her at Effra Hall, how long did you remain with her ? A. About
three quarters of an hour.? Q. Were you alone with her, or was anybody else
in the room ? A. There was a nurse in the room. ? Q. One of the nurses of the
establishment? A. One of the nurses of the establishment, and I think the
matron was present. I heard a person near the door, which led into another room,
and I asked the matron afterwards if she had been in the room. She said she
heard what I stated, so I concluded it was the matron and one of the nurses. ?
Q. I believe your first visit to her was on a Sunday? A. It was. I had
appointed Monday, but having received a letter from Mr. Turner, containing an
urgent request that I should visit her, I was compelled to visit her on the Sunday.
? Q. Did you make an apology for coming before she was up? A. I did. I said
I regretted coming so early, before she was up, and I said that I regretted that it
was likely to disturb her. She said, " Oh ! you do not disturb me ; no one has
disturbed me since I have been here, for I have seen no one."? Q. Did she say
she had seen no one, or that she had seen nobody she expected ? A. Except
through the window, she had seen no one, she had not been disturbed since she
had been there. ? Q. Therefore, she was not irritated or excited by your visit?
A. Not at all; she seemed quite composed, and gave that answer in a cool, quiet
manner. ? Q. Did you enter into a conversation with her? A. Before entering
into a conversation, she became suddenly very much excited. ? Q. How long
after you came into the room was that ? A. Very soon after she made this i*emark,
-very soon. ? Q. How did she show her state of excitement? A. There was a
closing of the teeth, and subsequently a gnashing of her teeth; her teeth closed
together, and there was an excitement, and a degree of irritation showing itself,
and then she became incoherent. ? Q. Now, will you be kind enough to explain
what you mean by that ? A. She rambled; she spoke in a rambling manner. If
you will permit me to remark, she spoke so quickly and rapidly that it was, im-
possible for me to retain all she did say, it was so remarkably quick; but Pwill
tell you what I was able to remember. ? Q. Could you at ail, though she spoke in
this rapid manner, collect the subject on which her mind was bent? A. Yes, I
collected something. She commenced something about the railroad, that she had
been dragged along the railroad, that she had never been on the railroad before.
She then spoke of the asylum, the persons she had seen at the asylum. She then
spoke with great bitterness of her daughters, and particularly of her daughter, Mrs.
Ince, who had been drinking at the Horns Tavern ; that she was very much dis-
gusted with her; that she had brought her up differently. She spoke this in a
most rapid manner, and I viewed it to be rambling and incoherent; and, in fact, it
was quite so, for there were many things that I could not recollect; it was verily an
-Incoherent mode of talking. ? Q. I observe you mention that she stated first she
had seen nobody at all, except through the window, while she was there, and then
you once said she spoke of the persons who had visited her ? A. She spoke of
persons whom she had seen in the asylum.?Q. You say she spoke of her daughter,
-with bitterness, I think your expression was? A. Yes; but particularly of her
daughter, Mrs. Ince. ? Q. Will you be kind enough to tell me, when she spoke in
this way of her daughter, whether you asked the cause of her feelings against her?
A. Yes; she was calmer after a time, and I then pressed this point as to her having
?seen her daughter drinking at the bar of the Horns Tavern. I asked her if she
was" positive of it. She said she was quite positive of it; she had seen her herself;
and this appeared to be the only cause, in fact, that she assigned to me for such a
great dislike to Mrs. Ince; that was the only cause I could ascertain from her on
this occasion. ? Q. Did she give, on any occasion, any reason for her dislike of
her other daughter, foryou say she expressed bitterness against both her daughters ?
A. Generally speaking, when her daughters' names were mentioned, she spoke of
them ; but I do not recollect any particular expression as regarded Mrs. Hooper.
As far as I can recollect, it was against Mrs. Ince. ? Q. Did you press her upon
the subject of the reason of her feeling against Mrs. Ince ? A.I spoke then about
it, and she said she had seen her, she was certain about it. ? Q. And there was no
-other cause assigned? A. There was no other cause assigned. I asked her if
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CCJMMING. G5
she had attempted to strangle her, or to poison her, but she made no reply. I think
she said she would tell me elsewhere all?tell somebody elsewhere, in another
place?but she gave no reply to my question I put as to her having been strangled
or poisoned, or an attempt having been made.?Q. Did you put any question to her
about her property ? A. Iasked herthe amount of her property, andshe wouldgiveme
110 reply. She said it was fast running away. She did not tell me the amount of her
property. Q. Did you ask her anything about a will? A. I asked her if she had
made a will, and she said she had not; subsequently, she said she had. ? Q. In the
same interview? A. In the same interview; and then I asked her to whom she had
bequeathed her property, but she did not reply.? Q. When she told you she had
made a will, did she say whether that had been made recently or at any distant
period? A. She did not make any remark: a long time ago, I think she said.
I think she had made a will a long time ago?if I recollect rightly?a long time
ago: she did not mention the period Q. Did you inquire of her whether she
had any friends who would protect her, aDd take care of her? A. I think she said
she had no friends who would take care of her. ? Q. I believe that she was com-
fortably circumstanced at Effra Hall, was she not? A." Quite so. ? Q. It is a
very nice place, quite like a country residence, is it not? A. Quite so; like a
private gentleman's residence?no high walls; there is an open railing in the front
of it. It had the appearance of a gentleman's house. ? Q. Upon the first occasion
you saw her, were you able to ascertain the state of her mind, and what was your
opinion of her? A." It was my conviction that she was of unsoundjmind. ? Q. Upon
the second occasion, you saw her at Effra Hall ? A. I saw her in the afternoon of
the next day. ? Q. Did you examine her, to see in what state she was as to her
bodily health? A. I did; I examined her pulse and her tongue; her tongue was
clean, her pulse was regular, and she seemed in a tolerably good state of health?
tolerably good?but I took into consideration that she had had paralysis of the
bladder. ? Q. Did you converse with her on that occasion? A. I did; she was
composed, in fact composed during the whole of that visit. She was sitting up
then?it was the afternoon; she was sitting up by the fireside, but she still persisted
in saying that not only Mrs. Ince had been drinking at the bar of the Horns tavern,
but that Mrs. Hooper had been doing the same thing. ? Q. Did she say anything
about her daughters, as to any food, or anything of that sort? A. There was a
small quantity of cold roast beef upon the table, and she pushed it towards me, and
said, I can get nothing else for dinner but this bone in the asylum?in this place?
and I then observed, that no doubt her daughters, if she required any delicacies,
"would send her some; and she said, Oh, I should be afraid to touch anything that
came from them?afraid to touch it. She also said she would not condescend to
touch it; she also said that. ? Q. Did you make any inquiry of her, upon that
occasion, as to her property? A. I asked her the amount of her property, and she
could not tell me anything about it. ? Q. What did she say ? A. She did not seem
to know anything about it at all, further than I think she did say, upon this occa-
sion, that a Mr. Ebenezer Jones had made a sale of some property; that he had
sold something, but that she would not have it done?as if it had been done, and
was rescinded afterwards?as a matter of course, it was a kind of way of expressing
herself, but I think that she made that remark. ? Q. Did she say anything about
Mr. Haynes upon that occasion? A. She said that she had been told that she had
only one friend; she had been told that Mr. Haynes was her only friend. ? Q.
Did you ask her whether she had seen anybody; do you recollect? A. Oh yes, I
do perfectly, because I was particularly anxious about it; to test her memory, I
asked her if she had seen anybody, and she still persisted in saying that she had
seen nobody since she had been at Effra Hall, although her medical attendant, Dr.
Caldwell, had not long left.? Q. Now your third visit, I think, was to go to
Gothic Villa? A. It was. ? Q. When you went there, you found her in bed,-I
think? A. I did.
The Commissioner.?When was that? A. The 28th of November.
Sir F. Thesiger.?On going in, what did you observe? A. On going in, I was
accompanied by Mr. Turner, and I found she had the curtains closed, excepting on
one side; on approaching the side where the curtains were closed, on opening them
to make an examination of her, she, on attempting to open them, exclaimed, very
loudly, " Don't do that; I cannot bear it." Well, wishing to ascertain what this
meant, I waited, for a single moment, and went to the other side of the bed, where the
E
6G THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
curtains were open, and I immediately discovered that the right eye was very much
injected, that there was great intolerance of light; it was very red, and she suffered
from great pain I presume in the eye, for there was great intolerance of light; she
could not bear the least light, and this was the cause of her exclamation ; and I
removed the cause as soon as possible, to occasion as little inconvenience as possible,
and then asked her respecting the persons she had seen at Effra Hall; she said she
had seen nobody excepting Mr. Haynes. I asked her where she resided in 1847
and 1843 ? she couid not tell me. ? Q. You say she could not tell you, or would not
tell you? A. She could not; she did n6t seem to be able to understand it at all; she
did not refuse to answer the question. ? Q. But did not seem to be able to tell you?
A. But did not seem to be able to tell me : when I then asked her about her pro-
perty, she again said it was fast running away; and, on making that remark, Mrs.
Moore interrupted her, and said, I think it will be better not to excite her. Though
I thought Mrs. Cumming could bear a longer examination, I yielded to Mrs. Moore's
request, and did not wish to be thought to excite her unnecessarily, and I discon-
tinued my examination?my examination was a very short one, but I was merely
testing her memory.?Q. Was any one there besides Mr. Turner? A. Mrs.
Moore and Mr. Haynes. ? Q. You did not mention Mr. Haynes? A. I did not.?
Q. Did you find him there when you went in? A. We found him there when we
?went- ? Q. In the room? A. Yes; and Mrs. Moore was there?he was there at
the time I made the examination Q. Do you remember Mr. Turner and Mr.
Haynes leaving the room, and Mrs. Cumming was going on talking ? A. Yes; and
I think I walked to the other end of the room, and looked out of window; and, not
"wishing to be thought to excite her; but, as soon as Mr. Haynes had left the room,
Mrs. Cumming would not cease; she went on in a rambling manner, and the
curtains were closed, and I could scarcely hear what she said; but she went on
rambling, and Mrs. Moore kept on looking towards her, and doing so?" Sh" " sh."?
Q. Did that appear to have any influence? A. No, she was talking and muttering
to herself still. ? Q. I believe you saw her once again, did you not? A. I saw her
once again on the 5th of January, she then declined to answer any questions that I
put to her. ? Q. Who was present then? A. Mr. Turner and Mrs. Moore.? Q.
But she declined to answer any questions? A. Yes, declined to answer any
questions; I think she said she would answer in another place.? Q. In your
opinion, was Mrs. Cumming of sound mind? A. In my opinion, she is of unsound
mind.? Q. In your judgment, is she capable of managing her affairs and herself?
A. In my judgment, she is not.
Cross examined by Mr. Serjeant Wilkixs. ? Q. Are you a physician? A. I
am a physician. ? Q. Do you practise otherwise than as a physician? A. No, I
do nor. ? Q. Your main practice is, I believe, amongst sane people? A. Princi-
pally. ? Q. Did you ever have anything to do with an asylum ? A. No; I attended
at IJattersea. ? Q. A patient of your own ? A. No, merely to become acquainted
with the disease as much as possible. I attended Sir Alexander's practice some
little time, and also his lectures; and also in various lunatic asylums. I read as much
as possible to make myself acquainted with the disease. ? Q. Are you on intimate
terms with Mr. Ince? A. I have now been off and on for about twenty years. I
liave been to his house, but not as a visitor. And his son has been at my house;
and I met him twenty years ago in the board-room of St. George's Hospital. I
know him to speak to him very well, but we have not visited. ? Q. Now, when
you went to this lady's room, at her residence, you say her right eye was much
injected; by that you mean, I suppose, in plain English, very much "bloodshot."
A. Very much bloodshot. ? Q. And you found there was a good reason why the
curtains should be, drawn?because the light pained her. A. Quite so. ? Q. Do
you know the lady who is attending her is the widow of a physician, Mrs. Moore?
A. I did not know it. Q. Did she not tell you Mrs. Cumming had had so many
medical men with her, and that she had had a troublesome night; she could not
bear any excitement. A. She begged her not to excite herself. ? Q. Did she not
tell you she had had medical men with her that morning; and several days
before that she had had a very uneasy night, and begged she might not be excited?
A. I do not recollect those words. ? Q. Or to that effect? A. I do not recollect
anything about a medical man. I immediately gave over.? Q. When Mrs. Moore
said "Sh! Sh!" did it not appear to you an ordinary precaution an ordinary nurse
woald use to a lady in a state of excitement? A. I do not know exactly in what
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 67
way to take it. ? Q. What induced you to come to the conclusion she was of un-
sound mind? A. Incoherence at the first visit. ? Q. Explain what you mean by
incoherence ? A. Rambling. ? Q. Were not every one of those subjects of
grievances of which she complained ? Did she not begin by complaining of having
been dragged on the railroad, never having been on one before in her life? A.
Yes. ? Q. Did she not complain that she could see no one, but through the window ?
A. Yes; she had seen no one. ? Q. Did she not complain that she could see no
one but through the window? A. No; she had not been disturbed; for she had
not seen anybody, except through a window. ? Q. Did you ask her if she had seen
any of her friends? A. Yes. ? Q. Friends? A. Yes. ? Q. Did she not, in
answer to that say, " why, how can I see any of my friends, when I can see no one
except through the window ?" A. Yes, she made a remark of that kind. ? Q. And
when at this cottage, she said, no one had called on her but Mr. Haynes; was not
that just after she told you she had no friends to take care of her; and did she not
say Mr. Haynes was the only friend who had called upon her at the madhouse?
A. Yes; she said she had seen nobody except Mr. Haynes. ? Q. Did she not say
he was the only friend who called upon her? A. No; I remember now; it was
suggested to me by the matron, that perhaps she does not consider all the persons
that visit her as friends; and I changed the word on several occasions, and put any-
body, or any person. At Gothic Villa particularly, I tried her in different ways.
I changed the word, I remember now. ? Q. Were not those incoherences of which
you speak, a rapid succession of complaints on her part; a different notion of the
sufferings she had undergone, and was undergoing? A. To a great extent they
were; but I could not connect the bar of the Horns Tavern with that incoherence.
? Q. But that was an answer to a question? A. No; she rambled in that way. ?
Q. You said you asked why she had disliked the daughter; and she said the only
reason was because she had seen her drinking at the Horns Tavern? A. No, that
was not so. ? Q. Did that form one of her complaints? A. Yes. ? Q. Did it
appear singular to you, that a person who had suffered a series of ills, should re-
peatedly repeat them, or recount them?or should be constantly dwelling upon
them? A. No, it is not remarkable.? Q, Was there anything besides the inco-
herences, that led you to suppose her unsound ? A. She had a dread of tasting
anything that came from her daughter. ? Q. That dread was expressed in those
words; you said, the daughters, if she wished it, would send her some delicacies;
and her answer was, " I should be afraid to eat after them; and would not eon-
descend to receive anything at their hands ?" ? A. Yes; I should be afraid to touch
anything that came from them, after what she said. ? Q. And " I would not eon-
descend to receive anything at their hands?" A. Yes. ? Q. Is there anything else?
A. No.
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?I understand that all the wine and other things
that came to Effra Hall, came from her daughters?
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?She did not know it, I suppose. Do not for a moment
suppose that I mean to insinuate that her daughters would do anything of the sort.
Sir Frederick. Thesiger.?But any delicacies she had, such as wine, or other
things, were all sent by the daughters.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?You may take that for granted, Sir Frederick.
(This closed the case of the Petitioners.)
