Crime, Education", and Insanity
================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
APRIL 1, 1852.
s/
Art. I.?
- *
Reason perplexes herself in yam for terms to define man in an irra-
tional state. It is difficult to conceive of him as a mere animal; to
divest him altogether of his intellectual attributes; to view him as a
creation " in the form of God," and yet deprived of those faculties of
memory, reflection, deduction, and calculation which essentially con-
stitute the figurative resemblance: once degraded from humanity, his
animal nature falls below the level of the brutes, for they never lose
instinct but with life, and remain subject to self-preserving restraint-
Language was not made for the portraiture of this anomalous con-
dition ; we are at a loss to express it even by paraphrase, or to idealize
it with sufficient accuracy to convey the idea with perspicuity. So
rare is the occurrence, that we have but one instance on scriptural
record of a total separation of body and mind while life was still
existent; and even this is only represented to us by one or two distin-
guishing traits that serve rather to indicate the grossness of the degra-
dation than the new character of the subject of it. We learn that
Nebuchadnezzar "was driven from men and did eat grass as oxen, and
his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like
eagle's feathers, and his nails like bird's claws." As a total prostration
of humanity, the picture is complete; but we are left in ignorance of the
extent to which human passions, human desires, or the appetites pecu-
* An Enquiry into the Extent and Causes of Juvenile Depravity. By Thomas Beggs.
Gilpin.
On Crime. By Mr. Flint. Gilpin. N
Moral and Educational Statistics. By J. Fletcher, Esq.
-NO. XVIII. JVL
262 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
]iar to humanity, were obliterated. As the severance of body and reason
was total, and the degradation was designed for punishment, it is pro-
bable that the passions and desires remained, but without the power of
gratification; unless we are to infer from the expression that his " under-
standing returned unto him," a temporary alienation of the soul from
the body, during which the soul was in a state of suffering?an infer-
ence that may possibly be correct; for Ave are told that his punishment
was to continue till he should " know that the Most High ruleth in the
kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will." This was a
knowledge which an irrational being could not attain, as a conviction
produced by suffering. It may be, therefore, that the intellectual and
immaterial essence was in this case removed, and not that its functions
were suspended; while the body it had inhabited, though not actually
disengaged from its affections, was left wholly unfettered by its control,
and unguided by its intelligence. It is idle to prosecute the specula-
tive inquiry.
While we are at a loss to define intelligibly the status of human
existence wholly apart from intellect or reason, the total severance of
body and soul is an idea, if not intuitive, yet easily received, and con-
firmed by revelation as well as instilled by education; but the partial
paralysis of the mind or soul, while yet in union with the body, affords
a problem of which we can feel the difficulty, though we can find no
words to convey it. Our passions are involved in a net of correlative
intricacy; they are so interlaced with each other that a fibre cannot be
wounded without affecting the sensibility of all. It is like a system
of complicated machinery, in which the absence of a single screw may
derange the whole, and put it out of working gear. The defect may be
so trivial that the engineer cannot discover it: he examines the piston,
the valves, the gauge, and all the apparatus; inspection can detect no
flaw; there is no actual cessation of action, but it "does not work well."
The engine is deranged, not incapacitated; his remedy is simple, though
expensive; he takes it to pieces, and adjusts the parts again : but the
derangement of the mind admits of no such process: we must bear with
the bad working till close observation and long experience aid us in
discovering the cause of failure; and if meanwhile we are called upon
to explain the mystery, our only answer is, that our machinery is " not
in working gear."
A closer examination into this web of human passions may be of
service. It will not be disputed that there are to be found in every man,
though modified in degree, the same dispositions to gratify, the same
desires to be satisfied. The modification arises from difference of cir-
cumstances : it may be of constitution, of example, of opportunity, or
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 163
otherwise; but the same nature that we all inherit, dictates to us the
gratification of our animal wants: hunger, thirst, procreation, and self-
protection, and, so far as consists with these, rest, are the desires which
nature has implanted in us. Such is the impetuosity of these desires
in animal nature not controlled by reason, that the brute creation will
endanger life itself to gratify the three first, and are gifted with instinctive
means to secure the others; but man, as an animal, is gregarious, and,
as an intellectual animal, has convinced himself that society requires for
its common safety the restraint of animal desires. To facilitate this
self-restraint, the same intellectual faculty has suggested a gratification
yet higher than that of animal passion, in self-complacency derived from
the approbation of his fellows. Yanity will not persuade a man to die
of hunger or thirst, but it will go far to keep him within the limits of
due moderation, and to promote self-denial. His nature compels sociality;
this is his animal instinct. His reason tells him that society lias its laws,
founded on what may be called a reciprocity of self-restraint. This is
the position in which we find ourselves placed by nature as intellectual
animals.
It is obvious that if there were an exact parity of circumstances, of
motive, and of opportunity, we should be reduced to an instinctive state
of existence. Like bees in a hive, we should do-our duty as good
citizens, each in his sphere, and nobody transgressing or falling short of
his proper limit. We are not, however, mere animals, similarly circum-
stanced, but responsible beings; and to secure this responsibility, it has
pleased the Creator to place us under variety of circumstances, affording
variety of temptation. To some are given vivacity of temperament and
robust health, tempting to sensuality; to some unbounded wealth, afford-
ing the solicitation of frequent opportunity; to others, and far more
frequently, privation and distress that seduce into dishonest paths.
Some are endowed with rank so exalted as to place them above the
decencies of life; while others are depressed so low as not even to un-
derstand them: one can offend with impunity because he cannot lose
caste; another has no caste to lose, and is, therefore, equally un-
restrained. In all these varieties of position, the animal wants common
to our race must be gratified alike; but the means of gratification being
unequal, the inequality of means provokes a corresponding inequality
of passion and of pursuit. The wealthy sensualist indulges in daily
potations, large perhaps and enervating, but not intoxicating! The
pauper sensualist lives like a hermit till Saturday night, and then gets
drunk with gin. The rich debauchee, always gratified to satiety, degene-
rates into a saturated clod of earth; the needy drunkard alternates
between the extreme of depression and the wild excitement of occasional
h 2
1G4 crime, education, and insanity.
inebriety; tlic former becomes morose, unreasonable, and tyrannical;
the latter cunning, vindictive, and desponding ; the first is uniformly
indolent; the last, idle and energetic by turns. Or, perhaps, intem-
perance is not, in its grosser forms, the besetting sin in either case.
Infirmity of body or early habit may prevent it; riches and opportunity
may assault in another direction, and tempt their possessor to the pur-
chase of power; power tends to oppression, oppression to resistance,
and resistance to revenge. So, on the other hand, poverty may provoke
to discontent, and discontent to rapacity and violence.
Nor is it only in the perversion of means to subserve licentious
excess, but in the adaptation of them to legitimate gratification, that
infinite scope is afforded for the range of passion; the trader begins
in frugality and ends in avarice; the ingenuity of the mechanic often
terminates in the gambling of the speculating patentee; the man of
science pushes analysis and research to the verge of scepticism in revealed
truth; perhaps (we say it doubtingly) the statesman may start in his
career in a patriotic spirit, while the chances are a hundred to one
that lie closes it in political corruption, or selfish and unscrupulous
ambition.
To check the vehemence of these passions, and correct their down-
ward tendency, society has invented a double system of restraint; reli-
gion has imposed a third, more powerful than either; the decalogue has
enumerated and prohibited specific offences of heinous guilt, under
penalty of incurring the wrath of God; and the gospel has extended the
prohibition and the penalty to the spirit as well as the letter of the
offence. But we are not all religious; and therefore, to secure the
common peace, society has promulgated her own codes in aid of the
divine law: where passion is indulged to an extent that works actual
injury or risk to others, legislation steps in to define the crime and visit
it with appropriate punishment. This is one part of our restraining
system; but it is clearly applicable only to cases where an evil intent
is manifested by overt acts, and such as can be well defined not only by-
words but by their practical results. We can justly punish, because we
can accurately describe, murder, theft, arson, forgery, and such like
crimes; but, consistently with due regard to freedom, we cannot reco-
gnise constructive crime as a fair subject of penal enactment; in some
instances we have gone to the very verge of discretion in the latitude
of our legislative wisdom, but, in all free states, crime must be accu-
rately defined, so as to admit of accurate proof, before it can be ren-
dered penal.
Yet passion may be indulged to a very culpable excess, without
transgressing the boundary that legislation has declared; to provide
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. I?**
some restraint even in such cases, society lias attached to this culpa-
bility what may be called a moral penalty, in the forfeiture of its good
opinion; thus availing itself of a peculiarity of our nature which was,
doubtless, implanted in us for good purposes, though often productive
of the worst. It cannot be that men were created to live together, and
yet to be indifferent to the esteem and respect of their fellow-creatures:
to set this up as a paramount motive, would be to disobey the command
to fear God rather than man; to disregard it as a secondary motive, is
to despise the example of Christ Himself, who, as He grew in stature,
grew in favour also both with God and man. Society, therefore, has
wisely imported this principle into her restraining system; and, by force
of it, the woman who has surrendered her virtue, the man who has
seduced her into falling, or who has been convicted of malicious false-
hood, of fraudulent practices, of breach of trust, of violating good faith,
such as opening or betraying a private letter, eaves-dropping, vindictive
slander, or any other sin against the so-called code of honour, is tacitly
shunned as one who wants nothing of legal criminality, but the courage
to defy its penal consequences. And, on the other hand, the man avIio
acts rigorously up to this conventional decency of the world, finds him-
self so protected by its smiles, that he may cut his neighbour's throat if
he will, provided he does it in a gentlemanly way, by tendering his own
to a similar process!
And thus by the very restraints imposed upon our passions, ultra
their necessary stimulus to provide for the wants of our animal nature,
a new impulse to excess is given to us in the gratification of that pride
or vanity which, when rationally indulged, supplies the best security for
conforming to social usages. Even for this licentious self-complacency,
society has found an appropriate and, generally, an efficient remedy in
ridicule and laughter; its displeasure may lose its acerbity, but it is
not the less painfully felt or the less openly expressed.
This exposition of the working of our passions from their first
legitimate use of opportunity to the ultimate abuse of it, may perhaps
appear elaborately commonplace; we introduce it to show the infinite
gradations that are found in the relaxation of the control of reason,
from the first and perhaps momentary indulgence of passion beyond
the supply of animal wants, till the chronic indulgence of it carries the
offender beyond the limits affixed by law. Strictly and metaphysically,
the very first post-prandial glass of wine beyond the allowance which
animal want dictates for the restoration of exhausted nature, is a self-
indulgence which reason forbids; and is, therefore, as much an act of
an irrational animal as self-investiture in a diadem of straw. It disturbs
no faculty of ratiocination, it is true; sometimes it improves the power,
and if the extra glass is taken with that view, it is a rational, not an
16(J CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
irrational act; but if taken merely to please the palate, or to produce a
little, brief, pleasurable excitement, tlie natural appetite being already-
appeased, it becomes an excess of tlie restraint wliieli reason imposes,
and is, pro tanto, the act of an irrational being. So, again, in the trader's
case; all trade is, in some sense, a speculation on contingencies; so long
as the speculation is governed by knowledge of the market, and by cal-
culations founded on experience, it is rational and legitimate, if the risk
is fairly within the limits of his capital; but a single adventure, how-
ever small, if not hedged round with these protective circumstances,
assumes the gambling character, and proves that the passion of avarice
has been carried beyond the limit prescribed by reason; it then becomes
the act of an irrational animal. Once more, an honest barber in a
borough town may usefully devote a leisure hour to parochial matters
in the vestry; he is talkative, fluent, and good-humoured, and, of course,
carries all before him; he reduces a rate, or removes a nuisance, and
makes himself useful to his neighbours?all this is rational and praise-
worthy: elated by success, and presuming on the good will he has
secured, he offers himself, at the next vacancy, as a candidate to repre-
sent the borough in opposition to Lord John or Sir Robert, the owner
of half the town; here reason, for the moment, has ceased to exercise
control?vanity has been indulged beyond a useful purpose?he acts
irrationally, and is laughed at.
Such casual and trifling disobedience to reason we designate as simple
folly. It amounts to no more than a verification of the old adage,.
" nemo mortalium," &c. Yet, if often repeated, the control of reason is
often suspended; if habitually repeated, irrationality becomes habitual;.
and inasmuch as passion of any kind cannot be habitually indulged with-
out acquiring additional strength by the indulgence, as the cause
becomes more powerful the effect becomes more marked; reason is
eventually defeated in the struggle, and a state of confirmed lunacy is
induced. The approximation to this state may be by degrees almost
imperceptible; it may be accelerated by accident, such as wounds,
disease, or domestic anxiety ; anything tending to unusual excitement
may cause more frequent resort to the accustomed irrational gratifica-
tion ; and so it may be retarded by similar accident; the restraint of
an unexpected guest, a sudden necessity for travelling or change of
residence, even illness of a lowering kind, may suspend the opportunity
or the inclination for the wonted indulgence; or the indulgence of one
passion may, for a time, be neutralized by the opportunity of yielding
to another of antagonistic character. Where casual irrationality slides
into chronic irrationality thus slowly and subject to such interruptions,
it will cease to excite suspicion that our most experienced men of
science, feel and generally avow their inability to define the state; a
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 107
single drop makes the glass flow over, yet tlie most accurate eye cannot
determine whether the glass will receive one or fifty more without over-
flowing. It is as difficult to determine the precise moment when passion
has overpowered reason and ejected her from her seat, as it often is to
fix the minute when death has separated the body and the soul; we feel
for the drooping pulse, and put the feather to the lips, and long watch,
in silent agony, before we dare close the half-shut eye, and announce
that the spix-it has departed. A remark in the Report of the Commis-
sioners in Lunacy, of 1847, respecting idiocy, is equally applicable to
every class of mania not marked by visible symptoms of organic disease:
" It comprises within its limits many intermediate forms, some of which
pass into each other by insensible gradations, and are not easily distin-
guishable by language, although the extremes are well defined and very
remote from each other."
It is for this reason that the facts which are commonly presented to
medical witnesses, as criteria to test the sanity of a party, are often
absurdly equivocal. In the recent inquiry into Mrs. Cumming's case,
the attention bestowed on half-a-dozen cats was gravely tendered as a
proof of irrationality : as if every old woman in the country had not
half-a-dozen pets of one kind or other at her elbow. In other cases,
slovenliness of dress, jealousy of female attendants, apprehension of
domestic treachery, and even eternal scribbling, have been quoted as
evidences of an alienated reason, sufficient to satisfy the physician,
whose opinion is to guide a jury. If the question were only whether
these were failings inconsistent with a well-regulated mind, that is, a
mind governing its will by certain fixed utilitarian principles, such facts
would be relevant to the issue; nor can it be denied, that an accumula-
tion of habits decidedly eccentric and motiveless, warrants a suspicion
of derangement; though, even in that case, it is only suspicion in aid of
proof. No single fact, nor any accumulation of facts, for each of which
a possible, though inadequate, reason may be assigned, is, per se, conclu-
sive of irrationality : as, for example, had it been proved that Mrs.
Cumming was in the habit of walking backwards in the park for half-
an-liour daily, what stress would have been laid on such a peculiarity!
Yet no man can take a pedestrian tour through Wales, without occa-
sionally witnessing a similar exhibition in well-dressed, sensible-looking
young gentlemen; it being well known to all addicted to such amuse-
ment, that the intercostal muscles are greatly relieved, especially in
ascending hills, by a change to backward walking. Apprehension of
domestic treachery is always a favourite topic with the pro-lunacy
counsel; yet one of the most eminent artists of the day, whose intellept
is as brilliant as his colours, for many years pursued the habit, and
. perhaps pursues it still, dictated by similar distrust, of baking his own
]0S CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
bread, grinding his own flour, and dressing his own dinner, with the
same hands that give enchanting animation to his canvas. A single act
may he ultra the restraint of reason ; even an habitual practice may be
motiveless to absurdity, and to that extent, irrational, and yet common
sense forbids us to regard it as diagnostic of insanity. It may warrant
the conclusion tliat the agent does not appreciate the force of tliat con-
ventional code of discipline which we have just described ; it may justify
?censure or ridicule as an error in good sense, a breach of good manners,
or an offence to good taste, but it does not argue settled irrationality.
Nebuchadnezzar, on being restored to understanding, might have
retained in his palace some of the freedoms of his seven years appren-
ticeship to brutality; he may still have found dress an incumbrance,
ablution a painful nuisance, and all the restraints that decency imposes
on social intercourse, for a time unnatural. It is probable, from the
narrative, that these mementos of his humiliation were not abruptly
removed; yet Ave cannot, consistently with the truth of Scripture, con-
tend that they ought to have been received as evidence of continuing
irrationality, for the precise limit of his mental alienation was pro-
phetically fixed; nor would such a diagnosis have been correct, even if
he had vindicated the adherence to his bestial habits. He might have
plausibly urged, that a sudden change to the warmth of clothing would
be prejudicial to his bodily health; that frequent washing Avas painful to
the neAV cuticle; that the peristaltic action would be impeded by needless
control. Such reasoning would at least have been plausible; yet, in
modern times, it Avould have been quoted by Sir Frederick Thesiger as
indicative only of the acknowledged cunning of confirmed insanity,
and, malgre the prophetic limit, a jury Avould have found him incapable
of managing his own affairs, though the Creator had restored his
kingdom as Avell as his understanding.
As acts of irrationality multiply in their frequency or tlieir kind,
they may be safely received as indications of a progressive struggle
going on between reason and passion, and that the latter is gradually
gaining the mastery, but not that the victory is obtained. The abuse of
opium furnishes a convenient illustration of our meaning. Its essential
medicinal property is so Avell understood, that men frequently resort to
it as a sedative, without duly appreciating it as a stimulant; the dose
is repeated till its pleasurable excitement becomes familiar, and then
the limit of its medicinal use is transgressed, regardless of its noxious
qualities. This is the first act of irrationality. Taken singly, it argues
no more than similar excess in the indulgence of Avine; it is only the
first glass beyond the just supply of natural Avant: yet a systematic
abuse of the drug is a much stronger symptom of the approaching
surrender of reason to passion, than a similar abuse of the AYine, because
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 109
the offender cannot be unconscious of the comparative rapidity and
greater certainty of the poison; he daily feels that the want and its
gratification act reciprocally on each other with fatal effect, not only on
his understanding, but on life itself, and yet he courts his enemy and
the conflict. But though the symptom is stronger, still it is not con-
clusive : reason is not yet conquere'd. The victim himself feels her dic-
tates, and often struggles for a time to obey them. He gradually
reduces the indulgence by half-a-grain a day. If he steadily maintains
his x-esolution, reason has triumphed, and he rallies ; but in the large
majority of cases, resolution fails : he returns to his excess, and then
the only question is, whether reason will take her departure before an
early death effects her total separation from the body whose passions
have estranged her.
So, too, where the acts of irrationality multiply in kind, as well as
frequency or degree. If the same excess of vanity that leads an
honest barber to propose himself for parliament, tempts him to array
his person in military uniform, and decorate his breast with spurious
clasps and medals, we cease to ridicule his folly, because we begin to
doubt his sanity; it is a step in advance, but it is not conclusive. We
remember an instance of this kind during the short peace of 1814:,
A youth of eighteen, the follower of a very humble and peaceful occu-
pation, was not only accustomed to assume the warlike garb, but more
than once thrust himself, in his borrowed plumes, into the gayest
military circles. He was soon detected, and punished with deserved
ridicule : yet he was not irrational; and on the contrary, for eiglit-
and-tliirty years he has maintained a high reputation for accomplished
vice, without the good fortune to excite a transient suspicion of any
intellectual deficiency! To proceed with our illustration; let the
barber, in addition to his other antics, offer his hand to Miss Burdett
Coutts, or tender his acceptance for a few thousands for discount at the
Bank of England, his preposterous pretensions tend largely to the same
conclusion, though still they do not establish it; for marriage with a
wealthy heiress, or even credit to a large amount, may enable him to
buy a seat in parliament, or establish himself as colonel of a yeomanry
regiment, and thus realize his dreams. All these supposed extrava-
gancies are but so many cumulative proofs of the excess to which
vanity is carried beyond its use as a utilitarian principle; they may-
terminate in alienation of mind, but do not prove her actual departure.
If, however, simultaneously with these absurdities, the unhappy wretch
now and then mistakes a grate of hot coals for his chair, or seeks to
draw a glass of ale from the spout of a boiling kettle, or shaves a cus-
tomer's head in lieu of his chin, this multiplication of irrational acts,
in kind as well as degree, justifies the conclusion that reason has
170 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
actually vacated her throne, though the precise moment of the abdica-
tion may remain as problematical as ever.
- There is a remarkable feature in that perpetual struggle between
passion and reason, which terminates in insanity in the manner we
have described. From the first commencement of the conflict to its
termination, reason is forewarned of the ultimate result. A single glass
taken in excess, or a cheerful glass, as it is frequently called, is always
followed by some proportionate depression Avhen the power of the
stimulus is exhausted. If the abuse has been but slight, the depression
is transient, and speedily removed by the excitement of business and
daily duty; if the abuse has been considerable, the depression will
cause a temporary incapacity for duty; if it has been unbounded, phy-
sical incapacity supervenes, and this unconsciousness is followed by
utter prostration of spirit. These stages of intoxication are well un-
derstood by the vulgar phrases of " fresh," " drunk," " gloriously
drunk." The excitement is well observed, and tersely described, by
the class in which it is common, but the subsequent depression eludes
their observation. The opium-eater exhibits this alternation of gaiety
and sadness in a more decided form. In his case, intoxication is
elysium, and its sequence, hell: and so it is, more or less, with every
struggle between passion and reason. The calmness of self-possession
gradually becomes unknown. We perceive this feature clearly in the
familiar instance of intoxication. It is equally marked, though less
distinguishable by the unpliilosophic eye, in all cases of contention
between the appetites and the reason. Gratification gives delight, but
it is transient, and vanishes in self-disgust, till new gratification revives
the delight in a less intense degree, and for a still more transitory
existence : eventually, even gratification itself palls upon the taste; all
pleasure is lost, and incurable despondency ensues. Miserly avarice,
perhaps, is an exception to the rule; but if an exception, it is only
because the passion is, from its nature, insatiable, and absolute gratifi-
cation unattainable; and even avarice to be an exception, must be
miserly, for when it assumes the form of gambling, the opium-eater's
languor is bliss, compared to the gamester's remorse.
It cannot be doubted that these retributory warnings, inseparable as
they are from all excess in the indulgence of our animal passions, are
mercifully designed to give reason time to rally; to afford fair oppor-
tunity for reflection; to enable her to resist the next temptation with
more fortitude and effect; for it is indisputable that up to a certain
point, when physical suffering has actually exhausted the energy of the
mind, its power is never so great as when the mere animal is subdued
into torpidity by satiety, the excitement of sensual gratification having
worn itself out: in religious language, conscience then begins to awake;
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. I71
in metaphysical language, we should say that reason then exerts her
power; she looks back, she calculates, she estimates the past and plans
for the future; and she resolves. We well know that by her own
strength alone, her resolutions will be wanting in constancy; but we are
considering the matter as philosophers, not as divines, and we therefore
abjure discussion of her self-sufficiency: Ave only aver the fact that
reason is most awakened and most powerful in the intervals of animal
excitement, and it is a most important fact in that j)sychological theory
for which we are contending: it is the remark of every commentator
that our Saviour, when tempted in the wilderness, an occasion when he
stood alone in his humanity, found himself in a state of almost super-
human endurance; that the design (if it is permitted so to speak of the
mysteries of revelation) was to add all possible force to the temptation
by the predominance of animal want; it was expedient to show to us
for whom the atonement was made, that the sacrifice was immaculate;
the very nature of the temptations offered, and of the indignant repulse
given to them, proves that his humanity was, as it were, momentarily
deserted by his divinity; he repelled Satan by reference to God, and
not by any inherent power in himself: and to make his human inno-
cence, if we may be allowed the expression, more conspicuous, the trial
was aggravated by physical suffering of the precise kind that the
temptation appeared calculated to relieve. We are entitled to infer
from this that reason is the weakest, when passion or desire is at its
culminating point; and that as desire is satisfied, reason resumes her
sway.
And it is through this interlocutory cessation of strife that, in the
large majority of cases, in the earlier stages of the conflict, reason
recovers her superiority once and for ever: shame at the self-exposure
(for reason always desires to veil her own infirmities as well as those of
the frail tenement she inhabits), apprehension of more serious con-
sequences, and where principle has been instilled by education, a
consciousness of sin, combine to strengthen determination for the future
and temptation resisted with success, loses power after every defeat.
Nor is it unfrequently that we find, in more advanced stages, that a
counteracting influence is brought in aid of reason, when beginning to
faint from the exhaustion of reiterated assault, by another inevitable
result of habitual self-indulgence; the sickness and debility of the
organs that it has sought to gratify. It needs not the authority of
science to assure us, that in whatever direction passion is indulged to
excess, actual disease of the organ thereby kept in constant excitement,
will sooner or later follow; and from the sympathy that exists between
every portion of the body and the brain, and more especially and per-
ceptibly, between the stomach and the brain, affections of the nervous
172 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
system, are usually the first visible fruits of organic derangement. It is
not necessarily tlie case that the cerebral substance is appreciably altered
in its structure: when that occurs in certain parts of the brain, the
symptoms of insanity are no longer equivocal; but long before disease
has attained that height, the patient is conscious of pain, dulness of
perception, impairment of memory and irregularity of thought: in
some cases slight epileptic or paralytic a flections add their premonitory
hints: and in all cases the taste for the favourite indulgence is tempo-
rarily checked. The alarm thus given, and yet more, the abridgment
of opportunity by the physician, and the languor of the depraved
inclination, combine to give another respite to reason. A singular
instance of this once fell under our observation: a young clergyman,
from domestic trials of a very severe nature, and not the less severe
because induced by his own misconduct, betook himself to drinking, as
well as other indulgences of a yet more debasing character; being the
incumbent of a remote country village, he was able to continue his
profligate course for a few years without attracting the notice of his
diocesan. At length his nervous system became so shattered that
exposure was inevitable; compassion for his state saved him from
degradation, but he was suspended for two years; this ignominious
sentence compelled his return to the parental roof, where for many
months his life was despaired of, though reason never absolutely forsook
him; sickness, however, accomplished her end. There is still too much
ground to fear that the reform is based on no higher principle than
prudence; however that may be, his moral conduct has ever since been
?correct, and all his intemperate habits abandoned; this case was singular,
because he was at once pronounced insane by the concurrent opinion of
his medical attendants, first in the country, and then in London, while
maternal affection denied it; with natural jealousy she repudiated all
the treatment recommended under that impression, except so far as to
deprive him of all opportunity of self-indulgence. Nature and reflection,
.aided by bodily suffering, did the rest.
The conclusion at which we arrive from this theory of mental
pathology is, that the sense of responsibility, though gradually decreasing
at every successive stage, is never wholly lost till the alienation of reason
is unequivocal: calculation of consequences not only may exist in a man
whose passions have uninterrupted sway for three or four days in every
week, but nature has provided intervals for reflection and calculation
arising from the very cause of the disease, and has given to the mind
during such intervals, a peculiar adaptation of tone to avail itself of the
opportunity thus afforded for weighing consequences.
It will of course be at once understood, that our theory is confined to
-those cases in which there is 110 possibility of forming a diagnosis from
antecedent circumstances, or physical development. If a man has been
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 17&
subject to epileptic attacks of aggravated character, it may be safe to
predicate insanity, from eccentricities and absurdities of thought and,
action, which otherwise would only indicate and amount to folly. If
there is reason to apprehend an hereditary predisposition, and the head,
the complexion, or other features, indicate a scrofulous habit, the same
latitude of judgment must be allowed. The state of the eyes is often
symptomatic of cerebral pressure; the expression of the features, well
understood though difficult to describe, may disclose aberration of mind
at a glance; the idiotic vacancy, though it may be casually assumed by
actors like Liston, is, when permanent, a symptom too decisive for
mistake : in a word, wherever there is clearly a predisposing cause from
physical injury to the head, constitutional affection, or visible organic
defect, it is needless to go very minutely into evidence of conduct.
The cases of perplexity are those in which peculiarity of conduct alone,
and wholly unattended by decisive physical symptoms, affords the evidence
by which disease of mind is to be determined; such cases are considered
to resolve themselves into metaphysical subtleties; medicine, as a science,,
being- supposed to have little to do with them. The action of the mind
upon the body is almost as great, though not so apparent as the action
of the body on the mind; hence, by constant observation of the charac-
teristic symptoms of those labouring under undoubted mania, the physi-
cian may infer the existence of incipient mania from similar phenomena
in a suspected party; and to this extent his experience is entitled to
weight; but where all such phenomena are wanting, or are uncertain in
their appearance, some other theory, it is said, than that of physical
disease must be suggested to account for derangement of the mind : we
have on a former occasion expressed a doubt whether in any case mental
derangement is ever found unattended by some altered state of nervous:
matter; we adhere to that opinion, and the theory Ave have ventured to
enunciate, is in unison with it. But the organic disease may be too
obscurely developed to guide the judgment; or its appreciable symptoms
may consist with other affections notoriously unconnected with mania,,
or insufficient to account for it. Restlessness, indigestion, increased
arterial action, and many other irregularities of the system, are found as
often in sane as in insane patients; after mania has become confirmed
and especially in those cases where it is incurable, the bodily symptoms-
assume a common type, varying a little according to constitutional habit,
or the violent or melancholy character of the insanity; when the mind
has clearly taken its final leave of the body, as regards its proper control
over it, the animal nature, thus left to itself, is, though animated, essen-
tially a passive substance; that, moulded by the same hands and sustained
by the same nourishment, and governed by the same principles, will
assimilate itself to any other substance of the like nature, so far as it is-
exempt from any peculiarity of disease or organization. In such eases
274 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
we may expect to find a general uniformity of symptom. Where, on
tlie contrary, the alienation of mind is not irremediable, its morbid
action on the body will be imperfectly developed; and though local
disease may exist, the actual seat of it may not be discoverable by any
symptoms peculiar to itself. In such cases we are compelled to resort
to some pathology of the mind to guide our diagnosis.
It is not, however, for scientific purposes that we have thus suggested
a principle on which such mental pathology may be based; our idiocrasy
is a subject of study for the practical statesman as well as the physician;
all peculiarity of temperament, and the causes which elicit it, are well
worthy of consideration in the dynamics of legislation; it seems strictly
within our province to aid in supplying the elements of legislative cal-
culation, and this is our apology for pursuing the inquiry into fields
where science rarely trespasses.
If our theory is correct, it affords a clue to the solution of the problem
that has long perplexed the most acute among our lawyers, as well as
the most learned among our medical professors. " Where shall the limit
of responsibility be fixed?" The mens capax doli is, as everybody
knows, the criterion of lawyers; but, except in the case of children, they
always have recourse to physicians to interpret this indefinite standard.
A few years since peers and judges met in solemn conclave to evolve out
of the confusion of ethics and metaphysics, in which both professions had
become inextricably plunged, some term of more definite meaning. The
united wisdom of their lordships broke down, as seems to be the inevi-
table lot of collective sagacity in modern times. It was announced by
tlieir supreme authority that a capability of distinguishing right from
wrong should henceforward be the measure of responsibility. This was
not even a step in advance; it only substituted for one expression of
doubtful meaning another still more unintelligible. As we long since
argued, " right and wrong" are arbitrary terms, and no two people are
exactly agreed in their application of them to any given deed of
humanity. The only practical result of this learned attempt to define
that which is from its nature undefinable, has been to give sanction to a
judicial usurpation of the functions of a jury; and to a certain extent
this has worked well, for our judges are far less credulous of insanity
than our juries, and so are we in respect of its apology for crime. It
is, however, still found that in all cases where medical opinion is required,
the " right from wrong" craniometer is unsatisfactory to our professional
brethren, and not always conclusive with a jury, notwithstanding their
wonted deference to the court; the problem of responsibility, therefore,
still remains unsolved.
Bearing constantly in mind that the problem never arises in cases of
unequivocal insanity, the difficulty may be stated thus: We find a man
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 175
apparently in good bodily health charged with a breach of our criminal
code; the offender has been long noted for eccentricity, and the crime
appears to have been committed without obvious motive: is such a man
to be held responsible like other men?
The corollary from our theory is, that criminality, moral or legal, and,
us regards the argument, it matters not which, is not only consistent
with the progressive alienation of reason, but is at once the cause, and
the invariable precursor of its final departure, excepting only such cases
us may be explained by physical indicia of a determinate character. All
indulgence of our animal propensities beyond the limit that is necessary
for the support and propagation of animal nature, is, morally or reli-
giously speaking, a crime; that is to say, it is a transgression of the
boundary which the law of God has appointed to the gratification of our
animal appetites. The law of man has been less severe in placing the
boundary; its restraint only begins when self-indulgence becomes inju-
rious to the reasonable gratification of others; the former code has for
its object to fix our responsibility to our Creator; the latter code to fix
our responsibility to society; but the subject-matter of either code is
equally the gratification of our appetites, and the object of both is self-
restraint ; conscience gives stringency to the first, and punishment to the
last, while reason is the guide to submission in both cases; disobedience
to our guide is visited Avith immediate penalty in the one case, and with
future penalty in the other ; and inasmuch as immediate punishment is
always more potent as a check than remote punishment, we find a far
larger proportion of mankind acting in disobedience to reason in refer-
ence to the law of God than in reference to the law of man; hundreds
and thousands daily indulge in many a glass too much for actual neces-
sity, who would be horrified at the idea of being picked up in the street
in unconscious drunkenness; yet the offence is the same except in cir-
cumstance. The incident of publicity brings it, in the one case, within
the category of municipal crime, but reason is as much offended in the
one case as the other; her restraint is despised in both instances alike;
criminality instantly attaches, but responsibility is instant or remote,
according to the code which has been violated; in the first stages of
criminality, consequences are calculated with accuracy and even anxiety;
as it becomes more frequent, frequent impunity becomes an element in
the calculation, till reiterated experience of impunity bids defiance to all
calculation, and the offender persists in his career, regardless of conse-
quences. This is the precise epoch from which common observers arc
apt to date the moral symptoms of mental aberration; nor can this
cxcite surprise, for the debilitation of reason by reiterated defeat in her
conflicts with passion, is a theory that has never been propounded: that
conscience becomes callous by resistance, is a doctrine enforced liebdo-
J[70 crime, education, and insanity.
madally; but conscience is a faculty so distinct from Uneducated reason,
that it often becomes obliterated before reason has attained its
maturity.
Disregard of consequences does not necessarily imply inability to cal-
culate them. A man who cannot swim may plunge into the sea to save
a child from drowning; in his generous heroism he disregards conse-
quences; he is perfectly able to calculate them, and may have argued
the folly of such self-sacrifice only five minutes previously; but generosity
is a passion, though, unfortunately, of rare occurrence; he yields to the
impulse of passion, and defies consequences; for the moment, reason has
lost her influence; and if he fails in his object, but is himself saved, he
will probably assent to the selfish comment, that he was a fool for his
pains; yet, in such a case, or for such a cause, who Avould venture to
denounce him mad; charity herself could not deny his responsibility,
though she would plead the generous feeling as a fair ground of exemp-
tion from punishment. The argument will hold good in the case of the
baser passions, as well as in the noblest; it is only the palliation that
fails.
Our corollary is also sustained by the strict analogy which is observ-
able between the progress of crime and the progress of mental aliena-
tion; the sophists of antiquity were as familiar as ourselves with the
graduality of degeneration; the chaplain of every gaol listens daily to
confessions that prove the apothegm " nemo repente turpissimus." The
first watch abstracted from its owner ticks punishment into the ear of
the thief for hours; the watch goes down, and apprehension goes down
with it; some " fence" buys it for a sovereign, and the delinquent finds
himself in wealth for four-and-twenty hours; such, however, has been
his alarm after the first offence, that reason resumes a temporary sway;
he reckons up the risk and resolves better things; but, meanwhile, he
starves, and starvation is not the less painful in the recollection of his
recent day of plenty and debauch; he will try the adventure once more
?only once more; if he succeeds he will husband the resources it sup-
plies, and look out for honest employment; it is reasonable to allow
himself a better chance; if he can " twig" a purse, his profit will be
greater and give him more time to seek for occupation; he watches an
unsuspecting victim receiving dividends, and aiding audacity by inge-
nuity, again succeeds?twenty sovereigns reward his second crime; he
reckons with more confidence on impunity?he finds his reckoning right;
a fortnight of idleness and profligacy repays him, and crime now becomes
his trade. Planned robberies, well " got up," succeed to petty thefts,
and these, in turn, are superseded by higher and more profitable crime;
the wants of nature are well supplied, and passion, beyond her wants, is
abundantly indulged; indulgence adds craving to the appetite, and
CRIME, EDUCATION-, AND INSANITY. 177
appetite must be satisfied, reckless of consequence. This is the ladder
by which the highwayman and murderer ascends the scaffold.
It matters not what may be the character of the crime; it may be
arson, it may be rape; the first successful gratification of vindictive
feeling leads by similar progression to the one; the first flirtation of
simple sensuality, unchecked, if not encouraged, leads by the like grada-
tion to the other; in all cases progress from venial to bad, from bad to
worse, and thence to extremes, is the invariable trait of a criminal
career; consequences are first calculated with anxiety, then merely
weighed against immediate gain, and, finally, disregarded altogether.
Here Ave find a perfect identity of character with that form of mental
alienation which is (apparently) distinct from organic disease. There is
no abrupt transition, no sudden metamorphosis, 110 marked convulsion
of the system, no violent disturbance of accustomed habit; cause pro-
duces effect by obvious and natural process. Each successive step in
either progress is characterized by the same traits. The first is so slight
an interruption to the daily path that it is taken almost unawares; then
conscience, the barometer of morals, indicates a fall to a lower level-;
consequences are now calculated with alarm that magnifies their danger,
and the calculation always arrests, and sometimes prevents, further
descent. Passion at length revives with aggravated strength, and
suggests that reason has overrated risk. Then comes the second step,
again followed by self-reproach, but with pangs less durable, and appre-
hensions less lively and defined. Thus the interval is reduced between
the second and third, and that reduction proceeds in geometrical pro-
gression ; then step follows step with a rapidity that admits of no check,
till descent is terminated by the bottom of the abyss. In both cases
the gravitation is occasionally interrupted; opportunity is adeemed by
change of circumstances, waning energy or lowering sickness: these
present a temporary obstacle, like a projecting crag that breaks the
precipice, and extend a momentary reprieve; but though strength may-
be recruited, it rarely avails to re-ascend the heights; the downward
tendency has become habitual; even the sensation of reckless descent
has acquired a charm; desperation itself is not without a compensating
power, and the temporary self-possession succumbs to it.
Identity of object is as marked as identity of progress; the object
in both cases is self-gratification, or, more correctly speaking, gratifica-
tion of passion. And here the legal criminal is often less culpable than
the moral criminal, and therefore more entitled to the protection of
irresponsibility. Our passions being designed for the support and per-
petuation of our animal nature, conces?ion to them, up to a certain
point, is, as we have before observed, legitimate; but the pauper can
with difficulty provide gratification even up to this legitimate extent :
NO. XVIII. N
178 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
when his superiors complain of hunger lie complains of famine; tliey
talk of fashion and overheated rooms, while he bewails both cold and
nakedness. If both transgress in availing themselves of the oppor-
tunity for excess, why should the rich man have a better claim than the
other to the privilege of irresponsibility? We admit, however, that
both are offenders, whatever may be their comparative temptation; for
the gratification of passion, ultra the demands of animal nature, is their
common object. The pickpocket has no abstract love of stealing for its
own sake, unless here and there vanity may prompt him to exhibit his
excellence in art. As a general rule, lie steals to get a dinner; and he
steals in preference to working, because the labour is less and the profit
greater: he provides a dozen meals in less time than the honest navi-
gator can earn one. Thus the animal love of rest is gratified simulta-
neously with the desire for food; he lias enough for the hour and to
spare; destitute of other resources for amusement, he feeds his passions
with the surplus; and steals again to satisfy the cravings of stimulated
appetite, though at first he only stole to appease the same appetite in
its natural state. The object of the moral offender is precisely the
same; he, too, by the temptation of opportunity, has stimulated passion
to a pitch of morbid craving, and, coute qiCil coute, it must be satisfied.
He need not steal, but he opens a second bottle, and were it not in his
cellar, he would steal rather than want it : not perhaps on the first
occasion, nor yet the second, nor indeed for many. At first he pays,
then pays on credit, then borrows; and when means and credit are
exhausted, he defrauds or steals, and descends to the class of legal
crime; for gratification he must and will enjoy, beyond the mere wants
of animal necessity. If his means are too ample to exhaust, the object
is still the same?the amplitude or the insufficiency of means is a mere
accident in a philosophic view. "VVe have taken but one, and that the
most familiar subject of inordinate self-indulgence. We might pursue
the analogy through all the range of human passion?lust, anger,
revenge, jealousy, envy, avarice, pride, vanity, ambition, are uniform in
their action whatever may be the social position of the man. Crabbe,
a name scarcely known to the present generation, though venerated by
their fathers, lias beautifully illustrated this truth in his village tales.
The only essential difference in the positions of the legal and the moral
criminal, is, that the self-indulgence of the one is dangerous to the com-
munity, and of the other only to himself; in the former it is practised
at the public expense, and in the latter at his own.
But this is a difference that points to a plausible objection to our
theory. " How does it happen," it may be urged, " that the large majo-
rity of legal criminals are of an age so young that it would be absurd to
contend for the triumph of passion over reason ? Their reason is not
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 179
matured; tliey are, for the most part, too ignorant to appreciate, or
even feel, her restraint. Who ever heard of a boy of the age of fifteen
setting up the defence of insanity to a charge of pilfering?"
The difference we have mentioned affords the answer. If the child
of fifteen, or five years younger, has displayed art in avoiding detection,
it is conclusive that his reason, however limited, has sufficed to tell him
that he has broken the law. He has disobeyed the dictates of reason
no less than the adult. It is conceded however, in his case, that reason
cannot have been extinguished altogether by perennial defeat in his
struggles with passion. Even passion itself, at so youthful an age,
rarely attains its strength; but legal criminality being dangerous to the
community, it is necessary that a system of prevention and detection
should be instituted, and as juvenile crime is less artificial, it is more
easily detected, and thus the young criminal is arrested in his career
long before the triumph of passion over reason is achieved. Our theory
is, that every self-indulgence, beyond the claims of animal want in its
natural state, is opposed to reason; and, as an act uncontrolled by
reason is so far an act of insanity, in any strict and philosophical sense
of the term; but we do not, therefore, say that reason is unseated; her
actual expulsion from the animal man, is only effected by the constant
repetition of irrational acts at shorter intervals and in greater variety,
so that the contempt of reason becomes chronic and habitual.
If the case of juvenile depravity is followed up, it will be found to
sustain our theory in a remarkable manner. At every Middlesex
Sessions, the judge, Mr. Serjeant Adams, complains in strong language
and with just indignation, of the reiterated appearance before him of
the same children; punishment has no reforming power; boys of ten
and twelve are again and again committed, imprisoned, and flogged,
and then discharged only to re-appear in court within a month to
receive the same sentence. In all such cases we are driven to a sad
alternative?either the animal wants of nature cannot be legitimately
supplied without offence, an explanation too frequently too true; or,
though they can be legitimately supplied, reason has wholly lost her
power to restrain illegitimate excess. If this branch of the dilemma
is adopted, then by our theory we do arrive at the conclusion that
reason has become extinct by indulgence, even befoi'e she has attained
maturity!
Thus far we have shown that the progress and the object of crime in
its legal sense, and of the estrangement of reason, are identified. We
will pursue the parallel to the final results, and there we shall also find
that the same similarity obtains.
The late Lord Nugent, a man very dear to those who knew him well,
was distinguished as the champion of the opponents of capital punish-
jt 2
280 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
nient. Agreeing with liim generally in principle, and much associated
?with him in most of his benevolent undertakings in his county, he was
anxious to enlist us in this crusade; hut there was one difficulty in the
case which even his lordship, ingenious and dexterous as he was in
parrying all objections to mounting his hobby, confessed his inability to
remove. If you abolish capital punishment at home, how can you
retain it in a penal colony? The principle on which you contend for
its abolition is, if just, a paramount principle; that life being the most
valuable gift of God, as affording while it lasts an opportunity for
reform and repentance, man may not abridge it, and thus deprive the
sinner of his eternal hope. If the legislature adopts this principle, then
it must extend to every place within her jurisdiction. But in a penal
colony, secondary punishment is exhausted, and expended, too, without
reform: then what remains but the extreme penalty] Suppose a man
resolutely determined on suicide, and he is self-placed beyond the pale
of law; he may sally into the streets and plunge his knife into every
one he meets with impunity. "When taken, they can but hang him, and
he is resolved to die already. He has the prussic acid in his pocket;
before he has reached the station he will be a corpse. Who can deny
that, were a pre-knowledgc of the man's status possible, it would be
right to kill him at once, on the same principle that you kill a rabid
dog? The contumacious criminals of a penal colony are in a position
precisely similar, when this contumacy proves that secondary punish-
ment is fruitlessly exhausted. Self-placed beyond the pale of law by
offending beyond the possibility of further punishment, they become
dangerous animals, whose extinction is indispensable to the safety of
their fellow-convicts.
But it is not as an argument against this extravagance of modern
humanity that we quote it here : it is a convenient illustration of the
status to which man is reduced by crime. Absolutely unfettered and
unrestrained, because the power of punishment is gone by exhaustion,
what is he but a rabid animal; and doubly dangerous because, though
reason has departed, cunning remains. We are not speaking of the
convict criminal, but of the incorrigible criminal among convicts.
Taking the convicts as a class, many among them show, by their sub-
sequent conduct, that reason recovers her sway when the opportunity
of self-indulgence is long suspended. A compulsory self-denial is
wrought into a habit, and they again become industrious, prosperous,
and orderly members of the social body. These, however, are excep-
tions ; and it is remarkable that these exceptions (we speak from
information given by a gentleman who, very undeservedly, spent five
years among them, when at length proof of his unjust conviction
obtained his full pardon,) are always to be found among the educated
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 181
portion of tliem; but tlie bulk settle down into a state scarcely
removed from bestial irrationality. A striking instance of tliis utter
degradation is to be found on parliamentary record. Six convicts
escaped into tlie bush, without food or the means of obtaining it,
?except a single axe. It served to provide them with the food of
cannibals, but no other. They successively fell under the axe to pro-
vide a horrid meal for the survivors, the last of whom returned to
Hobart Town to confess the dreadful tragedy, and be hanged! In
other cases, the miserable beings would draw lots who should die ; the
victim was promptly accused of some capital offence in contemplation,
and the false accusers received the usual reward for discovery; the
price of blood being expended by the others in clandestine purchases
of spirits for a night's debauchery! Practices which no pages may
record, except the annals of our criminal courts, were at one time all
but universal. The disgusting horrors of convict life, as exposed on a
parliamentary inquiry some years since, admit of no parallel in the
history of man, except what might be found in some of our lunatic
asylums at the beginning of the present century. It is, alas! too true.
The lunatic asylum and the penal settlement once stood unrivalled,
except by each other, in all that is dreadful and disgusting; and for a
very sufficient cause?man in the possession of his physical power, and
deserted by his reason, is at once the most profligate and the most
<langerous animal in God's creation.
We may find another example of similarity of result in our workhouses
at home. Their inmates, in the class of casual paupers, usually include
many avIio have also been inmates of the gaol. In our prisons the disci-
pline is necessarily severe, and there is a sufficient staff to maintain it, and
sufficient power to enforce it. It is not so in the workhouse; and
hence, while we rarely hear of disturbances in prison, Ave constantly
read in the police reports of the most violent and motiveless outbreaks
in these pauper asylums. The common apology of the offenders is,
that it lias all been " by way of a, lark." After making all possible
allowance for the romping turbulence of half-a-hundred young men
and women thrown unexpectedly together, it is difficult to account for
the absurd and causeless violence exhibited on these occasions, except
on the theory of transient irrationality. Boys, on the breaking-up for
the holidays, used, in our young days, to break up forms, and desks,
and school-room furniture, with a ruthless hand ; but it was done as
the symbol of emancipation from scholastic rule, and of a return to the
freedom of home. The emblem might be rude, but it had its meaning.
It is difficult, however, to find any emblematic expression in the wanton
-destruction of property that generally attends the "larking" of our
casual paupers ; but if we ascribe it, as Ave may fairly do, to a spirit of
182 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
mischief and ill-nature, we are justified in classing it with those other-
eccentric irregularities which, on our theory, are acts of irrationality,,
though too transient to imply more than a progressive step towards
total alienation of mind.
This combination to effect a common purpose of turbulent mischief,
exactly corresponds with the disposition of confirmed lunatics of the
violent class, should accident bring them together unwatclied by their
attendants; the only difference being, that they will, perhaps, injure
each other as much as the property within their reach, so that the
concert or combination is less conspicuously developed. This may
argue a nearer approach to total alienation of reason; but, nevertheless,
mischief is the type of irrationality in both cases.
Another resemblance in the results of acknowledged irrationality
and incorrigible criminality, is to be found in the absence of common
decency, as regards the infirmities of nature, or social decorum. There
are occasionally, though rarely, positions in life where reason herself
prescribes a temporary departure from that modesty which is a part of
our fallen nature, and was the first evidence of our fall ; but when no
emergency arises, this insensibility to appearances is one of the most
certain signs of that degradation which attends the departure of reason.
The same feature is broadly developed not only in the worst classes of
our convicts, but also among our disorderly paupers. Duty has some-
times called us to the houses occupied by the most degraded of our
metropolitan poor, and there we have witnessed scenes that argued a
total deprivation of moral sense; but we have invariably found, even
among the poorest, that where character remained unsullied, the decen-
cies of life were, at least outwardly, observed.
It Avould not be difficult to trace the close similarity of results in
further points. The same jealousy and distrust, the same submissive-
ness to authority in constant and severe exercise, accompanied by the
same vigilance of cunning to escape from it, the same habits of dissem-
bling and deceit, the same restlessness of body and anxiety about
trifles, and more than all, perhaps, the same indifference to danger,,
strangely attended by awe of corporal punishment, mark both the
criminal and the irrational being. It is a curious inquiry, but our
limits forbid us to prosecute it further. We have, we think, shown
that in progress, in objects, and in results, there is an identity of cha-
racter in crime and insanity. This naturally leads us to investigation
of the causeand we have suggested a theory which gives a common
origin to both, and warrants the conclusion that, however they may
differ in name and in responsibility, insanity and criminality intend the
same status of the human being in regard to his rational or intellectual
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 183
functions, excepting only in tliose cases wliere a morbid derangement of
tlie organic structure is apparent.
We anticipate an inquiry which will be made to test our theory.
Does it appear that insanity, in its perfect and incurable form, is found
more frequently in the convict class than in others ? We have no
accessible statistics to supply an answer to this question ; nor should
we be satisfied with that answer, even if it were favourable to our
theory. Scarcely a week passes over but we find men of undoubted
science and experience, with ample opportunity for observation, and
abundant learning to guide it, who, nevertheless, differ widely in their
opinion in any given case. We ascribe this diversity of opinion to the
want of any acknowledged principle of analysis ; but if, with all these
advantages to aid them, our most eminent authorities are so much at
variance, what reliance can be placed on the report, however faithful in
intention, of some two or three young and comparatively unknown
men, successively sent out in charge of a convict ship, or a convict
station 1 But if the answer were all worthy of confidence, and adverse
to our theory, it would still be inconclusive. The great majority of
convicts are young and in the prime of life. From the hour of their
conviction they are placed on the strictest system of restraint and
dietetic discipline ; they are debarred from all opportunity of excess;
even their tempers are kept in constant check, and their bodily health
is sedulously watched. Under such very favourable circumstances, all
morbid action is likely to be arrested, and reason may often be restored.
Nor is it part of our case that the convict, as such, is necessarily ad-
vanced to that stage of progression when reason becomes prostrated by
defeat; though, in the case of the contumacious convict, self-placed
bej'ond the power of secondary punishment by reiterated and unceasing
crime, we believe the consummation to be complete. Our theory, there-
fore, remains intact by the result of the supposed inquiry, whatever it
may be ; but the inquiry is one of such importance, that we trust the
legislature will require such returns as the nature of the case allows of
being made.
A similar test may be suggested in the case of the Society of Friends;
for, more accustomed as they are by education to habitual self-control,
insanity, according to our theory, ought, among them, to be of com-
paratively rare occurrence.
Here, too, as we believe, the statistics are not obtainable with sufficient
accuracy to justify absolute reliance upon them; but so far as we have
them, they are most favourable to our views; we may observe that
these statistics are deficient in one important feature, a defect which
they share in common with all lunacy returns; no distinction is made
234 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
between patients labouring under an insanity induced by predisposing
causes of acknowledged influence and tliose cases in which a predis-
posing cause Cannot be detected. It is to the latter alone, as we have
r peatcdly said, that we propose to apply our theory. It may also be
observed that hereditary taint, where it exists, is more likely to be pro-
pagated in the Society of Friends, because its members notoriously
intermarry with each other, with a frequency not occurring in any other
limited circle; and lastly, it should be noticed that, from the peculiar
constitution of the society, it is their practice to send to their asylums
very slight and equivocal cases of derangement ; these swell the number
of the inmates, though it may be doubted if they are of a type sufficiently
decided to affect any theory founded upon such statistics. Subject to
these remarks, we may quote the following calculations of Dr Thurnam.
The average number of the Society in England and Wales during the
twenty years, 1820 to 1810, appears to have been 17,900 of all ages:
for reasons which he does not explain, but which we may presume to be,
that insanity does not usually occur in extreme youth or age, he takes
only 10,000 for the basis of his calculation; he assumes that the Retreat
at York embraces in its experience all cases that occur in the Society;
this experience will give 1 in 2196, for the proportion of original (as
opposed to recurring) cases of lunacy in a population of 10,000, annually:
but he adds to the cases of the Retreat such a number as he considers
may not be sent there, being left to private treatment at home; and thus
corrected, he estimates the proportion at 1 in 1790. By including the
experience of the Retreat at Bloomfield, near Dublin, he further increases
the proportion to 1 in 1590, and there seems no reason to doubt the
general accuracy of this result, though it is not very clear whether he
means to limit this larger result to Ireland, or extend it to England.
Much variety of opinion has prevailed as to the comparative exemption
of the Society of Friends from this calamity, in relation to other classes
of the community. Dr Thurnam, in quoting the conflicting opinions
of Dr Burrows, Dr Jacobi, Dr Julien, and Dr Haslam, inclines to the
side of partial but not signal exemption; so at least we construe his
remarks, though they are avowedly made with hesitation: he states
distinctly, however, that the statistics of the Retreat " show that
intemperance and other causes of frequent operation in the world at
large are rarely met with as causcs of insanity in this community;"
the chief ground of his hesitation in arriving at a more definite con-
clusion, is the absence of data on either side of sufficient accuracy. Let
us, however, compare his results with such data as we possess. In the
Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy of 1844, a table is given,
extending only to the pauper class, in which the proportion of cases to
the population of England and Wales is given as 1 in 1019 for 1842,
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 185
and 1 in 980 for 1843; and in tlie same report, a " General Statement"
is published, " of the total number of persons ascertained to be insane
in England and Wales," under date of the 1st January, 1844; this
number is 20,893, which, compared with the population according
to the census of 1841, will give 1 in 784 for the index of English and
Welsh insanity; but this includes only such patients as are inmates of
public institutions, or found lunatic by legal inquisition: a large
correction must be made for the unascertainable proportion of private
patients, in families whose circumstances do not compel them to transfer
a deranged relative to a public asylum; if we estimate this as an addition
of a twentieth part41' to the sum of lunacy stated by the commissioners,
and such an estimate seems moderate, we obtain 1 in 745 for the ratio
of lunatics to the population, according to the census of 1841.
According to Dr Thurnam's experience, predisposing causes are to be
found equally among the Society of Friends as among other bodies,
with the single exception of intemperance: the term, of course, not
being confined to its vulgar acceptation of excess in drinking, but
including every form of excessive self-indulgence. If, with this exception,
the predisposing causes operate with equal force in the Society of
Friends as elsewhere, it follows that any greater prevalence of insanity
in other classes is ascribable to "intemperance;" according to the
calculations we have just given this greater prevalence is measured by
the difference between 1 in 745 and 1 in 1590, or very nearly one half :
thus, so far as the data that we do possess extend, one half of our cases
of insanity are proved to be caused by excess of self-indulgence, or, in
other words, by the habitual gratification of our passions, ultra the
necessary wants of our animal nature.
If we were to found our calculations on a more recent report of the
commissioners, the case would be yet stronger; for, on the 1st January,
1847, the number of lunatics had increased to 20,516, and this would
give the ratio of 1 to 618 as the proportion of lunatics to the population,
instead of 1 to 715: so that by the same process of reasoning, con-
siderably more than one half would be shown to be the victims of
habitual self-indulgence; this, however, would be fallacious, because the
population of the country in 1847, largely exceeded the census of 1841;
we need not resort to any fallacy to strengthen the argument, for the
statistics contained in the report of 1847 disclose another fact which
* In tlic Report of 1847, the commissioners observe that the higher and middle
elasses contribute their share of the lunatics of the kingdom in the proportion of 5000
to 18,800; this would justify the addition of a much larger part than a twentieth, it
being among those classes that private patients arc usually found. We refer to the fact
principally, however, for another reason: it justifies an argument subsequently adopted
in the text in favour of the identity of lunacy, induced by habitual intemperance, with
that status of hardened criminality which otherwise would appear to be almost confined
to the pauper class.
186 CEIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
will far extend tlie proportion which, we have assigned to self-indulgence
as a predisposing cause. It is stated (p. 274) that, "of the entire
number of lunatics in workhouses, computed at G020, or thereabouts,
two-thirds at the least, or upwards of 4000, would be properly placed in
the first class," that is, in the class of "the weak minded, imbecile, or
idiotic." If this analysis of so large a proportion as one-fourth of the
lunacy of the country, is accurate, it follows that two-thirds of the
whole body of 26,516 fall within the same class, leaving only 8840
whose insanity is to be accounted for by extraordinary or predisposing
causes.
"We have stated that the difference between 1 in 745 and 1 in 1590
is the measure of insanity caused by intemperance; but if we are to
infer from the quotation just made from the report of 1847, that two-
thirds of the sum total of insanity consist of imbecile or idiotic cases,
we must deduct two-thirds from 745, and then the measure of insanity
caused by intemperance Avill be the difference between 1 in 249 and 1
in 1590: or, in other words, more than five-sixths of the insanity in
England and Wales is to be ascribed to habitual self-indulgence.
Our argument, then, is briefly this:?
In the Society of Friends, where intemperance is not a predisposing
cause, one person in 1590 is insane.
In society at large, where intemperance is added to other predisposing
causes common to both, one person in 745 is insane.
Of these 745, two-thirds are imbecile or idiotic, being a form of
insanity almost universally traceable to organic malformation or to
senility: deducting two-thirds, 249 will remain for the number whose
lunacy is to be attributed to causes of which the operation is more or
less problematical, intemperance being one of them.
If then only one in 1590 is insane, where intemperance does not
operate, and one in 249 where intemperance does operate, other predis-
posing causes being common to both, it follows that more than five-
sixths become lunatic through intemperance: a word which, properly
translated, means habitual and irrational indulgence of animal passion.
The accurate reader will at once remark that to raise our proportion
from a half to five-sixths, Ave have deducted the idiotic from the mass of
lunacy in the community at large, but not from the lunacy of the
Friends; to a very limited extent Ave admit the inaccuracy, but we are
not guilty of it unadvisedly. The professional experience of Dr Tliur-
nam, on which Ave rely for the statistics of Quaker lunacy, supplies us
with this remarkable fact:?
"Idiotcy and positive imbecility from birth appear to be of very
unfrequent occurrence in the Society of Friends as compared Avitli the
general population of this country." And he gives a very satisfactory
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 187
reason for it. " It is, perhaps, not improbable that many in this society
avIio, by careful nursing, survive the period of infancy, and are merely
distinguished by these slightest shades of mental weakness, would, under
less favourable circumstances in the lower walks of life, in the world at
large, have grown up as positive idiots; or that, with that delicate
organization which distinguishes them, and which they perhaps inherited,,
would never have been reared at all."
We think that this is a sufficient authority for deducting the imbe-
cile from one side of the proportion, and omitting to deduct it on the
other.
So far, then, as we are supplied with data, it is clear that the expe-
rience of the profession confirms our theory. Insanity in the large
majority of cases is induced by the excessive indulgence of those passions
which God has given us as necessary stimulants for the support and pro-
pagation of our animal nature; and we have endeavoured to exhibit the
actual working of the process by which insanity is thus induced, in the
successive defeats of reason by the superior strength of passion when
indulged. There will always be found, especially in the world of science,
determined cavillers at a new principle, or more accurately, in the present
case, we should say, at a new application of an old principle; we may,
therefore, anticipate the question?What is here meant by the term
" reason," or in what sense is it used?
This is a convenient opportunity for introducing a remark of value to
our theory. The doctrine of perpetual internal conflict between right
and wrong is of very ancient date. Cicero arrived at it by induction
from philosophy alone. St. Paul, writing under holy inspiration,
describes the conflict in very similar, but yet more specific language:?
"For that which I do, I allow not: for what I would, that do I not;;
but what I hate, that do I. If, then, I do that which I would not, I
consent unto the law that it is good. Now then, it is no more I that do
it, but sin that dwelleth in me. For I know that in me, that is, in my
flesh, dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how
to perform that which is good, I find not. For the good that I would, I
do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. Now, if I do
that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in
me. I find, then, a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
me;"
The authors of our liturgy, partly on the authority we may presume
of this passage in the Epistle to the Koinans, have introduced a prayer
in the collect for the first Sunday in Lent.
" Give us grace to use such abstinence, that, our flesh being subdued
to the Spirit, we may ever obey thy Godly motions to righteous-
ness," &c.
188 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
We seem warranted, not only by these passages, but by the whole
ten our of revelation, in the belief that there is, not in any metaphorical
sense, but in actual fact, a warfare carried on between good and malig-
nant spirits, of which, for some mysterious purpose which it is not per-
mitted to us to penetrate, humanity is the field; it may be that these hos-
tilities extend to the whole material world, visible or invisible, or even
to regions where matter is unknown; the strong presumption, however,
is the other way, and that the spirit which we call sin, is allowed no
wider range than the earth which we inhabit; for though, most
assuredly, the great sacrifice offered for the atonement of man, would
suffice for the sins of all created existence throughout the boundless
realms of space, yet as our insignificant particle of matter called the
earth was selected for the altar appropriate to the sacrifice, the inference
is either that we are the most favoured or the most wicked of God's
creation; or yet, more probably, that Ave are the only beings of limited
existence who have dared to range ourselves with the fallen immortal
spirits in their resistance to the Creator's will. Milton was a sound
divine, no less than a sublime poet, and such certainly appears to have
been his creed. But it is foreign to our subject to enter upon such
mysteries, nor is the infirmity of human understanding equal to the
inquiry. We advert to them only to remark that our analysis of the
struggle between reason and passion, as a metaphysical thesis, is in per-
fect harmony with what revelation has deigned to tell us of the unseen
warfare that obtains between immortal spirits. The conflict itself is,
doubtless, the same, whether we choose to describe it by one name or
another. St. Paul speaks of "evil" and "himself" as the contending
parties, whom we designate as passion and reason. Our object has not
been to start any new hypothesis, but to avail ourselves of the Scriptural
?truth as a clue to the explanation of that phenomenon which has so long
perplexed us; where shall we fix the limit of man's responsibility as a
rational being, in reference to the laws of society'? It is with this view
that we have attempted, it may be feebly and unsatisfactorily, to pro-
pound a somewhat novel theory, as to the actual development of this
conflict by its visible effects on the moral and physical organization of
man.
We proceed with our answer to the anticipated question, in what
sense we use the term " reason."
Every animal, whether human or bestial, is endowed with certain pro-
perties for self-preservation and self-generation; in the lower orders of
creation these properties are called instinct; man, as an animal, enjoys
an instinct too, but in him the instinctive faculties are associated with
powers of a far higher quality, with a view to preparation for a nobler
and an eternal state of existence.
CHIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 180
His instinct, apart from tliese higher powers, resembles the instinct
of any other animal in its essential properties. It is perfect from his
birth; it is not progressive, because it is incapable of improvement.
Instinct guides him to the breast; instinct dictates the squalling of the
infant as well as the bleating of the lamb; instinct makes him shun
pain, and cry for protection from approaching danger; the infant will
shrink from a dog or a cat as soon as his eyes are capable of observa-
tion; he fears entering a field where cattle are feeding; he shrinks from
the touch of strangers, and will even hide himself on their entrance; he
runs to his mother at the howling of the storm or the pattering of the
hail; all this fear is instinctive, and shared by the infant with the
animal creation. As he advances to puberty, other instinctive feelings
arc awakened, and are indicated by the same change of manner, appear-
ance, and disposition, that mark the puberty of brutes.
But though his instinct is not progressive, those higher powers with
which it is associated are; he is at an early age conscious of a Avill to
obey or to resist his animal propensities: he cannot define this elective
poAver, but he feels it: he is sensible of a freedom of action wholly
independent of his animal nature: he marks the distinction between
himself and dumb animals, not merely in outward form or in their
respective objects of desire, but in volition. It may be restrained
by circumstances, it may be fettered by parental authority; but still
lie feels and enjoys the will. This development of will in inde-
pendence of necessity, is the ray which opens the bud of reason; what
may be its germ is known only to the Creator who planted it. As it
expands, it exhibits faculties of calculation, of deduction, and of antici-
pation. He finds these faculties subservient to his animal wants, which
instinct explains, though it can no longer provide the means of gratify-
ing, and here the range of uninstructed reason closes. If Ave could
conceive a man abandoned at this crisis to absolute solitude in the
steppes of Tartary or the wilds of America, and destitute of all means
of information from social intercourse, it is probable that he would
degenerate into mere animal existence, though gifted with more cun-
ning and less instinctive sagacity than the ourang-outang. He would
indulge to satiety when food was abundant, but if sickness followed the
indulgence, his rationality might prevail to check the repetition, till
long privation provoked to a second surfeit; if the pain of sickness had
been great, instinct would step in to restrain him, and reason would
suggest reserving out of the abundance for a future meal; but whatever
aid he might thus derive from reason in self-preservation, self would
still remain the sole object of his thoughts, and animal indulgence the
single end of all his efforts. In such a case reason would not become
enfeebled, simply because she would be subjected to no struggle: subject
IQO CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
to no law but that imposed by instinct for the preservation of the
animal, she could violate no obligation; and the stronger she found the
animal passions, the more imperative would be her duty to contrive for
their gratification. She would probably become the slave of passion
when conscious of no responsibility to any other master.
But the development of will not only gives its first bloom to the
reasoning power, but informs the juvenile logician that there is imposed
on his action an artificial constraint under the name of law: his will
prompts him to the gratification of his instinctive wants; his reason
suggests the means of gratification; and, simultaneously with this newly
acquired servant, he discovers that physical restraint impedes the
freedom of liis action, though not of his volition. First there is the
law of the nursery; he resists and is sent to bed. Then there is the law
of the school; he still resists and is whipped. The law of the academy
follows; he still resists and still is punished, restraint being throughout
associated with disgrace. At length, emancipated from all physical
control, he enters on the world at large, and there finds that a double
code of law is enforced; the penalty of a breach of the one being corporal
punishment combined with infamy ; the breach of the other being
visited by disgrace and exclusion from his caste. Where education has
been based on religion, he finds a yet more formidable check, and yet
more dreadful penalties, though more remote.
Beason is thus exercised in early life by continued struggle, and gains
strength by the conflict because she is assisted by physical and foreign
discipline; while this continues she can do battle with volition and
bring it into habitual subjection. The triumph tells to her advantage
even on the score of gratification, for if less intense it is more certain
in its occurrence and innocuous in its results. At length, however, this
foreign aid is withdrawn, so far as regards immediate check; the penal
consequences of indulgence to excess are removed to a distance, and
reason and passion are left in an open field to " fight it out" as best
they may. The will desires to remove all impediments to gratification;
the faculties of calculation, deduction, and foresight soon devise a way,
but they at the same time distinguish danger in the distance, which
instinct cannot see, and to which volition will not give credence. If
these faculties, which we conventionally express by the term " reason,"
retain the power given to them by habit, volition remains in subjection
still; if the force of habit is relaxed, volition regains her early
ascendancy, and the animal predominates over the intellectual; this
ascendancy is at first transient. It is a part of our animal nature, and
mercifully ordained by the Creator, that pain, whether of mind or body,
is only a present sensation; man cannot long exist under the pressure
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 191
of unceasing pain; as physical causes will always produce their physical
effect, pain will follow the first transgression of temperate limits; while
the pain continues, reason condemns volition for its folly, and resolves to
withhold further aid to its gratification. The pain subsides, and soon
ceases to be recollected in all its acuteness, or even to be forgotten
altogether. A first offence entails no permanent disgrace, and reason
begins to urge that she has overrated the distress of punishment: she
has undergone it once, and it is not so severe in recollection as it used
to seem in anticipation; thus she is prepared to yield more readily on
lier next encounter with volition.
It is another general law of pathology that the second attacks of the
same disease are, in their immediate and painful symptoms, less intense
than the first, where the complaint is not, in its nature, chronic, or j>ro-
ceeding from constitutional affection: cases are constantly to be met
with where the reiterated recurrence of a local disorder, gives it an
incurable hold upon the system, and yet the patient scarcely suffers
pain amounting to inconvenience, though in its earliest stages the pain
was acute.
Something of this kind obtains in excessive self-indulgence: smoking
gives a familiar illustration; the first time that the fumes of tobacco
are inhaled to even a moderate extent, most distressing sickness follows;
the second time, if the interval is long, the same result will follow, but
the nausea will be less and of shorter duration: after three or four
experiments, this painful derangement of the stomach is no longer felt,
unless the indulgence has been extreme; and eventually a man will
smoke all day unconscious of any inconvenience. Many other morbid
affections would admit of similar illustration, but for obvious reasons we
forbear.
Reason, when defeated in her second conflict with volition, again
suffers the penalty of pain, but in a less aggravated form: the effect of
intemperance is the same in character but less in degree, and its recol-
lection less admonitory, after every successive trial; the seeds of chronic
disease and permanent debility are abundantly sown, but the painful
paroxysms that at first were instant in their sequence, are no longer
felt; thus the penalty, though still inevitable, is more remote, and
reason, not sustained by immediate apprehension, is more and more
enfeebled in her resistance.
We have thus far only described the struggle as it might obtain
equally in the hypothetical case which we have put, of an utter outcast
from society; a struggle between volition and reason, where pain is the
only restrictive penalty; and we have adopted this simple form because
it affords a plain view of its nature and progress. Though the laws of
19.2 CIlIMEa EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
society interpose other restrictive penalties, and so far have strengthened
reason for the conflict, the tactics of the warfare remain the same
whether we place man in a social or solitary condition.
The inference which we are entitled to draw from these premises is,
that it is exactly in proportion as self-control is rendered habitual by
early training, that reason is enabled to retain her powers in health and
strength through life. The force of habit must be added to the force of
reason to keep the volition of the animal in constant, unvarying sub-
jection. It must not be supposed that Ave overlook or depreciate those
better motives that religion inculcates, or that all-powerful support
which the sincere Christian derives from the grace of the Holy Spirit;
we are considering the subject in the only light that befits a scientific
journal; as connected with metaphysical inquiry into the structure of
man as an intellectual animal, gifted with instinctive passion on the one
hand, and with self-controlling faculties on the other: a free agent as
regards his volition, yet restricted by physical and social responsibility
as regards his acts.
Another objection which may be raised to our theory appears very
plausible at its first enunciation. How does it occur that when the
proportion of lunatics among the higher and middle classes is so large
as 5000 to 18,800, or more than a fourth of the whole number, the
proportion of criminals among the same classes is so extremely small
as scarcely to amount to an appreciable quantity 1 It might be inferred
that where so many arc found incapable of subjecting their passions to
reason, crime would abound among them to a much greater extent, if
legal criminality and inordinate self-indulgence are identical in their
origin, their progress, their objects, and their results; crime is, with
rare exceptions, confined to the pauper class; lunacy, having regard to
their relative numbers in the population of the country, is nearly twice
as prevalent among their superiors; assuming, that of the entire
popidation in 1841, half a million will represent the higher and middle
classes, it follows, from the report of 1847, that their liability to insanity
is in the proportion of one in 500, while the corresponding liability of
the rest of the community is only one in 840: but the proportion of
legal criminals is at least 100 to 1 against the pauper class. "We have
no data to estimate this latter proportion; it may more likely be 500
to 1, but it is enough ground for the objection to take the lowest
estimate. We promised to advert to this topic in our note at page 185.
Instead of feeling it to be incongruous with our theory, we think the
fact goes far to sustain it; we have already alluded to it in a former
page, but only cursorily. It is almost a proverbial remark, that our
laws are made for the poor and not for the rich; and there is necessarily
truth in the remark, though not in the sense of vulgar declamation on
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. ' 10-3
the liutsings. Food and warmtli are the most pressing of our natural
wants, as well as the most frequent in their occurrence; the cravings
of appetite, whether in ourselves or in those who are dependent on us,
must be satisfied at all hazards, and there is only an inferior degree of
urgency in the necessity for clothing: hence the pauper is so often
tempted to appropriate the property of others, not for excessive gratifi-
cation, but for the indispensable nourishment of his animal nature and
in strict obedience to animal instincts, that not only is legislation con-
tinually at work for the protection of property, but our judges, for the
most part, reserve the severest penalties of the law for theft or fraud,
visiting crimes against the person with comparative lenity. Every
assize and every quarter sessions produces instances of transportation
for felonies of this class, in absurd contrast with imprisonment for a
few months for manslaughter, or assaults with intent, &c.. The life of a
man or the honour of a woman is often ludicrously weighed against
a loaf or a yard of broad cloth in our scales of criminal justice, and
kick the beam: a child of seven years of age is, at the moment we are
writing this, imprisoned in Knutsford Gaol on a charge of stealing a
mug of the value of a penny! This extreme severity of the law and of
the judicial caprice with which it is administered, not to mention the
enormous expenses of prosecution, induce many to overlook the injury
they sustain; and thus the pauper who begins by stealing to supply
actual want, is emboldened by impunity to steal for gratification of his
animal passions, ultra the necessity of his case: reason in vain points
to consequences when experience proves impunity, and thus she loses
all the aid of restrictive penalties in resisting the assaults of joassion.
We shall presently give a narrative pregnant with illustration of this,
and shall have further occasion to advert to the same topic in considering-
remedial measures.
The higher and middle ranks of life are not exposed to similar
temptation till a long career of extravagant indulgence has reduced
them to actual want; even when their own resources fail them, the
benevolence of friends, or more prosperous relatives, steps in to save
them from actual destitution. Thus the insanity induced by intem-
perance will often overtake them before they violate any law but that
which is imposed by the social code of decency. Even when reason is
rapidly declining, she will retain sufficient restraining power to prevent
a man incurring unnecessary hazard, when he can as easily obtain satiety
of gratification without exposing himself to legal retribution. The loss
of caste is also a restraining penalty, strongly operating in aid of reason
among the higher orders, but it is unknown to the low-born pauper.
Their sensual excesses, therefore, generally take a direction which entails
no public ignominy. As for disgrace in their domestic circles, it is
NO. xviii. o
J94 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
covered by affection, or, at the worst, retrievable by amendment; but
whatever be the direction of a pauper's passions, if gratified at all, tliey
must be gratified at the expense of others; hence, the penal law,
though made alike for all, seems, by its almost exclusive application to
himself, to be intended for him alone. "Were the pauper criminal a
man of wealth, he would become insane before he is marked a felon;
but being a pauper, he becomes a felon before he is ripe for the asylum;
abridgment of opportunity, and the discipline of a prison, preserve
him in the incipient stage.
In confirmation of this view of the subject, it may be remarked, that
in the comparatively few cases in which men in the higher walks of life
become amenable to the law, it is usually found that it is for some of
the offences that fall within the description of malicious violence to the
person. When the passions of a malignant type are. those habitually
indulged, such as anger, jealousy, revenge, or the coarser sensualities,
reason, though aided by all the restrictive penalties of the social code,
becomes subdued in his case as easily as in the lowest class ; murder,
and manslaughter in all its variety of guilt, violence to women, and
even vindictive injuries to property, are crimes not confined to the
pauper class; though far more frequent among them, simply, because
reason has not been fortified by habits of self-control, and strengthened
by education.
Nor is it less important to remark that, though in common with the
rest of the world liable to other predisposing causes, the Society of
Friends is exempt from intemperance as an inducement to insanity,
and equally exempt from appearance in our criminal courts. Some
spurious offsets of their body have now and then been arraigned, as, for
example, Tawell; but it has always been found, on inquiry, that in
these cases the dress had only been temporarily assumed, or the member-
ship of very recent date. That mental powers and peculiarities are often
transmitted from generation to generation, is undoubtedly true; but it
would be extravagant to infer from this, any peculiar idiosyncrasy dis-
tinguishing the whole sect. In truth, those who have been admitted to
terms of intimacy with them, a privilege which we have often enjoyed,
know very well that, as a body, they yield to none in strength of
passion, or generous warmth of feeling. Prudence, certainly, wears
with them a severe aspect, but it is a self-controlling, not a freezing
prudence. Where passion is right in its direction, and noble in its
object, no man will give the reins to it with more freedom than a cal-
culating and prudential quaker.
And, to adopt the habitual phrase of one nearly allied to them, the
late Sir Fowell Buxton, who was not less sound in his argument than
resolute on his point, who never maintained a point where argument
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 195
?was wanting, nor wanted argument when the point was generous and
good, " the sum of our argument is this,"?man, as an animal, is en-
dowed with instinctive properties for self-preservation ; but, created for
responsibility, volition is given to him that he may be a free agent, and
certain faculties that we designate as reason," are also given to guide
his acts by reference to their consequences. His animal instincts impel
him in a right direction, and his volition, partaking of animal instinct,,
carries him to excess ; reason's function is to restrain volition in its
tendency to excess, by the fear of penal consequences injurious to the
animal nature. An unceasing conflict is thus maintained between two
antagonistic powers. There can be no compromise between them; one
or the other must succumb. If reason habitually triumph, she retains
her seat till death; if she habitual!}' yield, at last, she abdicates from
debility and exhaustion. We have shown the identity of crime with
insanity, in its progress, its objects, and its results. We have proved
that intemperance, in its largest sense, is the predisposing cause of
both, except in such lunacy as in its development betrays the acknow-
ledged signs of local disease or organic malformation ; and we have
drawn this proof from statistics published by authority, or sanctioned
by large medical experience. We now propose to proceed to the con-
sideration of the remedy. But to effect a break in our elaborate disser-
tation, as our judges retire for half-an-hour at one o'clock for a glass of
sherry, after a speech from Thesiger or Kelly, we will here introduce
our promised narrative, in the same homely dress of grammar and
orthography in which we have received it. It is extracted from an
official report of the Eev. I. Clay, the chaplain to the Preston House of
Correction. We have erased some portions of it not applicable to our
subject. It will be found to contain a most striking picture of the
graduality of intemperance in generating crime. It is the auto-
biography of a coiner.
" I was born in 1800. My father was an honest and an upright man,
but he was much afraid some misfortune would occur to me, and his
words has proved true, for I have gone through more than all my sisters
and brothers put together; but I have earned the most money. With
all my earnings I am now by far the worst off; all my sisters and
brothers are in very creditable circumstances, while I am now within a
prison walls. My father left seven children. We were all sent to live
with my grandmother, but we were all soon separated. I was put to
live with a man at the place where I was born. He was a man that I
believe never attended any place of worship, except upon the occasion
of a wedding or burying; but I often heard him and his mates boasting
which had the best game cock, and which was the best fighter. He had
eight brothers, who were all fighting men: they were all hand-loom
weavers, and they kept a snug farm. It was about the time that peace
was made, after the battle of Waterloo.
o 2
190 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
" At the beginning of t-lie week, for two or three days, it was drinking,
fighting, and cock-fighting, card-playing, etc. His wife died, and we
were then removed to his parents. "We Avere about twenty, all in one
family. There I learned to know what it was to be without parents,
for I was under the control of the whole family: if I disobeyed any of
them, I was rewarded with a kick or a blow. One Sunday I went to
see my grandmother, and I had four or five cuts on my forehead and
cars, some of them bleeding at the time; so my grandmother got mc
into the factory, Lower Darwen, where I was bound apprentice for seven
years. I never was so happy as I was at that time, though I never saw
anything like religion exercised. The master was not content with the
bell-ringing, but used to come to every door in the morning to call his
workpeople up; and I have known us to work until sometimes eleven
o'clock at night, and on Saturday nights occasionally until twelve; and
after that time he would take all the men to the public-house and give
them plenty of drink, and they would continue drinking until the
morning. On the sabbath they would lie in bed all day.
" I served my time honestly, and I had not a bad master after all;
but he was a heavy drinker. In his mill a schoolmaster attended twice
every day, to teach all the hands that had a mind, and from him I got
most of the little learning I am possessed of.
"I was married, August, 1824. We had 33?. and a few shillings,
and all things went on very smoothly for a long time. I still kept in
work at the same mill, and we got on very well until the mob attacked
it in 1820, and broke all the power-looms; so I was six months without
work; so I went over to Wigan, and I had 10s. a week for looking over
the other spinners, and I was getting upwards of 21. per week off my
own wheels, and all this time I never got to drinking; but soon after
I got to like drink, and made a practice of going every Saturday night
with my wife and the other spinners, till at last I got to taking whole
days. When I first started to drink I had above 200?. in money, and
as good furniture as any working man need have.. We had been married
above nine years before I began resorting to these places, which have
been my destruction. I was a happy man. I used to have my chil-
dren well clad, well fed, clean, and comfortable, and my wife the same;
and I could go to a place of worship on a Sunday. When the labour
at the factory was over, I used to work two or three hours at home for
my own pleasure and advantage. I had a lathe, and got many a crown
for making chairs, tire. I carried on drinking for a long time, still
going longer and worse, until my money began to lessen very fast; so I
began to be more steady, and did not drink much for near twelve
months. I earned that time, with what I got in the factory, upwards
of 31. every week; so in one year I saved between 70?. and 80L, besides
maintaining a wife and four children. When I think on those days,
and my being now confined in a prison, and that same wife likewise,
and one of those dear children that we used to take such delight in,
confined within a few yards of me ! And what can be the cause of this
do you think, seeing that my former circumstances was so prosperous 1
I can explain the cause in a very few words:?neglect of the sabbath,
drunkenness, and bad company; but drunkenness, I do affirm most
CKIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 107
solemnly, lias been the cause of all the other evils. But to my story. I
worked at that mill twelve years, until our master's health began to
decline, and the mill began to make short time; and what little the
mill did run I was not to be found, for my time was the most employed
in the public-house; and this was the time I began to ruin myself; and,
still worse, my wife commenced drinking, and then all soon went to
ruin. At our master's death the mill stopped altogether, after which I
left Wigan. I had been at Bolton and taken a beer-house, and had
promise of work at Mr. Boiling's. I took the beer-house, thinking as
my father and mother-in-law had nothing to do, they might make a
little by selling beer. We might have done very well had I been
steady, for I got a very good pair of wheels, and the house I had taken
was convenient to the factory, and we got a good deal of custom: they
came at night when the factory was over, and Ave would let them stop
until twelve or one o'clock in the morning, cursing and swearing, and
me, and perhaps my wife and her father; and no one but the old woman
to fill, and perhaps twenty men drinking in the house. I have slept in
my clothes all night, and have had to go to the hot factory at half-past,
five in the morning, and the spinners, perhaps four or five, lying on the
floor, they were so drunk. As soon as I could get them up to go to
work, they wanted more drink; and we would sometimes take five or
six quarts to the factory; and as soon as we could we would get all our
big piecers to spinning, and we would creep out of sight of the over-
looker to drink, so that at breakfast time we might have another fetch-
ing; and this was the way we used to go on, so I got the name of a
regular drunkard; and the manager told me, if I did not give up the
beer-shop he should be obliged to acquaint the master, for, he said, all
the spinners were getting drunkards. At this time my wages, 011 an
average, after paying for rent, milk, and beef, was about 32 s. per week
clear; but I found that the hot factory and so much drink was causing
my health to decline; so I left Bolton, and went to spin for Mr. Side-
bottom, in Derbyshire, and the old people came to live with me, and we
were very comfortable. I was getting much less money than at Bolton;
but we began to mend; for I began to joiner a little at night; and it
was well I did so, as the mill went on short time for above six months;
and as there was no one who kept a joiner's-sliop, I got as much work
as I could do. Just at that time my wife fell sick, and continued so
above twelve months; and then one of the children died. I took much
to drinking through the death of that boy: but drinking was a sinful
folly; and if I had the same to do now, I think that instead of flying
to the alehouse I should fly to the house of God. At this time I was
getting but small wages comparatively?about 1?. 2s. or 3s. per week,
and my three children used to get about 10s. per week between them.
I was there about nine months weaving, before I got a situation as
overlooker. I was at that place but a very short time before my
mother-in-law died; and that was the worst shock I had ever expe-
rienced ; for Ave had six children, and my Avife Avas not able to attend
to them, on account of losing the use of one hand during her sickness.
I think after the death of my mother-in-laAV, I Avas more negligent in
my duty to my family than I Ava,s before; and I began to drink and
198 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
neglect my work; sometimes off my work a week or a fortnight drink-
ing; and tlie last time I was off, the master told the manager I must
not start any more. With that I took about 21., and went to Asliton
to see for work; hut instead of looking, I went straight to the place of
drunkenness, where I knew I should find plenty of company that were
spending their money and neglecting their families, like myself. I could,
at that time, have gotten near 21. per week with comfort, if I had been
a steady, sober man. I went to Ashton on the Wednesday, did not
return home until Sunday morning, with not one penny in my pocket,
and 11, in debt.
" I went to Blackburn to see if I could get work, but when I got
amongst my old friends, I could find but little time to look after employ-
ment for drinking. I was three weeks at Darwen and Blackburn, and
had come near forty miles for work, but did not ask any person for
work, though I had it offered me if I would bring my family. At last
I did, and we were getting on very well, but my wife took to drinking
very heavy; she had got acquainted with a class of women that made a
constant practice of drinking: often when we came from the mill have
we found her drunk in bed, and nothing prepared for us to eat, and
having at that time four children unfit for Avork, who were destroying
and Avasting the provisions we had to live on, for the want of a mother
to look after them. Bad as I was, I never lifted my hand to strike her
in all my life, for I was aware that if I had been a sober man, my wife
would never have been a drunkard; so I began to think it would be the
best plan to leave the town altogether, to separate my wife from her
drunken companions; so we went to Bolton, and I made the acquaint-
ance of a regular set of drunkards, who would do almost anything to
obtain money to spend in drink. I was always ready for a spree, and
they were never short of money, though they were scarcely ever seen to
work. One of them was a very good shoemaker; his name was X. S.;
the other was a labourer, and went by two or three different names.
One day, as they were all drinking at my house upon a Sunday, I said
to them, ' I do not know how you men scheme it, for you are never
without money, and you work very little.' 1 Ah,' said one of my new
pals, 'there is none Avho Avill Avork except fools and horses;' and I
said, f I should be very glad if they Avould teach me, for I was getting
very tired of working:' and they did learn me, to my sorroAV. A very
short time after they told me the grand secret, that they got their living
by making and paying bad money; and they told me they could get as
much-money on a Saturday night as I could get in a Avhole Aveelc by
working. So it Avas agreed they should get some ready by next Satur-
day, so Ave all three set off to Tyldesley Banks. We Avent through
Straight Gate, and came back through ClioAvbent, and Ave paid that
afternoon and night about 41. They declared I Avas one of the best
payers they ever saAv; and no doubt I did my part Avell, for they gave
me drink, and drink possesses me of a false spirit. They gave me 10s.
for my share in that afternoon's Avork, and 10s. in bad money; and I
paid that ten on Sunday in good time; but Avlien they got to know I
paid it in Bolton, they said I must not pay any more, for it Avas very
bad to pay in the tOAvn Ave reside in, for it may cause suspicion, and that
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 199
??sometimes caused inspection. I kept company with tliose men upwards
of twelve months, making and paying more or less every week. I had
left off work long before the year end, and followed nothing except the
bad money trade and drinking. But I had many narrow escapes from
the police. They were both taken before me. While we were all
drinking in a liquor-vault in Bolton, in came three policemen, and took
both of tliem, but they took no notice of me; so I went home as soon
as I could, and removed all that was in my house out of the way, for I
had about M. or 51. of bad money there at the time, and three moulds.
They were both committed to Kirkdale for the assizes. At their trial
I provided them both with counsel, and they both got acquitted. When
they came back they soon commenced their old trade again, and wished
me to join them; but for three or four months I had nothing to do
with them as regarded the bad money, although I went with them drink-
ing, until at last I joined them at the same game again, and I was not
long with them the second time before I was taken prisoner. I got
with my old mates again, and I asked them what I must give them to
make me a few pounds, and X. S. said they would make me 10/. for 10s.,
if I would find the metal, and they would come to my house to make it
on Sunday morning: Sunday was the best day for making, as the police
were always engaged in other business; and I was to buy a dozen of
Dixon's best Britannia metal spoons. We all got quite drunk that
night before we parted, and it was the last time Ave three got drunk
together, for in a few weeks we were all three in prison, myself first.
I was taken in Bolton, in a drunken state, with about thirty base six-
pences, shillings, and half-crowns in my possession, for which I got
?twelve months. When I had served my twelve months, I found my
wife and the younger children in the workhouse; those that Avere old
enough to get their oavii living had left her, so Avlien I come out I had
no home or friend to go to, for all my relations had turned against me;
so I Avent to Bolton, and Avas Avell received by 1ST. and a feAV more of
the same sort; there Avas plenty of drink, and plenty of bad money. On
Monday morning my Avife got a pound from the overseer to leave the
Avorkhouse, Avitli Avhich Ave bought furniture, and I got Avork for myself
.and as many of my family as was able to Avork. We had not been
above ten days in work, before the police came to the factory and told
the master Ave Avere a set of bad money makers; so the master sent for
me and told me Ave must get another situation, as Ave had been very
badly reported to him, so Ave Avere all Avithout Avork again. So I asked
.myself Avhat must be done noAV, as it will be of no use my trying to get
Avork in this country; so I said to my Avife, ' Go and get the children
in Avork if you can, and I will try the bad money system again, in order
to get a little to leave the country altogether, if I can.' Trade Avas
very bad at that time, and Ave could get no Avork, so Ave continued paying
until my Avife Avas taken Avith Mrs. Preston. They both pleaded guilty,
and Mrs. Preston got six months in Preston house of correction, and
my Avife three months. So I Avas left Avitli eight children for that time,
five of Avhom Avere not able to Avork, had there been any for them; but
there Avas no Avork at that time for one-third of the people in Lanca-
shire, as almost all the factories Avere either standing or running short
200 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
time. So I went to tlie relieving-officer and before tlie board of guar-
dians; but the workhouse was full, so they gave me a paper to get soup
and bread, and I was very thankful for it; but all we got from the
charity was not sufficient for my family, for we were nine in all: how
were Ave to live1? To carry on with bad money was very dangerous, and
owing to my wife being taken, the police came several times to my
house to search, so I got a few shillings from the relieving officer to
begin barbering; but I got very little custom, so I was determined to
see my children starving no longer, for we were whole days and never
tasted food, so I went to Bolton to see if my old mate N. S. could do
anything for me. When I got to Bolton, N". had got twelve months in
the New Bailey Prison, Manchester, for buying stolen goods, but his
wife was very glad to see me, and gave me 5s., and put me about 5s.
or Gs. worth of food up to take to my family, and she said she could
let me have some metal that N". left. It had been stolen, she thought,
for N. had told her she must keep it in the house. So as I was
waiting of this woman raising the plant, I went to see my acquaintance
old J. O. and K., as they had a quantity of base coin in plant, and they
said if I dare pay any I must have a few half-crowns or shillings; so I
took a few of each sort. O. said if I had a mind he would come to
Blackburn with me and stay with me until my wife came home, for no
one knew him in that quarter. So I was glad of his proposals, and we
returned together to Blackburn, having got the metal from N.'s wife,
and about six pounds in base coin. When I got home my eldest
daughter was waiting up for me, so I went and fetched a gallon of the
best beer and a pint of rum. Honesty is the best policy. Yes; for
whosoever defraudetli his neighbour shall be found out, as my present
situation in prison plainly shows; my wife is in prison, and my oldest
son also. I am the father of nine children, or was so when I came
lierc, but up to the time I write this I have heard nothing of them;
we have had thirteen children; I am upwards of fifty years of age,
and my constitution much injured through imprisonment. We have
completely lost our character. Had I done what was right in the
sight of God and man, my children might have proved a blessing to
me and my wife in our old age; and 1 am convinced had I done
as I should have done, that one or two of those children now in
their graves would now have been living, for my wife, through having
to look after me, and being in trouble, neglected the little ones.
It is my sincere wish, as a penitent, that those who read this narrative
may profit by it, and I wish the reader to compare the commence-
ment of my married life, when I never frequented the public-house,
and was happy in my own house, with the amusement of joinering
or birdcage making, with that which followed. The publicans got so
little of my money that we had always credit sufficient, and no person
had to say, if they came to see us, we were short of anything. There
could not be a more happy couple than we were; we never had
a cross word for years after our marriage, and as to blows, I never
struck my wife in all my life. Ah, but since I had to do with that
destructive and ruinous drink and base coin, I have been the most
unhappy man living."
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 201
As an example of tlie tendency of one form of intemperance, tliis
tale is conclusive. Similar gradations will be found to exist in all its
varieties, whichever may be the passion habitually indulged. The
crowning act of irrationality or crime is no index to guide us to the
diseased passion; for though, in our unsophisticated state, each has its-
peculiar province in stimulating to acts necessary for gratifying our
instinctive wants of self-preservation and self-generation, yet passion
begets passion in such large variety, that at last we cannot distinguish
the progeny from the parent stock, or appropriate to each its peculiar
functions in the animal economy. We cannot trace back the crime or
the folly to its motive, from its own peculiarity of feature. Tawell
committed murder to conceal the shame of a minor offence. Rush com-
mitted murder from revenge. Burke perpetrated the same crime as a
trading speculation. Eugene Aram (divesting the story of Bulwer's
romantic colouring) from a combination of vanity and cupidity. Thurtell
and his associates, in aid of gambling propensities. ISTot one of these
cases was marked by drunken habits. Wot one of them was free from
the visible taint of irrationality. Yet, apart from the circumstances-
disclosed on trial, who could have assigned an adequate cause for their
respective crimes, except in the habitual and intemperate indulgence of
some favourite though latent passion 1
It is in this comprehensive sense that intemperance is included among
the predisposing causes of lunacy for which a remedy should be provided.
This remedy is to be found in a revision of our system of national
education, so as to give it more extensive operation, and a revision of
our criminal code with a view to its greater efficiency: the first of these
remedial measures is sufficiently obvious; the last will not be less
acknowledged when we examine closely into its present administration.
It would be waste of time to argue out the truism that self-control
is the invariable fruit of early education.'"* Of course it is; it is at once
* There is one singular exception to the general rule most ably established by Mr.
Fletcher, in his " Moral and Educational Statistics," that crime dccreascs as education
advances. This exception is to be found in the county of Cheshire, " which," observes
the learned author, " stands alone in its inky blackness in every moral characteristic,,
except in regard to instruction, in which, unhappily, it bears a more favourable tint than
nearly all that surround it.''?Stat. Soc. Journal, vol. xii. p. 191. From our personal
knowledge of that part of the county which contributes its undue share of crime, we can.
explain this seeming contradiction to Mr. Fletcher's doctrine. lie estimates the amount
of crime by the number of commitments; a very fair criterion, because every com-
mitment is strong presumptive evidence that a crime has been committed, though the.
guilt of the party accused may be doubtful. In the case of Cheshire, however, it is not
so; for in that large and densely peopled district, of which Birkenhead is the centre,
and which, from its vicinity to Liverpool and the coast, is probably the most prolific of
crime, the bad system prevails of paying no salary to the magistrates' clerks, and of
remunerating them for their professional services by the costs of the prosecutions. As
county justices are rarely able to move a finger except under the guidance of their
clcrk, there will never be any lack of commitments when the clerk has no other treasury
to look to for remuneration !
202 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
the end, and the means of accomplishing its own end. Yet the
deficiencies of our national system are such that one might almost
suppose that this admitted axiom were still to be explained to the con-
viction of our legislators! They certainly have adopted as a general
principle of legislation a maxim so antagonistic in its character, that the
progress of education among the lower classes is almost arrested by it.
Compulsory adoption of the opportunities of education is considered
incompatible with the just liberty of the people. Hence it is left
optional even to those who cannot appreciate its advantages. If it
could be proved by a comparison of the statistics of crime and educa-
tion, that the latter is practically inefficient to check the former, some
weight might be allowed to this objection, founded on principles of
civil liberty. This comparison has been attempted on very in-
sufficient data, as regards the statistics of education, it must be con-
fessed ; still the result corresponds with our views. In some papers
read to the Statistical Society by Mr. Fletcher, and which appear in
their quarterly journal for August, 1849, the learned author states as one
of the " conclusions" at which he arrives :?
" The conclusion is irresistible that education is not only essential to
the securing of modern society, but that such education should be solid,
useful, and, above all, Christian, in supersedence of much that is given
by the weakest of the day-schools, and attempted by the most secular
of the Sunday-schools."*
It is a " conclusion" of common sense as much as of statistical calcula-
tion. But the objection is destitute of the foundation on which it is
assumed to rest: compulsory education is no violation of our free con-
stitutional principles; so far from it, that instances are not wanting in
modern times of the parental authority being superseded, even in the
highest ranks of society, by the judgment of our courts, when that
authority was wanting in providing suitable education for the child.
The Wellesley case is familiar to every lawyer, and almost to every
layman. He must be a very subtle logician who can suggest any differ-
ence that property makes in the principle, though it supplies the only
means of bringing such questions within the jurisdiction of the Court
of Chancery. If it is competent to that court to take its wards out of the
paternal control with a view to their proper education, it cannot be
foreign to the duty of Parliament to exercise a similar discretion as
* We cannot quote from Mr. Fletcher's papers without acknowledging the obligation
he has laid upon the public by his talented and elaborate researches. These papers con-
lain a mass of most valuable information, ingeniously classified and arranged: we do not
wish to qualify our commendation, if we add the expression of our regret that they are
not prepared with more attention to perspicuity and style?an error common to too
many dissertations of the learned upon statistical subjects.
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 203
regards tlie infants of the realm, who, in common with their parents,
are protected by its wardship.
It is not essential to our theory to go into the controverted question
of educational principle; whether exclusively secular, or partially reli-
gious, all education must be necessarily based, more or less, on self-
control. It is upon this, and on this alone, as an habitual discipline of
the mind that we insist, as indispensable to sustain reason in her daily
conflict with the turbulence of passion: a system of education that adds
to other restrictions on excess, that which in well regulated minds is the
most powerful of all, the apprehension of the divine wratli, is of neces-
sity preferable to any other; but it is the discipline of education which
we invoke, as the most efficient of moral means to restrain every form of
intemperance that enfeebles the power of reason. A lamp-lighter and a
letter-carrier are equally exempt from gout, so far as exercise will save
them.
Returns of the schools of all descriptions have, we believe,been for some
time in preparation; if made, they are not yet accessible to the public.
We must content ourselves with the information we can derive from
the blue books, entitled " Minutes of the Committee of Council on
Education," relating to those schools which receive assistance from the
parliamentary grant. It is not probable that the more general returns
in preparation will prove more instructive on the particular points to
which we propose to draw attention.
We collect from these Minutes for 1850 and 1851, page 156, that
provision is made in England for the accommodation of 622,828 children
in our national schools, not confining the term to those which belong to
the Church of England. Considering that by the census of 1851, the
population of England and Wales is 17,922,768, this would seem to be
a very inadequate provision; but when we add that it appears from the
same authority, that only 241,836 children habitually attend these
schools, and that estimating the number of those who do not attend,
by the proportion of absentees in Wiltshire and Berkshire (the only two
counties of which the number is given), there are at the least 357,000
who never approach them, it will be probably thought that the provi-
sion is ample for the existing emergency, and that we must look else-
where to account for the ignorance of the lower classes.
The reader will refer to these two books in vain for our authority for
this calculation, without explaining the manner in which we arrive at
the result. He will find annexed to the report of each district-inspector
a table giving the number of children in habitual attendance. These
tables include thirty-eight of the English counties and the Isle of Man.
By adding together the numbers indicating the average attendance in
each district, including the Roman Catholics, and such of the Dissenting,
204 CHIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
schools as participate in the grant, we obtain a total of 241,830; and
by comparing this with the proportion of absentees in Berkshire and
Wiltshire, estimated, at page 141, to be 40,011 to 31,943 of labourers'
children, we obtain, omitting the fractional parts of a thousand, 357,000
for the non-attendants. This is, of course, a loose calculation, but it is
the best that can be made from any statistics already published, and it
is sufficiently accurate to warrant our inference that the ignorance of the
million does not arise from the want of opportunity.
Whence then does it arise? The experience of an anonymous writer
is not of much value; yet fifteen years of that experience, in very dif-
ferent localities, enables him to offer a very plausible answer to the
inquiry.
Poverty compels selfishness. It is not only uncharitable but absurd
to suppose that the pauper parent is wanting in parental affection; for
that affection falls within the class of our animal instincts; but when
employment is precarious and food uncertain, all other considerations
must yield to the necessity of securing the daily meal. An infant under
six is an incumbrance, for he contributes nothing towards the common
maintenance, while he monopolizes the mother's time; he is, therefore,
gladly sent to the infant school; it is worth a penny a week to get rid
of him during the hours of labour; but when he attains the age of seven
or eight he can help to clean the house and watch his younger brothers
and sisters, if he can do nothing else, and the mother thus gains two or
three hours a day for profitable labour. At the age of twelve or thirteen,
even the child can earn a weekly shilling or two in aid of the common
purse. Were his own interests alone to be considered, he would be, far
more wisely, kept at school, and especially at that critical age when the
strongest passions begin to show themselves; but this cannot be, for " he
must earn something." Such is the answer we have received in
innumerable instances to the question " Why not send your boy to
school 1"
When tbe lad attains adolescence, he is quick enough to perceive that
his weekly pay exceeds his share of the domestic expenditure, and at
eighteen or nineteen he throws off the yoke, and, if he does not improvi-
dently marry, he spends his money in the beer-sliop, and begins that
system of irrational self-indulgence of which we have been tracing the
progress to crime and insanity. We have at this moment under our
charge a pauper school, nominally consisting of some 150 children;
from causes such as we have described, it is impossible to secure an
average attendance of more than half that number, even upon Sundays.
Personal expostulation with the parents is not wholly thrown away, for
we have extended the average from forty to eighty-three by this means;
yet, beyond this, advance seems impracticable.
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 205
We are fully sensible that in all tliis we are stating nothing new.
There is not an individual that has personally exerted himself in the
formation of parochial schools who cannot quote the same experience;
hut we imagine that it will surprise many to learn from the statistics
of intemperance, what are the physical results of such a well known
system.
In the Journal of the Statistical Society, for September, 1851, there
is a paper by Mr. Nelson, giving a comparative view of the mortality in
persons of temperate and intemperate habits, at all ages. From this
paper we learn that, at the early age of sixteen to twenty, the mortality
in England and Wales, of the intemperate to the temperate is as 1'8 to
?730! and from the ages of tAventy to thirty, as 5-1 to *974! Is it
possible to attribute this vast disproportion to any other cause than the
early emancipation from all control that is the unhappy lot of more than
half the labouring population'?
The same authority, and writing, be it observed, on official data,
namely, the returns of the registrar-general, supplies us with another
result directly bearing upon our thesis.
From the age of twenty-six to thirty, delirium tremens is the cause of
death in the proportion of 7 to 1 of nearly every other disease; from
thirty-one to thirty-five, in the proportion of 10 to 1; and from thirty-
five to forty, of 16 to 1; and, generally, diseases of the head are the
cause of death in the proportion of 97 to 82 of respiratory complaints,
and to 83 of diseases of the liver.
We have failed in discovering any average of the age of criminals, cal-
culated upon authentic data. It varies between twenty-one and twenty-
four. In the absence of correct information Ave lay no stress on this cir-
cumstance; but it seems worthy of remark, that for the three years,
1845, 184G, and 1847, the average number of commitments tallied very
closely with the number of lunacies. We have already mentioned that
the latter amounted to 2G,51G, while the former amounted to 20,G98.
?Stat. Soc. Jour. vol. xii. p. 207. This is easily explained by the axiom
that like causes produce the like effects; the excess on the side of
lunacy may be accounted for by the fact already noticed more than once;
that intemperance, where it leads to legal criminality, is often arrested
in its progress by the imprisonment of the offender, while it proceeds
unchecked by the abridgment of opportunity, so long as its irrational
excesses keep within the pale of the law.
When Ave advert to the revision of our criminal code as the other
remedial measure, Ave limit ourselves, of course, to such an amendment
of it as may render its restrictive poAver on the intemperance of passion
more stringent; Ave suggest, as moral jurists, not as laAv reformers; all
punishment has, or ought to have, in vieAV, self-restraint, as regards the
206 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
offender, and example as regards others. The lax and capricious admi-
nistration of our criminal law deprives it of much of its efficiency in both
these particulars.
The distinguishing trait of irrationality is recklessness of conse-
quences, while good sense, and the self-denial which it inculcates, are
equally marked by a prudential regard to consequences; the more speedy
and certain these consequences are, the less is the effort of self-denial
required. Even the habitual drunkard will not drink a tumbler of
brandy at a draught, for he has sense enough remaining to know that it
is immediate death. Burke, or his disciple, Bishop, would not have
murdered a man for the value of his body, had instant detection and
Lynch law been inevitable. The criminal of every class speculates on
impunity, and he speculates with more chances in his favour than is
commonly supposed.
First, he has the chance of escaping detection; this is not inconsi-
derable where there is no organized police. From the narrative which
we have extracted from Mr. Clay's report, some estimate may be formed
of the extent to which a man may go in his career of crime, even where
detection is apparently most easy.
Then, if detected, he has the chance of escaping prosecution; a
man's public spirit must be very great indeed, who will incur the cost
and trouble of prosecution in ordinary cases. To waste three or four
days in awaiting the pleasure of an unpaid magistrate, to travel some forty
or fifty miles to the assizes or quarter sessions, there to be detained for
three or four days more, and to pay travelling expenses for himself and
half-a-dozen witnesses, hotel expenses, and legal expenses, and be allowed
about a fifth part from the county purse, is a sacrifice which a man
may, in his simplicity, make once, but lie never will again. The culprit
knows all this as well as a county magistrate or his clerk.
Then, if prosecuted, he has the chance of being acquitted, either from
some legal oversight, or the sentimentality of a jury. The value of this
chance may be guessed from the fact, that out of 28,833 commitments
in 1847, not less than 7251 were acquitted or discharged for want of
prosecution.
And lastly, if convicted, he has judicial caprice in his favour; for
out of the number of 21,542 that were convicted in the same year, not.
less than 15,499 were sentenced to less than six months' imprison-
ment. If they chanced to be the Avinter months, this punishment
would be a boon to nine-tenths of them.
With such an accumulation of chances in favour of impunity, and
with such a remote possibility of severity of punishment when it
happens by any accident to follow, what becomes of the self-restrictive
tendency of our criminal law, where the social condition of the
CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY. 207
culprit is so low as to render inoperative tlie fear of losing caste1? 1ST or
is the exemplary force of punishment less endangered by the capricious
inequality of its infliction.
The million derive their impressions of legal obligations by expe-
rience of it in the persons of others, if not of themselves. They have
no instruction in the principles of jurisprudence, or of ethics; no
access to tuition, either oral or written, on subjects like these. Their
estimate of the criminality of excessive self-indnlgence is formed by its
visible effects. They restrain an intemperate propensity because they
see the drunkard revelling in misery, or the thief carried away in hand-
cuff's to the cells of a prison. Such plain matter-of-fact lessons as these
are sufficiently intelligible, and their impressiveness ought not to be
diluted. But what must be the confusion created in their minds as to
the heinousness of crime, or the guilt of excess, when in one town the
poacher is visited Avitli more severity than the burglar, and in another
with less? When the bigamist is imprisoned by one judge for a month,
and by another for a year? When the perjurer is fined to-day, and
transported to-morrow? When the manslayer is sent to Norfolk
Island from the Old Bailey, and to the treadmill from Aylesbury, or
possibly discharged with a reprimand, at Chester? What can they
know of " extenuating circumstances," who never hear the trial ? or of
the subtle distinctions of time and circumstance, that mitigate the
penalty, though they affect not the legal classification of guilt? Our
diversities of judicial administration are yet more singular. A cow
may sometimes be stolen with more safety than a cabbage; a banker's
parcel at less risk than a pocket handkerchief; or a rib broken at less
expense to the assailant than an eye blackened! More strange still,,
a man may be punished in one place for an offence of which he has
been just acquitted by the jury; and another, tried elsewhere on the same
charge, be discharged scatheless, notwithstanding a conviction ! This
requires substantiation, and it shall be given. The other instances we
have mentioned are so familiar to every reader of a daily paper, that
quotation of examples is unnecessary. The recent assize reports will
supply them in abundance, to anybody who will be at the trouble to
examine them.
At the Quarter Sessions at Knutsford, on the 27th Nov. 1851, one
James Blakeley was tried on a charge of assaulting a young woman, with
intent, &c. No evidence was offered of any other assault. The jury
acquitted him of the assault with intent, and found him guilty of a
common assault. This was obviously a blunder; but the chairman of
the sessions, a Mr. Mannering, immediately passed sentence of nine
months' imprisonment, stating it to be for the " indecent" assault. Just
two months afterwards, on the 27th of January last, a man was tried
208 CRIME, EDUCATION, AND INSANITY.
at tlie Clerkemvell Sessions for precisely the same offence, and under
circumstances as nearly similar as could be. The same result followed.
The jury acquitted him of the graver charge, and found him guilty of a
common assault. In this case the judge was a lawyer, instead of that
hermaphrodite class, a county magistrate. Mr. Serjeant Adams de-
cided such a verdict to amount to an acquittal, and discharged the
man.
Our criminal code is alike deficient in certainty of offence, certainty
of prosecution, certainty of conviction, and certainty of punishment.
The first, second, and fourth of these defects admit of remedy; and till
that remedy is applied by a graduated classification of crime, by the
appointment of a public prosecutor, and, more than all, by displacing
ihe whole body of county justices, and transferring their criminal juris-
diction to responsible stipendiaries, educated in law, we cannot hope to
obtain that restrictive efficacy upon the excessive indulgence of animal
passions which ought to follow the administration of all punishment
intended to be exemplary to others.
We have been betrayed into greater length than Ave intended ; and
yet we feel that Ave have, after all, treated our subject more superficially
than is consistent with its importance. We must plead the liacknied
?excuse, that a periodical essayist is limited to the opportunity of sug-
gesting to others objects worthy of their attention, and the means
whereby they may be accomplished. If our review of the progress of
insanity and crime be correct, it is for the statesman to follow up the
of the statist.
