On The organization of Asylums For the Insane
==============================================

519
?
BY JOHN M. GALT, M.D., PHYSICIAN TO THE EASTERN ASYLUM OF VIRGINIA,
AT WILLIAMSBURG.
At the last meeting of the Association of Medical Superintendents of American
Institutions for the Insane, the state of my health prevented a participation in
the interesting proceedings of this body. Having been directed, according to
an order passed at a previous session, to choose a subject on which to report,
I did so, but was unable to write out my views fully, owing to the same reason
just given above for my absence from the meeting referred to. Insomuch,
however, as most of what I should have remarked would have necessarily been
found elsewhere, and doubtless expressed in a better manner than any effort of
mine could attain, it matters little that this duty was unfulfilled. But wishing
to conform as closely as possible to aught assuming the shape of a promise, I
content myself witli now presentiug a few observations concerning the Organi-
zation of Asylums for the Insane, instead of offering an elaborate article on the
subject. I shall therefore simply touch upon three prominent points in this
relation.
The first of these topics which we proceed to notice, is an arrangement
suggested in connexion with the early history of a lunatic asylum: we think
that when such an institution is contemplated, the medical superintendent
thereof should be appointed before the building is put up, or even a plan of
construction is adopted. And this, too, whatsoever be his particular functions
with regard to the necessary buildings; in other words, for example, whether
he be entrusted with the supervision of the whole undertaking, or have only
the task of making suggestions as to the adoption of a suitable model. Not
unfrequently we find that it is a practice with the trustees of new asylums to
select as their medical superintendent, some gentleman who is already con-
nected officially with an establishment of the kind. In such event, as regards
an asylum designed to be erected, it is evident that you secure the aid resulting
from the counsels of an individual directly and personally interested in the
proposed institution, who has a thorough acquaintance with the architectural
requirements for the management of the insane. Here you have, therefore,
the combined assistance of self-interest, experience, and study. But even in
cases where an ordinary physician is selected, you have under this plan, in the
first place, an early attention on his part to the important subject of archi-
tectural provisions; and, secondly, almost as a matter of course, a devoted
investigation into the general subject of insanity and its treatment. Hence,
when the establishment is ready to be occupied by its future insane inmates,
the superintendent, is fully prepared to undertake its judicious supervision.
f Secondly, the government of an asylum as at present constituted, usually
* This essay was presented to the "Association of Medical Superintendents of
American Institutions for the Insane," in June, 1850. It has been published iu the
"American Journal of Insanity."
f At their meeting, held ia May, 1848, in the city of New York, the Association of
Medical Superintendents of American Institutions for the Insane adopted the following
preamble and resolution relative to the appointment of superintendents:?
Whereas, in the selection of Medical Superintendents to American Institutions for
the Insane, it is important to choose men with the highest qualifications, both as respects
professional acquirements and moral endowments, therefore
Resolved, That any attempt, in any part of this country, to select such officers
through political bias, be deprecated by the association as a dangerous departure from
that sound rule which should govern every appointing power, of seeking the best men,
irrespective of every other consideration.
520 ON THE ORGANIZATION OF ASYLUMS
consists of a Board of Trustees, and a superintendent acting under their
direction. I am of opinion, that all persons whatsoever, serving in the capacity
of assistants to this officer, should be absolutely under his control as to
dismissal from their situations; and that every such assistant should either be
selected by the superintendent immediately, or from his nomination to the
Board of Trustees; the superintendent being himself appointed by that body,
and being liable to removal through their action. This last regulation I deem
a sufficient check upon the superintendent, whether he be given the power of
nomination or that, of appointing. He is more accurately acquainted with the
precise characteristics which are requisite in any subordinate than the Board
of Trustees can possibly be; experience, observation, and self-interest teach
him this, and on these grounds merely, it is far more likely that he will make
a good choice than they. Then again, if an individual is found on trial not to
possess the requisite qualifications, of which circumstance the superintendent
alone is the proper judge, a new appointment can be effected without the
exciting and prejudicial process of an examination into the matter on the part
of a superior authority. Moreover, such bodies are unpaid, and to some
extent irresponsible; and it is contrary to human nature to suppose, as an
ordinary event, that they will take so lively an interest in the welfare of an
establishment of the kind as is evinced by most superintendents; hence they
would be more easily induced, through the persuasions of others, to give their
votes for persons not exactly qualified for particular posts in an asylum.
"Whereas this is very different with a superintendent. For it is pretty certain
that the success of an institution for the insane depends greatly upon the
character of this officer's subordinate auxiliaries, and therefore it is to his direct
advantage to choose those assistants that will faithfully and efficiently perform
their several duties. There is, indeed, a sure guarantee of proper management
here, in the fact that a failure of success is, in the chief officer, a failure in the
mode of earning his livelihood and supporting his family; and the risk in
connexion with incapable subordinates is of extreme importance to him. So
far as the power of dismissal is concerned, it is manifest to all who have had
charge of the insane, that there are officers and attendants whose deficiencies
cannot be well explained in words, or fully demonstrated and pointed out for
the decision of trustees, and yet an institution may suffer grievously from the
presence of such individuals. Moreover, no general system can be fully carried
out, unless each member of the official corps co-operates fully with him who
has the responsibility alike of both the medical and the domestic arrangements
of an asylum ; and it is in vain to expect so desirable an union of effort, where
subordinates look to a higher power than the superintendent.*
* " In the French establishments, the visiting physician is invested with supreme
power over the 'hicdical and moral management, appoints the attendants and some of the
subordinate officers."?I. I!ay, M.D., Superintendent of the Butler Hospital for the
Insane, at Providence, Rhode Island. Whilst speaking of the action of trustees in
England, in a policy the reverse of that just mentioned, Dr. Ray observes: " In the
exercise of the appointing power, a favour is dispensed and an obligation is incurred,
that may redound in some way to the benefit of the obliging party. True, the helping
of a servant to a place would seem to be a privilege hardly corresponding to the dignity
of the class who exercise it, but this consideration is allowed to have but little influence,
wheu a dependent may be placed beyond the want of future assistance, or a powerful
friend obliged. At the very least, the simple abstract love of patronage is gratified, and
that is something to those who may never have had the opportunity before."
" There is one (topic), however, to which I will call your attention, because it lies at
the foundation of a successful, permanent organization, and is, in my opinion, the only
safe basis upon which a lunatic hospital can be organized : which is, that the super-
intendent should be a physician, with the entire control of all departments of the
institution, domestic as well as medical (of course under the direction of a board of
trustees). The superintendent should have this control, because unity of action, arising
FOR THE INSANE. ' 521
Comfortable accommodations, liberal diet, and warm clothing, now constitute
established, settled means of treatment in insanity. These are forms of expen-
diture that must be incurred, and little difficulty is usually found in obtaining
them. But if there be any progress in the treatment of this disease, if there
be any measure radiant witli future promise, it is discoverable in the agency of
the influence over the minds of the insane, that results from the exertions of
teachers and other additional companions appointed for their benefit. It is
here, therefore, that the battle is to be fought for an increased outlay in our
lunatic asylums. But certainly we should seek that medium in this regard, by
which we can obtain the largest available force of such agents at the least
expense. Here, too, the simple though important doctrine of political economy
should always be held in due consideration, to the effect, that in every depart-
ment of public business the.people should be served by individuals fully
qualified for the discharge of their official duties, and that an expenditure should
be allowed, requisite for securing the services of such persons; but that any
amount beyond this must be considered as wasteful extravagance. The more
closely indeed we adhere to the rule thus enunciated, the greater will be the
number of our assistants in so material a line of endeavour. Legislative bodies
may rest assured, that never will the combined advantages of proper treatment
and minimum expenditure be fully attained, until the superintendent has the
control of his subordinates, for which I have contended above. Under the old
system of organization, where the steward and matron, and a few other officers
and attendants of very definite functions, formed the entire body of agents
assisting the superintendent, the exact degree of compensation involved in
obtaining the services of persons capable of filling a particular office, was more
easily assignable and capable of recognition. But when, in addition, we have
teachers and companions, and, in fine, a much greater variety of capabilities in
demand, to procure an entire set of officials, all of the requisite character,
becomes difficult, and especially so in conjunction with motives of economy.
Owing to his practical experience, a superintendent alone can determine with
accuracy the comparative facility in obtaining talent or natural ability suitable
to each post in an asylum; so as measurably to graduate the salaries according
to this scale. It is a simple matter for a subordinate officer, apparently faithful
to his trust, to represent to a Board of Trustees the onerous nature of his
duties, and, by such a course, to induce a useless increase of salary. But the
superintendent is alone capable of judging properly, first, the fidelity and value
from unity of views and sentiments, is the chief element of system. System cannot
exist if the action comes from more than one source; and without system, there cannot
be success. Upon him should responsibility rest, as under any arrangement in public
estimation it will rest; he should have the entire control; his spirit, his plans, his
system, should pervade the institution; from him all power should proceed, that conse-
quently when he delegates to others the duties of the several departments, those duties
should be performed in accordance with that system, however much the opinions of
subordinate officers may differ from his. The more entire the control, the greater safety
in delegating to others those- subordinate duties; and this truth is well illustrated in the
best-arranged and the best-managed hospital in this county (Worcester), where the super-
intendent (nominating the steward to the board and appointing all the officers) having
the entire sway, derives the greatest assistance from, and reposes the utmost conlidence
in, his subordinate officers. They adopt his system and carry it out. There is no
clashing of conflicting opinions; there can be none where one system pervades the whole.
This principle is adopted in all the departments of associated efforts in society, and is
nowhere more essential to successful results. The guards against the possible abuse of
this concentration of power in one individual, are to be found in the frequent and rigid
inspection by the trustees, of every department and room in the hospital, and the free
access and invited scrutiny of an intelligent community. Under such an oversight, it is
not possible, in this country, for any erroneous practices to be kept long concealed from
the public eye."?Dr. John S. Butler.
522 ON THE ORGANIZATION OF ASYLUMS
of any particular assistant; and, secondly, tlie amount of pay which he should
receive, from the comparative facility of filling the situation which he holds.
Let the superintendent, hut have the power of appointment and dismissal, and
he is perfectly aware when he should discharge an official who is dissatisfied,
and when, on the contrary, he should recommend an increase of salary to one
whose ability could not easily be found in another.*
The third point to which I would call the attention of the Association, is
the question whether it is advisable to have a visiting or a consulting physi-
cian, instead of the American plan of dispensing with such an official, f I
think this strict exclusion to be at least a doubtful policy. Now, where, as
in some few asylums in this country, and in a large number on the other side
of the Atlantic, the visiting has superior authority over the resident physician,
no doubt, in adopting the plan, we should be establishing one inferior in merit
to that in vogue amongst us?however well the former may have succeeded
in particular institutions of the United States. But the arrangement which I
would propose is, that the superintendent should have the nomination or
appointment of a consulting physician, who would thus, like the other officers,
be considered as an auxiliary subordinate. This officer might or might not be
recompensed pecuniarily. Whilst in private practice, scarcely a person becomes
dangerously ill, but that their friends view it as necessary to call in more than
one physician, should not the same rule apply, if not to insanity as a disease,
at least to formidable maladies, to which the insane are equally as liable as are
those of sound mind? Were there any power given to such an officer which
would conflict with the authority of the superintendent of an asylum, I should
be clearly against so undesirable an arrangement; but under that which I
propose, nothing of the kind is admissible. The officer in question is to be
selected by the superintendent, and consulted by him when deemed necessary.
If it be alleged that this arrangement endangers the growth of cabals and
intrigues against the superintendent, the answer is simply, that physicians are
found in all Boards of Trustees?in other words, occupying a position superior
in point of fact to that of this officer; and yet these gentlemen are oftener of
service to him than the reverse. Apart from the old adage as to the increased
wisdom in numbers, an important advantage under the plan pursued, would be
attained by giving satisfactory testimony to the friends of patients as to the
care taken of their afflicted relatives ; for they thus perceive that these unfor-
tunates have not only the benefit arising from the enlarged experience of the
superintendent of an asylum as to mental derangement, in which particular he
almost necessarily excels other medical men, but also that on the occurrence
of bodily disease, they would have attendance of a character not to be sur-
passed at home. A second advantage in this regard consists in the circum-
stance, that in many instances the diseases prevalent in the vicinity of an
asylum would be known by a consulting physician, who, as a general rule,
would be probably a physician in practice, and thus additional light might be
constantly thrown on the physical diseases from time to time attacking the
inmates of an institution in an endemic or epidemic form. Again, the false
reports and rumours occasionally affecting the reputation of an asylum for
the insane, could not receive a more useful contradiction than would come
from the lips of a physician in active practice. In the third place, as to many
difficulties, not only with regard to treatment, but as to general management
also, an influential physician, by his counsel, and by his testimony out of
doors, might often lighten the weighty load of responsibility to which every
* As regards tlie offices of steward and matron, I may remark, par parenthese, that I
should consider their abolishment a desirable innovation.
t " In such a case, we cannot doubt that the frequent visits of an intelligent phy-
sician in general practice may be, in a vai'iety of ways, of the greatest advantage.3'?
Samuel Take.
FOR THE INSANE. 523
superintendent is subject; and suggestions of improvement would not unfre-
quently occur to such an officer, which might escape even the experienced
mind of a superintendent, burdened as he must ever be by a multiplicity of
cares and multiform duties.
Moreover, and lastly, by filling the office of consulting, physician, instead of
that of superintendent, lives valuable to the cause of the suffering insane might
be prolonged for years, which, under the toils of a superintendency, would be
quenched in darkness, after shedding for a short time a brief and transitory,
though effulgent light. In this connexion, I trust it will not be deemed amiss
to offer one humble tribute of admiration to the memory of the lamented
Brigham?from the south, to add one more to the many voices which have
uttered their praise of his exalted merits. If this eminent labourer in the field
of benevolence, after establishing on a permanent basis the important charity
over which he so ably presided, had then acted in its behalf, under a less con-
fining class of duties?a situation which would but have given more scope for
his sensible suggestions and his fearless reflections, we might still, perchance,
have had the light of his intelligence amongst us. He might have been a
blessing for years to the great institution in whose service lie died, as the
martyrs of old offered their corruptible bodies for an incorruptible faith. He
might have been a blessing fen- years to the insane in the populous common-
wealth which chose him from afar to watch over the infancy of its noble asylum;
to the insane in every State of this extensive and expanding Union, in whose
cause his wise words will ever be as a beacon and light to those who would
strive for their benefit; to the mentally afflicted, in fine, everywhere : for his
was a most liberal sympathy, and was displayed for the good of all in every
land, whose minds are darkened. But alas! lie has gone from us for ever !
Ours is the loss?his the exceeding reward. Whilst on.this earth, he contended
for the truth against all opposition and under all circumstances. He is now
gone to that mighty Being who is the source and essence of truth. His spirit
has passed to the bosom of the Eternal One, where the toil-worn and weary
have an everlasting rest.
ON THE MEDICO-LEGAL QUESTION OF THE CONFINEMENT OF THE INSANE.
The subject on which I have been instructed to report, is somewhat peculiar,
in the fact that it may be referred conjointly to two important professions?
medicine and law. With regard to the considerations which appertain to the
first half of the compound term, the indications for the confinement of persons
labouring under insanity are manifest in a number of cases. Taking those which
are clearly proved to belong to mental derangement, it is obvious, for example,
that the medical treatment will be very uncertain, if the patient is allowed to
go at large and to act according to his own fancy. In most instances, which
at all approach the maniacal type, the individual then must be confined on his
own account, for his own welfare. Here any scruples as to personal rights are
necessarily to be waived, being dispelled by the advantages which accrue to the
patient himself from placing him either in positive confinement, or uuder such
a degree of control as will enable the physician to give suitable directions in
the way of - treatment, and further, to ensure the certainty of these directions
being carried into effect. In this view, and under the present head, what is
entitled moral treatment and the deductions in connexion with it, fall under
the general division of medical treatment, as contradistinguished from the
second question, or the considerations arising as to the legal necessity of
restrictions on the insane. Upon the ground so stated, another principle for
confining this class is found in the circumstance, that should the patient be left
to indulge his peculiar morbid ideas and propensities unchecked, there is an
increased intensity given to them; hence, one of the rules of moral manage-
ment, to lessen the force of these, by exciting in the diseased mind new trains
524 ON THE MEDICO-LEGAL QUESTION OF
of healthy thoughts and emotions; but to effect this, presupposes the exercise
of a due degree of control over the individual. If for these and other reasons
?which might be mentioned, it be both justifiable and judicious to confine a
lunatic at home or elsewhere, so far as the benefit from medical supervision is
concerned, the argument has the greater force when applied to isolation in an
asylum, because here the means of effecting good results through the agency
of treatment, arc much more efficient and extensive than in general could be
provided in any other situation. This conclusion has been so universal, that
it scarcely seems necessary, either to enter into the comparative merits of
treatment in asylums properly managed and constituted, and that pursued
elsewhere, or, on the other hand, to discuss the essential difference as to
various points between the two modes of action. Suffice it to state, that
medical authorities in all civilized countries are agreed as to the superiority
of asylums in this regard. And there is not a doubt on the score of humanity,
that this greater efficacy altogether justifies the increased abridgment of
liberty, -which is sometimes the lot of the insane when thus situated. Whilst
we consider, however, the lamentable condition of those confined in prisons,
and also of some in confinement at home?whilst we view with feelings of
compassion the utter misery attending the situation of a large number of these
unfortunates in every land, we cannot but conclude that the natural liberty of
a citizen is practically and in reality far more affected by a residence in localities
like these, than when he dwells within the precincts of an asylum. In such an
establishment, the mournful isolation of dark and loathsome dens, and the
degradation of chains and stripes, are done away with entirely, and the hapless
lunatic can still receive unrestrained, at least the mitigating influences of light
and air. As respects the pauper insane, there are few who can be retained
with their friends, compared with those to whom an asylum is suitable; but
doubtless, in a medical aspect, there are amongst the wealthy patients, who
might be advantageously managed in private. In this matter much reflection
is necessary. For example, the number and character of the friends by whom
an individual will be environed at home, are circumstances worthy of great
attention; whether, in other words, they are in the first place persons of intel-
ligence ; and secondly, whether there will be such a loving devotion to his care
as will eventuate either in his restoration to sanity, or in an amelioration of the
morbid symptoms, and which will conduce to secure to him the greatest possible
comfort of which he is at all susceptible. The particular features of the
patient's disease, and the attendant circumstances generally analogous to those
just mentioned, must govern our decision in each separate instance. On this
subject, Dr. Jacobi acknowledges his readiness to admit, that many harmless,
low-spirited, or hypochondriacal patients, regain their health more easily in the
tranquillity of a domestic circle in the country, and under proper direction, than
in any other position; the situation itself forming for individual cases of the
kind the best remedial means. He afterwards comments on the difficulty of
finding persons in private, willing and duly qualified to make the necessary
exertions in behalf of those so afflicted. It should not be forgotten also, that
a severance from familiar scenes, associations, and persons, is, according to
universal experience, almost invariably a measure of advantage in the treatment
of insanity.
Most asylums for the insane have not only to be looked upon as curative
establishments, but also as adding much to the comfort of a large number of
lunatics, who must be considered as decidedly iucurable. It is a somewhat
?different question as to these, and as to individuals labouring under the early
and curable stages of insanity. The question now concerns a permanent loca-
tion : it is, whether a lunatic shall reside as a continuous mode of life in an
institution for the insane, or shall spend his days elsewhere ? Here the decision
to which we ultimately arrive, should also be determined by the character of
the patient's mental affection, and his condition as to friends and other modify-
THE CONFINEMENT OF THE INSANE. 525
ing circumstances. For if it is evident, that lie would be far more comfortable
in an asylum than at home, then the abstraction of his liberty in obtaining such
a residence is perfectly justifiable. In a medical point of view, perhaps the
order of cases causing the most perplexity, are those which fall into a line
intermediate between mere eccentricity and positive insanity; these are not
usually recent in their origin when first especially observed. What we have to
determine is, indeed, whether we shall allow an individual to lead a sort of life
most uncomfortable to himself, if we judge his feelings by those of other per-
sons ; or shall we bestow on him the comforts of an asylum, whilst at the same
time he is averse to a procedure of the kind, has property for his support,
inflicts no direct bodily injury on himself or others, and yet lives in a manner
which must be painful to himself, or which renders him very annoying to his
friends and connexions ?
With regard to the second head of the subject that has been allotted to us
for discussion, an eminent jurist of Massachusetts remarks, that the right to
deprive an insane person of his liberty is found in the great law of humanity,
which makes it nccessary to confine those whose going at large would be
dangerous to themselves or others. And he further observes, that if this were
otherwise, we could not even venture to restrain an individual in the delirium
of a fever, or in the case of a person seized with a convulsion. Again, as con-
cerns the confinement of those labouring under forms of insanity, which lead
them to destructive acts of various sorts, the necessity of this is so apparent,
that we may take it for granted that there are regulations to this effect amongst
all civilized nations. It is just as necessary to guard the public from being
injured by these, as it is to protect them against the violence of real criminals.
With regard to interdiction, it may be simply remarked, that under all legal
systems, from the Homan jurisprudence down to the different codes of our own
time, the grant of this power has been thought requisite. But who shall draw
the line of distinction between a form of insanity which is dangerous, and one
which is not so; "definitio est periculosa." When we peruse the history of
various cases in works on insanity, we find that some of the most horrid acts
have been committed by monomaniacs. So also as respects the comparative
mental condition of individuals affected with moral insanity; is there any
variety of mental disease, which oftener renders its victims unmanageable and
exceedingly troublesome ? Instances, too, are not uncommon, in which the
demented have committed the most fearful outrages. Hence it is that jurists
of this country have asserted it to be the duty of friends to take the necessary
steps for providing a proper degree of restraint to those afflicted with mental
derangement; and that in their judgment, although unsanctioned by any sta-
tutory provision, their confinement in an asylum is not consequently a violation
of a natural right. Hence, also, in an article published during the present year,
we find Dr. Winslow declaring that no person evidently deranged in mind,
should be permitted to go at large, without some degree of surveillance; and
that society must be protected against the insane, and the insane against
themselves.*
Forsaking, temporarily, the general subject of the confinement of the insane,
it seems necessary to touch liere on two subordinate points, relative to the
same topic. The 'first of these has reference to that psychological condition
entitled a lucid interval. There are many cases of insanity which are periodical
in their character; in a ratio with the approach of a patient's mind to complete
insanity in these intervals, and with their comparative duration, will he have
more or less the right to demand a withdrawal of interdiction and isolation ?
Each instance, we think, should be determined by its own essential charac-
teristics. And we ought, therefore, to lean to one side or the other; that is,
* Journal of Psychological Medicine, Oct. 1850; Art., " The Trial of Pate " (by
the Editor).
526 ON THE MEDICO-LEGAL QUESTION OF
forbid or allow restriction, in accordance with the degree of the lucidity, its
duration, and also the wishes of the individual, and his prospects of self-support
when he shall he sole master of his own actions. Difficulties may certaiidy
occur here, but practical good sense should be permitted to disentangle our
doubts, and enable us to arrive at a proper conclusion.
A second point of consideration, is the length of time that a patient should
remain in an asylum after convalescence has appeared. Now it is manifest
that in such a retention we are temporarily confining a man who is sane. This
we think, however, entirely justifiable, inasmuch as nearly all writers on insanity
agree as to the necessity of occupying due time in the consolidation of a cure;
the reports of various institutions for the insane exhibit this fact very plainly.
And we should not hesitate in thus restraining a patient, merely to gratify the
ultraism of fanatical excitement and visionary theories of liberty. Moreover,
we think that a just regard to the safety of the public or of the patient himself,
authorizes the retention for a longer period than usual of individuals, who,
whilst insane, have committed homicide or attempted self-destruction; for the
risk involved in permitting a person to go at large, in whom propensities so
dangerous might be still latent, is sufficiently great to require a conviction
approaching ccrtainty on the part of a superintendent, that the mental disturb-
ance is removed at the time of discharge.
Having assigned the reasons why a person when insane shoidd be subject to
confinement, it remains for us to look somewhat in a contrary direction, by
turning the view to abuses which have attended the exercise of this power of
isolation. Iudividuals merely eccentric, or altogether unaffected in mind, have
been incarcerated, not for their own good nor for the safety of the public, but
only with the pretence of insanity to carry out evil designs on their property
or to serve some other unholy purpose. This has been an occasional result m
many foreign countxies, though we have scarcely heard of any cases of the kind
in the United States. As concerns American asylums, the very few supposed
examples, in which a portion of the public have deemed otherwise, m our
opinion were wholly fallacious.
There are, then, two purposes to aim at, in instituting legal provisions for
the confinement of the insane. First, that the advantages muring to hospital
treatment, and particularly as regards recent cases, should be fostered, as far
as possible, by a wise legislation. And secondly, that all abuses should be
subject to correction, by the invariable establishment of a watchful and entirely
paramount supervision?a supervision by its characteristic features removed to
as great an extent as is feasible in human affairs, from the probable action of
selfish motives. With regard to the first of these principles, circumstances
must so vary its action, that we have no space to enter into details. For
example, the means of support possessed by an asylum, or by the patients
therein, the extent of a country, the reputation of an institution, and other
modifying influences. On the whole, it may be remarked, that whilst the laws,
in appointing an authority to judge of a person's sanity and take the respon-
sibility of confining him, should be such as will ensure the deliberate action of
an unbiassed tribunal, at the same time they should never be so complicated or
of a nature that would create difficulties in sending an insane patient to an
hospital, at an early stage of his mental disease. Perhaps some legislation is
needed here in most communities; for it is a common cause of complaint with
medical superintendents, that the insane are but too often kept back from
asylums until they have become wholly incurable. Respecting the prevention
of false imprisonment, the great measure for this end is embodied in an aphorism
of Millingen, to the effect that "All lunatic asylums, whether public or private,
should be placed under the immediate care of government." With regard to
the steps made necessary for restrictions on the insane elsewhere than in an
asylum, a carefully devised local tribunal is not an entirely sufficient safeguard
against corruption; there should also be some central authority emanating from
the government of a State, and having wide powers of investigation.
THE CONFINEMENT OF THE INSANE. 527
We cannot avoid thinking, moreover, that the free entrance of visitors into
asylums has an excellent tendency in relation to their custodial functions.
Under this regulation, in instances in which the reputation of an institution is
j eopardied, pre-conceived notions on the part of communities, or an entire want
of previous reflection, are not so liable to exert a pernicious effect. If, for
example, the accusation is raised that sane persons are confined in the demesnes
of a hospital, there will be most probably a number of visitors who can contradict
such a report. We waive here the question as to the moral influence upon the
insane from the introduction of visitors, but would simply remark, that our
opinions on this point have been heretofore expressed, and that our views and
experience are directly opposite to those of most of our medical brethren.
In conclusion, we may venture to observe, that although as to the confinement
of persons in asylums, public opinion is often in the wrong, yet caution is
requisite from the managers of these charities, lest an institution should be
placed here in a false position. If the opinion and action of the public are
evinced decidedly against the confinement of an individual as being an unfit
subject for the process, although to those experienced in the symptoms of
insanity the reverse may seem clear; admitting also, that the legal right of
restriction is fully in the hands of those having charge of an asylum, it is still,
to say the least, doubtful whether this right should be exercised. The matter
evidently stands thus : so far as the welfare of the institution is concerned, it
makes no difference whether the supposed lunatic is committed to its care or
not; but by insisting on the use of a lawful power, it inevitably gives colour
to the accusation of improper motives. In our judgment it would be better to
yield to the wishes of the community, at the same time making a public protest
against the erroneous train of ideas by which they are deceived. This we
believe, too, is the proper course, not only to avoid the false imputation to
which we have referred, but for the especial reason in addition, that in a
republic, respect is always due to the opinions of the people.
