The Stomach and its Difficulties
=================================

540
Jtfltsccllamous iEottces.
. By Sir James Eyre, M.D.
Churchill. 1852.
There are few things connected with literature so difficult to accomplish as
that of writing a pleasant and readable work on a medical subject. The
market is over-stocked with dull, heavy, prosy works, which few have the
patience to read. It is gratifying to meet with a member of the profession
capable of placing before us a volume connected with a most important class
of affections, written like the one now upon our table. Sir James Eyre takes no
elevated flights; he leaves the more abstruse points in relation to this subject
to such men as Dr. W. Philip, and others, and confines his attention to the
consideration of those matters which admit legitimately of a somewhat extra-
professional discussion. In this respect he has followed in the wake of the
late.Dr. James Johnson, whose valuable works on indigestion and health are
as much addressed to the public as to the profession. Sir James Eyre has
the ability to communicate valuable knowledge in an agreeable manner. This
little volume is as amusing as a novel, and yet it is replete with facts and
principles of the utmost importance to the preservation of the human health.
Thousands who could not be persuaded to peruse the recognised medical text-
books on the subjects of diet, and indigestion, will eagerly devour the con-
tents of Sir James Eyre's little volume; and if they are wise enough to follow
the sensible advice he offers for the regulation of the digestive apparatus, how
much misery they will be exempted from. It would be unfair, and mani-
festly unjust, to subject a work like the present to serious criticism. Sir
James Eyre does not put his little volume forward with any ostentatious
pretensions. It conveys what he intended it to convey, sensible and practical
instructions for the regulation of the functions of the stomach, adapted for
general perusal. The little volume is full of pleasantries, all embodying,
however, an important principle of treatment.
Rheumatism, Gout, and Neuralgia as affecting the Head and Ear, Sfc. &,c.
By William Harvey, Surgeon to the Royal Dispensary for Diseases of
the Ear.
Mr. Harvey has devoted his attention for many years to aural medicine and
surgery; and the well-earned reputation he has acquired, entitles anything
that proceeds from his pen to the careful consideration of the profession. The
volume under review is an excellent work on several important diseases,
written in a clear style, and full of sound practical observations.
On the Diseases of the Bladder. By W. Coulson, Esq., Surgeon to St. Mary's
Hospital. 4th Edition. Churchill. 1852.
Mr. Coulson's work requires no commendation from us to recommend it to
the notice of the profession. It is the most comprehensive, practical, and
valuable work on the subject of which it treats. The edition before us embo-
dies all the most recent discoveries of any importance connected with the
diseases of the bladder; and these, combined with Mr. Coulson's own original
remarks, add great value to his work.
MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES. 547
On the Nature and Treatment of the Diseases of the Heart. By James
Wardrop, M.D.
The principal portion of tliis work has been published in the columns of the
Medical Times and Gazette. We have read Dr. Wardrop's volume with
much interest. It is a valuable contribution to medical literature. There
are many passages in the work of a psychological character, which we had
marked for quotation ; but we regret that want of space compels us to set
them for the present aside. This work must find its way into every medical
man's library, and be referred to by all anxious to make themselves acquainted
with the treatment of diseases of the heart.
Poms, Essays, and Opinions. By Alfred Bates Richards, Esq.,
Barrister-at-Law. 4 vols. 1852.
Mr. Richards is a vigorous writer. He handles the " grey goose-quill"
with considerable ability. His able tragedy, Croesus, King of Lydia, had fully
prepared us for the advent of a man of original capacity, and one who dared
to think for himself. All the essays are on topics of great, of popular, and
scientific interest. It is with much pleasure that we recommend these
volumes to the notice of our readers.
A Practical Treatise on Diseases of the Skin. By J. Moore Neiigan, M.D.,
M.R.I.A., &c. 1 vol. 8vo. Dublin : Fannin and Co.
We have been much pleased with this volume. Dr. Neligan writes with all
the ease and confidence of a man taught in a practical school. His work is a
valuable addition to the literature of skin diseases. We predict for it an
extensive sale and great popularity. Dr. Neligan's work may be considered
one of the best practical works extant on the diseases of the skin.
