A Singular Case of Monomania
=============================

A very curious affair is announced to comc before the tribunals in a short
time, wherein the medical faculty of Paris will be greatly interested. One of
the numerous victims to the disease which, according to Broussais, makes
more ravages in this one city than in the rest of Europe put together?the
terrible, relentless, inexorable idee fixe?died at the Hospital Beaujou a short
time ago, leaving a considerable sum behind him. For seventeen years he had
never slept two nights following in the same lodging, nor during that time had
he taken his meals at the same place; and in spite of the easy circumstances in
which lie had lived?in spite of the vigilance of kind friends and relations, the
icUeJixe has chased him to the hospital after all! Well might poor Broussais
express such alarm at the idee fixe, the pious horror of which had at last
become his own. According to Broussais, every man was under the influence
of the idee fixe, and, by his first question to the patient, he was invariably deter-
mined as to the direction in which it lay. "Are you feverish?" would he say
to the sick man who came to consult him. " Very," was most frequently the
reply. " Restless, hey??fidgetty at night, hey ??tormented and uneasy, hey ?"
To all this the patient would, of course, assent. " Then, monsieur, you have
surely got some idee fixe! Ah ! prenez garde a V idee fixe!" It is a curious
fact that, however strongly the supposition was denied at first, Broussais
seldom failed to elicit something like an avowal of some pet anxiety or other,
which by its nature he pretended to trace either to the brain, the stomach, or
the bowels. Monsieur A , the patient who has just died at Beaujon a martyr
to the idee fixe, was -formerly an employe in the Tuilcries under Charles the
Tenth, and held a post of high trust and confidence. In July, 1830, when the
mob entered the palace, so great was the respect and consideration in which he
NO. XIX. D D
402 A SINGULAR CASE OF MONOMANIA.
was held, that his apartment was unvisited, and afforded shelter to many of the
gardes du corps, who otherwise would have been sacrificed to the fury of the
nle. He was allowed to retire at his leisure from the place he had occupied
ong without tlie slightest molestation, taking with him his goods and
chattels, and not in any way experiencing any more annoyance than the removal
from one house to another must always occasion. He went to live with his
?wife and family in the Faubourg St. Honore, announcing his intention of
retiring altogether from public life. His mind was perfectly tranquil as to the
future, for he had been prudent in his expenses, and had saved a sufficient for-
tune to ensure perfect ease and comfort for the remainder of his days. No
symptoms of madness had ever been exhibited by himself or any member of his
family, nor had previous pre-occupation been observed in his manner, when
suddenly, on the 14th of November following the July of the Revolution, while
at dinner, he laid down his knife and fork, and, turning to his wife, exclaimed,
with a face full of consternation, "I have just remembered that I have to go
to Vierzon." " Why so ?" returned his wife, perfectly astonished at the sudden
announcement. " To present myself at the drawing of the conscription." His
wife laughed heartily at the idea. He was past fifty years of age?long past
the time for entering the army; and his threat of repairing to Vierzon to pre-
sent himself to the mayor was considered by her as an unaccountable joke.
She knew he had escaped in his youth by making a journey over the frontier
at the time of drawing ; she knew that he had always been subject to the in-
quisition of the police until liberated by his age from all obligation of the kind,
and she dismissed the affair altogether from her mind, and saw him depart for
his walk, " as was his custom of an afternoon," without the slightest feeling of
uneasiness. Her surprise may therefore be imagined when, late that evening,
she received a note from her husband, wherein he requested her not to sit up
for him that night, as he should not return, being well aware that the police
were on the look out for him, and that, if taken, he should be condemned to
imprisonment for contumace as regarded the conscription! From that hour
he wandered forth, finding no rest, seeking no company, pursued by the
remorseless idee fixe which had taken possession of his soul; one night sleeping
in the Faubourg St. Antoine, the next at the Barriere de l'Etoile; sometimes
dining on the Boulevard, and passing the night at Vincennes, to rise before
daylight in order to avoid the gendarmerie, and then hurrying straight to Passy
to snatch a hasty meal, and hurry off to St. Germain. This life he has led for
seventeen years, and at length, worn out with anxiety and fatigue, he was
brought from a small lodging-house in the Rue de la Pepiniere. At the last
moment he requested to see his wife, who was summoned on the instant.
When she appeared at his bedside, he seemed to grow furious at sight of her
features, which perhaps brought to mind his first seizure and his first despair.
He reproached her with the greatest bitterness for having betrayed him to the
police; it must have been her who had given notice of his defalcation at the
conscription, as none knew it but herself. He had sent for her but to tell her
this, and to bid her not rejoice at his death, as he had given his whole fortune
into the keeping of Mons. Sainte  (whose brother is one of our first
litterateurs); and although it was her own by right of the marriage contract,
he would defy her to draw a farthing from him, were she backed by all the
lawyers in Paris! Letters corroborative of this assertion were found in the
knapsack, which, in the character of wandering beggar he had adopted for so
many years, he had carried on his back, together with the account of his daily
expenditure most regularly kept. As he had anticipated, however, Mons.
Sainte denies all participation in the concealment of the money, and de-
clares the letters found with his signature were but to soothe the irritation of
the "jpauvrefou."
