On Mental Physiology
=====================

Art. IV.-
-
These chapters embrace the psychological portion of Dr. Holland's
former able work, "Medical Notes and Reflections." We quote a passage
from its preface, to indicate the value which the learned author places
on the subject to which our journal is devoted:?" Scarcely can we
name a morbid affection of the body in which some feeling or function
of mind is not concurrently engaged. No physician can rightly fulfil
his duties without an adequate knowledge of, and constant regard to,
these important relations." It is refreshing to the mind to take up
these pages of a philosopher in his unprejudiced pursuit of truth,
after having been compelled to travel over, and, alas, to wade through,
the pages of so many who have, in their course, blinded their eyes
even to the facts around them, if opposed to their own notions; or who
have precipitately formed crude deductions, and endeavoured to frame a
gigantic theory on a foundation which is scarcely firm enough to sup-
port the most fragile hypothesis.
Convinced that it is our duty to proceed firmly in that course,
which in the climax of its study may tend to render the term meta-
physics a misnomer, Ave have ever, without any fear of the hackneyed
stigma of materialism, regarded the investigation of the physio-pathology
of the brain as the essence of psychological study, not by any shallow con-
clusions, pro or con, on popular prejudice or proselytism, but by a care-
ful association of cerebral symptomatology with mental phenomena.
That there are many things yet undreamed of in our philosophy must be
admitted, and we must so far fail in our duty, even as the physicians
of the body, when we blink or disregard psychal derangement, so often
but a symptom of corporeal disease.
This must be done, however, Avitliout caprice or bigotry. We must
accept every neAV and proved fact, and measure or explain it on the
acknoAvledged principles of science; "separate," in Dr. Holland's oAvn
words, " what is knoAvn from that which is unknoAvn?Avhat is capable
f Chapters on Mental Physiology. By Henry Holland, M.D., F.R.S. London:
1852.
ON ME#TAL PHYSIOLOGY. 323
of being reached by the human understanding from that which is pre-
sumably unattainable by it." Thus restrained in our especial study,
we are satisfied that we are progressing in the only path to the temple
of truth.
With these sentiments, we at once recognise the importance of the
first chapter, on medical evidence, especially in reference to the effect of
remedy.
The idiosyncrasy of the mind, as well as that of the body, is as
multiform as feature or shape; so, even the truthful evidence of one
physician regarding his own favourite remedy, perhaps precipitately
advanced from isolated cases, becomes a stumblingblock to the pro-
fession : vide the history of tar-water, digitalis, cubebs, iodine, &c. In
the study of psychology this equally obtains, for insanity has its multi-
form phases; and even though the proximate cause or structural con-
dition may be similar, its exciting causes are so various, and its
sympathies so intricate, as to require equally patient study and discrimi-
nation regarding the principles of its treatment. Of the valuable
hints and precepts of Dr. Holland, we may especially note those on the
jumble and discrepancy of our medical nomenclature. In discussion,
especially, a protracted war of words is often carried on upon one
misapplied term ; and Avhen the strife is over, the subject is, of course,
just as perplexing as ever, the combatants discovering that they have
really been talking about two different things.
And this is aggravated by the prevailing fashions in medicine ; as
Dr. Holland says, " terms have descended to us which we can hardly
put aside, maxims which fetter the understanding, and methods of clas-
sification which prevent the better suggestions of a sound experience."
Regarding our own pages, Ave have ever adopted the course here
enjoined, of never rejecting what is new or strange, because it is new
and strange. In proof of this we may refer to our criticisms on Reichen-
bach, and Mayo, and Crowe, and to our own original papers on psychal
phenomena.
The faculty of attention, to which Dr. Holland refers, is one of the
most important attributes of human intellect. The high degrees of its
power constitute indeed the strong and energetic mind, and its physio-
logy and pathology are often marked in the same individual. The
concentration of the mind on one point, which has worked out some of
the most abstruse problems, and the most marvellous works, may, by
over-indulgence, become morbid abstraction or absence of mind, and the
subject of very unmerciful satire : and if Sir Isaac Newton formed
his brilliant theories from simple facts by "always thinking unto
them," he was, it is said, from the same abstraction, guilty of very
y 2
324 ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY.
eccentric and even ridiculous behaviour. Indeed, insanity is not an
infrequent consequence of tlie long continuance or excess of attention,
which, like connate imbecility, cannot be fixed to a point. Conscious-
ness is, indeed, for a time lost, as in the cases of Parmegiano and
Archimedes, and the most strange illusions may also thus arise in the
mind.
This principle of concentration is the grand secret of all the popular
phenomena of the day, and it is almost the duty of the psychologist to
develop this principle, so that the popular mind and purse may cease to
be gulled and plucked. Whether this attention, or, as Dr. Holland
would call it, direction of consciousness, or, as we have termed it,
concentration of thought, be voluntary or reflex, as well as the nature
of its intimate association with the phenomena of the day?all this is
yet only on the threshold of development. It is this power of mental
concentration on one point, which conferred on Archimedes, and Watt,
and Smeaton, and Telford, and Stephenson, that wondrous power of
working out and adapting mechanical forces to their will; and it is
this concentration on another point which enables many to ward
oil an evil, or to endure torture with almost superhuman courage. It
is the mvoluntary or reflex influence of concentration, which excites
the feats of fragile girls during the convulsive epidemics.
We have known, also, deep and fixed thought on one absorbing sub-
ject control or even obviate sea-sickness.
This concentration of the attention on one sense, will thus exalt and
extend its power, but at the expense of the other senses. This is the
rationale of community or transference of senses.
It is clear, from these reflections, of how much importance is the
study of the influence of mind on body. As it induces disease by con-
centration, it may, when properly studied, prove of great remedial
benefit, as in the cases of the Hohenlohe miracles. Concentration of
attention on the heart may instantly induce increased action, and, as
in the case of Colonel Townsend, diminished action, even to a fatal
extent. The principle will in the end, we think, be brought to bear
as an important therapeutic agent.
Even concentrated thought on the intestinal canal will, as we have
ourselves known, at once induce peristaltic action; and we are con-
stantly aware how the contractions of the bladder obey the same influ-
ence. The thought, as well as the sight, of a savoury dish will directly
excite the salivary glands to pour forth their fluid. The fixing of the
thought will also induce disorder : the spasm of cramp may so be
renewed after a contraction has ceased for a time.
There are some curious cases in which muscular action seems to
ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY. 325
depend on attention; for when it lias been for an instant diverted, an
article has immediately dropped from the hand. And this may even
form one mode of the fulfilment of a prophecy.
Dr. Holland's reflections on that especial faculty so peculiar to man,
the power of thinking of our thoughts, are interesting. We refer to
" The influence of attention directed inwards upon those images or
repetitions of objects of sense, which, even in the waking state, are per-
petually generated within the sensorium, independently of all direct
impressions from without, though often immediately consequent upon
them."
Dr. Holland very candidly discusses the association of attention with
the favourite phenomena of the day. We have, however, in the course
of our labours, so fully discussed the subjects and effects of passes and
odyle forces, the virga divinatoria, and other psychal novelties, that we
can only refer our readers to the acute reasonings in our author's pages,
in which the true balance is drawn between the material effects of
magnetic force and the mere results of psychal influence?between the
voluntary and automatic powers,?and to the many passages which, with
the author's lucid phraseology, so constantly point out and explain the
cui bono of what profane sceptics would call the imperfections of our
nature; thus " vindicating the ways of God with man." The eccen-
tricities which with the multitude constitute a complete puzzle, are thus
clearly referred to: " In many remarkable cases the ordinary percep-
tions from the senses are wholly disturbed and perverted by the
condition of the sensorium receiving them. Muscular motions occur
from other causes than volition; and past images and memories rise up
unbidden to perplex both sensations and acts by mingling with them,
without control or direction of the rational will." Our own constant
reflections (and Dr. Holland evidently coincides) convince us that the
essence of mesmerism is in the body of the patient, and not in that of
the operator: that is, the predisposing is of more account than the ex-
citing cause, however essential the latter may be. The phenomena
may, indeed, be brought out by many other modes than passes and
touching, especially where there are weak or sensitive points. " A
singular case is that of an expected impression on some part of the
body producing, before actually made, sympathetic sensations or move-
ment in other parts which are wont to be affected by such impressions.''
For the odyle force, Reichenbach chiefly selected females under 30, and
all affected by some abnormal nervous condition. These females, we
believe, are especially prone to deception, and there are few psychologists
who will not at once recognise those to whom Dr. Holland refers, in
Lord Bacon's words: " Delight in deceiving and aptness to be deceived,
S2G ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY.
imposture and credulity, although they appear to he of a diverse
nature, yet certainly they do for the most part concur."
The principle of consciousness?the feeling that we are?ah! who
can answer the question of Dr. Holland 1 Who will ever fathom the
mystery 1 Descartes, Berkeley, Locke, Hume, Priestley, Paley, all would
look different ways to find it; and at last some vulgar Pyrrho might,
with a " we wish you may get it," confute them all?not on the truth
of personal existence, but because they could not find or prove it. Let
us take Descartes. His ego?the I-ness or ichikeit of the Germans?is
but a shallow definition of this principle. We are conscious we are,
because we think?a notion, by the way, previously put by Milton into
Adam's thought, " That I am I know, because I think." But the very
ego, the thing that thinks, must have a prior existence; therefore,
thinking is not the essence, although it may be the proof, of being. We
quite agree with Dr. Holland that consciousness is a succession, and
not simultaneousness. We believe that the slightest thought is an
action : two, of course, cannot exist at the same time in the same part.
It would be curious to pit this hypothesis of succession with one brain
and the synchronous antagonism of the two brains of Wigan together;
but we must, at least, defer it. There seems a constant antagonism
between mental and physical consciousness, and intellect seems to hang
on our power of making the former predominate. The idiot, when he
is conscious, is only physically so; the perception exists, but it vanishes
when the excitant is withdrawn.
This question of mental consciousness is of real consequence in
psychology, as the method of arrangement of perceptions is at the root
of all, constituting the varied degrees of intellect, from the idiot to
the philosopher. So Cicero : " Magni est ingenii revocare mentem a sen-
sibus, et cogitationem a consuetudine revocare." And we might quote
Samuel Johnson at Iona, were not his fine sentence as common as
household words.
On this point of antagonism of will and senses Dr. Holland reasons
with perspicuity, from whence we might, if we had space, found some
very salutary precepts for the self-government of the mind, which might
at once answer Dr. Holland's query.
Time Dr. Holland deems of much importance as an element in
psychical studies, in regard to sanity, or health, or integrity of mind.
We might contrast the closeness with which a question is answered,
not only on recovery from adynamic or comatose states, but also in the
early stages of typhus (the delirium of which so much resembles a
dream), with those dreams in which a myriad of years is gone over in a
few seconds?the one arising from inaptitude of perception or con-
ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY. 327
sciousness; the other from that exalted or concentrated condition of
brain analogous to eccentric and almost preternatural muscular actions.
Dr. Holland's opinion coincides with that of Locke, that at one time
the mind is in a boggle, and requires spurring; at others, it presses on
like a war-horse, and cannot he held in. Walter Scott acted consciously
on this principle of varied states and capacities of mind quoad time,
when he was wont, after trying to recollect or compose in vain, to sleep
on it, and it would all come in the morning; or when, to use his own
graphic term, he had :t a fit of the clevers." The misty brain, we may
be sure, is known to all authors; even Milton was occasionally subject
to it; while, at other times, "the unpremeditated verse flowed like an
inspiration."
Probably not only the loss of memory in the senile brain, but also
that of the incubation stage of insanity, may be thus explained: that
is, ere the sluggish mind is conscious of a perception, or a question, so
as to set about answering it, another idea or suggestion is forced on
it, and thus, time being, as it were, called, the first idea is erased, and
the answer does not come to the scratch. Some intellectual minds are
thus set a wool-gathering. When John Kemble had indulged in free
libations, his perceptions took so long a time to germinate that he often
burst into laughter at a joke long after it was uttered, and when, per-
haps, the topic then on the tapis was a death or a funeral.
We have already fully analyzed the oblivion of sleep, the irrationality
of the dream of slumber, and its extreme and persistent prototype,
insanity. If not, we might perhaps differ with Dr. Holland and Aristotle
regarding the period of sleep at which dreams arise, and express our
coincidence with Lord Brougham and the author of the " Philosophy of
Mystery," that it is the transition state. The truth is evidenced by a
host of anecdotes related by common dreamers, who were not anxious
to prove a position.
We must, however, pass over this chapter, merely alluding to a
seeming paradox in page 93: " Some dreams are well remembered,
others not at all" How do we positively know they occurred, if not
remembered? No one but the slumberer can decide this.
And what is a dream. This is Bichat's definition:?" lis ne sont
autre chose qu'une portion de la vie animale echappee de l'engourdisse-
ment ou l'autre portion est plongee." Now no one can deny the
plausibility?the truth (?) of this want of balance, or its importance in
our study. This metaphysical cause, however, leads to no practical
result. The vital question seems to be how far the blood, or the
nerve, or cerebral disorganization, is involved in the states of dreaming
and insanity. Dr. Holland refers very acutely to this subject; but,
328 ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY.
again, we have in many papers so amply discussed it, especially in the
comparative importance of blood and nerve, that we must pass by this
chapter also, which, according to Dr. Holland's distaste for conjecture,
is chiefly bearing on the difficulties oi the discussion. We may just
surmise, that undue determination of blood, and of the nervous or
sensorial power, have probably about an equal share in many cases.
The only allusion we make is to one special exciting cause of insanity,
the protraction or excess of reflection; or, as Dr. Holland writes, " the
concentration of the consciousness too long continued upon its own
functions." The proneness of deep thinkers to ultimate derangement
is unhappily not rare; and it is probable that the result is depending
on a certain predisposition, which itself may be owing to a peculiar
texture of brain or nerve. The firm brain will bear it, and find it but
little effort; the softer brain will yield, for the act is exertion; always
attended, we believe from the beginning, with varied degrees of erethism
or excitement.
The pathology of memory (" the reproduction of a perception" of
Spurzheim) is of the deepest interest; the faculty, indeed, being con-
stantly exerted by us, even between a question and its immediate (?)
answer. There is, in truth there must be, a lapse of time, and, ere we
respond, we recollect the question, or we could not answer: of course,
therefore, all thought must be memory. Dr. Holland cites some inter-
esting cases of the loss of memory; among them, that of Messala
Corvinus, as forgetting his own name; and we might refer to parallel
cases of J. W. Yon B., &c. &c. Another person lost the memory of
words only; events and persons were still remembered. Another
patient, on convalescence, constantly substituted one pronoun for
another. A third, during his delirium, spoke only in French, a lan-
guage he had ceased to converse in for thirty years. Priestley, Scott,
Porson, and many others of high talent, might also be cited as
examples. Many of these cases are paralytics. The pages of our
journal, especially in the second volume, and some standard works
to which we can refer, abound with these curious records. We cannot
agree with Thomas Brown, that voluntary memory or recollection is a
mere suggestion; if so, it must be from a man to himself: he dictates,
when he says, " let me recollect." Memory is a suggestion; and he
says, " I do remember." Gall is a little more precise: " Remembrance
is the faculty of recollecting that we have perceived impressions; and
memory the recollection of the impressions themselves." The susjoen-
sion of memory is one of the most mysterious of mnemonic pheno-
mena; as if, after the intoxication of Lethe, we had corrected it by
quaffing copiously of the fountain of Mnemosyne.
ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY. 329
Accident, as concussion, or disease, often produces this abeyance,
tlie mind being a mere tabula rasa, until, in a moment, when the
oppression is removed, thought recurs at once to the point of time
when the accident occurred. A rider who has been thrown, will lie in
coma even for ten or twelve days, or more, and then directly he comes
out of the stupor, will exclaim, " Put the horse in the stable." But we
might fill a volume with these anecdotes.
Memory being the essence of all healthy thought, its derangement is
of course one constant symptom of insanity. But were we to comment
on it here, we must of necessity only quote ourselves. Dr. Holland
has hinted that " defect of memory may be the primary disease, and
insanity its consequence." We have, however, always taken the loss of
memory as one prominent sign of disorder of its organ. Returning
memory, as the sequela of convalescence, proves this to be the case-
And again, the recurrence of certain morbid states of the brain repro-
ducing the same distorted image in a patient who had, during the
healthy interval, entirely forgotten the illusion, illustrates the intimate
dependence of memory on structure.
We cannot attempt to explain that which Dr. Holland waives?the
exact mode by which an eidolon is impressed on the brain, or how it
can be re-excited. Locke, we remark, asks this question, Whether the
temper of the brain makes this difference, in some it being like marble,
in others like sand? Haller does not blink the question; and Dr.
Hook, one of the first Royal Society Fellows, decides how many hun-
dred ideas can be made or retained in one day! It is, however, most
probable that impression is the proper word, as children retain more
than adults. Yet is it also true, that one idea or thought out of so
many thousands must displace another, either confusing or dispersing
the rest.
We agree with Dr. Holland, however, on the importance of the
study of the varied power of memory in different persons, regarding
the system of its education. The encouragement of natural precocity
may often be attended by the same prejudicial effect as the taxing of
the memory of children unduly. The constitutional power of the
mind, like that of the body, is very varied; and memory, one of the
functions (?) of that mind, as well as any physical or clearly organic
function, must not be overstrained, or it will of necessity suffer.
Getting by heart is to a degree salutary; but if strained, it becomes a
sort of parrot learning?very, specious perhaps, but it is anything but
wisdom. The preceptor, then, should be the physician of the mind, and
as watchful as he of the body.
There are, it is true, statements of very extraordinary memories
330 ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY.
recorded, especially in Sir Alexander Crichton's " Inquiry," and in the
" Philosophy of Mystery," &c.; but common powers must not aim at
this, or the fable of the bull and the frog may be realized.
Dr. Holland glances at two instances of almost imbecility induced
by this over-action; and Ave should not hazard much if we concluded
that varied degrees of ramollissement were the cerebral conditions thus
induced. This, we believe, is the gist of Dr. Holland's remarks in
page 159 of his work, although he does not quite approve of the
word.
Less severe impairment of the memory may, however, be the result
of very common causes: a glass of wine may thus restore a failing
memory, " so suddenly," as Dr. Holland writes, " as to show that the
want of due excitement to the circulation was the cause of the failure."
Thus also in fevers, and all disorders marked by adynamia.
Dr. Holland confesses we have no specific, no mnemosyne for the resto-
ration of fading memory. The only mode must be, to direct remedy to
that organic point, of the derangement of which the defect of memory
is but a symptom. Restore completely the brain, and memory would
be sure to return. We refer our readers to the judicious precepts
proposed by Dr. Holland as remedial. The effort of recollection will
often fail when spontaneous memory succeeds. " A line," Dr. Holland
remarks, " laboriously and vainly sought for, will often flash upon the
mind when the search has been discontinued." And this seems a
curious analogy to the visibility of a small star, when we look merely
at its vicinity.
Dr. Holland and the late Dr. Wigan (who dedicated his book to
him) differ widely on the physiology of brain. Doubleness and duality
are very opposite things. Wigan argued that the two minds might
antagonize each other?both, in fact, thinking of different subjects
simultaneously. Dr. Holland's arguments regard succession?a matter
of time?the brain thinking on different subjects only at different
periods : and as it is a unity, the two hemispheres are coinciding with
each other through the medium of their commissures.
The question is curious, how closely towards duality, division,
disease, or absence of these commissures would tend.
Even in alluding to the disturbance of brain and nerve, and even to
idiocy, and also to the curious cases of hemiopia, of which Abernethy
and others have been subjects, the question of time still reconciles Dr.
Holland to mental unity. Perhaps the immediate succession of thought
may associate fairly the differences of unity, duality, and plurality of
mental organization. In page 184 we have very sensible arguments in
favour of unity; but whether the one or the other, there must be
ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY. 331
doubtless two states of brain, when a person is irresistibly impelled to
that which his better nature abhors. The
"Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor,"
and the
" Contra miglior volcr, voler mal pugna"
of Dante, are painful records of the victory of Arimanes over the
good spirit. The rapidity of thoughts in succeeding or in galloping
over each other will explain all this, and also those curious cases of
double consciousness in which we seem to be ourselves and others at
one and the same time. Of this interesting question phrenology should
be but the alphabet or preface. Phrenology, the doctrine of mind, is,
however, too much mixed up with craniology, tli.e doctrine of the skull,
to render its minutiae yet available for the psychologist. "Viewed as
a whole," writes Dr. Holland, " it is a sort of especial contradiction to
theprincipe cle la moindre action, so generally prevailing throughout all
parts of the creation; and it is yet further liable to this peculiar
objection, that the limitation of the list of organs is hardly more reason-
able than its extent,"ifcc. The mapping of the skull quoad quantity and
extent merely, without reference to quality, must ever be liable to fallacy,
although the unravelling and analysis of brains will doubtless develop
much of which we are at present ignorant. Dr. Holland refers with some
confidence to the researches of Baillarger in 1845. That phrenologists
have jumped precipitately to a conclusion is very clear, and, like many
other abstruse or interesting sciences, systems, or processes?mesmerism,
vaccination, &c., &c.?phrenology yet suffers from the haste of its san-
guine professors in their " over early and peremptory reductions into acts
methods," as Lord Bacon writes. In the mass, however, the system is
probably true. For the analogy of propensity and instinct, the principle
of antagonism of different organs, to the controversion at once of abstract
phrenology, we refer to Dr. Holland's calm and philosophic reasoning,
merely hinting at the fallacy of the mere cranial topography, when we
cannot define the direction of convolutions, in the course of which, and
not across them, we must locate our propensities and faculties.
The line of demarcation between instinct and reason has been by
many deemed indefinite; they have been, indeed, identified: but they
have really no analogy. Reason is an intellectual act, and progressive;
but as man possesses also instinct, so brutes have in a minor degree a
reasoning faculty; but instinct is connate and fixed, a custom or habit,
as Dr. Holland properly terms it, and no more mental than is the
shrinking of the mimosa, or shutting up of the dionaea, perhaps not far
removed from the " affinite des molecules des cristeaux" of Laplace.
382 ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY.-
Take instinct then as a sort of inherent vital property, incited by a
stimulus, and we may almost reason on it as we would on peristaltic
action. We have ever held this to be truth, and therefore coincide in
the author's clearly expressed opinions, especially regarding the relative
proportions of instinct and reason in man and brute, and also to the
inverse perfection of intellect and instinct in the hymenoptera and
the hemoptera.
On this point, therefore, we have ever held the hackneyed lines of
Pope as a quibble :?
" And reason raise o'er instinct as you can?
In this 'tis God directs, in that 'tis man."
If man does direct, God has directed man.
There is, therefore, either an inherent law in organization, or a
special direction of the creative mind to the organ, for the purpose,
which refers an act at once to the Deity, and removes free agency and
responsibility. The great and important difference is this : in man
reason constantly controls instinct; even organic function is fettered by
his will. So the powers of resistance are as varied as the tempera-
ments with which they are associated; and we must quote a very lumi-
nous passage of our author on this point.
"In considering this curious question of the relation of human
instincts to those of lower animals, a valuable distinction may be de-
rived from looking to their respective development in species and
individuals. In other animals instincts are chiefly or entirely those of
the species, uniform and permanent; with far less of intelligence in any
case to modify or control them, and this, at a certain point, disappear-
ing altogether. In man, they have more of individual character, are
far less numerous and definite in relation to the physical conditions of
life; more various and extensive in regard to his moral nature; yet still
subject, as such, to the control of his intellectual powers. It seems the
proper destination of reason, as bestowed by his Creator, to acquire
mastery over the instinctive conditions of his nature?to cultivate some,
to subdue others, to give due proportion and direction to all."
Now, this is one of the most important questions in ethics, inasmuch
as this perpetual conflict between the light and shade of human nature
involves half the questions of the lunacy commissions and of the criminal
court.
It is probable that, regarding erotic and furtive and vindictive pro-
pensities, the vince seipsum is often as difficult as the nosce seipsum. If
this, however, were ensured, how less than perfect would man become !
But, alas! the victory is too often on the dark side; and even if it be
not, the climax of the struggle is insanity. Thus, regarding instincts,
Dr. Holland writes: " They modify, often control or compel, the whole
ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY. 333
course of life. In some cases, tliey are felt as opposed to the reason of
the individual, yet dominant over it; in extreme cases they become a
sort of madness, by opposition to the reason of the species."
The indications of emotion and the changes of the expression of
feeling and passion in different stages of life, involve a curious inquiry,
especially as to their being a sort of safety-valve to the system. They
?i. e., tears, sighing, even violent efforts, &c.?are doubtless prophy-
lactic in warding off those effects upon organization which might lead
to peril or even fatality. They are also a complete study: they are
not so explanatory as Le Brun has depicted them, and they are not
exactly uniform in every one; still have they a sort of general likeness.
Regarding the earliest instinct, suckling, we may perhaps somewhat
differ from the learned author, in deeming it a reflex action. The
mother may generally first apply the nipple to the infant's lip, but the
lamb certainly rushes at once to the udder of the ewe. Roth must be
governed by the same law. If the proof of contact always preceded
these acts, the reflex theory of Hall would at once untie the Gordian
knot. Some instincts are produced, doubtless, by the cerebro-spinal
system; but animals who possess it not have instincts highly developed.
Even the experiments of Huber and Latreille, to which Dr. Holland
refers, still leave the mind unsatisfied. Development or loss of nerves
may perhaps in the end decide it. The transmission of habits, mental
and bodily, through a succession of races, is another subtile question.
It is, of course, possible that certain conditions of nervous or vascular
influence may become hereditary, so as to modify the peculiarities of
whole communities and races in the course of time (as in the domestica-
tion of animals), so that the constitution of mind may " become here-
ditary by propagation." It is, indeed, an acquired or second nature.
In proof of this, Dr. Holland refers to hereditary monstrosity, and
inclines to the belief of some structural constitution or quality. In the
case of brute animals, we cannot believe in the working of mental im-
pression or propagation, notwithstanding the incident of Laban's sheep:
but in the cases of monstrosity it may be that the brooding over an
unnatural state of one member of a family may, in the pregnant mother,
induce a sort of uterine erethism in several successive generations;
while the potent influence of imitation in the transmission of pecu-
liarities and eccentricities is a truth constantly before us.
The nervous system?what a deep and intricate study! what a mine
of physiological riches yet unexplored, after the myriad of disquisi-
tions, from Aristotle even to our own day! Its influence is universal?
the source of our perceptions, our consciousness, our reflections,
pleasure, pain, and sympathies. Dr. Holland shrewdly foresees the
334 ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY.
difficulty of ascertaining the nature or mode of this influence. The
opinion that sensation and volition simply depend on centripetal and
centrifugal nervous action; the varied phenomena, as secretion, volition,
reflex action, &c., brought out in different tissues by the same apparent
nervous causes; and the functions of organic life,?are referred to as
proofs of this. But still the learned author looks the question fairly
in the face, if he has not decided on the nature or materiel of nervous
influence, whether a subtile fluid, an electric aura, or " some superior
and independent principle, of which, however designated, the brain is
the immediate source or seat." But the recognition even of this prin-
ciple, as well as the new sense of the Germans, selbstgefiihl, and even
the grand philosopher's stone of physiology?the vital principle?would,
probably, even if demonstrated, leave neurology somewhere about where
we left it. The theologian and the physiologist being still at issue, the
theory of vitality?the breath of life?the living soul?the quickening
spirit?rove?dv/jiocr?and other Greek terms, will still all be
bandied about, like battledore and shuttlecock, between the combatants,
even as the vital principle was in the arena of the College of Surgeons,
between two learned professors, in days not long agone. It has ever
seemed to us that the analysis of spontaneous generation, or partheno-
genesis, of the lower vitalities, indicates the simplicity of a principle
which becomes complex, and indeed confused, in proportion as organiza-
tion, of which it is the moving power, becomes more intricate or com-
bined. We know not which it is that in old age wears out, according
to its law, the principle or the organization, any more than we know
whether nervous power influences the germ, and expands with it, or if
it be generated by the nerve in the progress of its growth. We do
know, however, that, as the nervous system is multiplied or expanded,
the phenomena are themselves extended or refined. The minute
anatomy of Ehrenberg, the ingenious though somewhat fanciful no-
tions of Alison, and the host of modern English physiologists even
now prosecuting their labours, added to the deductions of deep thinkers
like our author, will continue to throw fresh light on the corridors and
chambers of science, even if they do not illumine the very sanctum
sanctorum of the temple.
How far the hemispherical ganglion and the tubular neurine are con-
cerned in the generation and transmission of psychal phenomena, is of
the extremest importance to our subject. But perhaps the most im-
portant matter of all is, the intimate relation which anatomy discovers
between nerve and blood-vessel, which, indeed, involves all the mysteries
and discrepancies of psychology. The lens can never ultimately divide
that which is infinitely divisible; but as this applies as well to one as
ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY. 335
to the other, we may still discover very much as to their dominant or
prevailing influence in psychology, and perhaps thus ascertain many
truths regarding the primal impingement of malaria.
Dr. Holland, perhaps wisely, leaves this deep question with a passing
glance at its importance, and proceeds to a general view of the three
grand divisions of the nervous system?viz., the cerebrum and cere-
bellum, .the cerebro-spinal axis, and the sympathetic. The cerebro-
spinal, the tract between brain and body, will, we conjecture, be the
great Californian field whence the gold dust of psycho-physiology, will
be, for the present, gathered; especially regarding remote sympathies,
one curious instance of which was noticed by Bernard, of diabetes
induced by injury to this part.
Dr. Holland believes that " memory and association are more closely
related to the cerebral hemispheres than any other attributes of mind."
The unravelling of the cerebral convolutions, he thinks, " detaches mind
itself from all material organization." It resembles, Ave suppose, a
peep behind the curtain, which dispels the illusion of the scenic repre-
sentations. The contradiction, by post-mortem evidence, of the received
hypothesis, especially regarding the function of the cerebellum as an
organ of sexual impulse, or a regulator of muscular movements, im-
peratively requires strict investigation. This, and the physiology of the
sympathetic system, Dr. Holland terms a terra incognita. We confess
we have little hope of soon rendering the circulation of nervous fluid as
plain as that of the blood. In the mean time, innervation exhibits so
many analogies to electric forces, that our minutest attention should be
paid to the resemblance. Dr. Holland almost describes this analogy
when he writes of " a power originating within the system, and trans-
mitted, progressively, along the course of the nerves, to fulfil its func-
tions in the several parts of the body to which they conduct."
We have, like Dr. Holland, seen several cases in which there is a
general "deficient evolution of nervous power." He refers to two
or three cases of his own ; and we may allude, also, to the case of
Cowper. All these are, however, but extremes of what daily occurs.
In the senses also, in prejudices or antipathies; in the collapse conse-
quent to surgical operation, or shock; in the slumber between the pangs
of lingering labour; and in the criminal on the night before his execu-
tion, we see this enervation, arising from the exhaustion either of excess
of sensibility or of suffering.
The curious effects of chloroform have seemed to us illustrations of
this rapid exhaustion, rather than of direct anodyne influence. In
most cases (and we have seen one in a boy on the day we are writing
this), the first influence is excitement, somewhat like that from nitrous
33G ON MENTAL PHYSIOLOGY.
oxide inhalation; it may even amount to convulsive action, and tlien
speedily comes on tlie collapse both of sensory and motive power;
indeed, a state of trance.
This bears Dr. Holland out in his notion of quantity in reference
to innervation, not only in defect but also in excess, as in the irresist-
ible and almost supernatural and disproportionate spasmodic actions, in
which it is, indeed, often perilous suddenly to close this safety-valve of
the system.
This subject of innervation strikes, also, deeply at the root of
insanity; and we are pleased to observe the coincidence of the author
with our recorded opinions. The allusions to excess, defect, intensity,
quality, and time, evince his close and prudent reasoning.
Then comes the popular question?which again we have prejudged,
especially in our review of Catherine Crowe.
On the intercommunication of nervous influence, some will persist in
saying, if not in believing, consist the truths of mesmerism and electro-
biology. "VYe think (and Dr. Holland evidently thinks so too) that, not-
withstanding the experiments of Eeymond in inducing deviations of
the needle by muscular action, there is no necessity for this projectile
faculty of mind or nervous power, or of the blue fluid of Dupotet, for
the explanation of the phenomena : indeed, one self-made experiment
in electro-biology would, we think, settle the question.
It will be seen how much of Dr. Holland's volume is taken up in
referring to the difficulties of his subject. So much simplicity and
beauty, however, are displayed in his reasoning, that Ave almost regret
the guarded opinions and reluctance to form conclusions which ever
mark the writings of a true philosopher. So, while the book raises,
throughout, our admiration of its purity, and indeed of its humility, it
makes us the more confess, with Socrates, and (may we say?) Dr.
Holland, that all our knowledge consists in our knowing that we know
nothing.
