On The Structure and Functions of Nervous Tissue
==================================================

Art. II.-
.*
It is well that Ave should, from time to time, present to our mind a
resume of our knowledge of different organic tissues, with the view of
ascertaining the amount of progress we have made in those departments
of science specially connected with the prorince of this journal. A
recent edition of Dr Carpenter's and Dr Kirke's Physiology enables us
to present to our readers a sketch of the state of our knowledge of the
structure and functional peculiarities of nervous tissue. We need say
nothing in commendation of Dr Carpenter's labours as a physiologist.

The new edition of his work speaks for itself. The labour bestowed upon
it must have been immense. Many portions of the work have been
entirely re-written. The two volumes before xis may be considered
fairly to represent the state of physiological science of the present day.
Although endowed with such varied and remarkable properties, the
elementary structures through which the nervous tissue manifests its
functions are extremely simple, consisting apparently of little else than
highly endowed cells for the purpose of originating the nervous force or
principle, and an assemblage of tubes or fibres for the transmission of
this principle to the parts to be influenced by it. The function of the
latter, namely, the fibrous element of the nervous tissue, being thus, as it
were, secondary to the former, it might indeed be inferred that the
cellular or vesicular element is the only essential constituent of nervous
tissue, and there are not wanting arguments in support of this view; but
since no animal organization has yet been discovered in which vesicular
nervous tissue uncombined with the fibrous element occurs, we are
compelled to believe that both these elementary parts of nervous tissue
are essential to the production and manifestation of nervous phenomena.
Of these two constituent elements of nervous tissue, namely,' the
corpuscular and the fibrous, the one is usually collected into masses, or
nervous centres, as they are termed, such as the brain, spinal cord, and
the various ganglia; while the other, the fibrous element, is disposed in
Principles of Physiology, General and Comparative. By W. B. Carpenter, M,D.
3rd edition. Churchill. 1851.
Hand-book of Physiology. By W. S. Kirkes, M.D., assisted by J. Paget, F.R.S.
2nd edition. Churchill. 1851.
the form of nervous trunks, issuing from sucli centres, and proceeding to
all parts of tlie body, which they thus bring into connexion with the
nervous centres. In describing the structure of nervous tissue, we will
.speak first of the fibrous element. This enters largely into the compo-
sition of the brain and spinal cord, forming the greater part of the white
substance of these nervous centres; it is there, however, mingled and
brought into relation with the corpuscular element, while in the nerves
which issue from these centres it exists uncombined Avith corpuscles, and
constitutes nearly their entire structure. The fibres or tubules of which
this portion of nervous tissue is composed are met with under two
distinct forms, characterised by certain peculiarities in size, colour, and
structure. Although there is reason to believe that these diversities are
more apparent than real, and that there is no more essential difference
between the two kinds of fibres than might result from different stages
of development of one and the same kind of fibre, yet it will be neces-
sary to speak of each of them separately, and then to state the relation
which they seem to bear to each other. Of the two kinds of fibres then,
one consists of what are called tubular or white fibres, the other of
gelatinous or grey: the former comprises most of the fibres found in
cerebro-spinal nerves, the latter nearly all those which occur in the
sympathetic system. In the nerves both of the cerebro-spinal and the
sympathetic systems, however, both sets of fibres are found variously
intermingled, so that it cannot be said that either system is composed
exclusively of one set of fibres. Since the tubular form of nerve fibre
enters so largely into the composition of the cerebro-spinal nerves, its
structure can be best determined by an examination of one of these
nerves. Each cerebro-spinal nerve-trunk is composed of a number of
nerve-fibres arranged in fasciculi or bundles, each of which is surrounded
and separated from the rest by a sheath of fine fibro-cellular tissue,
while the entire nerve is itself also invested by a similar though coarser
fibrous sheath, termed the neurilemma. The use of this investment to
?the entire nerve and to the individual bundles of which it is composed,
is to protect and isolate the elementary fibres of the nerve, and at the
same time to furnish them with a net-work of blood-vessels from which
they may derive their supplies of nutriment. By separating the several
fasciculi of which a nerve is composed, and dividing and subdividing
any one of them, we arrive at length at the primitive [nerve-fibres or
fibrils, which are the essential elements of the fibrous portion of nervous
tissue. When carefully examined, each elementary nerve-fibril of this
class is found to consist of a delicate homogeneous cylindrical membrane,
which forms a kind of isolating sheath or tubule for the proper nerve-
substance contained within it. The nature of the substance thus
enclosed within the tubular membrane is not yet clearly determined.
When a perfectly fresh cerebro-spinal nerve is examined microscopically,
eacli individual fibril presents the appearance of a fine tliread of glass, on
account of the contents of the tubules appearing to consist of a clear
colourless homogeneous fluid. But very shortly this appearance is lost,
and the contents of the tubules undergo changes, which make it probable
that, instead of being really homogeneous, they consist of two very dif-
ferent materials. Viewed under these circumstances, a nerve-fibril
appears to be constituted first of a layer of soft whitish material, named
the white substance of Schwann, situated immediately within the mem-
branous tube, and surrounding the other, or second ingredient, which is
a clear transparent material, occupying the centre or axis of the fibre,
and hence termed the axis-cylinder. It is often very difficult to obtain
a distinct view of these two individual portions of the nerve-fibre, for
the whole substance contained within the tube is very soft, yielding
readily to the slightest pressure, and causing the wall of the tube to
bulge and become distorted. Moreover, the contents themselves seem
to undergo a kind of coagulation, in consequence of which they collect
in little masses, which distend the tubular membrane unequally, and
cause it to assume a peculiar varicose or beaded appearance, instead of
its previous cylindrical form. In spite, however, of these obstacles to a
correct determination of the real structure of the primitive nerve-fibrils,
it seems to be admitted, by nearly all physiologists of the day, that each
fibre is really composed of the distinct portions just named, the one
circumferential, the other central. Of these two portions, it is also now
generally admitted that the latter, namely, the clear central-axis portion,
is the essential component of the nerve-fibre, that on which its true
functions depend; while the outer, white, medullary portion, serves only,
or chiefly, as an isolator or protector to the important part within, sur-
rounding and defending it in the same way and for the same purpose
as both are surrounded by the tubular membrane outside. The prin-
cipal evidence in favour of this view will be presently adduced.
In size, the nerve-fibrils just described vary considerably, the majority,
however, measuring, in the trunk of a nerve, from a ^ 0 to of
an inch in diameter. As a rule, they are much smaller when examined
within the nervous centres than they are in the rest of the course, and
they are also often noticed to diminish considerably in size previous to
their peripheral termination. The fibres of the nerves of special sense,
likewise, are smaller than those of the nerves of ordinary sense.

The gray or gelatinous fibres comprise the majority of the fibres
found in the trunk and branches of the sympathetic nerve. They differ
from those just described in being smaller, finer, of a pale yellowish gray
colour, flat instead of cylindrical, without the double contour produced
in the tubular fibres by their compound structure, and apparently devoid
botli of an outer tubular envelope, and of the medullary or white
substance of Schwann. They appear, indeed, to consist of little else than
a material very similar to that forming the axis-cylinder in the tubular
fibres, except that it possesses a finely granular appearance, and is
marked by numerous nuclei adhering to its surface. So little general
resemblance to the tubular fibres is possessed by these gray or gela-
tinous fibres, that their title to be regarded as nerve-fibres at all has been
disputed. Without pausing, however, to consider this point, since by
almost general assent their nervous character is admitted, we will briefly
state some of the arguments in favour of the view that these fibres are
not, as they at first sight seem to be, different in kind from the tubular
fibres, but are merely modifications of them. Admitting as true what
has been already stated, that the central part, or axis-cylinder, is the
essential component element of the tubular fibre, the general resemblance
which the gelatinous fibre presents to this might be deemed con-
clusive that it possesses the essential structural attributes of the tubular
fibre. But stronger evidence of the same kind is afforded by the fact,
that at their origin in the nervous centres, and very commonly at their
peripheral terminations, the tubular fibres generally lose the white me-
dullary portion which they possess in their course along the nerves, and
then present the faint outline and finely granular aspect belonging to a
gelatinous fibre. So also in the first development of nerve-fibres as wit-
nessed in the tail of the tadpole, fibres exactly like those of the gelatinous
kind may be seen gradually passing into and becoming continuous with
proper tubular fibres, which are therefore, probably, only the same structure
in a higher phase of development. Again, it is not uncommon to find
in the same nerve, mixed with gelatinous and tubular fibres, other fibres,
which in general characters are intermediate between the two varieties,
thus showing a kind of transition from one kind of fibre to the other,
and helping to demonstrate the truth of the view which is now rapidly
gaining ground, that there is no real difference between the gelatinous
and the tubular fibres; that they both contain the same essential nervous
element; and that the small size and homogeneous structure of the
gelatinous fibre is due to its being, for some special purpose, less com-
pletely developed than the tubular fibre.

The origin, course, and termination of the nerve-fibres will be more
advantageously studied after a description of the second component
element of nervous tissue?namely, the vesicular or corpuscular struc-
ture.

The vesicular structure of nervous tissue consists of nucleated cells, in
various stages of development, collected together in masses, and imbedded
in a finely granular blastema, which is traversed by blood-vessels and
nervous fibrils, the several collections constituting Avliat are termed nervous
centres or ganglia. The cells, which are also termed ganglion-corpuscles,
or nerve-vesicles, differ greatly in size, some being scarcely larger than
a human blood-corpuscle, while others may be one-three-liundredth
of an inch in diameter. They are nucleated, very often nucleolated also,
and contain a finely-granular or grumous material, in which are occa-
sionally noticed larger and darker particles, giving the corpuscles a
peculiar dark brownish appearance. The majority of the corpuscles are
spheroidal, though from mutual pressure they often become more or les3
angular and irregular in shape. Besides these latter irregularities in
form, which have long been noticed, other varieties have lately been
discovered, which promise to be of great service in helping to a right
interpretation of nervous phenomena. The varieties now alluded to are
those in which corpuscles present a peculiar caudate or stellate form,
in consequence of one or more processes being given off from their
surfaces. Usually these processes extend but a short distance from the
corpuscle, terminating abruptly, or in a fine point; but occasionally they
may be traced much further, and even seen to branch, and not unfre-
quently one of the branches may be seen to become directly continuous
with a nerve-fibre, which thus appears to originate from it, or rather, by
means of it, from the corpuscle. The processes which issue from the
nerve-corpuscles are moreover tubular, and are filled with granular
material, similar to that in the interior of the corpuscle, from which in-
deed they seem to derive it, for the contents of each appear to be con-
tinuous, the processes being so many hollow tubes issuing from and
communicating with the interior of the corpuscle. The nerve-fibres,
which appear to originate in this manner from the nerve-corpuscles, at
first consist simply of the pale granular out-growth of the contents of
the corpuscle, but when traced further they may be seen gradually to
assume a medullary sheath of white substance, and thus come to resemble
an ordinary tubular fibre. This fact has been already partly alluded to
as seeming to prove an identity between the tubular and gelatinous fibres.
Although many of the nerve-fibres entering a ganglion or nervous
centre are thus found to be directly continuous with the ganglion-cor-
puscles, yet many other fibres pass through, apparently without forming
any such connexion; while there are also found many corpuscles in the
various nervous centres, in which no such close relation between them
and the nerve-fibres around them exists; the question, therefore, still
remains unsettled, whether all nerve-fibres thus originate in ganglion-
corpuscles, and if this mode of origin is not universal, whether there is
any functional diversity between those fibres which do and those which
do not possess this intimate connexion with the ganglion-corpuscles.
Dr Carpenter seems inclined to adopt the view that the cells from
which the nerve-fibres seem to spring are those by which they are
formed, whilst the globular cells among which they pass are rather
the instruments of their functional changes. " This idea," he remarks,
" derives confirmation from the researches of Kolliker on the peripheral
origin of the nerve-fibres; for he has found that in the tail of the
tadpole the nervous plexuses are formed after the same fashion as the
capillary net-work, namely, by the inosculation of the prolongations of
radiating cells whose centres are at a considerable distance from each
other."

Further investigation is, however, necessary before a definite judg-
ment can be pronounced respecting the number and kind of fibres which
are thus brought into immediate relation with the ganglion-corpuscles.-
This portion of the subject naturally leads to a consideration of the
central and peripheral terminations of nerve-fibres, and of certain peculi-
arities observed in their course from one extremity to the other. The
central termination, or perhaps, more correctly, the central origin, of the
majority of nerve-fibres, is obviously effected by their becoming con-
nected with ganglion-corpuscles in the manner described. As the fibres
enter a nervous centre, they gradually become finer, the outer white sub-
stance of the tubular fibres gradually disappears, while the central gela-
tinous portion becomes continuous with the granular processes arising
from the ganglion-corpuscles. Whether all the fibres of both kinds of
nerves enter into this close relation with the ganglion-corpuscles is, as
already stated, still uncertain, though it seems highly probable that
they do.

In their course from their central to their peripheral extremities, the
individual fibres of each nerve are supposed to proceed uninterruptedly,
each fibre preserving its continuity, without branching or anastomosing,
from one extremity to the other.

The phenomena of nervous action are more intelligible according to
this view than they would be if it were assumed, as has been recently
suggested, that such continuity and singleness of each individual fibre
throughout its entire course do not exist. The question, indeed,
is not easy of anatomical solution; but since all physiological reasoning-
is on the side of perfect continuity of fibre, from origin to termination,
and no sufficient evidence against this view has yet been advanced, it
may still be allowed to stand. Although there is probably no anasto-
mosing or union of the substance of one fibre with that of another in
their course along the nerves, yet we frequently observe an intermingling
of fasciculi of fibres of different nerves. This is seen in the formation
of the various plexuses, and of the nerves which issue from them ; the
plexuses being formed by the interchange of bundles of fibres from
various nerves, while the nerves which emerge therefrom are also made
up of fibres derived from several different nerves. The object of such
OF NERVOUS TISSUE. 4=7

interchange of fibres is obviously to afford tlie several nerves issuing
from the plexus a wider connexion with the nervous centres than they
would otherwise have. For example, since the brachial plexus is
formed by the intermingling of fibres from the four last cervical and
first dorsal nerves, each nervous trunk emerging from this plexus pro-
bably contains within it fibres derived from the several parts of the
cord intermediate between the origin of the fourth cervical and the first
dorsal nerve, and hence the parts supplied by it will have wider relations
with the nervous centres, and more extensive" sympathies, than they
could have if they were supplied by nerves proceeding directly from the
spinal cord, and without such intermediate connexion with other
nerves.

At their peripheral extremities nerve-fibres terminate in various
ways; but in almost every case, previous to their termination, they break
up and form delicate networks, called the terminal plexuses. From
these plexuses the individual fibres issue, to terminate in the elementary
tissue of the parts in which they are placed.

Concerning the mode in which the ultimate fibrils are really disposed
of, much doubt still exists ; but as far as microscopic investigation at
present extends, we are entitled to admit of at least three distinct
modes of termination : first, by a kind of looped arrangement, in which
the individual fibril, after issuing from a terminal plexus, forms a single
narrow loop on the tissue in which it occurs, and then turns back to
join the plexus from which it proceeded, or an adjoining one, and thus,
probably, pursues its way back to the nervous centres. This mode of
termination has been observed in the papillae of the tongue, the tooth-
pulp, the internal ear, and other parts. A second mode of termination
has been described as present in serous membranes, in which the nerve-
fibres form minute plexuses composed of innumerable delicate fibres.
In the third mode of termination the individual fibrils end in free
extremities. There is reason to believe that the fibres in the papillae
of the skin, as well as in other parts, terminate in this way; but it is
only in the little bodies named Pacinian corpuscles that this mode of
termination has been clearly determined. These Pacinian corpuscles
are small, oval, elongated bodies, situated on some of the cerebrospinal
and sympathetic nerves, especially on the cutaneous nerves of the
hands and feet. Each corpuscle, attached by a narrow pedicle to the
extremity of the nerve, is formed of several concentric layers of fine
membrane, with intervening spaces filled with fluid. Through the
pedicle by which the corpuscle is attached to the nerve, a single nerve-
fibril enters it. traversing the concentric layers of membrane and the
intervening fluid, and terminates in a knob-like enlargement, or by bifur-
cation, at or near the distal end of a small central cavity existing in the
interior of the corpuscle. As the fibril enters the corpuscle it gradually
loses its outer investing portion, and while traversing the central
cavity is very small and delicate, and appears to consist of little else
than its central gelatinous portion. There are certain peculiarities often
observed in the mode of termination of the nerve-fibre within the cor-
puscle, but into these it is not necessary here to enter, the account just
given being applicable to the majority of the corpuscles.

The chemical composition of nervous tissue demands a few remarks.
Owing to the presence of blood and capillary blood-vessels, and probably
other accessory tissues in nervous matter, it is scarcely possible to sub-
mit it to an exact chemical analysis. But the same difficulty exists in
the case of most other tissues, and need scarcely be considered in the
results of the ordinary analyses to which nervous tissue has been sub-
mitted, and which show it to consist of albumen, fatty matter, and salts,
combined with a very large proportion of water. The large quantity of
water, amounting to from four-fifths to seven-eighths of the whole
tissue, is very remarkable ; and, as observed by Dr Carpenter, is espe-
cially interesting when considered in relation to the fact that the
" vital activity of a tissue is usually greater, as the proportion of its solid
to its fluid contents is less for there is no tissue whose vital energies
are so active as those of the nervous tissue. According to Fremy,
the cerebral substance, which may be taken to represent nerve-substance
in general, consists of 80 per cent, of water, 7 of albumen, and 5 of fatty
constituents. The albuminous ingredient requires no comment here.
The fatty principles are remarkable from the fact that two of them, which
arc acid compounds, contain a large proportion of phosphorus. The
total amount of phosphorus thus existing in the brain is very consider-
able, being from 8 to 18 parts in 1000 of the whole mass, or from
one-twentieth to one-thirtieth of the entire solid matter. This im-
portant ingredient in the nervous tissue appears to be continually given
off during the change and disintegration which ensue in the nervous
as well as other tissues in the discharge of their ordinary functions.
It is now a well-established fact, that in every act of an organized
structure, there is a corresponding change or death of a certain amount
of the acting tissue, the act indeed being the manifestation of the che-
mical change, and the index of its amount. The elements of the
parts thus changed or decayed assume new forms and combinations,
leave the tissues to which they are no longer of use, and often
re-appear in a discernible form in some other part of the body,
affording thus a proof of the disintegration of a given tissue, and a
tolerable estimate of the amount of waste undergone. We observe
this especially in the muscular tissue, the amount of the disintegration
of which is pretty accurately determined by the quantity of urea into
which the elements of the wasted tissue resolve themselves, found in
the ui'ine. So, too, in the nervous system, a tolerably correct estimate
of its activity can be formed, by determining the amount of alkaline
phosphates found in the urine : for the phosphorus set free by the dis-
integration of nervous tissue during the discharge of its active func-
tions, unites, in the form of an acid, with the alkaline bases in the
blood, and is thence separated at the kidneys, and discharged with
the urine. In this manner, may be explained the alkaline urine, de-
pending on excess of alkaline phosphates, after undue exercise of the
mind, which is necessarily attended with an unusual waste of the cere-
bral tissue.

In forming an estimate of the amount of disintegrated cerebral
tissue, by the quantity of phosphates present in the urine, the alkaline
phosphates alone have to be considered, for the quantity of earthy phos-
phates present in the urine have been shown by Dr B. Jones to be de-
pendent on the quantity taken in as food, and not on the decay of
nervous tissue.

Having offered this brief outline of the structural and chemical
peculiarities of nervous tissue, we proceed to give a general sketch of
its functions. Nervous tissues being composed, as already shown, of
two distinct portions,?a vesicular, designed to originate nervous im-
pulses and to take cognizance of impression conveyed to it, and a
fibrous, designed to transmit the nervous influence to and from the
vesicular portion,?it follows, that in considering the general functions
of the nervous tissue, we must deal separately with each of these two
elementary parts, of which the tissue is composed. But it may be as
well to state generally, in the first place, what is the special purpose and
office of the nervous tissue considered as a whole: and in doing this,
no better words can be used than those of Dr Carpenter, who says,?
" The functions of the nervous system are two-fold: first, to bring
the conscious mind (using that term in its most extended sense, to
denote the psychical endowments of animals in general) into relation
with the external world?by informing it, through the medium of the
organs of sensation, of the changes which material objects undergo :
and by enabling it to re-act upon these through its motor apparatus :
and also to connect and harmonize different actions in the same indi-
vidual, without necessarily exciting any mental operation. These two
sets of purposes, however, are fulfilled by a mechanism of the same
kind. An ' impression' made upon some part of the general surface of
the body, or upon a special organ of sense, is received by the nerve-
fibres, which originate in it, and is propagated by them to some part
of the central ganglionic apparatus.^ If the impression reach the por-
tion termed the sensorium, (which is always seated in the head, where
this can be distinguished,) it then affects the consciousness of the
animal, and becomes a sensation, provided the sensorium be in a con-
dition of activity. The sensation thus produced may give rise to ideas,
and these to reasoning processes, which may terminate in an act of the
will; and this playing, as it were, upon the nervous apparatus, pro-
duces a change in the condition of that portion of the nervous centres
from which the motor nerves arise, whence it is propagated by these
nerves to certain muscles, and excites them to contraction. But the
sensation may, in itself, more directly excite a motor action, without
any reasoning process or voluntary effort: and the movement is then
said to be ' automatic.' Farther, even if the impression do not reach
the sensorium, it may still excite a motor action through some other
nervous centres : and the movement thus produced is ' automatic' like
the preceding, from which it differs, in not being prompted by a sen-
sation, but in resulting from the conveyance of the simple impression
to a portion of the nervous centres capable of originating a respondent
action."

Such being the general functions of the nervous system, we will
proceed to consider, rather more in detail, the share taken by the two
elementary portions of the tissue, through the influence of which these
functions are discharged. That the vesicular portion of nervous tissue
is the seat of all the active powers of the nervous system, while the
fibrous portion merely serves to conduct nervous impressions to or
from them, may be proved in various ways, but, perhaps, most readily
by an experiment of the following kind. If a nerve, which is but a
collection of the fibrous elements, be divided at any part of its course,
all the parts supplied by the portion thus separated from the nervous
centres, will be paralysed both in motion and sensation, while the parts
supplied by the portion still in connexion with the nervous centre will
retain their sensation and power of motion. Moreover, irritation of
that portion of the divided nerve in connexion with the nervous centre,
excites sensations which are referred to the parts supplied by the other
portion of the divided nerve, showing that it is at the nervous centres
alone that impressions are perceived as sensations; on the other hand,
irritation of the separated portion of the divided nerve is followed by
motion in the muscular parts supplied by this portion, showing that
the nerve retains its power of conducting impressions though it is
unable to originate them.

In the discharge of their respective shares of the functions of the
nervous system, the fibrous and vesicular elements appear to be
governed by certain laws into which it may now be desirable briefly to
inquire. For this purpose, we will follow the account given in Dr.
Kirkes's c Handbook of Physiology,' and will commence with the fibrous
portion of the nervous tissue. Speaking generally, nerve-fibres may
be said to convey impressions in two directions; first, they convey to
the centres impressions made on their peripheral extremities; secondly,.
they transmit impressions from the brain and otlier nervous centres, to
the parts to which they are distributed, these latter impressions being
of, at least, two kinds, namely, those which excite to muscular action,
and those which influence the nutrition, secretion, and other organic
functions of a part. As far as we, at present, know, the same fibre
cannot convey impressions in opposite directions, neither does it seem
to be able to convey impressions of different kinds, even in the same
direction. Hence, there are, at least, two distinct sets of fibres pro-
vided, the one to transmit impressions from the nervous centres,
and hence called centrifugal or efferent fibres, the other to convey
impressions towards the centres, and hence called centripetal or
afferent.

The former set comprises the nerves of motion, the latter the nerves
of special and ordinary sensation : the nervous influence by which the
organic functions of nutrition, secretion, and the like, are governed,
being supposed to be conveyed along both sets of fibres. Although
the fibres thus differ in function, yet there is no obvious difference in
structure, neither does the tissue to which they are distributed, deter-
mine the kind and direction of the impression they convey, for the
muscular tissue is endowed with both motor and sensitive properties.
In order that nerve-fibres may act and convey impressions, they must
be stimulated, since they possess no power of originating impressions in
themselves. Under ordinary circumstances, nerves of sensation are
stimulated by external objects acting upon their extremities; and the
nerves of motion by the will, or by some force generated in the nervous
centres. But almost all things that can disturb the nerves from their
passive state act as stimuli, and in this way all chemical, mechanical, or
electric irritation will excite nearly the same effect as the natural sti-
muli, provided they are not so violent as to destroy or seriously injure
the fibre to which they are applied.

Some of the laws and conditions of action observed in nerve-fibres
apply to both sensitive and motor nerves, while some are peculiar to
nerves of motion, others to nerves of sensation. Of the laws common to
both fibres we may mention that an impression made on any fibre is
transmitted along it simply and uninterruptedly without being diffused
among any of the fibres lying near it. This is in accordance with the
view that each fibre is simple and continuous from its central to its
peripheral extremity, while the complete isolation afforded by the tubu-
lar sheath around it is probably the reason why the impression is not
imparted to the surrounding fibres, the sheath acting like the isolat-
ing covering to an electric wire. Again, the rate at which nervous
force travels is immeasurably rapid; possibly some interval does elapse
in the transit of an impression, but it is too small to be appreciated.

Another law is, tliat the same fibre, as has been already stated, cannot
convey more than one kind of impression. Thus a motor nerve cannot
convey sensitive impressions, neither can a sensitive nerve convey
motor impressions : so too, a nerve of special sense can only convey
those impressions which give rise to the sense peculiar to the organ it
supplies. The only apparent departure from this law has been already
stated, namely, that the impressions governing the organic functions of
nutrition and secretion seem to be capable of passing along both sensitive
and motor filaments.

With respect to the laws peculiar to the nerves of sensation, we find
first, that impressions are conveyed only in the direction from their
periphery towards the nervous centres in which they arise. Thus, if a
sensitive nerve is divided, and irritation is applied to the portion still
connected with the nervous centre, sensation is perceived, but no effect
ensues while the other portion of the divided nerve is irritated.
Secondly, an impression made upon any part of the course of a sensitive
nerve is perceived both there and at all the parts to which the fibres of
tjicf irritated portion of the nerve are distributed; the explanation being,
that the mind always refers the impression produced by irritation of a
sensitive nerve to the peripheral extremities of the fibres of such nerve.
In this way is explained the fact that when part of a limb has been re-
moved, irritation of the nerve of the stump produces sensations referred
to the lost part: the same is sometimes noticed after division of a nerve
for neuralgia. The only law specially relating to motor nerve-fibre is the
converse of one already mentioned as belonging to sensitive fibres,
namely, that motor impressions are conveyed only in the direction from
the centre towards the circumference. Thus, if the distal end of a motor
nerve be irritated, contractions of the muscles supplied by its branches
ensue, while no result follows the application of the irritant to the
portion of the nerve still in connexion with the nervous centre.
The vesicular nerve-substance is collected, as already described, into
masses denominated nervous centres ; as, for example, the brain, spinal
cord, and the several ganglia. In speaking, therefore, of the functions
of the vesicular portion of nervous tissue, we shall have to consider the
functions of nervous centres generally. The remarks already offered
will have shown that the office of a nervous centre is of a twofold
nature?namely, to take cognizance of impressions brought to it by the
nervous fibres, and to originate (either in consequence, or independent
of such impressions) impulses which are transmitted to various parts of
the body, for the purpose of determining and governing their functions.
The instances in which nervous centres can be said to originate impulses,
independently of being excited thereto, either by the mandates of the
will, or by impressions conveyed to them from without, are however
very few. For in the majority of cases, tlie impulses are consequent on
an act of volition, or are called into existence by the transmission of an
impression to the centres, through centripetal fibres. The nervous
force which excites the rhythmical action of the heart may, however,
be said to be issued spontaneously from the nervous ganglia within this
organ; and the spinal cord may be said to generate spontaneously the
force requisite to keep the sphincter ani in contraction; but beyond
these, and a few other similar examples, the nervous force which issues
from a nervous centre is called into existence by some applied stimulus,
and does not originate in a spontaneous action of such centre. For
example, the nervous influence requisite to make a muscle contract is,
in most cases, excited either by an act of will, or by some impression con-
veyed to the nervous centre by a centripetal nerve. Although, therefore,
we are justified in considering a nervous centre as really an originator of
nervous force, yet we must do so with certain qualifications, and admit
that some external stimulus is in most cases necessary, in order that
the nervous centre may develope the nervous influence which is to pro-
ceed from it. In developing this influence in consequence of a stimulus
conveyed to them, and in disposing of impressions so received, nervous
centres manifest various peculiarities, which require to be noticed.
Thus, an impression conveyed by a sensitive nerve may be conducted
through the nervous centre which it first reaches to some other adjacent
or even distant centres. For example, the stimulus afforded by the
presence of food in the intestinal canal, is conveyed along the nerves
distributed over the intestinal mucous membrane, to adjacent sympa-
thetic ganglia, and usually excites merely muscular contraction of the
coats of that portion of the intestine in which the food is contained.
But if irritant substances are mixed with the food, the impression con-
veyed to the ganglia is stronger, and is then conducted through them
to other adjacent ganglia, whereby larger portions of the intestinal
walls are excited to contraction; or it may be further conducted to the
spinal centres, and lead to the production of spasmodic contraction of
the abdominal, or other muscles ; or lastly, it may even be conducted
to the brain, and give rise to the sensation of pain. Instead of, or even
as well as, being conducted, impressions reaching nervous centres may
also be either transferred, or diffused, or reflected. An example of the
first mode of disposal is afforded in the pain occasionally felt in the
knee in cases of disease of the hip-joint. The impression conveyed to
the nervous centres by the sensitive nerves supplying the diseased
joint, is, at such centres, transferred to the central extremities of the
nerves of the knee; and thus the mind is led to refer the morbid
impression to the part from which these nerves ordinarily convey
impressions. An example of the diffusion or radiation of impressions
received at a nervous centre, is furnished in the well-known fact that
continued tooth-aclie is often followed by pain in the adjoining teeth,
or even in all the surrounding parts of the face. The explanation of
this seems to be, that the morbid impression conveyed to the nervous
centre, is thence?not merely transferred, as in the last case, but
diffused and radiated so as to influence the various other fibres entering
the same centre?and thus to excite sensations referred by the mind to
the parts from which these secondarily affected nerve-fibres proceed.

Besides being thus communicated from one sensitive fibre to others
of the same kind, as in the instances last named, a morbid impression
may also be transferred or reflected from a sensitive to one or more
motor nerves, and thus involuntary muscular action may be induced.
In this manner arise all those singular movements denominated reflex.
As an example may be mentioned the contraction of the iris, conse-
quent on the impingement of a ray of light on the sentient surface of
the retina. The stimulus thus applied to the optic nerve is conveyed to
the brain, and thence reflected to the central end of the third pair of
cerebral nerves, along which motor impulses are transmitted to the iris,
and induce its contraction. Numerous other similar examples of reflex
action might be mentioned, but the above will serve as an illustration
of the class ; and the several conditions which exist in it are essential
in every other instance of reflected movement. These essential condi-
tions are three : namely, first a centripetal nerve-fibre to convey an
impression to the nervous centre ; secondly, a nervous centre to which
this impression may be conveyed, and in which it maybe reflected;
and thirdly, a motor or centrifugal nerve, on which this impression may
bis reflected, and by which it may be transmitted to the contracting
tissue. No proper reflex movement can take place if any one of these
three conditions is wanting.

There are certain peculiarities in reflex movements which require a
few remarks. For example?all reflex movements are essentially
involuntary; being quite independent of the will, though admitting of
a certain amount of control by a voluntary effort. This is seen in the
movements of respiration, which are of the reflex kind ; they continue
during sleep or coma, though in the wakeful and conscious state they
may be variously modified by an effort of the will. All such movements
again have an obvious purpose, designed for the welfare of the body;
as, for example, the movement of the heart, of the digestive organs ; the
closure of the eyelids and pupils to exclude excess of light; the
spasmodic closure of the glottis against the ingress of foreign sub-
stances ; and others of a like character. Such movements also may be
continued for any length of time without producing weariness; this is
well seen in the movements of the heart and of the respiratory muscles.
OF NERVOUS TISSUE. 55
The outline which has here been offered of the functions of nervous
tissue applies to the nervous system generally. There are, however,
many peculiarities displayed by different parts of the nervous system in
the discharge of their functions, such as those of the nerves of special
sense, and of the sympathetic system; but to enter fully into these
would enlarge the present article much beyond its proper limits, even if
it were not foreign to its special purpose. A few words, however, must
be said respecting the mode in which the nervous tissue acts?i. e., the
power or force by which it is enabled instantaneously to transmit its
influences from one part of the body to another; especially since tbis
portion of tlie subject is treated at some length by Dr Carpenter, in the
work which has furnished the basis of the present article. As far as
concerns our actual knowledge of the nature and mode of action of the
nervous force, we may indeed be said to be entirely ignorant; and in
this state of ignorance we are perhaps likely ever to remain. But tlie
great similarity evidently subsisting between nervous and electric
phenomena has naturally led to much speculation as to the possible
identity of the two forces. Dr Carpenter has well discussed this sub-
ject, and thus briefly expresses what is probably the best mode of
viewing the subject :?

" Notwithstanding the strong analogy which exists between these two
powers, we are not warranted in regarding them as identical; and we
should probably best express their true affinity, by saying that these are
so closely 'correlated,' that each may be the means of exciting the
other."

Thus, the nervous force is evidently capable of being excited by
electricity; for if this latter force is applied to a motor nerve, contrac-
tion of the muscles supplied by it ensues ; and if applied to a sensitive
nerve, whether of common or ordinary sensation, the mind perceives a
sensation exactly similar to that conveyed by the nerve when excited by
its ordinary and natural stimulus. That the converse is also true?
namely, that electricity may be excited by the nervous force?is shown
in the phenomena displayed by electric fishes, the operation of whose
electric organs evidently depends upon their connexion with the
nervous centres, and varies in intensity according to the amount of that
connexion.

Equally with electricity, we find that heat, light, motion, and che-
mical affinity, possess the power of exciting nervous action ; while,
conversely, the nervous force seems to be able to develope or modify
each of the above-named forces : hence, it must be considered to be as
much correlated with them as it is Avith the electric force, or as each' of
these several forces are with it and with each other.
