Mental Dynamics, In Relation to The Science of Medicine
========================================================

A COURSE OF LECTURES DELIVERED BY M. LORDAT, PROFESSOR OF PHYSIOLOGY
IN TIIE UNIVERSITY OF MONTPELLIER. ARRANGED AND TRANSLATED BY
STANHOPE TEMPLEMAN SPEER, M.D., CHELTENHAM.
Lecture I.
A remarkable contrast exists between the rival schools of Paris and Mont-
pellier, in their mutual appreciation and explanation of what I denominate the
"principle of intelligence." It is but a few years, since the heads of the pro-
fession in the capital of Prance knew nought of the nature of man but what
was to be found in bodies submitted to inspection after death. Convinced that
our existence was but a matter of tissues and systems, they persisted in
investigating the science of medicine by a close attention to the condition of the
corporeal organs.
Such a belief, however, has been but of comparatively short duration. Their
want of success in the above mode of prosecuting so important a research;
their inability to reconcile certain well-founded precepts in therapeutics, with
anatomical rules; the variability of their doctrines contrasted with that of a
school which advances, slowly indeed, but surely; all these, I repeat,-have at
length led them to the conclusion, that they have chosen a wrong path.
The press of the French capital affords us a striking example of the difficulty
then experienced in founding an anthropology capable of forming a sound basis
for the science of medicine. The materialists readily perceive the difficulty of
solving the intricate problem, of which man, in his fullest sense, is a personifi-
cation. They admit that anatomy, physics, chemistry, and mathematics, fail to
give an idea of the human dynamism.
It is something to have allowed that man is not formed solely of materials
appreciable by chemistry and physics. The conviction of an error is the first
step towards its repudiation." But more than this is requisite, to elevate the
art of medicine to the dignity of a science. The compass hitherto trusted to,
has been cast aside, without another being at hand to steer by. It would
appear, indeed, that the school of which I have just spoken, does not possess
any scientific method capable of being successfully opposed to that, for instance,
which is familiar to the pupils of this university.
In a discourse lately emanating from the press of the capital, the orator, after
acknowledging the insufficiency of physical science in explaining the phenomena
which occur in the living body, takes refuge in uncertainty, rather than have
recourse to any other method of investigation. He thus expresses himself:?
" To the chemical theories of the present day, which outrun the actual dis-
coveries made by the science itself, must we oppose the abstractions of vitalism,
which merely forges a physiology independent of organs, and even then accords
it but an accessory importance ?"
Now it appears to me, that this sentiment may be taken as the expression of
scientific opinion among the medical observers of this country; and it indicates,
first, a complete forgetfulness of the philosophy of Bacon, of so much importance
in its application to medicine; ana secondly, an ignorance of the real and
essential nature of vitalism, one of whose chief characteristics is to examine,
with the same zeal and the same unbiassed judgment, causes, some of which are
appreciable by the senses while others are invisible; so that, with us, the whole
of man's nature is equally deserving of inquiry?we see in it nothing accessory.
Now this forgetfulness of the rules of philosophy, as laid down by Bacon,
MENTAL DYNAMICS, ETC. 385
or the inability to carry them out in practice, would appear to be the principal
cause of this uncertain stagnation in medical opinion. Materialism, once in
such favour, has been now abjured as an absurdity. Ashamed of being made
the dupes of physical theories, relative to the principles of life and intelligence,
its votaries no longer repose confidence in it.
To remedy this, the simplest plan would appear to be a return to the doctrines
of Hippocrates, so rashly cast aside about the middle of the seventeenth
century.
On a former occasion, I spoke of the disorder occurring in the world of
medical opinion, at the time of the Cartesian revolution; and you must be well
aware, that in all cases of commotion, order is seldom re-established without
some injury having taken place. It is indeed difficult for the mind, freed from
its previous shackles, to avoid abusing its newly-found liberty. In cursing the
prejudices by which it had been hampered, how many truths may it not entangle
in the proscribed objects of its hatred. Hippocrates had laid it down that man
was a combination of three causes ; the first, an aggregate material; the second,
a principle of intelligence, incommensurable with such an aggregate; the third, a
vital force, which is neither the one nor the other, and is to be appreciated solely
by its effects. Now this distinction, so long upheld, was at length abolished upon
the authority of Descartes, and ere long, the science of human metaphysics
experienced the ill effects of his teachings; it first underwent mutilation; was
then attacked, scouted, and ridiculed; and of medical science there was soon
left but anatomy and surgery.
We have seen, however, that this state of things did not, and could not last,
and that a return to the science of metaphysics became inevitably necessary.
"Why, however, was this science, as taught by Hippocrates, so studiously
shunned ? I may be allowed to explain it in the following manner.
The Hippocratic doctrine, so admirably inculcated and practised in Paris, by
Bailliou, at the time of the Cartesian secession, was rather too rudimentary, and
at the present day, more especially, bears too strongly a got.hic origin to be at
all presentable. There exists, however, a modification of it, that has gradually
expanded, cotemporaneously with the advance of civilization, has taken proper
cognizance of every discovery, and has armed itself with all the varied weapons
that have ever and anon been directed to its annihilation; but its most
enthusiastic champions happen to belong to that school which the admirers of
Cabanis, Bichat, and Broussais have long spurned and insulted, and which they
now regard with sullen dislike.
Be this, however, as it may, let us take some examples to prove that many
of the most inveterate materialists have at length recognised and acknow-
ledged the reality of causes of a metaphysical nature, the duality of which,
however, they still deny.
At a meeting of the Academy of Sciences, one of the physicians of the
Salpetriere, M. Lelut, allowed the inability of morbid anatomy to throw light
upon the theory of mental affections, and openly confessed that the various
diseases coming more especially under his own observation, and the theory of
which it was a duty to solve, wTere under the influence of certain invisible
causes, totally irrespective of organs; he likewise declared that a necessity
existed for seeking some metaphysical explanation of such phenomena. After
reading his oration, however, it is easy to see that the author is a spiritualist
of the Cartesian school. The principle of intelligence is, in his eyes, a speciality
incompatible with matter; and as regards that vital force which, while
unconscious of itself, possesses, nevertheless, a unity and activity of its own,
and which presides over the development of the body, and preserves it from a
thousand disturbing influences?with regard to this force, I repeat, he entertains
a hope that it may yet be explained by a reference to physical laws, whenever
anatomy and microscopy shall have taught us the secret of the union of the
different nervous fibres. All that Stahl has ever urged against the possibility
of such a disclosure, would appear, with M. Lelut, to be as nought.
NO. XIX. C C
386 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN EELATION TO
Again, M. Collineau, in his " Analyse Physiologique de VHntendement
Humain," raises his voicc not only against psychological materialism, but
against vital mechanism likewise. Unfortunately he appears to have misun-
derstood the duality of the human dynamism, and to have adopted that bastard
description of Stahlianism, still adhered to by a few, who, while acknowledging
the absurdity of materialism and the necessity of a cause of metaphysical
origin, will not allow, with Stahl, that life is the expression of a spiritual entity,
which deteriorates as we descend in the scale of the organic world, from man
down to the lowest extremity of this domain; but assert that the principle of
life is the radical base and essence of every living thing, and that human intel-
ligence is but a hijrfi degree of this very principle. Upon this hypothesis is the
work of Collineau based, and it is but a reversed form of animism, applicable in
case of necessity to organicism on the one hand, and to Hylosism, or materialism
proper, on the other.
I might adduce additional examples to show that many of our Parisian
brethren have renounced the doctrines of materialism, and have recognised the
existence of a human dynamism, based on metaphysical doctrincs; unfortunately,
this laudable confession has led to no results, having become a mere hypothesis,
simply from an obstinate determination to include under one and the same
cause, two series of phenomena which common sense alone would suffice to
separate. I mean by this, that the distinction between the two actually exist-
ing order of causes is regarded in the light of an hypothesis or opinion.
But the duality of the human dynamism is not an opinion; it is a fact
deduced from daily experience. Inductive philosophy forbids us to say that the
vital force and the principle of intelligence are of one and the same nature. Of
the importance of this truth you will, I am sure, be persuaded, when you
learn that it is the base of the genuine Hippocratic medicine.
In proportion, then, as this doctrine is neglected, do I consider it impe-
rative to oring it before the mind of my hearers, and I purpose devoting a
portion of the present course to its elucidation.
The term life, as understood by naturalists, is a temporary phenomenon, con-
sisting in the formation, growth, degradation, and dissolution of a ccrtain mixed
aggregate. In this we must distinguish the material element which falls under
the cognizance of our senses, and a mysterious dynamism, constituting the
active agent in the production of vital phenomena.
This aggregate and its vivifying influence commence by a point of origin
scarcely appreciable. They increase progressively up to a ccrtain epoch, say
forty years; the acting force then decreases, by a gradation similar to that
which marked its previous augmentation; and the aggregate material undergoes
a simultaneous degradation.
After a certain period of time, this same vital force finds itself on a level with
its primary origin, and shortly afterwards becomes extinct. The material
aggregate lias not been destroyed, but from the first moment of its deterioration
it has imbibed a tendency to decay. Endeavours may have been made to
repair the ravages of time, but such conservative efforts have served but to
ward off the inevitable termination. The tenement was still habitable when
the vital force became extinct; and the material aggregate, no longer under any
directing vivifying influence, was seized upon, disintegrated by the action of
the elements, and its component parts dispersed. Thus, in a zoologic point of
view, the life of man, like that of many animals, presents two qualitative
phenomena?a progressive increase, which we may designate youth, and a pro-
gressive decrease, denominated old age. The period which marks the cessation of
increase or of youth, and the commencement of decrease or old age, is well
deserving of a special denomination, which I shall borrow from one of the tech-
nicalities of astronomy. If, then, the creative power of life ascends, as it
were, to a certain point, its meridian, it must culminate previous to descend-
ing ; and when I shall speak of the vital force being actually at the culmi-
THE STUDY OF MEDICINE. 387
nating point, you -will understand that I allude to that period at which, having
attained its maximum of perfection, it is about to return to its pristine condition.
If, now, we turn from this view of the question, and look closely into the
object of our present investigation, man; we perceivc that this vital force,
which is the author and promoter of all vital phenomena, and is at the same
time unconscious of its own existence, undergoes a progressive increase, a cul-
minating period, and a finally gradual declension .... but that the principle
of intelligence, self-existing, self-conscious, self-appreciable, and capable of
ignoring the operations of the vital force .... alike experiences a gradual
increase, but not the culmination of this latter force, since it is not liable to a
process of decay, but continues its onward progressive course.
The contrast thus manifested at so important a period of our existence, does it
not indeed merit the most profound attention ? If senescence be the appen-
dage of a vital principle, and that, on the other hand, the intellectual principle
be irrevocably exempt from it?such an immunity, would it not suffice to prove
that the former of these processes was essentially of a nature different from that
of its coadjutor ?
Such, however, has not been the opinion of many ancient and modern writers;
among the former we find Lucretius. . . . After premising that the principle of
intelligence is an aggregate material, of a nature identical with that of the body
in which it resides, he thus continues: "We see it originate simultaneously
with the body, increase and grow old along with it. During infancy, a frail
and feeble organism serves as the cradle for an equally feeble intelligence; age,
in strengthening the limbs, ripens the intellect and increases the vigour of the
mind. Lastly, when the influence of years has altered the form of the body,
blunted its perceptions, and exhausted its powers, the judgment wavers, and
the mind partakes of the uncertainty of the speech. In a word, all the springs of
the machine give way in turn. Is it not, therefore, reasonable that the mind
should undergo a like prostration, and end its career as smoke borne upon the
wings of the wind, since we thus see it arise, increase, and finally succumb,
beneath the pressure of accumulating years ?" (Lucretius, De Iterum Natura,
lib. iii.)
Another poet, Shakspeare, has reproduced the same idea in a manner by no
means worthy of his great reputation. The description which he gives of the
seventh age, and of its alleged characteristic, imbecility, I must take leave to
say is false. Imbecility is not the result alone of old age, since it may super-
vene at any period of our existence; and even were it true that the decline of
life is especially liable to it?a point upon which statistics are not as yet agreed
?it is certainly not the fact, that one characteristic of old age is a reduction of
the intellectual principle to the standard of the newly-born infant.
A philosopher of our own period, Jouffroy, in his "Melanges Philosophiques"
has likewise adopted a similar view of the decline of the intellectual principle,
and its return to the infantile condition. " When," says he, " man attains a
great age, he usually finishes where he began; that is, in the impersonal vitality
which precedes during infancy the birth of the will, and hence the ordinary
expression, that the old man has become a child?has entered his second child-
hood." . .,
This assertion is then developed with considerable talent, without, however,
any proof being adduced; of which, however, the author does not perceive the
necessity?since the fact is, according to his opinion, a matter of observation,
or, in other words, a popular persuasion.
It is against this persuasion that I raise my voice, and upon which I demand
some more ample information. The formal intention of Epicurus and his fol-
lowers, has been to disseminate a belief that the principle of intelligence is
identical in nature with the body it inhabits; that the mind and the material
aggregate, or body, are co-partners; that their operations are subject to the
same vicissitudes, and that the development, the growth, the deterioration of
c c 2
388 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
the different parts of this aggregate, arc accurately imitated in the operations of
the intellect. But an impartial method of daily observance will, I conceive,
suffice to falsify and disprove that doctrine.
For this purpose, let us examine a certain number of individuals well
stricken in years, and whose intellect has been thoroughly cultivated; let us
listen to their avowals relative to their intellectual condition, and let us, at the
same time, examine their actions. Let us not choose, however, one who, like
Le Sage's Bishop of Grenada, after a succession of apoplectic fits, ended by
deceiviug himself relative to the consecutive infirmities he had experienced as
their result. But we may take as an example a healthy sexagenarian, who
after having thoroughly tested his intellectual and vital powers, honestly con-
fesses what are actually the respective conditions of these two principles. To
appreciate satisfactorily this species of observation, it should be conducted iu
such a manner as to enable us to verify the resulting declaration by the subse-
quent acts of the individual in question. The subject for such an observation
has long been at hand, it remains but to examine it carefully. I allude to
Bossuet. He possesses all the required desiderata, and we take his declaration,
made during his sixtieth year; up to that period his life had been one, marked
by laborious exertions of every description, and of his sincerity there can be
but one opinion. The eighteen years of his life which succeed the epoch of
which I speak, belong to the history of the human intellect.
The declaration to which I now refer is so well known, that there is perhaps
not one of my auditors to whom it is not familiar. It forms the close of his
oration over the body of the great Conde. It will be for us an easy matter to
abstract, intellectually, all that pertains to the religious faith of the orator, and
to confine our attention solely to the avowal lie makes relative to his past, his
present, and his future; you will remember that his peroration is a proso-
popoeia addressed to the departed hero, and he thus expresses himself:?"You
here assign a termination to these my funeral orations. Instead of deploring
the death of others, I will learn-of you, 0 mighty prince, to make my own
holy. Happy, if warned by these grey hairs, of the account I must soon
render of my stewardship, I may reserve for the fiock, to whom it is my duty
and mission to dispense the words of eternal life, the relics of a voice already
quavering, of an ardour almost extinct."
This exordium, the effect of which upon the hearers of Bossuet is still to be
seen in the admiration of his readers at the present day, we shall now endea-
vour to reduce to a simple expression of facts, divested of the flowers of
oratory. Let us imagine for an instant, Bossuet communicating the same
ideas in conversation with an intimate friend, without style, solemnity, or alle-
gory, but in language dry and prosaic as that of the natural historian; candid
as from brother to brother. Let us, then, attempt to paraphrase this group of
ideas.
" My last discourse has now been pronounced. The success that has attended
my efforts in the midst of the most illustrious of the world's assemblies, has
depended as much on delivery as upon the sentiments uttered. But I have
now lost the major part of those physical and vital qualities necessary for the
production of such effects. Years have mutilated my corporeal qualifications,
wrinkles have destroyed the play of my features, my eyes have lost their
wonted fire, my voice and speech have become uncertain and quavering. I
want words to express my ideas; and yet these ideas exist in all their perfec-
tion. Nay, since the period of my corporeal degradation, the mind has seemed
to grow by a daily acquisition of new ideas. The more this frail body invites
seclusion and care, the more does the principle of intelligence urge me forward
to action. Happily, I adore the profession which I have so long cultivated,
and I believe that my mission (which is that of diffusing its precepts) may
still prove of service to the cause of morality. But I shall no more appear on
the scene of so many former triumphs, upon which I can no longer expect to
TIIE STUDY OF MEDICINE. 389
elicit either pleasure or emotion. I shall continue, nevertheless, in a career which
permits me still to instruct the world by improving science, and my parishioners,
whom I love, by a communication of ideas delivered in a simple amicable
style. In this way only may I hope to negative the growing inutility of the
body, and to prove a source of benefit, as long as it remains above the sod."
This amplification, then, is it not, I ask, a true exposition of the sentiments
and intentions of this great man ? Not only does it interpret all the funda-
mental ideas contained in his discourse, but it recalls all that the actual expres-
sions appeared to predict. Bossuet fulfilled indeed his promise. The great orator
no longer appeared on the stage of the world, but in the exercise of his pastoral
functions, and through the medium of the press. Though he ceased to address
himself to the admiring ears and eyes of the multitude, he directed his remain-
ing energies to the care of their immortal souls. Neither Paris nor the French
court ever more heard his thrilling accents, but eighteen years of his subse-
quent existence were occupied in disseminating through the religious world a
prodigious number of writings, books, memoirs, dissertations, exhortations, and
warnings, the merit of which appears to have progressively increased; and the
entire collection of which is now honourably deposited as an item in the prin-
cipal trophy of our country's glory.
It was during this second period of his existence, that Bossuet was placed
among the foremost rank of orators, historians, dialecticians, philosophers,
and fathers of the church.
Choose we any topic of a serious nature upon which to fix our attention, and
we find in his writings the finest model of a thinking mind, and of the mode of
arranging and transmitting our ideas. What, then, can be the meaning of
those philosophers, poets, and physiologists, who assert that the principle of
intelligence undergoes in old age a deterioration similar to that of the vital
principle? The example I have just quoted, does it not suffice to repudiate
such an assertion. Yes! In Bossuet, the unconscious vital principle, after
attaining a culminating point, experienced its natural and expected degradation.
Troubles, labour, and suffering may have, indeed, accelerated its extinction, and
may even, if you will, have reduced it to the condition of an embryo. But as
regards the principle of intelligence, it had lost none of its perfection, none of
its utility, when death claimed him. On the day on which he ceased to breathe,
his intellect was as powerful as when, forty years previous, Madame de Sevigne
thus wrote respecting him, " Bossuet would appear as if engaged in a war of
words with his auditors; his sermons are all mental combats."
You will perceive from what I have just said, that it has been, and ever will
be, my intention to oppose that popular prejudice, which pretends that the prin-
ciple of intelligence is amenable to the laws of age as is the vital force. This
I undertake to refute, and my chief argument will rest upon a consideration of
actual facts. The one I have already laid before you carries great weight along
with it. But I shall not content myself with a single observation, which our
adversaries might consider as exceptional. Not but what I might reasonably
oppose it, and it alone, to any theory connected solely with causes of a physical
nature, and we have already seen that our antagonists admit none other; for to
prove that the decline of the principle of intelligence in man, is the result of the
same cause to which we attribute the supervention of corporeal decay, it would be
necessary to show that its declension was general, infallible, and free from excep-
tion. Cine single instance of immunity well authenticated, one well recorded
case, in which the principle of intelligence remained unscathed during the
senescence of its corporeal tenement, would suffice to destroy a theory, founded
solely upon mechanical hypothesis. But as the public prefer reckoning the
number of examples, rather than judging of each by its individual value, I am
enabled to gratify the tendency, and to multiply facts to the utmost.
In undertaking the refutation of a theory, which the obstinacy of a sect may
possibly protract, I fear lest the idea should suggest itself?where is the advan-
/ ?. f -y.
9t>d ? C^y &?-
/. .-, & ;/? ?^tt)?'7U..
390 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
tage, where the utility, of proving that the principle of human intelligence does
not suffer the inevitable decay of the vital force? Is it not a speculative ques-
tion ? Does the solution of the problem in any way tend to a practical appli-
cation ?
I have already afforded you a glimpse of the importance and extent of the
proposition which I now advocate. But I fear lest this rapid sketch should not
suffice to fix your attention as continuously as I should wish, and I have there-
fore chosen a certain number of examples, bearing upon the truth of this sub-
ject, and more especially capable of illustrating the applications of which it is
most susceptible. As in the mutual interchange of thought a community of
interest 011 either side facilitates the process, I shall not conceive it a loss of
time, if I take some pains to place you in the most favourable light for seeing
with ease, that the insenescence of the principle of intelligence becomes an esta-
blished fact, an experimental dogma, capable of affording an insight into some
important points connected with that science upon which medicine is based.
Allow me, then, to point out to you a few applications of my proposition, in.
order to banish from your minds all doubts as to its utility.
My primary object, then, is to show that the principle of human intelligence
does not experience that process of culmination to which the vital powers are
inevitably subjected. I do not, however, seek to prove that this principle is in
its own nature, by its own essence, incapable of growing old, for of this my
own experience affords me no proof, and it is my especial wish to teach you
nothing of which such experience has not satisfied me of the truth. A captious
hearer might indeed say,?" I allow that you may meet with a number of indi-
viduals whose intellect has braved the ravages of time, but this does not prove
anything beyond the simple fact, that the culminating point of which it may be
susceptible is more tardy in its approach, and that the natural term of life has
drawn to a close even before the principle of intelligence had attained its meri-
dian." Gentlemen, to this I could say nothing, and as regards the insenes-
cibility of this principle I am silent; it may, as you will see, be fairly surmised;
but of actual proof there is none.
One thing, however, may, I think, be proved, and it is this?viz., that the
natural meridian of the intellectual principle has not been witnessed, and that
it frequently continues its progressive ascension, in spite of decay and decrepi-
tude, up to the moment of corporeal annihilation. Let us not, therefore, con-
found insenescence with insenescibility.
This distinction is one of great importance; the latter term being the expres-
sion of a dogma, alike theoretical and paradoxical, and of which I have no need
at present, while the word insenescence stands the representative of a general
fact of historic origin, or of an experimental dogma, of which I propose to avail
myself in considering several important points of human physiology.
Without dipping deeply into the science, but choosing rather some elevated
point from which its principal divisions may be more readily appreciated, it is
scarcely possible not to recognise six points upon which this insenescence of
the intellectual principle serves to throw a palpable illumination. These are?
1st. Legal medicine and medical ethics; 2ndly. The analysis of the human
dynanism; 3rdly. The human synthesis; -Itlily. The existing distinction
between the nature of man and animals; 5thly. The appreciation of certain
experiments made upon living animals with a view of elucidating the physiology
of man; and, Gthly. The science of rational psychology, at present a subject
ardently revived. A few words will serve to explain these different relation-
ships.
1st. Legal Medicine.?Should it ever happen that legislators forget the reality
of the insenescence of the intellectual principle, legal medicine would be there to
remind them of it. You might say to me, that legislation has not ignored this
fact, and that the acknowledged rights of old age are conformable to the above
proposition, the legal presidentship in a deliberative assembly devolving upon
THE STUDY OF MEDICINE. 391
the most ancient of its members. This is true, and we must confess that here
common sense has triumphed over the theories of sages and philosophers.
But who will say that this victory over materialism is to be a permanent one,
should its votaries unite en masse, and resolve to be consequent in the enun-
ciation of their doctrines ? Hence it should be the object of legal medicine to
frame and elevate into a natural prerogative that which exists m reality ; lest
the dispensations of the law should ever range themselves side by side with the
philosophy of the 18th century.
Let us, then, suppose that a popular belief continues tacitly to oppose the
exertions of a sophistical science, and that the public feel persuaded that all
things being equal, those intellects which have had the longest period of time
for the exercise of their mental perceptions, deserve a preference in the considera-
tion of matters requiring mature deliberation. Is this a reason for leaving un-
solved the real motive of such conduct ? No ! It is of the utmost importance to
reduce it to the standard of a mathematical formula, in order that sectarians
may not deceive themselves with the notion, that so prudent a custom is, after
all, merely an old prejudice, opposed to the dictates of reason and progress.
But, in addition to legal medicine, there exists a moral medicine, or code of
medical ethics. We possess an inward tribunal, the distributive justice of
which requires as much assistance from the science of medicine, as does that of
our external tribunals. And a strict examination of our principle of intelligence
is far more competent than public laws or public opinion to grant or deny
certain dispensations. Whatever legal exemptions may be claimed in favour of
age and infirmities, a conscientious individual, when he feels that his intel-
lectual powers may escape the influence of years and of decay, will probe his
own mind in order to appreciate truly both his duties and the powers he still
possesses for their performance. In this way a knowledge of the fact we are
now considering contributes to render us not only irreproachable, but at the
same time exempt from all remorse.
The treatises of Cicero, St. Evremont, and Meister, are indeed a means of
consolation, adapted for those who are advanced in years, but they are at the
same time little short of manuals for the voluptuary, in which endeavours are
made to attract his attention towards some pleasant notions, offered as com-
pensation for the losses he may have experienced. And I fear that such epicu-
rean morality can only tend towards the false idea, that age constitutes a dis-
pensation from mental exercise. Sensuality may, in this way, exaggerate the
rights of age at the expense of its moral obligations. It is necessary, there-
fore, that along with the mitigations required by the increasing debility of the
vital powers, should be inscribed rules of conscience, deduced from the antago-
nistic and progressive career of the intellectual principle. As long as this prin-
ciple is incapable of alleging a true declension, it must not be permitted to
quit its post.
Man, in his civil capacity, is a citizen of two republics, of which the one is
material?the other intellectual. The elder no longer pertains to the first of
these, when his organic principle refuses to perform its former wonted ser-
vices as in days past; he becomes nought but a parasite, and may reasonably
dread the fate of the drones when the hive of bees no longer requires their
presence. In the intellectual republic, however, he still preserves his rank and
rights, and may, if he choose, do so up the latest term of his existence. The
truth of the insenescence of the intellectual principle becomes thus an appeal,
not only to his self-esteem, but likewise to that innate sense of duty which
regulates an honest man, and whispers in his ear, that 110 sentiment capable of
proving useful to humanity at large, deserves to be buried in the tomb.
2nd. Analysis of the Human Dynamism.?The insenescence of the prin-
ciple of intelligence once established, we may proceed to utilise it in an exami-
nation of the nature of this principle, as compared with that of the vital force
in man. You are aware that this latter power acts, presides, and suffers,
392 MENTAL DYNAMICS, IN RELATION TO
unconscious of itself; while the very reverse is the case with the principle of
intelligence. It is already a difficult matter to consider, as of an identical
nature, two powers?the one of which is endowed with a consciousness, of
which the other is devoid. But if, in addition, the latter is without exemp-
tion, prone to decay, while the former continues its onward progression for
an indefinite period, and enjoys a real insenescence, shall we, I repeat, then
say that these two great principles are alike? .... What becomes of the
principles of metaphysics, or of the rudiments of philosophy, if phenomena
so different, so distinct, allowed of our seeking their respective origin in a
single hidden cause.
The history of man, then, is derived from a science itself of duplicate essence;
the one division being of a physical nature, namely, anatomy; the other of a
metaphysical nature, again subdivided into?first, psychology; and secondly,
human biology. These three very distinct sections of physiology are all of
equal importance, and alike deserving of conscicntious careful investigation.
3rd. The Human Synthesis.?Those who are convinced of the difference
which really exists between the primary causes from whence all anthro-
pologic phenomena are derived, will allow, that since man is composed of three
elementary principles, none of which can be considered as proceeding from the
other, but are united in one system by virtue of a superior agency ....
we should carefully inquire into the laws which regulate this association.
These laws, not to be compared, indeed, with those of nature in general, are
the subject of a special department in human physiology. They can only be
known and reduced to anything like precision, by acquiring exact notions
respecting the anatomy, psychology, and biology of man, and consequently,
after having accurately distinguished the two elements of the human dynamism.
The code of this association is what we denominate, anthropopceia; a science
essentially medical, intimately connected with moral principles, and having no
equivalent in comparative physiology.
A distinct appreciation of the three elements just mentioned, is by no means,
however, the sole condition indispensable to a formal establishment of the
laws which regulate their co-ordination; it is, in addition, necessary that we
should be agreed upon the fundamental doctrines of philosophy, upon its
axioms, and upon the technicalities which express them. Tor such a mutual
understanding, it is necessaay to appreciate, the legitimate signification of the
word ontology. Now it was no more lawrful for Brouissais to consider ontology
(another term for general metaphysics) as the poetic creation of an imaginary
entity, than it was for Prado to take the words metaphor and metonymy for
terms in chemistry. Moreover, we must become familiarized with the rules of
the " Novum Organum," which is but the manual of the art of philosophizing in
the interpretation of nature. Experimental causes are not to be regarded in
the light of hypotheses, inasmuch as the use of these abstract expressions has
had for its object the exclusion of all concrete supposition. In distinguishing
natural causes, it is of consequencc to bear in mmd the two heads to which
they may be referred, the physical and the metaphysical. Lastly, in a specific
determination of experimental causes, the reasoning should be as impartial as
should be the heart in the verdict of a jury.
Without a due observance of these precepts, I see no possibility of arriving
at an exact analysis of man; and without such an analysis, how can we hope
to arrive at any rational mental synthesis. Hence it is that anthropopceism is
not even dreamt of in those schools of physiology where the Hippocratic
analysis is ignored and repulsed. Cabanis, who would appear to have attempted
it, failed to achieve the desired end. Among many requisite conditions in
which he was wanting, we may particularly remark the one I have just
mentioned. Blinded by the spirit of materialism, he never possessed that inde-
Sendence of reasoning so necessary in applying the method of Bacon to the
iscrimination of experimental causes. The title of his work, " Da llapport du
THE STUDY OF MEDICINE. 393
Physique ct du Moral," is in itself a physiological solecism, since the moral
bears no relation to the physical, properly speaking, but only to the vital, which
alone influences the latter. Neither Bichat nor Broussais have been more
attentive in then analysis than Cabanis. The science of medicine truly re-
quires some other synthesis, under penalty of losing all philosophic bond of
union.
4th. Parallel of the Human Dynamism with that of Animals.?I have
already, on another occasion, instituted certain comparisons, the result of which
has served to prove that the two dynamisms were not of an identical nature.
If then the insenescenee of the principle of intelligence be incontestable, you
must no longer expect to see any greater resemblance between man and the brute.
If the brute be not endowed with a principle capable of resisting the decay
of its vital force, I have a right to suppose that its dynamism is not the same
as that of man; either it is simple in composition, or it is a combination of two
elements, and if so, that which would be equivalent to our principle of intelli-
gence must be essentially different. Already do we perceive the contrast be-
tween the delicate susceptibility of the human brain, of which trifling lesions
are sufficient to threaten existence, .... and the tolerance of this organ in
many animals; a tolerance, indeed, which allows it to be mutilated, ana even
partially destroyed, without much alteration of function: equally evident be-
comes the contrast which exists between so many animals which from their
birth are enabled to supply their own wants without instruction, and man,
who cannot live after birth but by the assistance of his fellow-creatures, or by the
aid of a lengthened apprenticeship. Such contrasts, I repeat, must have often
struck unprejudiced minds, as showing that the experimentalists were comparing
things which did not admit of comparison, and that the cerebral physiology of
animals could have but little in common with that of man. But the insenes-
cenee of the intellectual principle in the latter, as opposed to the senescence of
the vital principle, and on the other hand, the complete degradation of
the entire animal, should suffice, I think, to open all eyes, and to convince
physicians that an amalgamation of human and animal physiology is, after all,
a bastard production, of which no application can be made, whether in medicine
psychology, or ethics.
5th. Application of certain vivisections undertaken with a view of deter-
mining the functions of the Brain.?One of the most serious results attending
the establishment of the insenescenee of the principle of intelligence is, that it
destroys the value of those experiments which have been made on the brain
and nerves of living animals, with the view of solving the theory of the intel-
lectual faculties in man. I feel satisfied that the anticipation of such a result
may prove the most active cause of opposition to my doctrines. What becomes
of so many vivisections, so ingeniously imagined, so carefully and laboriously
executed ? And yet, what reliance can I place upon phenomena observed in
beings so different from myself ? You see that, to apply the results of vivisec-
tion to the elucidation of human physiology, it becomes necessary to prove
that animals possess a principle of intelligence analogous to our own?a
principle of intelligence that can resist the influence of years, and remain
vigorous and unscathed while the body withers and the vital powers are becom-
ing extinct. You must prove to me that in animals there exists some intellec-
tual compensation as a set-off to the destroying influence of age upon their
bodies; and unless you can do that, I must continue to deny the identity of
their nature and mine.
Now, in spite of the difference which really does exist, we are perpetually
told, that these vivisections are of the greatest use in the advancement of
medical science.
I have, on another occasion, entered my protest against that doctrine which
admits of a compromise between the science of man and comparative physiology.
I have long since been scandalized at perceiving that the designation and
394 MENTAL DYNAMICS, ETC.
privileges of the human being had become the common property of certain
species, whose only claim to such consisted in their possessing, along with him,
vertebra;, or some other anatomical peculiarity. . . . And this sentiment would
indeed be heightened, if I found that our brethren allowed the laws of human
psychology to be framed upon the result of experiments made upon the lobes,
corpora striata, or tubercula quadragemina of rabbits, turkeys, fowls, &c.
Believe me, the hierarchy of science is never overthrown or deranged with
impunity. It has been determined beforehand by the dictates of common
sense, and any infractions of its laws are sooner or later avenged.
6th. Rational Psychology.?Physiology, medically speaking, comprehends only
that division of psychology denominated empiric psychology, or in other words, the
science of the functions of the intellectual principle, without regard to the nature
of such principle. But an inquiry, having for its object the solution of this
problem, which is of little interest as regards our own peculiar department of
science, becomes nevertheless of great importance in a moral as well as in a
political and philosophical point of view.
The editors of the Encyclopedic des Sciences JPhilosophiques, professing to
establish truths by the unaided powers of reason, without the intervention of
faith; teach without reserve, that "the mind is a free and responsible agent,
an existence entirely distinct from any other; self-containing, self-producing,
self-governing, and bearing along with the stamp of its own origin the warrant
of its own immortality."
I cannot imagine that these judges should have pronounced such a verdict
without consulting us, who, as physicians, form a sort of public tribunal in
relation to the science of man. They would rather wish to know our opinion
of this matter in an experimental li"-ht. Now, is it not evident how the
insenescence of the human intellectual principle comes to the assistance of
their proposition ? This insenescence, is it not a presage of insenescibility, and
is not insenescibility a step on the road to indefectibility, and, as a consequence,
to immortality ?
The sect of the Organiciens, representing the philosophy of the eighteenth
century, addresses itself to us in the same terms as did Augustus (after the
taking of a city) to the inhabitants who craved Ins clemency?" Moriendum
est," (death is inevitable.) But does nature, or to speak more definitely, the
analysis of facts, speak as pitilessly as these philosophers? Is the literal
interpretation of the sentence susceptible of no modification ? May I not
expect some slight commutation? Fortified by a conviction of the existing
distinction between the two principles of my own dynamism, may I not console
myself with the reflection that all is not lost, and that it is not unwarrantable
to exclaim in a literal and experimental sense, as did the poet in a metaphysical
one?"Non omnis moriar"?
From what I have said, gentlemen, you must, I think, feel persuaded that
my proposition relative to the insenescence of the human principle of intel-
ligence is not a frivolous paradox, incapable of application. Whatever contrary
opinions you may happen to hear upon the subject, do not believe that it is
merely a phantom of the imagination, or that, on the other hand, it is but an
apology on my part, for an order of which I have long been a professed member,
and which I now seek, from selfish motives, to elevate in public estimation.
Believe me, I am actuated by far higher motives. Once for all, be persuaded
that it is my wish to teach nothing but fundamental truths. I am as economical
of your time as I am of my own, and I fear not to remind you of the declaration
of Bossuet, in which I see the expression of my own duty?the approval of my
own sentiments. Though my body be feeble, the intellects of those around me
still require direction. The good they may anticipate is indeed unworthy to be
compared with that which the illustrious prelate was enabled to dispense. But
though temporal and of an inferior order, it possesses a certain dignity, since it
interests humanity at large. The sublimity of the one is no reason for depre-
DESCRIPTION OF A NEW BED AND BEDSTEAD, ETC. 395
dating the value of the other. If the former has been, metaphorically speaking,
denominated the word of life, we cannot be reproached with applying a similar
term to the latter, in an acceptation approximating more to its true and literal
meaning.
It is, then, in the hope of disseminating these (I trust) beneficent doctrines,
that each succeeding year finds me increasingly animated, in proportion as the
chilling influence of age deadens my corporeal perceptions. Each day do I
desire, more and more, to protect you from the ignorance and errors which
threaten you, without considering that present and future inspectors, more able
than I, will doubtless preserve you from them. You may carry home my words
to your fathers, who have been heretofore my friends and auditors. I feel
myself in the condition of one who, at the close of his earthly career, sees his
rapidly approaching departure, and exaggerates the approaching misfortune of
his young children. His grief arises not from a presumptuous estimation of
his own capacity, as compared with that of those who may be their future
guardians; but from an all-powerful conviction, that to none but himself can the
happiness of his little ones ever be so dear.
Seek not, therefore, my beloved children and pupils, to destroy or dissipate
an illusion which is, indeed, little short of providential; inasmuch as I owe to
it a courage truly paternal, and expect on your parts a sentiment of gratitude
susceptible even of imitating filial love.*
Lecture II, will appear in our next number.
