Statistics of Crime, and the Moral and Mental Condition of Prisoners
=====================================================================

Art. Ill-

We have before us the seventeenth report of the Inspector of the
Prisons of Great Britain, and the last parliamentary report relating to
the Discipline and Management of Pentonville, ParJchurst, MillbanJc,
Portland, and Dartmouth Prisons, including official returns of the
condition of the Hulks for the year 1851. This document contains
much valuable and interesting matter, illustrative of the state of our
criminal population in duresse. We purpose, however, confining our
attention to the moral state and mental health of the prisoners; and
our extracts from the documents under review will relate exclusively
to these points. Under the head of "Religious and moral instruction,"
the chaplain of the Pentonville prison makes a satisfactory report.
When speaking of the educational condition of the prisoners, the
chaplain observes, that they had at least had as good educational oppor-
tunities as the classes in society to which they belonged, but to which
in the matter of honesty and good conduct they were so disgracefully
the exceptions ; and therefore that the mere want of secular education
was not the cause, or even a chief one, of their crime, which being
removed, they would naturally return to society reformed and useful
characters. Some proved to have been highly educated, and a very
large number sufficiently so for any situation of life which they were
ever likely to occupy.

These facts rather militate against the generally entertained opinion,
that the criminals of this country belong to the uneducated classes.
446 STATISTICS or CRIME, and the
In regard to the mere improvement of the convict, he says, that
during the past year there has been less profession of a religious
character. But the chaplain thinks the results have not been worse
on this account. Experience has taught him to be more cautious in
receiving as undoubted, professions of a change of heart in men shut
out so completely from the great temptations of life. The tenour of
the addresses would therefore insensibly, perhaps, partake more of
this character, and the prisoner would be led thereby rather to defer
his profession of such a change until placed in more natural circum-
stances.

There is much good sense in the following remarks :?
"I think nothing easier for an affectionate, zealous Christian
minister to accomplish, than to move the feelings of prisoners in
separation, and to gain control almost over their very wills; but it
would be a great mistake to conclude that there was a real change
of the principles or character of the man whenever this effect is pro-
duced. That, under God, this influence may tend to salvation in some
cases, and may civilize and bring men into order to a very great
extent, I thoroughly believe; but, as regards real change of heart, I
must say, looking closely into such accounts as have been made public
of changes wrought in large proportions of prisoners, they require to
be received with considerable allowance for partiality and a sanguine
temperament in the writers. Eeal conversions to God are not more
frequent in our prisons than in our refuges and penitentiaries ; and
compared with the general mass of people, under similar advantages of
Christian faithfulness, zeal, and love, I believe them to be more rare.
Nevertheless, few prison chaplains of this character are without the
encouragement of knowing that their labour is not vain in the
Lord ; whilst it must not be lost sight of, that Christianity, if it accom-
plishes nothing more, civilizes man, subdues ferocity, procures respect
for laws, improves the mind, enlarges and elevates its conceptions, and
gives vigour and judgment to the conscience. This aspect of religion
is constantly presented to our view. During the past year we have
had reason to be encouraged in both these respects."

The medical officer's report of the state of the Pentonville prisoners
is an important document. We designedly confine our attention to
the mental health of these who have, during the year 1851, been con-
fined in this establishment.

Two cases of insanity, requiring removal to Bethlem, have occurred
during the year. Their history is subjoined.

James Satchwell, 32/59, was received from the Hulks, where he had
obtained a very bad character on account of repeated acts of insub-
ordination and violence.

On several occasions during his imprisonment in Pentonville, he
exhibited similar misconduct, and committed breaches of discipline so
MORAL AND MENTAL CONDITION OF PRISONERS. 447
flagrant as to lead to doubts being entertained as to his actual sanity.
He lfiid naturally but low intellectual development, and his cranial
capacity was found, by actual measurement, to be far below the average.
He could neither read nor write, and was incapable even of learning
a trade. In disposition he was cunning, suspicious, and deceptive.
After much close observation, it was acertained that the prisoner
was the subject of insane delusions, and he was therefore removed to
a lunatic asylum. It was impossible, however, for a time, in the
absence of the evidence of positive delusion, to state that he was irre-
sponsible for his actions, or to say that his violent conduct was not
alone attributable to a wicked and ungovernable temper.

The history of the other case is as follows :?
B. Woller, 3,688, aged 24, of bad moral character, having been three
times previously convicted and imprisoned, and several times also
examined on charges of felony, and discharged on account of defective
evidence ; was noticed on admission as somewhat pallid; he had also
some imperfectness of vision, accompanied by a peculiar and constant
oscillation of the eyeballs. He had been but three weeks in the prison,
when he was suddenly seized with mania, and was shortly afterwards
removed to Bethlem.

The morbid conditions noticed on admission were regarded at the
time as of functional origin only; but, considered in connexion with
the subsequent attack of insanity, it is presumed both may be referred
to cerebral disease which existed previous to his imprisonment.
The number of removals to Bethlem, as compared with preceding
years, is found to be :?

*27 per cent, on the prison population of the first seven years.
"32 per cent, on the prison population of 1850.
*16 per cent, on the prison population of 1851.
Three cases of delusion have also occurred :?
1. W. Ross suffered from depression, and was the subject of aural delusions. These
symptoms disappeared under treatment, and he was subsequently removed as unfit for
further separate confinement.

2. H. Litchfield laboured under the delusion that he was suspected of having com-
mitted an unnatural offence, and that this was made a subject of conversation by the
warders. The delusion in this case had ceased to affect the prisoner before he was
removed from the prison.

3. H. S. M'Laughlin, 3,617, has been affected with insane delusions, which, under
association, have vanished at times, and again re-appeared. This case also recovered
under treatment in the prison.

Besides the cases of insanity and delusion already noticed, there
were observed other cases, in which mental depression, irritability,
natural feebleness of intellect, and other conditions not amounting to
actual disease, existed, and rendered relaxation, or suspension of the
discipline, necessary in the first place, and removal from the prison
advisable at a subsequent period. They amounted in all to 22.

The report from which the preceding facts have been gleaned, is
made by Mr. C. Lawrence Bradley.

Parkhurst prison next claims our attention. It appears from the
chaplain's report, that he had under his own observation, in the year
18-51, 280 juvenile prisoners. The subjoined facts constitute the
result of his examination of 154 general ward boys. It appears that
only 62 of them had both parents alive at the time of their con-
viction ; 30 had neither father nor mother, and the remainder had but
one of the parents living : so that 92 out of the 154 were orphans,?
a fact calculated to excite pity. If industrial orphan schools were
established, which, by all accounts, might be made to support them-
selves, a vast amount of crime would be prevented, and great expense
saved to the country.

104 had attended day schools, for periods of from six months to
seven years. Few of them were at school less than one year, so that
a want of education,?or rather, to speak accurately, a Avant of the
means of instruction,?was not, in the case of these boys, the cause of
crime ; and the chaplain begs to be allowed to express his conviction,
that it is not that kind of education which, in the present day, is so
much sought to be given to the children of the poor, that will prevent
crime, and make its recipients respect the rights of others. His
experience here and elsewhere shows that what we need is, such a
course of industrial training, combined with religious and secular
instruction, energetically imparted, as shall fit its recipients for the
station they are likely to occupy, and the duties they will probably
have to perform. His observation does not show him that what is
now called education accomplishes this. Four have only attended
ragged schools. As large a proportion as 113 have been Sunday
scholars, for periods ranging from three months to six years. Only
7 resorted to thievery from poverty and want. It appears that 3 only
out of the 154 were led into crime, or encouraged in it by the father,
and not one, in either respect, by the mother.

It will be seen, that, from the above particulars, it may be inferred
that the prisoners last year received did not come from the lowest
classes. The question then occurs, What was the cause that led these
boys into crime ? The immediate cause was bad company. As many
as 137 attribute their fall into crime to this cause; and the truth of
this is manifest from their general history. It coincides, too, with
another point; that as many as 135 came from large towns and popu-
lous places; just those parts where the greatest facilities exist for
getting into this sort of company. The rest came from small towns.

We seldom get a prisoner from a really rural and scattered population.
But the remote cause was a want of proper parental control: only G2
had both parents alive to control them; all the rest were deprived
either of both parents, or of one. But those parents that are alive
exercised little or no authority over these their children, but allowed
them to be out late at night, with those ill-behaved and loose characters
that congregate in the streets ; and there it is that they are picked up
by those who are already thieves, and who are always on the look-out
to recruit the ranks which justice has thinned. They are then treated
by these prowlers to the low theatres, and to feasting at a public-
house, until they are entangled in the net of the destroyer. Thus it
is that more than two-thirds of juvenile crime are propagated ; indeed,
so prolific of crime is this unobserved cause, and such misery and
expenditure does it entail, that it is worthy of universal notice.
In connexion with the last particular, no more than 5 out of the
154 ever went to an evening school; thus we arrive at the same point
from a different direction, for if they had been at an evening school
they would not have been open to the pernicious influence above
referred to.

The following table will show accurately how many times each boy
has been in prison :?
14 boys
27
23
24
15
12
10
7
2
1
3
3
1
1
3
not once in prison.
1 equal to 27 imprisonments.
2 ? 46
3 . ? 72
4 ? 60
5 ? 60
6 ? 60
7 ? 49
8 ? 16
9 ? 9
10 ? 30
12 ? 36
14 ? 14
15 ? 15
18 ? 54
not known 0

Total . 548 imprisonments.
146 of these boys were, before their sentence to transportation,
imprisoned no less than 548 times, Avhile the mischief they did to the
morals and property of others is incalculable. Does not this suggest
how very much more economical it would be to prevent juvenile
crime, by an industrial and religious training, than after allowing it to
be manufactured and perpetrated, to reform it 1
The improvement in the moral conduct of the prisoners during the
past year was greater than in any previous year; and this not only in
one, but in all departments of tlie prison. The governor in his report
gives the statistics of behaviour in the wards; the following refer
solely to the conduct of prisoners during the time they were in school.
Total number of boys under instruction during the course of the year . 632
Number of boys entered into the school inisconduct-book for petty
offences ........... 70

Number of boys reported to the Governor for continued petty misconduct,
or more serious offences . . . . . . . .71
Number of boys who have not been complained of at all in school
throughout the year . . . . . . . . .562
Number of boys who have not been reported to the Governor through-
out the year .......... 561
Number per cent. :?
1. Of boys complained of for petty offences . . . .11
2. Of boys not complained of at all . . . . . .89
3. Of boys reported to the Governor . . . . . .11
4. Of boys not reported to the Governor ..... 89
Of the 70 boys entered in the school misconduct-book for petty
offences, there were complained of, once, 38 ; twice, 10; three times,
10 ; four times, 6 ; six times, 1 ; eight times, 1.
Of the 71 boys reported to the governor, there were reported, one,
53 ; twice, 10; three times, 4 ; six times, 1.

We have, under the above heads, a total number of 250 offences,
but 201 of these offences were committed by the boys while they Avere
in the probationary ward?that is, during the first four months of their
residence here ; a pleasing indication of the efficiency of the means
used for their improvement.

On the 1st of November last, a new general routine came into
operation, by which it was arranged that boys who had been here a
certain time should altogether cease attending the day school, and be
always industriously occupied, as it was conceived that this would
better prepare them for labour in the colonies. The principle of this
alteration is good, and in the right direction; and it seems capable of
producing useful results if properly carried out.

In May of last year, another change took place in the same beneficial
direction, by which it was arranged that the prisoners should attend
school one morning of one day of the week for four hours, and one
afternoon of another day of the week for five hours; that thus, even
on school days, the prisoners might have either a long morning or a
long afternoon for labour.

Stimulants to industry and good conduct were at the same time
added. All who have been here a sufficient length of time, and whose
correct behaviour has merited a good-conduct badge, are allowed a slice
of pudding on the Sunday, if they have worked diligently and behaved
well during the preceding week. They have also a small amount of
their earnings credited to their account, to be received by them when
they get to the colonies. But the reward which is most prized is the
liberty of writing to their friends at stated seasons.

" In allowing these rewards, it was considered," says the chaplain,
" that to expect prisoners ' to do well for its own sake,' was to suppose
them to have arrived at such a state of virtue which, if it had been
possessed, would have effectually prevented them from committing the
crimes for which they are punished. This motive is all-important as
the ultimate one to be aimed at, but it is inapplicable to those who are
utterly destitute of that moral sense by which alone it can be appre-
ciated ; and I would with reverence suggest, whether the Great Ruler of
the world does not hold out present secular advantages, as well as future
spiritual rewards, in His infinitely able system of reforming mankind
and preparing them for another sphere of happy existence. In my
judgment, therefore, gentlemen, you acted wisely in recommending these
rewards, and the present state of the prison justifies the measure."
" The numbers of the prisoners that act well from Christian motives
give a joy to the chaplain which, as it is not generally appreciated, he
will do no more than allude to, though it is one great stimulus to his
exertions in the midst of frequent and extreme depression of spirits, neces-
sarily arising from the peculiar and monotonous nature of his duties."
The following extract from the chaplain's report will convey to our
readers an accurate idea of the kind of religious instruction provided
for those confined in the MillbanJc Prison :?

" During different periods, amounting to six months in the course
of the year, the number of schoolmasters employed was seven, at other
times eight, the present number.

" The whole of the male prisoners not in the infirmary, or hindered
by casual sickness, Avith the following exceptions, those permitted to
be absent on account of dissent from the Established Church, employed
as artisans, kept back for the morning school, engaged in the bakery,
and some ot those employed in the kitchens, have regularly attended
the daily chapel service.

" On Sundays the prisoners in association have attended two full
services ; those in separation, the morning and afternoon alternately;
those employed in the bakery have had the benefit of both services;
arrangements have been lately made for prisoners in association receiving
further religious instruction in the wards, from the schoolmasters, on
each alternate Sunday evening.

" The assistant chaplain has been in the regular practice of visiting
the infirmary wards every day, reading prayers in all, and delivering a
lecture to the prisoners in each successively.
" On Sundays suitable ministrations have been afforded in the infir-
mary, by the religious instructor reading both prayer and lecture in its
several wards.

" The religious instructor lias on week-days been constantly engaged
in reading the Holy Scriptures with the prisoners from cell to ceil, and
giving catechetical instruction to the juveuile prisoners individually.
" The Holy Communion has been administered to the male prisoners
four times in the year, the communicants having been previously visited
by the chaplains, with a view to their suitable preparation.

" The behaviour of the prisoners, as falling under the chaplain's
observation, has been orderly; and the schoolmasters speak satisfac-
torily of the attention generally evinced. Of moral improvement,
however, as regards the many, embracing change of principle, and real
amendment of character, he feels considerable diffidence; bearing in
mind the circumstances of the prison?the period of separate confine-
ment, rarely exceeding six months, being somewhat brief to be perma-
nently effective for reformatory purposes?the danger of any good
impressions made during that period (the seedtime of reformation)
being effaced when prisoners are transferred to the large rooms and
general ward, where the opportunity is withdrawn from those under
incipient convictions of being ever left alone with their conscience, and
the spiritual exercises of the more advanced in religion, both meditation
and prayer are subject to disturbance."

The number of insane cases during the year 1851 is, we regret to
find, considerably above the average; whilst referring to this fact, the
medical officer observes that it is his opinion that there are no new
causes tending to injure the minds of the prisoners in operation at
Millbank. Of the eight prisoners removed to Bethlehem Hospital, five,
Dr Baly says, were decidedly insane when admitted at Millbank.
Two others were noticed at the time of their reception to be of very
low intellect, one of them also sullen, and in a state already verging on
insanity.

We append, without abridgment, Dr Baly's important statement of'
facts. It will be perused with interest by thousands whose attention
has been zealously directed to the consideration of the influence of
prison discipline and confinement on the health of the "mind :?
" Thomas Whittaker, who had been convicted of an unnatural crime,
appeared from the time of his reception weak in intellect, was idle,
inattentive to all rules for order and cleanliness, noisy, frequently
disturbing the ward by singing and whistling, and, when admonished,
most violent and abusive in his language. Unequivocal symptoms of
insanity showed themselves on the 23rd October, after he had been
eight months in prison.

" The only patient removed to Bethlehem Hospital who was received
in a sound state of mind, was Ann Moran. This prisoner was received
from York, on the 28tli March, 1849. Her insanity declared itself in
the form of violent mania, on the 28tli March, 1851 ; but for some
weeks previously, she had been strange in conduct, pilfering various
articles of clothing, &c.; concealing them in her bed, telling falsehoods
without any apparent motive, &c.

" Five patients who suffered from different forms and degrees of dis-
ordered intellect were not removed to a lunatic asylum. One of these,
" William Lamb, received from Aberdeen, was in a state of complete
dementia at the time of his reception : another,
"Daniel Coghlin, received from Manchester, on the 13th February,
1851, Avas a man of naturally weak intellect, and timid disposition.
From the middle of September, 1851, he laboured under delusions,
characterized chiefly by fear of injury to himself. He has recovered.
"The three following were apparently of sound intellect at the time
of their reception into the prison; although one of them had been
insane previously :?
Cain Squires .... received from Wakefield.
Henry Smith .... ? ? Warwick.
Henry. Scull .... ? ? Bristol.
" Cain Squires, who was received on the 15th February, 1851, began
to manifest some disorder of intellect in May. His only delusion
related to his trial and sentence. Under the influence of this delusion,
he has at times been restless and excited. But usually he has been
quite tractable, and during long intervals has apparently recovered his
soundness of intellect.

"Henry Smith was received into the prison on the 13th February,
1851. He was a youth of considerable intelligence. His delusions,
which for the most part have religious questions for their subject,
unfortunately still persist; although he is in good bodily health, and
retains perfect clearness of intellect on general matters.
" Henry Scull was sent to Millbank prison from Bristol on the 28th of
January, 1851. He began to talk incoherently at the commencement
of August, soon afterwards became violent and destructive, and then
lapsed into a state of dementia. Within the last two months his state
of mind has so much improved as to give strong grounds for hope that
he will speedily recover. His removal to Bethlehem Hospital, an order
for which had been obtained, has, consequently been postponed. His
parents, who visited him during his insanity, stated, that lie had twice
before been insane, with the same symptoms, and had even required
restraint.

" With respect, then, to the origin of the cases, the facts are, that of
13 insane patients, 6 were at the time of their reception insane, 3 of
weak mind, and 4, including the female patient, of sound mind.
Extending the same inquiry to all the cases of insanity that have
occurred in the prison amongst the male prisoners during the last eight
years, we obtain the following results :?
Year 1844 ....
? 1845 . . . .
? 1846 . . . .
? 1847 . . . .
? 1848 . . . .
? 1849 . . . .
? 1850 ....
? 1851 . . . .
Aggregate numbers for the
eight years
Annual proportion of in-
sane of each class, per
1000 prisoners .
Average
daily
Number of
Male
Prisoners.
699
828
845
983
1223
896
1001
918
7393
Total
Number
of
Insane.
7
11
15
6
11
Insane
when
received.
3
1
3
4
7
10
1
6
65
35
8-75
4*73
Of weak
Mind
when
received.
1-21
Of sound
Mind
when
received.
21
2*84

"During the period specified, 65 male prisoners have come under
treatment for insanity in the prison; but of this number 35 were insane
when they were received, and 9 were of weak mind, or, in some
instances, in a state verging on insanity. Only 21 were in quite a
sound state of mind when they came into the prison; and if we com-
pare these numbers with the male population of the prison during.the
same period, Ave find that the annual proportion of cases of insanity in
patients previously of sound mind was somewhat less than 3 (2-84) per
1,000 prisoners; and, including the cases of patients previously of
weak mind, more that 4 (4 05) per 1,000 prisoners. This at first sight
appears a higher rate of cases of insanity than would be expected in the
Millbank prison, where, for several years past, only about two-thirds of
the male convicts have been confined in separate cells, and where the
average terms of imprisonment in the several years have ranged between
2^ months and 6-^ months; but before the numbers above given are
left for comparison with the statistics of other prisons, it must be
explained that they include the slighter forms of disordered mind,
consisting in " delusions," and that many of the patients recovered in
the prison, several after very short attacks. From the subjoined table
it will be seen, that, of the 30 prisoners attacked with insanity during
their imprisonment (those previously of weak mind or doubtful sauity
being included), 14 recovered without removal to a lunatic asylum, or
other place of confinement. The remaining 1G, who did not thus
speedily recover, or who died, give an annual ratio of only 2 (2-1G) per
1,000, when compared with the number of male convicts in the prison
during the eight years. And this ratio, though double that of the cases
of insanity of similar severity which occur annually amongst the general
population out of prison, is not greater than might perhaps be antici-
pated from the nature of the various influences acting on the minds
and bodies of convicted criminals. That the length of the imprison-
ment, up to a certain limit, affects the result considerably, is quite
certain, and is rendered sufficiently apparent by the following facts: ?
Insane Prisoners of
weak mind when
received . .
Insane Prisoners of
. sound mind when \ 21
received .
Both Classes . . .30
Recovered
in the
Prison.
18
14
Removed
to
Bethlehem
or other
Prisons or
Asylums.
13
Died.
Remarks.
One committed suicide,
and one died of de-
mentia.
Died of bodily disease
unconnected with his
insanity.

" During the former four years of the period above referred to, the
average duration of the imprisonment of the male convicts was only
three months and seven days; and the number of cases of insanity
amongst them was 11, or 3-28 per 1,000 prisoners annually. During
the latter four years (1848 to 1851 inclusive) the average duration of
their imprisonment was five months and six days; and the number of
cases of insanity was 19, giving an annual ratio of 4-70 per 1,000
prisoners. Omitting the cases of those who recovered in the prison, the
number of cases in the former period becomes five, and the annual ratio
l-49 per 1,000; the number in the latter period 11, or 2'72 per 1,000
annually.

" The same result, namely, the increasing risk to insanity that attends
the protraction of imprisonment, at all events through the first 12
months, is shown more precisely in the subjoined table. It will be
seen that of 30* male prisoners who became insane in Millbank prison
in the course of the last eight years, only 9 were attacked during the
first three months of their imprisonment, 9 in the course of the second
three months, 8 in the course of the third three months, and 4 at later
periods; while about 16,000 prisoners passed through a single three
months' imprisonment, only about 8,400 through a second three
months' imprisonment, about 4,200 through a third three months, and
about 1,200 through a fourth three months : so that the ratio of cases
of insanity has been nearly twice as high in the second three months of
imprisonment as in the first three months, and in the third three
months more than three times as high as in the first.

* In three cases (L. D., J. J., and M. M'G.) the men were so exceedingly imbecile
or melancholic at the time of their reception, and passed so gradually into a state of
complete insanity, that the period of the commencement of their attacks cannot be
exactly determined. Two of these cases are referred to the first three months, and one
to the second three months of imprisonment.

Periods of Imprisonment.
Approxima-
tive Number
of Prisoners
who passed
through
each Period.
Number
of Cases of
Insanity
occurring in
each Period.
Annual
ratio per 1,000
of Cases of
Insanity for
each Period.
Pirst Three Months . . . .
Second Three Months .
Third Three Months . . .
Fourth Three Months, or later
16,000
8,400
4,200
1,200
2-25
4-28
7-61

"With* respect to the particular influences which give rise to mental
disorder with this increasing frequency during the first nine or twelve
months passed in prison, it may, I think, be affirmed that the more
powerful ones are included under the following heads:?
" 1. The various feelings of remorse, shame, and despondency, which
act most strongly on educated and sensitive minds, and at an early
period.

" 2. The withdrawal of the accustomed external sources of excitement
inducing a state of inertia, or torpor of mind, which leaves any tenden-
cies to mental disease more free to develop themselves. This cause
affects more frequently men of low intellect and deficient education,
and, in others, produces its evil results at a later period.
" 3. Various morbid influences acting on the mind through the body;
including many disturbances of the general health, due chiefly to com-
parative deficiency of exercise and fresh air, and the exhaustion of
nervous power induced by the ? solitary vice ;' this last cause operating
especially on young persons, and generally after some months' impri-
sonment.
" All these influences, but especially the latter two, will, it is obvious,
have greater sway in proportion as the imprisonment involves more of
actual seclusion. It is, therefore, not surprising that at Millbank
prison during the last eight years the cases of insanity have been
much less numerous among the prisoners ' associated' in large rooms,
than among those confined in 'separate' cells. The number of pri-
soners in separate cells has, on the average, been 624; the number in
association 298. The cases of insanity among prisoners of the separate
class have numbered 24 ; the cases among those of the associated class
have been 6. The annual ratio of cases of insanity has, consequently,
been only 2-52 per 1,000 among the latter, and 4-78 per 1,000 among
the former.
" An important fact remains to be noticed, namely, the much larger
proportion of men originally of weak or dull intellect among the
prisoners who became insane while in separate confinement. Of the
6 prisoners attacked with insanity while in ' association,' only 1 was
weak-minded at the time of his reception; while of the 24 men who
became insane in separate cells, 8 were imbecile, or of a very low grade
of intellect. If, now, these men of originally weak mind be excluded
from the calculation, the preponderance of cases of insanity among
the prisoners in ' separation ' is, of course, much diminished; for there
remain only 1G cases of insanity amongst prisoners of the separate
class, or 3'19 per 1,000 annually; and. 5 cases among those of the
associated class, or 2-10 per 1,000 annually. From the calculation
thus made, the inference at first sight appears to be deducible, that
men of sound mind do not suffer in any very considerable degree more
from separate confinement than from imprisonment in 'association,'
but in more or less strict silence. But such a conclusion would be
erroneous : for the average term of imprisonment of the prisoners
of the ' associated' class at Millbank prison has been far longer
than that of the prisoners of the 'separate' class; the 700 pri-
soners of the juvenile class, who in the years 1844 to 1848 under-
went on the average 12 months imprisonment, and nearly all the
prisoners who on account of physical disabilities or other causes have
been detained for long periods in the prison, except the ' incorrigibles,'
having been in 'association.' So that if the influences tending to
disturb the intellect acted equally under the two modes of imprison-
ment, the proportion of insane ought to be much greater among the
prisoners in ' association ;' while, notwithstanding their longer terms
of imprisonment, it has been one-third less.

" The above-mentioned facts do, however, show incontestably the great
danger that attends the confinement of prisoners of weak minds in
separate cells. It might, I think, almost be affirmed that men of any
considerable degree of imbecility, or great dulness of intellect, will
with certainty be rendered actually insane or idiotic by a few months
separate confinement; and the multiplication of cases of insanity at
Millbank prison, where so many men of impaired or deficient mind are
received, has been prevented only by the precaution of placing in
association all such prisoners as soon as their infirmity of mind became
known to the medical officer.

"The man who committed suicide on the 25th September, 1851, after
having been eight months in the prison, had been convicted and
sentenced to transportation for an unnatural offence. He had mani-
fested no symptoms of insanity, nor any great despondency, and the
only probable motive for the act was the fear of immediate transporta-
tion, since he had been on the previous day inspected, together with
other prisoners, who were about to be removed from the prison."
The following carefully written analysis of " The Seventeenth Report
of the Inspectors of Prisons of Great Britain," we copy from the pages
of a contemporary.* It appears to embody all the facts of any interest
contained in the parliamentary document:?

" The criminal tables afford pleasing evidence that the decrease of
crime, as compared with the amount ten years ago, continues to be
* The Athenceum.

maintained. For, although the slight increase of 4*2 per cent, marks
the returns of 1851 as compared with those of 1850, the increase of
population may be most fairly adduced as a satisfactory cause for this
increase. The commitments during the last ten years stand thus :?
1842, 31,309 ; 1843, 29,591 ; 1844, 26,542 ; 1845, 24,303; 184G,
25,107; 1847, 28,833; 1848, 30,349 ; 1849,27,816 ; 1850,26,813;
1851, 27,960 : total, 278,623.

" The increase of 4-2 per cent, during the past year has not been con-
fined to any particular localities. It extends generally over England
and Wales, including all the chief agricultural and the largest manufac-
turing and commercial counties. In 1841 the commitments were in
the proportion of one in every 573 of the population, while, according
to the last Census Returns, the proportion in 1851 is reduced to one in
641. Between these two periods the population increased 12-6 per
cent., while the commitments remained as nearly as possible stationary,
their increase amounting only to a fraction per cent. But the relative
progress of population and crime has been very different in different
parts of England. In the large manufacturing districts where the
working-classes during the past year have been steadily employed, the
proportion of commitments to the population has signally decreased.
Thus, in Yorkshire and Lancashire, the population during the last ten
years has increased 18-2 per cent., while the commitments have simul-
taneously decreased 4-3 per cent. In Cheshire, Derbyshire, Nottingham-
shire, and Leicestershire, where, mixed with a considerable agricultural
population, the chief silk, lace, and other textile fabrics are produced,
the proportion of the commitments decreased from 1 in 579, to 1 in
633, the population having increased 7 per cent, while the commit-
ments decreased 2 per cent. In Staffordshire, Warwickshire, and
Worcestershire, the seat of the chief manufactures in hardware, pottery,
and glass, the commitments decreased from 1 in 435 of the population
to 1 in 552, the population having increased 20-4 per cent., and the
commitments decreased 5 per cent.

" In the more purely agricultural counties the progress is slower, and
the results less favourable. In the eastern district, comprising Essex,
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Lincoln, the proportion of the commitments to
the population has increased from 1 in 669 to 1 in 604 ; the increase
of the population being 6-8 per cent., and of the commitments 18-4 per
cent. Of the seven chief midland agricultural counties, Cambridge,
Northampton, Bedford, Hertford, Oxford, Bucks, and Berks, the pro-
portion of commitments has decreased from 1 in 572 to 1 in 620; the
increase of the population being 10-3 per cent., and of the commitments
1-8 per cent. only. In the counties in the south and southwest, Hants,
Wilts, Dorset, and Somerset, the results prove more favourable than in
any of the other agricultural districts. The proportion of the commit-
ments to the population has decreased from 1 in 508 to 1 in 651 : the
population having increased 12-5 per cent., and the commitments
decreased 12*1 per cent.

" On a comparison of the offences upon which the increase of the
commitments last year has arisen, it appears that the increase has
extended to each of tlie classes of crime, with the exception of the sixth
class, comprising miscellaneous offences. In the first class, Offences
against the person, the commitments for murder, attempts to murder,
wounding, &c., remain stationary ? unnatural offences, however, show
an increase, as do those under the head of lesser offences of assault. In
the second class, Offences against property committed with violence, the
commitments have been without change, except the marked increase of
robbery, the tendency of the whole class, on a more extended com-
parison, being to an increase. In the third class, Offences against pro-
perty committed without violence, which contains the great bulk of the
commitments, there is an increase of three per cent., arising chiefly in
the commitments for larceny from the person and for frauds. The
fourth class, Malicious offences against property, although comprising a
very small comparative proportion of the commitments, yet exhibits a
marked increase, particularly under the heads of incendiarism and
obstructing railway carriages. In the fifth class, Forging, and offences
against the currency, there is a considerable increase, particularly under
the head of uttering counterfeit coin, which offence has increased thirty-
six per cent. 011 a comparison of the totals of the last two five years.
" The foregoing analysis refers to the total number of commitments
during the past year ; the following table shows the result of the judicial
proceeding. We place the return of 1850 in juxtaposition for more
ready comparison:

1850. 1851.
Not prosecuted and admitted evidence .... 141 . . . 131
No bills found against  1,458 . . . 1,484
Not guilty on trial  4,639 . . . 4,744
Acquitted and discharged 6,238
Acquitted on the ground of insanity  26
Pound insane  12
Sentenced to death  49
? transportation 2,578
? imprisonment 17,602
? whipping, line, &c  307
Pardoned without sentence  1
6,359
13
9
70
2,836
18,418
248
7

Total number convicted  20,537 . . . 21,579
The effect of the act of Parliament passed in 1849 to repeal the
punishment of transportation on a first conviction for simple larceny,
is more fully exemplified by the returns of last year. The capital sen-
tences in 1851 are above the yearly average since 1841, when the last
alteration of the law abolishing capital punishments took place. This
increase arises chiefly 011 the offences of burglary and robbery, attended
with personal violence or injuries. Of the 70 persons capitally con-
victed last year, the sentence was recorded against 53, sentence of death
upon 17; and of these 17, 10 were executed, 2 of them being females.
The proportion of crime among females has shown a slight tendency to
increase in the last three years. The proportions areas follows :?1848,
23-4 females to 100 males; 1819, 24-1; 1850, 24-4 ; and 1851, 24*8.
In the offences against tlie person, the proportion of females last year
was 13-4 to 100 males. In murder the large and increasing propor-
tion of females, arising from the many cases of poisoning, has been
much remarked. The number last year was 41 females to 33 males.
" It would be extremely interesting to compare the amount of crime
with the extent of education in each county, and to be enabled to mark
the extinction of the former by the growth of the latter. A remarkable
instance has lately shown that crime is rife where education is neg-
lected. In the borough of Stockport, possessing a population of
85,000, which has just made itself conspicuous for its atrocities, the
reports of the School-inspector state that only 350 children were at
school in the whole borough.

"We do not mean to say that education would blot out crime, but
there can be no doubt of its beneficial nature; and we have hopes that
our Legislature is beginning to discover that education is less expen-
sive, and more honourable to a nation, than huge machinery in the
shape of prisons, transport ships, and penal colonies for the punishment
of crime."
