Dr. Williams on Insanity
=========================

Art. II.?
Dk. Williams has tlie honour of having written the most recent
monograph 011 Insanity. As his work has been extensively advertised
as the " Lord Chancellor's Prize Essay," we opened the volume with the
assurance that we should find in its pages a record of both novel and
valuable views relative to the pathology of the brain, and the therapeutics
of insanity. We regret to say that Ave have been grievously dis-
appointed. It would have afforded us much satisfaction to have had
an opportunity of recommending this work to the favourable notice of
our readers; but a stern sense of critical justice compels us to withhold
from Dr. Williams's volume the stamp of our approbation. The first
j "Insanity; its Causes, Prevention, and Cure, &c." By Jos. \Yilliams, 1M.JJ.
London: Churchill, 1852.
DR. "WILLIAMS ON INSANITY. 27T
edition of this work was published under the title of " An Essay on the
Use of Narcotics and other Remedial Agents calculated to produce
Sleep, in the Treatment of Insanity;" and for this essay a premium,
which the present highly distinguished Lord Chancellor, when pre-
siding over the Irish Court of Chancery, placed at the disposal of the
President and Fellows of King and Queen's College of Physicians, was
awarded. Of this we have no right to complain. Dr. Williams has
re-written the "prize essay," and has published it under a totally
different title, still announcing it to the public as the " Lord Chancellor's
Prize Essay on Insanity." We do not wish to make any observations
personally annoying or offensive to the author; but Ave ask, whether
lie is justified in so advertising his present work 1 Sir Edward Sug-
den's prize was far the best essay on a specific form of treating
insanity by means of narcotics; Dr. Williams's present volume is
entitled "Insanity; its Causes, Prevention, and Cure, including Apoplexy,
Epilepsy, and Congestion of the Brain!" This can no more be considered
the prize essay of Lord St. Leonards, than the last volume of the " Lancet,"
or the " Psychological Journal." It is quite a misnomer, and we re-
gret that Dr. Williams has been so ill-advised as to designate it as such.
If this practice be allowed, much mischief to the cause of legitimate
literature will inevitably ensue. A premium is awarded for a given essay,
selected perhaps from a number of MSS. sent in for competition; a
particular essay is approved of, and its author carries off the prize. The
matter of the essay is unobjectionable; it is supposed to contain no
false facts, wrong deductions, or mischievous doctrines, and it is sent
forth to the world stamped by the authority of those selected to adjudicate
in the matter. A few years elapse, and the little prize essay swells out
into a huge volume, containing perhaps not fifty pages of the original essay,
but several hundred pages of new matter. Is it fair that this new?entirely
new?Avork should be announced to the public as the original prize essay?
The new work may contain very questionable matter?false data and mis-
chievous conclusions, which the adjudicators might greatly disapprove of:
we say this is possible, and therefore it is unfair to them that it should be
published as the original prize essay. On principle we object to this
proceeding, and we feel it our duty to direct attention to the fact. Dr.
Williams may advertise his original essay, which, in all its features, is
very different from the volume under consideration, as " Sir Edward
Sugden's Prize Essay;" but he cannot honestly put his present volume
forward as the one submitted to the President and Fellows of King
and Queen's College of Physicians, and to which the Irish Lord Chan-
cellor's prize was awarded. Having made these preliminary remarks,
we proceed to consider the contents of the volume itself. Having
perused Dr. Williams's work attentively, with every wish to speak
278 DK. "WILLIAMS ON INSANITY.
favourably of it, we are compelled to withhold from the essay our ap-
probation. It is composed of vapid nonentities and common-place
truisms, interlarded with hackneyed quotations from Dr. this and Dr.
that, and Mr. A. and Mr. B., without an observation of the author's
which may be termed either novel or original. We will not pretend to
divine the motives which may have led Dr. Williams thus to rush into
print.
" I too can write; and once upon a time
I poured along the town a flood of rhyme,
A schoolboy trick, unworthy praise or blame;
I printed?older children do the same."
Dr. Williams prefaces his essay with a few metaphysical reflections
and observations. We shall content ourselves with making only a few
quotations from this portion of the work. After announcing the im-
portant fact that " the mind is an immortal and immaterial entity," Dr.
Williams ventures, with a degree of moral courage which we are bound
to commend, to enumerate a great metaphysical truth which he has
had the good fortune to discover. It has remained for that gentleman
to settle beyond, we trust, all future cavil or dispute, the long vexed
question with reference to the distinction between mind and soul. All
honour to Dr. Williams, and to the county which gave him birth! The
intellect, says this great metaphysician, " is the mind, whilst it occu-
pies its earthly tenement; but having left it, it is called soul." By
whom it is so called the author omits to state. The Doctor does not
venture to explain by what process of induction he has arrived at a
knowledge of this great fact j he announces the discovery with all the
modesty which usually accompanies genius, simply observing in a foot
note, that " I shall remain satisfied with this dogmatical statement, as
it is my intention at an early period to discuss and illustrate this po-
lemical and psychological subject in one of the Reviews." We await
with feelings of intense interest this promised illustration, and until we
have the pleasure of perusing Dr. Williams's exposition, we must, we
presume, take for granted the metaphysical question as settled. Meta-
physicians, and theologians, must for the future cease to talk of the
soul until after the extinction of vitality; the soul having no existence
during life, it being nothing but an off-shoot or prolongation of
mind. The discovery of Dr. Williams must tend to revolutionize
the whole of metaphysical science! The introductory chapter of the
work before us is replete with valuable apothegms. For example:
"The soul or mind can never perish.'" "Or mind." How does
the Doctor reconcile this expression with the previously enunciated
doctrine relative to the soul? "Man is a rational creature"?"by
reason we distinguish right from wrong;" the "highest faculty is
DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY. 279
termed self-inspection or reflection." This is tlie first time we have heard
reflection, or, as Dr. Williams classically designates it, "self-inspec-
tion," termed the "highest faculty of the mind." Whatever is perceived,
is called an idea in its enlarged sense." What is it, we ask, in its
contracted or limited sense? "Imagination is purely intellectualWho
ever dreamt of its being otherwise? " Imagination enables us to con-
ceive, compose, and form new ideas such is not the province usually
assigned to this faculty. Certainly conception cannot properly be
deemed as one of its attributes. " Imagination is often one of the most
dangerous gifts (?) a man can possess, impairing his judgment and weaken-
ing his attention." This may be said of any faculty of the mind if not
properly regulated, disciplined, and controlled. If not abused, the
imagination is a most essential, useful, and important faculty of the
mind; we do not conceive how it can be justly designated " as one of
the most dangerous gifts a man can possess," or how it can be supposed
to "impair the judgment," or "weaken the attention." After de-
tailing various definitions of insanity, Dr. Williams ventures to
give his own test of unsoundness. " That man," he says, " may be
said to be insane who has no control over his thoughts and
actions." We sincerely hope for the peace of mind and reputation
of the Doctor, that he will never propound such a definition of insanity,
should he ever have the fortune or mis-fortune to take his place in the
witness box. If the loss of control over the thoughts and actions con-
stitute insanity, we tremble for a large class of Her Majesty's subjects,
at present permitted to roam in undisturbed possession of their liberty,
and left without hindrance to manage themselves and their property.
Let Dr. Williams be assured, that a definition of insanity is a hazar-
dous experiment. " The most simple deviation from insanity is usually
termed eccentricity." (p. 8.) By whom is it so termed? We do not re-
cognise this " simple deviation." ' Eccentricity may, and often does
exist to a considerable extent, the mind being sane. Does Dr. Williams
deny the fact ? "A man," says our author, may be eccentric in dress,
in manners, in habits, or he may draw inferences at variance with the
opinions of a sound judgment, being different from those of any sensible
person ; now, such affectation as this is apt to grow," and Dr.
Williams, therefore, suggests that the " affectation" leading to eccen-
tricity " should be checked in its earliest development." After alluding
to the fact that " lunatics are often very vain;" that they are " fond of
assuming high characters;" Dr. Williams with great naivete observes,
" it is right here to mention that Gall and his disciples believed that
these assumptions of different characters depend upon various portions
of the brain being affected." We beg to call particular attention to the
distinction which Dr. Williams draws between a " weak" and an " insane"
280 DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY.
mind. " A person of merely weak mind," says our author, "although he
may be very eccentric and foolish, yet when his errors are pointed out
by another, Ice sees and admits them." How fortunate it would be for
society if such were the fact. The folly of the merely " weak mind,"
is often exhibited in an obstinate and tenacious adherence to absurd
conceits. " Though thou shouldst bray a fool in a mortar among wheat
with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him." Again, our
author observes,?" Unsoundness of mind consists in a morbid condition
of intellect, or loss of reason, coupled with an incompetency of the person
to manage his own affairs," (p. 14.) This is tantamount to a declaration
that unsoundness of mind is insanity, and insanity is a morbid condition
of the intMect; this explanation, lucid as it may appear to the Doctor,
leaves us as much as ever in the dark.
It is important to notice that, among the symptoms exhibited by
those " predisposed to insanity," to Avhich the author refers, " is a
remarkable fondness of showing off ('?), and reciting, and spoutingWe
would have some of our amateur theatrical friends bear this in mind.
In the celebrated commission of lunacy in the case of Mr. Davis, one
of the arguments in proof of his insanity was, that he " spouted " and
" recited " Shakespeare with insane elevation of voice, and with a morbid
vehemence and warmth of gesticulation. It was when giving evidence
in this inquiry, that Dr. Haslam, much to the amusement of the court,
and Mr. Davis's celebrated counsel, Mr. H. Brougham (now Lord
Brougham), talked of the alleged lunatic labouring under a " delusion
of manner." We were present in court at the time, and well recollect
the ludicrous effect which this remark had upon all present. For the
future, we presume, we shall be justified in talking of the " delusion
of showing off," and of " reciting and spouting." In the chapter on
Siticide, we find nothing worthy of notice. We are informed that " in
France, where foolish lovers together commit this deed, (how pathetic!)
they often meet a united death in the fumes of carbonic acid gas." In
the vulgar tongue, they destroy themselves by ignited charcoal. Again,
the author communicates to us the novel and important information,
that, " persons who commit suicide have often insane relations, and
there can be no doubt that suicide is in some instances hereditary."
We trust, after this announcement, the fact of the hereditary character
of the suicidal disposition will be no longer questioned. The whole
chapter on " Suicide," and " Melancholia," is replete with common-
place observations, to be found in every elementary work on insanity.
There does not occur one remark in these chapters quotable on account
of its originality. For example, we are gravely informed, as if the
author had lighted upon a great psychological fact, that " many persons
are unable to look down from any great height without feeling an
DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY. 281
inclination to throw themselves down." Then follows the author's
rationale of this very singular and startling fact. " This (he says)
does not arise from giddiness, but seems to depend upon some pecidiar
fascination." After a pointless and senseless tirade against theatrical
performances, the author discusses, in Jive pages, the important and
comprehensive subject of " religious insanity," in which we find the
following astute observation: ?" Persons afflicted with religious
insanity sometimes require watching (an important admission,) as they
occasionally become dangerous, hearing whisperings (?), which tell them
to take the lives of their infants," &c. When speaking of cases of
" moral insanity," in which, by the by, Dr. Williams erroneously says
" there is no illusion, no hallucination," our author observes, " those
individuals (the morally insane) feel inclined to break china (so do
some sane women, when irritated by their husbands), dash down
girandoles, or crack any small objects of vertu." Heaven preserve a
number of her Majesty's male and female subjects, disposed to "break
china," " dash down girandoles," &c., " crack small objects of vertu,"
or their own heads, if they come within the " long range" of those
who thus define moral insanity! The author's account of what is
termed " moral insanity," is excessively meagre; many of the more
peculiar and pathognomonic features of the disorder are entirely
omitted or cursorily passed over. Take, for instance, Dr. Williams'
description of the disease. " Some persons utter words they do not
wish, being unable to control or direct them, (so do those who are said
to be 'intellectually insane,') yet knowing them not to be correct.
The same has occurred in writing: thus in drawing a cheque he has
begun correctly enough; but in continuing, has put down something
totally irrelevant to the subject." We have no doubt the butcher,
wine-merchant, or tailor of this said gentleman would be disposed to
question his mental condition if he so acted when they requested
payment of their respective accounts. Again: " The memory is the
facidty at fault in such cases, (moral insanity.)" Is the memory, we
would ask Dr. Williams, a mon'al or intellectual faculty? Let him
consult Locke, Dugald Stewart, Browne, or A bercrombie, before he
replies to the question. In cases of moral insanity, according to our
experience, and the experience of all authorities, the memory is
generally active and tenacious. Viewing the whole of his account
of moral insanity, we should consider it as applicable to de-
mentia as to the affection he purports to delineate. In the chapter
on " moral insanity," the following observation is made, apropos of
what it is difficult to say. " Stupid persons often forget what they are
talking about, (and some what they are writing about), even in the
midst of conversation, and a more or less complete absence of thought
282 DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY.
is occasionally produced by a too protracted mental effort." Surely
this is not intended as Dr. Williams' description of one morally insane?
We should imagine not, because, in illustration of tlie remark, the
author cites the cases of John Hunter and Dr. Wollaston! In deciding
the question, whether an " alleged lunatic is fit to be intrusted to the
care of himself, or capable of managing his own affairs," our readers
will be gratified to hear that Dr. Williams " does not accord with those
who place the property first and the person after." This announcement
will perhaps remove any apprehensions which might exist in the public
and professional mind as to the opinions of this distinguished autho-
rity upon so important a point.
To Dr. Williams Ave are indebted for having discovered a new form
of insanity, hitherto undetected by the medical psychologist. He says
that there " is a form of insanity to which butlers are becoming
much exposed, and if from loss of place or any other circumstance, the
intoxicating draught is withheld, depression folloivs, and they then often
commit suicide. I believe more butlers have recently, in London, ter-
minated their existence by their own hands than any other class of indi-
viduals"* We should have been obliged to Dr. Williams if he had
referred us to the statistical data from which he deduced this valuable
conclusion. If a butler is discovered playing tricks with his master's
wine?if he is detected, at unreasonable hours, flirting about the choice
old port and madeira, and a necessity arises for his summary ejection from
the wine cellar and the house, depression of mind, under such circum-
stances, will occasionally ensue; and it is possible that, like the celebrated
cook, Yattel, the butler may commit suicide by cutting his throat with a piece
of a broken wine-bottle : but we much question whether, if these unhappy
accidents were to be of more frequent occurrence than they in reality
are, we should be justified in introducing among our already too minute
divisions and subdivisions of mental derangement a form of aberration
to be called the " Butlers Insanity." A cook burns his master's mutton
?spoils his sauce?sends the salmon, turbot, or cutlet, half-dressed to
table, and, in consequence of gross inattention to the duties of the
cuisine, receives a peremptory notice to quit: should the unhappy cook
run himself through with his own spit, or choke himself with a knuckle-
bone, we doubt whether we should be warranted in talking of a form of
lunacy to be denominated the " Cook's Insanity." If we do so, we
shall have in our psychological nosology the " Kitchen-maids Insanity,"
the "Footman's Insanity" the " Nursery -maid's Insanity." A painful
necessity has recently arisen compelling us to intimate to our coach-
man the propriety of his immediately leading the premises : the conse-
* Page 78.
DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY. 283
quence may be, that, depressed by tlie consciousness of having lost our
confidence, he may take a prolonged cold bath in the adjoining river
Thames, and remain sufficiently long under the stream to induce
asphyxia. Should this unhappily be the effect of his discharge from
our service, our readers must not be surprised if in the next number of
our Journal they find a chapter headed, " A new Form of Lunacy?the
Coachman's Insanity."
Proceeding onward, we find Dr. Williams denominating Erotomania
to be a "metaphysical disorder," because " the sentiments" are " affected."
A "metaphysical disorder," indeed! "Nymphomania, or satyriasis,
arise (he says) from physical causes;" but we ask, is not this also the
case with regard to the " metaphysical disorder," erotomania, as Avell as
every other form of insanity1 Dr. Williams suggests for the cure of
erotomania, "a happy marriage." We question the utility of the
remedy. " Erotomania" and " nymphomania" are both described in the
chapter on Moral Insanity. Does the author consider these disorders
as illustrations of that class of patients " who are insane in conduct, and
not in ideas?" such being the definition which the author quotes with
approval, of moral insanity. " One of the earliest indications of in-
sanity attacking women is the change of ideas, sentiments, and actions.'""
Is this not also the case with men? The important subject of puerperal
insanity is discussed in thirty-four lines. We cannot divine why the
author should discuss this form of derangement in his chapter on Moral
Insanity. It is surely out of place there? The only advice he ventures
to give with regard to the treatment of this form of disturbed mind,
is, that " these cases ought not to be sent to a mad-house (elegant
phraseology in a work purporting to be a scientific production!) it being
rare for puerperal mania to continue long, especially when early and
promptly treated; but (continues the learned Doctor) if, after a month,
the symptoms still continue, the pulse being very quick, change of
residence and removal from home should not be generally longer post-
poned." Whilst thanking the author for these valuable suggestions,
fraught with so much wisdom and sagacity, we may observe that he
would have enhanced our obligation if he had informed us where the
patient should be removed to ? The chapter on " Dementia" is totally
valueless. The whole subject of dementia and idiocy is dismissed in
five pages, and contains nothing beyond an attempt, and a very laboured
one it is, to define idiocy, fatuity, and dementia; the definitions
of idiocy are taken from " Dr. Johnson's Dictionary," " Blackstone's
Commentaries," and " Coke upon Lyttelton!" The preliminary observa-
tions of Dr. Williams, in his chapter on the "General Treatment of
* Page 81.
284 DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY.
Insanity," contain a gross and inexcusable libel upon tlie profession. He
says:
" It forms the exception for medical men to pay any attention to
mental disease; and hence, when a case of insanity occurs in private
practice, the individual so affected is either sent away at once to a lunatic
asylum, or the medical attendant, being himself alarmed, restrains his
?patient by violent measures. The general ignorance of diseases of the
mind, so prevalent throughout the profession, has frequently led to
very unjust detentions; and if any medical man, so uninformed upon
this subject, is requested to visit an alleged lunatic, he goes prepared to
prove insanity; whereas his object should be to ascertain the exact state
of the patient's mind, and to see whether there would be danger to life
or property in allowing him personal freedom; but the very fact of see-
ing a person already manacled has, alas! been to many sufficient proof
of his insanity; and, indeed, as Sir Henry Halford has said, if already
confined, his condemnation is almost certain."?p. 90.
We maintain that it does not necessarily follow, as Dr. Williams asserts,
that, if a patient be not sent to an asylum, " the medical attendant,
being himself alarmed, restrains his patient by violent measures." We
deny the fact: the disposition is, we think, otherwise on the part of the
profession. The ultra views on the subject of non-restraint, pro-
mulgated by a few over zealous members of the profession, have, in
some cases, unhappily, led to the sacrifice of valuable lives. Again,
upon what ground is Dr. Williams justified in saying that when "a
medical man is requested to visit an alleged lunatic, he goes prepared
to prove insanity?" We declare this to be a scandalous imputation upon
the profession. Our readers will, no doubt, feel greatly obliged to Dr.
Williams for informing them, that " no medical man is warranted in
signing a certificate of a patient's unsoundness of mind without having
seen such patient." If he Avere to do so, contrary to the express stipula-
tions of the statute, he would expose himself to an action for misde-
meanour. Is the author of this work aware of the fact ? We should
suppose not, or he would not have offered such advice to the profession.
After a fair proportion of twaddle about not listening to the " mere
representations of friends"?that the " application of the family is no
sufficient warrant for confinement;" that " personal observation alone
can justify any medical man in signing a certificate of unsound mind"?
Dr. Williams makes the subjoined grave accusation against his profes-
sional brethren:?" The generality of medical men, when asked to see a
case, go with the fall intention of establishing insanity, not to disprove
it" (p. 91). Need we attempt a refutation of this calumnious state-
ment 1 Perhaps Dr. Williams may yet have the satisfaction of hearing
some distinguished member of the bar, or judge on the bench, quote
DK. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY. 285
this very passage to establish, that the opinions of medical men relative
to the subject of insanity are totally worthless. It is our duty to dis-
countenance these attempts to depreciate the value of medical testimony,
let them proceed from whatever quarter they may. It is, alas! mor-
tifying to be compelled to repel an arrow aimed at the members of
an honourable profession from the hand of one of our own brethren!
The passage we have just quoted and commented upon, is nothing more
than a new and offensive edition of Lord Truro's unjustifiable observation,
" that a medical man would give any opinion in lunacy that he was paid
foran imputation which has been so severely animadverted upon by
all the medical journals. "Medical men (says Dr. Williams) should
never enter court as partisans" Of course not; "their object should
be to establish truth (certainly.) " When examining a patient take
care he is not agitated (sensible.) Gain his confidence (often a difficult
object to attain) and endeavour to ascertain whether he has not been
previously excited." The Doctor does not say excited by what; whether
by the disease, his medical attendants, or " unprincipled relations." "The
most monstrous means have been adopted (continues the author) to
intimidate weak-minded individuals; and fraud, conspiracy, and intimi-
dation must be met by perspicacious sagacity."?Right; but how few
(according to this learned Theban) have the amount of " perspicacious
sagacity" sufficient to overcome such a degree of base conspiracy. Dr.
Williams communicates to the profession the important fact, " that a
person improperly taken and detained as a lunatic, may maintain an
action for assault." We trust this announcement will be consolatory
to those of our readers who may be nervously apprehensive of the " mad
doctor," the " medical certificate," or of being kidnapped, and confined by
kind relatives in an asylum. It is very important that the members of our
profession should, with these pains and penalties staring them in the face,
have a clear conception of the kind of patient they are justified in depriving
of liberty. Dr. Williams, conscious of the necessity of enlightening the
profession upon this point, generously lays down rules for our guidance.
We cannot sufficiently express our gratitude to the Doctor for his lucid
instructions. He says, " There can be no doubt as to the necessity
of placing under control a furious maniac, who would be constantly
injuring himself or others." So far the advice is unexceptionable; but,
fearful we might be led into error, and be disposed prematurely to in-
terfere with the free agency of the Queen's subjects, the Doctor kindly
develops still further his views upon the point, and adds, " and should
he (the alleged lunatic), in addition, eat his own excrement, this would
even render more stirveillance and cleanliness necessary." So we should
suppose. In the name of those associated with the treatment of the
286 DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY.
insane, Ave thank Dr. Williams for tliis extremely satisfactory advice.
For the future, writs of habeas corpus, and actions for false imprison-
ment, will only be referred to as remnants of the dark ages. Let us
clearly comprehend, " that there can be no doubt as to the necessity of
placing under control a furious maniac;" but if our friends have any
qualms of conscience in so acting, these will all disappear if, superadded to
this, the " patient should eat his own excrement." " How often (says Dr.
Williams) is a man sent to an asylum by his friends because he is eccentric
and irritable." We doubt the fact; nothing is easier than to make general
statements and assertions of this kind; but as two medical men must
certify not only as to the presence of insanity, but to such a hind and
degree of insanity as to justify confinement, we are disposed to consider
the occurrence of which the author speaks, extremely rare; in fact, we
do not think it possible, considering the character of the members of
our profession, the vigilance of the commissioners, and the amount of
surveillance to which private asylums are, in the present day, sub-
jected. After talking of an " eccentric" and " irritable" person being
sent unjustly, by his friends, to an asylum, the author, with wonderful
pathos, exclaims, " how dreadful for a patient (" only eccentric" and
"irritable") just becoming conscious, with reason dawning upon him,
to find himself in a mad-liouse." When speaking of the " eccentric" and
" irritable" patient, the Doctor said nothing of the loss of consciousness
and reason; surely, if these co-existed with the "eccentricity" and "irrita-
bility," a good and valid reason existed for placing the unhappy patient in
a position most advantageous for recovery; and, instead of being appalled
at finding himself in a "mad-house," after his restoration to conscious-
ness and reason, one would imagine that he would be grateful to those
who, in the hands of a wise Providence, had been instrumental in re-
storing to him the healthy exercise of mental faculties.
When talking of the effects of associating with the insane, the
author observes, " that very few nurses or keeper's live under such
exposure many years without themselves becoming insane!" We
never knew an instance corroborative of this assertion. The state-
ment has no foundation in fact. If Dr. Williams doubt our word,
let him ask those whose practical experience in the matter qualifies
them to pronounce an opinion upon the point. " Moral treatment is
more effective in the early weeks (of an attack of insanity), than at
any subsequent period." This is contrary to the experience of all
practical men. In the early stages of derangement, the medical treat-
ment is the most essential and important, because the symptoms are
generally more acute in their character, and clearly dependent upon
physical ill-health. As the disease advances, and the bodily symptoms
DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY. 287
disappear, moral means are often of great service in tlie treatment of
the insane. Dr. Williams suggests the propriety of removing "idiotic
or highly eccentric persons, especially if noisy, from public gaze, in
large towns, as the less such cases are exposed the fewer examples may
reasonably be expected," (p. 108.) By what authority and power we
are to remove " the eccentric persons" from " public gaze in large
towns" the author has forgotten to inform us. The lunacy statute
contains no clause justifying us in interfering with eccentric persons,
however offensive they may be to the "public gaze," in small as well as
" large towns." " Directly a person, be he rich or be he poor, enter-
tains erroneous impressions, and often when only eccentric, away he
is hurried to an asylum, where the chances of his cure are as remote
as is the love which has, not unfrequently, especially in the upper
classes, dictated his removal." "VVe are puzzled which most to admire
in the above paragraph?its elegance of literary diction, or the impor-
tant truth which it developes. " Be he rich or poor," it matters little,
if he have " erroneous impressions," or is " eccentric," his family, in the
exuberance of their affection, " hurry him to an asylum," where,
unhappily for the poor man, his " chances of recovery" are said to be
" remote." The " upper classes" appear specially to merit our author's
animadversion, for upon their heads he often opens the phials of his
wrath. We would have " Belgravia" beware. We should have been
thankful to Dr. Williams if he had deigned to have been a little more
explicit on the subject of " erroneous impressions." If the existence
of these be a justification for incarceration in a lunatic asylum, Dr.
Williams must be on the look out! So forcibly impressed is the
author of the great truth he has enunciated, that, in the very next
paragraph, he again exclaims, " the mistake seems to be, that a person
is considered a fit subject for a lunatic asylum, merely because he holds
fictitious or erroneous ideas, and this applies both to the rich and the
poor." We trust Dr. Williams does not feel unnecessarily alarmed for
his own safety 1 The author appears to entertain, in common with
many ignorant of the real character of the first class modern asylums,
a horror of what he, with great want of taste, designates a " mad-
house." In every chapter this feeling shows itself. " How dreadful
for a patient to find himself in a mad-house." " There cannot be a
doubt, that numbers, now the occupants of lunatic asylums, ought
never to have been subjected to such treatment." After relating a case
of recovery from an attack of delirium, he exclaims, " how different
might the result have been, if placed (we suppose, the patient) within a
lunatic asylum." " In an incipient case of mania, it is far better to
treat it at the patient's own house." We would add, particularly if the
288 DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY.
f
family should have the advantage of the author's skill and experience.
" It is considered advisable, that, whenever a person's means will at all
admit of his being treated at home, that this is always preferable."
We might proceed ad infinitum, usque ad nauseam, in quoting analo-
gous passages, embodying a wholesale and indiscriminate abuse of
institutions for the treatment of the insane. But the selections
we have made are sufficient to establish the animus as well as igno-
rance of the author. The reader having perused the previous passages, we
would suggest that they should be taken in connexion with the follow-
ing observations: " Throughout Europe (says Dr. Williams, p. 115),
?physicians are agreed, that separation and seclusion are of the greatest
benefit in the treatment of insanity." Again: " Early seclusion
is often of the greatest service.'" If " seclusion" does not mean confine-
ment in an asylum, what idea are we to attach to it? Assuredly Dr.
Williams does not recommend a recourse to that barbarous mode of
"seclusion," termed the "cottage system," of isolating the insane, which
the Earl of Shaftesbury so eloquently denounced in the House of
Commons, and which has been so frightfully and disgracefully abused 1
If Dr. Williams prefer the snug cottage in St. John's-wood to a
well-regulated private asylum ? the irresponsible authority and
management of a keeper, and occasional hurried visit of a medi-
cal man, to his kind, skilful and daily surveillance'?we feel
disposed to exclaim?may God protect the unhappy lunatic! If a
patient be restored to sound mind under such a system of isolation, it
will be in defiance, and not in consequence, of the means used for his
restoration. We maintain that it is impossible to carry into effect any
curative system, of either medical or moral treatment, in cases of
actual insanity, outside the ivalls of a lunatic asylum. In lodgings, at
home, or in cottages, where the miserable patient must necessarily be left
the greater portion of his time to the unlimited control and exclusive
association of the attendants employed to watch him, the mind rarely
rallies from its disordered condition. The chances of complete recovery
in asylums are increased at least 50 per cent., and this will be
obvious when we consider that in a well-regulated establishment the
patient is night and day under the eye of the vigilant, anxious, and
skilful physician; that the operation of the medicinal agents adminis-
tered to promote recovery are carefully watched; that the patient has
the advantage of the most approved medical treatment, and is subjected
to the minimum amount of restraint; whilst, in lodgings or in cottages,
the poor afflicted patient is generally either in a strait waistcoat or
tied down to his chair, and is left day and night to the tender mercy of
perhaps coarse and brutal attendants. The medical man visits his
JHG
AN -
r , ? 61 , ?
I r L- id t
0
DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY. 289
patient perhaps once or twice a week,?it may be every day;?but
we ask those acquainted with the treatment of the affections of the
mind, whether, under such a system of treatment, the probabilities of
recovery are not very remote, if not entirely hopeless? We have seen
patients subjected for months and years to this species of isolation of
which Dr. Williams speaks, without making the slightest approach to-
wards restoration to health; and yet these same patients have, after a few
months' residence in a well-organized private asylum, been entirely cured.
"An asylum," says this eminent psychologist, " is at present (what they
will become, should Dr. Williams have one of his own, remains to be
seen) a necessary evilWhat says the insignificant and obscure
Esquirol. " An asylum," says M. Esquirol, is " an instrument of
cure, and, in the hands of a skilful physician, the most powerful
THERAPEUTIC AGENT AGAINST MENTAL MALADIES." " A necessary evil,"
indeed ! Eating and drinking are necessary evils; sleeping may be viewed
in the same light. It is a " necessary evil" that we should be obliged
to build houses, wear clothes, marry and have children, and even ?print
books. If our first parents had not transgressed, and eat of the fruit
" of that forbidden tree," and thus
" Brought death into the world, and all our woe,"
these things would have been quite superfluous. It is the disease which
is the " evil/" the means used for its cure certainly cannot -be so desig-
nated without a gross misuse and perversion of the Queen's English.
" As there must be lunatic asylums," says the author, " and as (mark
the acute logician!) the majority of them are unfortunately densely
thronged, (why so?) the importance of classification cannot be over-
estimated(p. 119.) Can our readers trace any connexion?necessary
connexion?between the fact referred to in the first and the assertion
contained in the latter part of this sentence? We might as well say,
as there must be horticultural gardens at Chiswick every year, and as
the next fete is likely to be " densely thronged," the importance
of umbrellas cannot be over-estimated! We pray the attention of
our readers to another lucid passage. " A man who has once been
the occupant of a mad-liouse seldom regains his social position, and
(mark the corollary!) therefore it is so essential to remove all predis-
posingcauses; and first as to intermarriage."* The first assertion in this
* It would, indeed, be a sad aud discouraging reflection, considering the amount of
insanity, and the number of the patients under treatment, and discharged as " curcd,"
from both public and private asylums, if there were the slightest pretence for Dr. Wil-
liams' bold assertion. We unhesitatingly deny the fact. We have before us the report
of the " Massachusetts State Lunatic Asylum," and in it we find Dr. Chandler, the
physician, making the following remarks: " I have known a few individuals who were
brought here insane, and who recovered to become better citizens than they were before.
Their minds and feelings acquired strength and soundness by the disease, and by under-
going the proccss of cure, as some musical instruments are said to be improved by being
NO. XIX. U
290 DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY.
paragraph contains a positive error. Hundreds and thousands who have
been confined, and justly, properly, and kindly confined, in asylums, and
that too for a considerable period, have regained tlieir " social position."
Need we, in confirmation of our opinion, appeal to tlie experience of
men of great and established eminence 1 The fact is undeniable, indis-
putable?and it appears extraordinary how any man in his senses could
doubt it. As a specimen of the author's brilliant literary attainments?
of the classic dignity of his style?of the purity of his diction?the
vividness of his fancy?we quote the subjoined passages in full. Shade
of Burke, Addison, and Johnson, defend us!
" I am aware (important admission) it is said mental disease is com-
plicated?it is so (nervous language); but there is no very great
difficulty in estimating the amount of benefit resulting from any
established rules of treatment which have generally hitherto been
adopted. (We should imagine there was, after reading this Avork.)
Disease of the mind is complicated, and the persons ivho have specially
undertaken to cure that disease have, at present, individually done very
little in the way of suggesting either therapeutical, moral, or general means
for alleviating or curing such an afflictive disorder, and this too with
ample means of investigation before them; the desire has always been
to keep the system or plan of treatment close. Even to this day their
practice is often secret?empirical
What consummate ignorance and impertinence ! We will, upon this
occasion leave the Doctor to the tender mercies of the English Psycholo-
gists, who may, and perhaps justly, flatter themselves that they have
done something towards the advancement of our knowledge of the
pathology of insanity, and who certainly are not open to the grave
imputation of either a " close" or " empirical" " plan of treatment."
"Those errors of society which every person must necessarily mix with
should be judiciously exposed, their evils shown ; for if the mariner is
previously made aware of the existence of the hidden rock, that is
generally sufficient to prevent him from foundering upon it (not inva-
riably so) ; at the same time there are evil and wicked machinations and
designs, ivliich, as they but seldom expose themselves to public gaze, and
though miserably enslaving those still more miserable persons who are
enslaved by them, are yet happily confined to the few, and those fre-
quently only the offscum of society?therefore it is unwise, it is preju-
dicial to the best interests of individuals and of the public in general,
to expose and propagate, even in the way of caution, the more refined
broken and repaired again." Such is the experience of all engaged in the treatment of
the insane. It is a fact that in some instances the judgment appears more vigorous,
the affections more evenly balanced, the volition stronger after recovery than before the
development of insanity. We readily admit that the mind cannot be subjected to fre-
quent attacks of disorder without having its faculties impaired; but the assertion of the
author that a man once having been confined in an asylum, "seldom regains his social
position," is a perfectly gratuitous, and is in direct opposition to the experience of those
whose practical opportunities for observation entitle them to form a sound and safe,
opinion upon the subject.
DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY. * 291
systems of vice, tlie more intensely devilish seductions of iniquity, and
tlie more so, as no person ever can reach this climax (what climax 1) at
once ; as there are numerous paths of virtue, so there are yet more
numerous roads to vice, and few (few paths or persons ?) are so created
as to become proficients at once; and therefore it is when sin is hurling
down a young man headlong, (into an asylum 1) that the beacons should
be brought (after he is down, or whilst being burled ?) prominently
before him to warn him of bis danger."
After the reader has rallied from the overpowering effects of the
glowing and impassioned eloquence of the above extract, let him ask
himself what is meant by " Those errors of society which every person
must necessarily mix w^A/'and which the author conceives should be "ju-
diciously exposedto what does Dr. Williams refer when he speaks of
the " evil and wicked machinations and designs, which, as they seldom
expose themselves (we presume the fear of the police would deter them
from doing so) to public gaze, $c. V We should imagine that " evil
and wicked machinations and designs" would find some difficulty in
" exposing themselves to public gaze," therefore we ask, is not the
worthy Doctor rather severe in his animadversions 1 We will not ven-
ture to make any further analysis of this psychological paragraph. It is
certainly a fine specimen of pure and classic English composition. The
only doubt we entertain is, whether it is not boirowed from the
Spectator.
We had marked several other passages, equally sublime, for quota-
tion, but we have already exceeded our limits. We shall content our-
selves with one more extract. Dr. Williams observes, in a paragraph
?which has no reference to the one immediately preceding, " light is
the only effect the moon has upon lunatics : they cannot sleep, the moon
is at the full." If the author had sufficient knowledge of literary com-
position to explain in unadorned English the notion he wished to con-
vey, he could easily have developed the idea struggling,
? " Like the pale moon's misty light,"
for existence, in the sentence just referred to. It is not difficult
(obscure as the passage is) to divine Dr. Williams' meaning. He
denies that the lunar rays have, as many suppose, a specific influence
upon the insane; whatever the effects may be, they are entirely owing to
the action of light, which interferes with the sleep of the insane, parti-
cularly when the light is intense, as it is when the moon is at the full.
We merely record the views of the author, without giving any opinion
of our own upon the point. It has given us much pain to be obliged,
in duty to our numerous readers, to speak in such disparaging terms
of Dr. Williams' work. The author requires to be taught the neces-
sary lesson, that it is the duty of men to learn before they attempt to
teach, and that without long experience and great sagacity no man can
u 2
292 DR. WILLIAMS ON INSANITY.
by a hop, skip, and a jump, place himself in the professor's chair. In
a medical point of view, the essay is of no value; as a piece of literary
composition, it is, we regret to say, contemptible. The author appears
to have sat down to write his book without an idea of his subject,
(beyond what he has found in the text books), or of the arrangement
necessary for its lucid exposition. On several occasions, his fancy has
taken an elevated flight; and in more than one ambitious attempt at
fine ivriting, he has lost himself among a number of extravagantly
hyperbolic expressions, reminding us of the passage descriptive of the
"fix" into which a poor poet had placed himself in his vain effort to
convey to his readers his exalted conception of the sublimity of an
American forest:?
" When I hear the gentle breeze,
A blowin' in among the trees,'
I can't my thoughts in words express,
But they are mighty strong,?nevertheless."
