Homicidal Monomania
====================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
OCTOBER 1, J 852.
Art. I.?

"When any great criminal, rendered great, in the common acceptation of the term, by the enormity of his delinquency, is arraigned before the
tribunal of justice, the bench, the bar, and all the avenues of the court are packed with a dense mass of spectators, belonging to all classes of
society, who will endure any amount of personal inconvenience rather
than not see the notorious criminal, whose trial, however shocking its
details, they will persevere in listening to with intense interest. We can
imagine the scene before us. The verdict of " guilty of wilful murder"
has been returned, the sentence of death solemnly. pronounced, and,
when the fatal morning arrives, a rush is made to the scene of execu-
tion ; the space surrounding the scaffold is crammed almost to suffo-
cation ; there is a sea of moving heads and uplifted ghastly faces?such
as the Opium Eater describes in one of his most agonizing dreams?
every eye being fixed with intent and savage earnestness on the
machinery of the cumbrous drop. Streams of human beings may be
observed extending far away through all the adjacent streets and alleys;
the windows of every house, up to the attic storeys, are filled ; the roofs
above them dangerously crowded ; and every ridge of wall or gable-end
upon which a footing can be secured, is taken possession of to catch
even the most distant glimpse of this revolting spectacle. A hasty ob-
server might ascribe all this apparently morbid curiosity to the principle
laid down by Hobbes, that man possesses naturally a cruel and ferocious
disposition ; but the more reflecting philosopher will discover that
other causes are in operation, less derogatory to human nature. How
* "Examen Medico-Legal des Faits relatifs au Proces Criminel de Jobard." Par
J. Artaud, D.M., Medecin eu Chef des Alienes de l'Antiquaille. Paris et Lyon: 1852.
NO. XX. E E
41 G HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
are we to account for the gratification which people derive from wit-
nessing the performance of a deep tragedy 1 The explanation appears
to us obvious. The desire of indulging in emotions of pity is, as
Dugald Stewart has shown, one of the active principles of the human
mind. There is a conscious pleasure in the anticipation of this excite-
ment; hence persons of sensibility enjoy, even through the haze of
tears, pathetic situations on the stage. They provide themselves with
handkerchiefs, knowing they will weep with unaffected sincerity, and
not as Juvenal describes the hired mourners at a Roman funeral, who
" with well-feigned tears their eyes they taught to weep." The same
principle induces many persons to witness an execution. But, with-
out dwelling on the causes which have in all ages, and among the
most enlightened nations, congregated together such immense masses
of people to witness these cruel exhibitions, let us concentrate our
attention upon the poor wretch who stands trembling with fear on the
brink of eternity, for, as in one of Rembrandt's awe-inspiring concep-
tions, amidst the gloomy concourse of the multitude around him the
whole light of the picture falls upon that solitary figure, surrounded as
he is by the ministers of justice, who are themselves doomed to execute
the sentence of the land. Upon this miserable object let us, we repeat,
fix our attention, and endeavour, as psychologists, to trace the causes,
whether physical or moral, which have urged the mind through so many
guilty phases; for we may rest assured that vices are transitional, and
increase in their enormity as the turpitude of the one becomes absorbed
in the turpitude of the other ; hence no man ever, on a sudden, became
thoroughly abandoned: Nemo repente fuit turpissimus. There are gra-
dations in crime?successive stages of mental perversion and moral
degradation. The problem therefore which we propose to ourselves is
one of deep and perplexing interest : its solution affects the pure ad-
ministration of justice, and the welfare of every community.
The accomplished Madame de Stael, in one of those brilliant essays
in which she so often and unexpectedly brings into dazzling and fasci-
nating light some of the most recondite truths in philosophy, observes
that " man is complete in every individual man." In other words?or
rather to follow up this observation?the type of one individual mind
is common to all mankind. There are certain fixed and permanent
principles of action which are universal, and govern the whole human
race. The law Avliich Geoffroy St. Hilaire pointed out as visibly deter-
mining the uniformity and unity of organization throughout the ani-
mal creation, is not restricted merely to physical structure, but governs
also our mental and moral constitution ; hence the same faculties, the
same feelings, the same sympathies, are in constant operation. The
mind of a Bacon or a Newton, a Shakspeare or a Milton, represents the
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 417
type which must ever characterize the mind of every great philosopher
or great poet;?with different degrees of success, they must cultivate
the same faculties. And so also is it with our moral nature. The good
who are immortalized by their virtues bear in the features of their cha-
racter a certain resemblance toeach ot her: they are like stars at dif-
ferent altitudes illumining the same heaven. The evil-disposed, on the
other hand, preserve the same type of wickedness, varying only in de-
grees, according as their crimes may reflect intenser and darker shadows
on the face of humanity: hence Domitian, Caligula, Nero, do not stand
alone; they have their prototypes and rivals in the eastern and in the
western world?the Ali Pachas and Zingis Khans, the Robespierres
and Dantons, and other monsters as execrable, for the type remains
constant. With other criminals more vulgar than were any of the
twelve Caesars it is the same: " Man is complete in every individual
man." Upon this principle therefore we are justified in selecting any
conspicuous criminal for the purpose of analyzing the state of mind?
whether in health or in disease?which existed when he perpetrated the
offence, and the particular motives, as far as they can be discovered, by
which he was actuated.
Without entering into any profound psychological disquisition re-
specting the principles of human action, it will, we apprehend, be at
once admitted that all our actions originate from causes acting from
without or from within. They are objective or subjective. A man
exposes himself to temptation; he listens to and hears the plan laid
down for a highway robbery or for committing murder, and he calcu-
lates the amount of booty and the advantages he is to obtain. All this
is external, and purely objective. The reflections, however, to which the
proposal gives rise, originate in the mind itself, and suggest a series of
impressions which are purely subjective. The desire of gain, or many
other motives, soon begin to tamper with the understanding, and ob-
scure the j udgment ; reason, no longer under its own educational con-
trol, then misapplies its divine attributes, and lends its powers to assist
in the consummation of the crime devised: hence objective causes give
rise to a long series of subjective mental operations. In such cases the
intellectual faculties may be in their normal or healthy state, and deli-
berately reject the remonstrances and admonitions of conscience; there
are, however, other cases in which the mind itself, participating visibly in
defective or diseased cerebral organization, is obviously weak and inca-
pable of any subjective power of resistance. We may, indeed, satisfy our-
selves on this point, by comparing the heads of criminals upon a large
scale with the heads of lunatics?the interior of a gaol with the interior
of a public asylum. Every civilized nation has allowed the existence of
insanity to be received as an exculpatory plea in criminal cases ; and
e e 2
418 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
although our courts of justice too frequently present the unseemly exhi-
bition of expert counsel endeavouring to puzzle witnesses, and perplex
the evidence, by quibbling with physicians unaccustomed to the tactics
of cross-examination, for the purpose of obtaining a verdict in favour of
the side upon which they are retained,?still the broad fact is admitted,
that the state of the criminal's mind is to be taken into consideration,
and his responsibility or irresponsibility determined by medico-psycho-
logical evidence. " The judgment of the court," says Hoff'bauer,
" ought to be governed by the opinion of the physician; and no phy-
sician should be permitted to give evidence who has not made a speciality
of the study of mental diseases." In a tragedy by a favourite modern
poet, one of the judges, in passing sentence on a state prisoner, is made to
observe significantly, "We try the crime, the motive heaven will judge;"
and many a victim, really insane, has been so sacrificed; but a more be-
nign spirit pervades the principles of Christian legislation. The crime
alone is not to be tried in the abstract; but all the circumstances atten-
dant upon its perpetration are to be taken into consideration. We
gather from the highest legal authorities, that death upon the scaf-
fold?the ultimum supplicium?is not intended to avenge the outraged
laws of humanity, but to deter others, by example, from committing
the like offence. " The execution of an offender," says Sir Edward
Coke, " is for example," ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat;
and he adds, that the execution of a madman would be a " miserable
spectacle," and one of "extreme inhumanity and cruelty," because it could
not be regarded as an example to others, the irresponsibility of lunatics
being universally recognised.
Unfortunately, however, insanity assumes so many forms, and pre-
sents itself under such a variety of aspects, that the plea is, we admit,
often very disputable. It is upon these occasions, we conceive, that the
opinion of the medico-psychologist, founded upon facts which accord
with his observation and experience, should be permitted to weigh as
evidence; for in all other cases of medical jurisprudence, affecting the
cause of death by violence or accident, the opinion of the profession is
held to be sufficiently valid to be received for the guidance of the jury;
but in adjudicating upon the existence or non-existence of insanity in
criminal cases, medico-psychologists are constantly desired by the court
to adhere to facts, and not to give opinions, as if, indeed, the opinion
of a medical man, derived from observation and experience, were not
the interpretation of a fact as he beheld it; for, after all, it is the
opinion he forms of symptoms which can alone guide him in the treat-
ment of every disease, whether it be bodily or mental. The truth is,
that all people, in the weakness of humanity, fancy themselves capable
of pronouncing judgment upon each other's motives and actions; and
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 419
when cases of great medico-legal interest come before our public courts,
non-professional men, wlio may be excellent lawyers, but who have not
investigated the pathology of the mind in connexion with the functions
of the brain and nervous system, and who have had no experience in
insanity, fancy themselves as capable of drawing a proper diagnosis,
and pronouncing a valid opinion, as men who have for many years
devoted themselves to the study and practice of this department of the
profession. We believe the time is not far distant when the progress
of medico-psychology will vindicate the authority of medical men who
make insanity a special study. In the meantime, obscure and doubtful
cases will necessarily continue to provoke vague and irrelevant dis-
cussions. To return: it must be acknowledged that in many cases
there is a very great difficulty in drawing the line of demarcation
between sanity and insanity, nor are the rules laid down in the text-
books upon medical jurisprudence by any means satisfactory. Noso-
logical definitions are useful in enabling a student to.methodize his
study of diseases incident to the body; but in actual practice these dis-
tinctions are soon lost sight of: it is the same with the generally
accepted classifications of mental disease. There is, however, one form
of insanity which must be familiar to every practical observer?viz.,
monomania, which comprehends that form of disease in which the
mind is under some specific delusion, or some one morbid train of ideas,
which no power of reason can rectify. Some recent authors upon
insanity have ventured to doubt, upon very insufficient grounds, the
existence of monomania; because, they contend, the order and
succession of the morbid phenomena implicate generally the aberration
not of one, but of many of the mental faculties. This is purely a
psychological error ; for, as Sir William Hamilton has remarked, " it
should ever be remembered that the various mental energies are only
possible in and through each other; and our psychological analyses do
not suppose any real distinction of the operations which we discriminate
by different names. Thought and volition can no more be exerted
apart, than the sides and angles of a square can exist separately from
each other." We cannot disentangle and separate the intellectual facul-
ties as we might the threads in a skein of silk; thus, the operations of
imagination blend almost with every form of thought and feeling; hence
Wolfe observes, " in omnem actum perceptiones injiuit imagination
We do not, in speaking of monomania, refer to the aberration of a single
faculty, but to the fact of the mind, with all its faculties collectively,
being absorbed in a false impression upon one subject, while upon other
subjects it is capable of thinking and reasoning correctly. The celebrated
visionary Swedenborg, who was constantly in a state of ecstatic mania,
fulfilled the duties of his office so well that the king of Sweden ennobled
420 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
liim. The late estimable Dr. Prichard states, in his work on Insanity, that
he knew a doctor in laws who had taken it into his head that all the
freemasons had entered into a league against him; yet in other respects
he was perfectly sane, and held with credit a chair in an university.
We will grant that the mind of such persons, if carefully watched, may
be found in some instances to be not altogether in perfect health; but
the predominant illusions being confined to one train of associations,
the prefix fiovog to the substantive term mania appears to us peculiarly
well chosen to designate this disease. Shall we deny that a man who
is under the delusion that he is the emperor of the world (such a patient
we now have under our care), yet who can talk coherently on other
subjects, is labouring under monomania? There is, perhaps, not an
asylum in the kingdom which has not within its walls some patient or
patients who are deranged upon a given subject, yet rational upon all
other topics, and perfectly capable of entering into the amenities and
participating in the pleasures of society. " The word monomania,"
says Esquirol, "involves neither a system nor a theory; it is the
expression simply of a fact observed by the physicians of all ages." It
often happens, observes Daquin, that a person who is very intelligent
and sensible upon other subjects, is as much deranged on some par-
ticular point as any of those patients who, being declared lunatics, are
confined in asylums. He adds that intense and long-continued reflec-
tion may produce some violent and sudden impression on the brain,
which may give rise to erratic ideas which become indelibly fixed upon
the mind. When, therefore, we use the term monomania, we do not
contend that the mind may not be weak and vacillating on many sub-
jects, but simply that this form of insanity is characterized by the
predominance and persistency of one particular delusion, which may
affect either the intellect or the moral feelings, or implicate the
derangement of both. And here it is important to observe that we
cannot take a philosophical view of any of these cases without bearing
in mind that the disorder may consist either in a derangement of the
intellectual or the moral faculties, that is to say, a clear distinction
must be drawn between intellectual insanity and what Dr. Prichard
has designated moral insanity?the ?'manie sans delire" of Pinel, the
"manie raisonnante" of Esquirol. We are indebted to Dr. Prichard for
having, in his treatise on Insanity, very clearly identified and esta-
blished the existence of moral, independent of intellectual insanity.
In such cases there is a morbid perversion of the feelings, affections,
and active powers, without any illusion or erroneous conviction being
impressed on the understanding. There is no disturbance of the
intellectual faculties, which, nevertheless, cannot control the moral
conduct. Cases of this description constantly occur.
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 421
About two years ago, without being provided with the usual forms
of admission, a gentleman presented himself at a lunatic asylum in the
metropolitan district, and begged that he might be received as a patient.
He stated that he had just left his solicitor, from whom he in fact brought
a letter of introduction, confirming his account of himself, and that it
was necessary he should be placed under some form of restraint, for he
had an irresistible desire to murder his wife or one of his children. He
then added, that the preceding day he was walking in his garden, when
he saw his wife and little girl approaching towards him. His eye at
the same moment caught the sight of a hatchet lying on the gravel
walk, and he described that he had the greatest struggle within himself
to escape out of the garden before he seized it to strike, perhaps fatally,
one or other of them. He loved his wife and child, he affirmed, dearly;
but the homicidal idea haunted him continually, and he felt that he
could not trust himself alone in their presence. It should be added,
that the last night he slept at home he did attempt, in the middle of
the night, to strangle his wife, and would have succeeded had not her
cries in the scuffle brought in timely assistance. In the midst of all
this, during the explanation he gave of his case, he expressed himself
well and rationally. His intellect appeared to be unclouded, and it
turned out that he was at the same time in communication with his
solicitorrespecting some proceedings in the Court of Chancery, upon which
he gave perfectly sane instructions. After some necessary delay, in order
to procure the forms prescribed by the act of parliament, he was admitted
into the asylum; but always when his wife or child came to see him,
he required an attendant to be present at their interview. Here we
may remark that Esquirol repeatedly declared his conviction that there
exists a species of homicidal madness, in which " no disorder of the
intellect can be discovered." The murderer is driven, as he describes, by
an irresistible power; he is under an influence which he cannot over-
come?a blind impulse without reason. It is impossible to divine the
motive which induces him, without interest or disorder of the intellect,
to commit acts so atrocious and so contrary to the laws of nature. On
the criminal side of Bethlem, and in the county asylums where homi-
cidal lunatics are confined, many such cases Avill be found. We were
told by Hatfield, who lately died in Bethlem, that when he went to the
theatre prepared to shoot George III., he perceived and reasoned clearly
enough upon all that passed around him. The idea which possessed
him was, that if he could kill the king, the Messiah would immedi-
ately appear on earth, and the reign of the millennium begin; and, in
illustration of his self-possession, he mentioned that, when standing at
the pit-door expecting it to open, the people around pressed and
crowTded inconveniently upon him, when a young woman, putting
422 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
her hand upon his shoulder, said, " Sir, you are hurting me ; the
handle of your umbrella is running into my bosom." " I could not,"
he added, " help smiling at the time ; for the handle of what she
supposed my umbrella was the handle of my pistol, which I held con-
cealed within my coat, under my arm."
We were some time ago consulted by the friends of a gentleman,
who was a highly-educated and accomplished man, and a very agreeable
companion. We could not in conversation detect any aberration of
the intellectual faculties; but he had a propensity to set fire to various
descriptions of property (pyromania). He had set fire to his own
premises, and had contrived afterwards to set fire to three different
lunatic asylums in which he was successively confined, but fortunately
neither of them was destroyed. He was, as a matter of course, in the
house to which he was next sent, closely watched; but after his death,
it was found that he had managed to secrete a number of lucifer
matches within the lining of his hat. It is well known that many
persons have an irresistible propensity to steal, and, without any
assignable motives, will commit petty thefts in the houses of their
friends, and in public shops. Such cases frequently come before the
public. This morbid propensity is exhibited by many declared lunatics,
who will steal and accumulate in different parts of their dress all sorts
of articles?nightcaps, handkerchiefs, forks, spoons, tobacco pipes, rags,
bits of iron, half-picked bones, portions of bread, cheese, &c. We
knew a patient who was permitted, in a lunatic asylum, to indulge
harmlessly this fancy. When stripped of this miscellaneous gear, he
appeared a thin and lathy figure; but presently his clothes would begin
to expand around him, and he would increase in size until it became
necessary to unpick the lining of his coat, waistcoat, breeches, and
relieve him of his imaginary booty. We have also heard the case of a
poor woman, who, after wandering about in the open country in a state
of lunacy, was sent to an asylum, where she for a long time persisted in
refusing food, unless she could steal it; her meals Avere therefore put in
an out-of-the-way corner, on purpose for her to take her food clandes-
tinely, which she habitually did, under the idea she was stealing it.
Suicidal mania is another variety of this form of disease; it is known to
be hereditary, and to prevail at certain seasons of the year. Sometimes,
also, it is epidemic. This morbid propensity?which overcomes the
strongest of our natural instincts, that of self-preservation?frequently
co-exists with a perfectly healthy state of all the intellectual faculties.
Among those cases of moral insanity which most frequently demand
legal adjudication, and which always excite great public interest, are those
of homicidal monomania?men arraigned for murder, who were the
victims of this morbid propensity, which they could not control or resist.
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 423
In the case of the gentleman above referred to, there was no aberration
of the powers of reasoning; his judgment was unimpaired, and he
was, excepting under this impulse, habitually self-collected. The moral
perversion of his nature nevertheless required to be controlled, and if
possible corrected. The opinion of Dr. Prichard is, that all cases of
monomania begin with a disordered state of the feelings and inclina-
tions, and end in producing intellectual insanity. We know a gentle-
man subjected to restraint, and there are many similar cases under
similar circumstances, in whom this morbid propensity is very
strongly developed; he is habitually restless and agitated; and if
he cannot kill one person, he would fain kill another. When asked
by what motive he is actuated, he evades the question. " Has
the person you threaten ever done you wrong ? have you any
feeling of hatred against him V " No," he will answer, " not the
least; but he must die !" in saying which he will make a gesture, as if
assassinating or striking him; yet does this person not labour under
any delusion or hallucination to which the suggestion can be ascribed.
In the same asylum is a female patient, in humble circumstances of
life, who constantly implores that her bands may be fastened behind
her, lest she should attack, for the purpose of killing, persons around
her, or destroy herself. The whole conversation of this woman is
homicidal and suicidal; she has attempted self-destruction ; she con-
stantly says she knows and feels she is shaken in her mind, but no
specific delusion or hallucination of any kind appears to exist.
One of the most remarkable and interesting cases illustrating this
form of insanity, homicidal mania Avithout aberration of intellect,
recently occurred at Lyons; the medico-psychological evidence has
been collected and published, with observations by Artaud, whose work
has suggested the previous observations. Anthony Emmanuel Jobard
was born on the 4th of February, 1831, in the village of Essertenne,
Haute Saone; his parents were respectable; and his mother and
younger sister are described to have been very religious. The infancy
of Jobard was passed at home, without the occurrence of any remark-
able incident; at twelve years of age he was admitted to communion
in the Catholic Church; and the priest of Essertenne declared that no
child ever gave him greater satisfaction. His habits were regular, his
disposition gentle, and he was very social and kind to his companions,
with whom he was a great favourite. Having received his first com-
munion, he attended mass regularly, assisted in the offices, and was punc-
tual in the discharge of his religious duties ; nevertheless, at this early
period of life he addicted himself to a degrading and solitary vice. At
thirteen years of age he left his native village, and with letters of
introduction from his late pastor, he was sent, to complete his religious
424 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
education, to M. D'Oligny, the canon of Dijon, and here remained at
school for three years; leaving the house only to go to the lodgings at
which he slept. Here also he is reported to have given his masters
every satisfaction; but whatever may have been his exemplary conduct
outwardly, at the expiration of this time,?when, be it observed, he was
only sixteen years of age,?in addition to the vice to which we have
adverted, he began to frequent the society of disreputable women.
His career of vice began therefore at a very early age, and causes were
brought into operation which notoriously pervert the moral feelings,
and undermine the strength of the intellect. We are no apologists
for crime. The young Jobard had already entered the seductive
labyrinth of temptation, and, doubtless, gave unbridled indulgence to
his passions: albeit, in the presence of his preceptors he maintained
the appearance of being a virtuous and well-conducted youth. The
good canon at Dijon was already interested in his welfare; and being
now sixteen years of age, and old enough to prepare himself for
the active business of life, under his recommendation he was received
as a clerk in the establishment of M. Thiebaut, a highly respect-
able clothier and draper at Dijon. This mercantile firm, which had
been long established, bore a high character; the persons employed
in it were boarded and lodged in the house, and their conduct, as a
matter of course, subjected to the general surveillance of the heads of
the family, it being understood that any one who committed any
infraction of the rules of religion and morality would be liable to
summary dismissal. Upon these terms Jobard was admitted, and
received, independent of his board and lodging, in the beginning
200 francs a year, which sum was gradually raised until it reached
450 francs. His conduct continued to all appearance good: he was
kind, affectionate, and sober; fond of playing with the children of the
family; and the care he took of a pet lamb obtained for him the title
of " Pere nourricier cle Tagneau," a circumstance indicating elements
and feelings of humanity which should not be lost sight of in the
sequel. Here also he was constant and punctual in the discharge of
his religious duties ; he assisted in the service of the church on Sun-
days, attended the sermons which were delivered at Christmas, con-
fessed and took the sacrament at Easter; all which, it is stated, he
did without any apparent ostentation. There can be no doubt, how-
ever, that he still privately?when absent from the house of his
employers?persisted in the same immoral habits, which he carried
to an inordinate excess, and, at the same time, blended his mis-
conduct with religious, or we should rather say, superstitious feelings,
often reasoning upon scripture passages, and addressing exhortations of
reformation to his reprobate companions. He would advise the very
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 425
females with whom he associated to give up their vicious course of life,
and on one occasion took very great pains and interest in endeavouring
to recommend one of these unfortunate women to retire into a convent,
and there expiate by penitence the errors of her past career. This may
appear strange, but the contradictions in human nature are very
marvellous. The notorious Burke, who was hanged for murder in
Scotland, which he committed for the purpose of selling the remains
of his unfortunate victims to the anatomical schools, was very partial
and kind to children. He preached religious sermons, and the whole
series of his murders was suggested by his confederate Hare reading
aloud one winter evening the death of Ben-hadad by Hazael, in the
second book of Kings.* Incompatible as true religion must ever be
with every description of crime, yet we frequently find the almost
inarticulate voice of conscience reminding the worst natures of its
mandates. Once deeply and at an early age implanted in the mind,
true religious and moral principles cannot easily be uprooted, but
spread like pure ore through a corrupt soil, blending with elements it
fails to purify. We do not accuse such men of hypocrisy; they
express in such moments feelings which have become a part of their
moral constitution, and which can never be thoroughly eradicated.
These habits of criminal self-indulgence, commenced, as we have seen,
so early in life, soon began to undermine the health of Jobard, whose
nervous organization, while yet a youth, could not fail to become thereby
enfeebled, and otherwise affected. The health and spirits he had
enjoyed in the little village of Essertenne, soon failed him at Dijon;
he suffered frequently from intense headache, attended with a sense of
weight upon the brain, giddiness, and a general feeling of bewilder-
ment ; which distressing symptoms ended in a copious bleeding from
the nose, which doubtless relieAred the cerebral congestion. On one of
these occasions the attack assumed a very alarming character, as may
be inferred from the following account given by Dr. Noirot, a physi-
cian at Dijon, who, upon the occasion of the trial to which we
must presently refer, made the following deposition, in the form of a
certificate or affidavit. We translate it literally: "I, the undersigned,
Doctor of Medicine of the faculty of Paris, certify as follows :?A few
years ago, the precise date of which I can scarcely determine, but which,
* This is a very curious fact. The diabolical suggestion arose from Hare reading the
account given (verse 15, chap, viii.) of the death of Benhadad, who was thus killed by
Hazael: " And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took a thick cloth, and dipped it
in water, and spread it on his face, so that he died." Burke and Hare adopted the
same plan. They made their victims drunk, and then covered the mouth and nostrils
with wet cloths. Sometimes, by kneeling on the epigastrium they forced a deep expira-
tion, which emptied the lungs, and the wet cloths prevented the re-admission of the air.
This murderous method was so physiologically scientific, that it was suspected to have
been suggested by some anatomist. This was not true; the above statement came out in
evidence.
426 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
from different circumstances, I believe to liave been in the winter
of 1844-5, I was called one evening by Madame Perle, a " sage femme"
at Dijon, to attend a young man who was lodging in her house,
Ant. Em. Jobard. They informed me, upon visiting him, that he
had for many days previously complained of severe headache, and that
he became on that morning delirious. He was so when I saw him ;
and from this fact, the state of his pulse, and other symptoms, I
apprehended inflammation of the membranes of the brain (meningitis).
Accordingly I proposed that he should be immediately bled; he
obstinately, however, resisted the operation, and I thereupon ordered
the application of leeches, and then withdrew. The following morning,
I found the application of the leeches had been neglected; but during
the night a very copious nasal haemorrhage had taken place, which
salutary crisis cut short the disease. He no longer complained of the
sense of weight and pain in the head, accompanied by general weak-
ness, which he had endured during the whole of the previous week. I
heard no more of the patient, and lost sight of him up to the present
period. (Signed) L. Noirot, D.M.P.; and dated Dijon, 7tli November,
1851."
We have already referred to the opinion of Dr. Pricliard, that moral
insanity frequently terminates in intellectual insanity, the disordered
state of the feelings eventually affecting the faculties of the mind and
the brain. Professor Heinroth goes further than this; he contends
that moral depravity is the essential cause of insanity. Violent passions,
sinful indulgences, want of mental discipline, upon this theory give a
preponderance so impetuous to all the evil tendencies of our nature as
to completely destroy the power of self-control, and subvert the under-
standing. The case of Jobard would appear to go far in supporting
the theory of the learned professor; indeed, there can be no doubt that
extreme indulgence in vicious propensities, habitual intemperance, and
depraved habits generally, will produce disease of the brain and nervous
system ; the predisposition, however, to this self-abandonment may be
regarded as a disease in itself, and will be frequently found to be here-
ditary. To proceed, however, with the history of Jobard. On the
12th of September, 1851, he left the house of his employers, not pre-
meditating the tragedy in which he was about to perform so conspicuous
a part. His cousin had commissioned him to buy some windows for a
church; and remitted him 50 francs, which was the maximum price he
was to give.
On Sunday, the 14th of September, he attended mass, and afterwards
vespers, as usual, and after the latter service, went to a restaurant's
with three of his fellow-clerks, belonging to M. Thiebaut's establishment,
and there they dined together very cheerfully, nor did either of them
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 427
drink to excess. When the dinner was over, Jobard suddenly rose from
the table, and left his companions, following hurriedly into the street a
German singing girl, with whom it appears he went home. He remained
with her about ten minutes, and then returned to the cafe, when he
called for a glass of kirsh; his expression of countenance was anxious
and haggard, and the waiter noticed that he was much agitated. Imme-
diately afterwards he took up his cane and hat, and without saying a word
to his companions, who were still at the table, he again sallied out, and
went in search of a cutler's shop, for the purpose of purchasing a knife;
but it was after nine o'clock, and the shops were then shut. Foiled in this
intention, he directed his steps to a house of ill fame in the Rue Quen-
tin, where he passed the night. His conduct there, which we abstain
from describing, was exceedingly extravagant?apparently insane. About
two o'clock in the morning, he hastily dressed himself, said he must be
off by the railway to Paris, and, without uttering a word, left the house;
and without being prepared for the journey, proceeded to the railway
station, and asked for the first train to Paris. He was informed it
would not be there until seven o'clock. The train, however, for Chalon,
came up while he was talking, and he instantly took his ticket, and
proceeded en route for Lyons. Arrived at Chalon, he took an omnibus
which conveyed passengers to the steam-boat which leaves the pier of
that town for Lyons. We must now premise that we are tracking the
steps of an assassin?the question of homicidal monomania will be
presently considered. In the train from Dijon to Chalon, he tells us
that he could not explain the nature of his feelings ; he could not think
or reflect on anything?(favais la tete vide ;) he ate a little, however,
on the way. Arrived at Lyons, he felt much fatigued, and walked
mechanically to a restaurateur's, where he dined. He drank half a bottle
of wine, but ate very little. During dinner, he asked the waiter to
direct him to a cutler's. The man did so, but Jobard could not find
the house ; he therefore got into a cabriolet, and desired to be driven
to a shop where they sold knives, where he bought a knife, with as
much coolness as if it had been a lead pencil, or any other harmless article.
This done, he sought out and entered another house of ill fame in the
Hue de la Cage, determined, he afterwards stated, to kill one of the
female inmates. He was introduced to a girl named Rachel; he
remained with her half an hour, but she was so pretty that his arm was
arrested?he could not strike the blow?and was tempted to delay for
a few hours his resolution; he therefore left her, promising to return
to her at night after the theatre, and he adds, that if he had done so,
he would have stabbed her in her sleep, (je lui aurais perce le cceur
pendant son sommeil.) This resolution, he confesses, he did not take
without some qualms of apprehension, for he was afraid that before he
428 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
could effect his escape lie would be torn to pieces by the exasperated
women of the house.
This happened on Monday, the 15th of September, 1851. Upon
arriving in the town, he stopped as he walked along the streets to read
a bill of the play, and he determined to go to the Theatre des Celestins.
Upon leaving this house, therefore, after walking for about ten minutes
in the Jardin des Plants, he went to a cafe opposite the theatre, and
there waited until the doors opened. He then paid for his admission
and took his seat in the gallery, aux 'premieres, but at the end of
the first act of the second piece, which was entitled Adrienne Le-
couvreur, he changed his place, and Avent into the amphitheatre, where
he sat down behind a pillar. He there saw at a little distance from
him a little girl about ten years of age; he grasped his knife, and
would have killed her, but she was beyond his reach, and he could not
move towards her without attracting attention. Another little girl,
apparently between twelve and fifteen, sat nearer and a little to
his right, but she too was beyond his grasp. His attention was next
directed to a lady who sat immediately before him; she wore a gray
silk dress, and as he stood up and looked down upon her, he saw a
portion of her breast uncovered; but at this moment he heard steps
behind him, and looking round saw the manager of the theatre, whom
he knew personally, and avIio had just entered the house by a door near
him. He instantly pretended to be cleaning the nails of his fingers
with the knife; turning towards him, he smiled, and after exchanging a
few gracious words with each other, the manager passed on. Suddenly,
a scream, sharp and piercing, resounded through the house, and persons
were seen rising confusedly around the place whence it proceeded. The
fatal deed was perpetrated. With deadly aim and force, he had plunged
the knife into the bosom of the unfortunate lady, and as she uttered
that thrilling shriek, she withdrew with her own hand the knife from
the wound, and, covered with blood, fainted in the arms of the persons
near her. Her husband, who was sitting next her, not having any
idea of the fatality of the blow, turned round upon the assassin, and
exclaimed, " What have Ave done to you, that you should thus strike my
wifeT "Nothing!" answered the imperturbable Jobard ; " you have
done nothing !" He stood calmly Avith his arms crossed upon his
breast, and added?" I am a miserable being; do what you please Avith
me ; it is not my Avish to escape !" He AAras immediately arrested ; he
did not make the slightest resistance, and as he Avas being conducted to
the Hotel de Ville, be said, " I am Avell content," (Je suis satis/ait
actudlement). In the meantime, the poor lady Avas removed into the
"foyer," (the green-room of the theatre;) the Avound noAV appeared
evidently mortal, and in about five minutes she expired. She was a
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 429
young woman, the daughter of M. Cliabert, the Proviseur of the Lyceum
at Limoges, and the Avife of M. Ricard, the Professor of Mathematics in
the same institution. Melancholy to add, she was in the family-way?
enceinte de six mois. As he struck her from behind, she never even
saw the person of her murderer.
The excitement and consternation produced by so tragical an event,
very naturally spread through the whole city. Who was the assassin 1
By what motives was he actuated 1 An eye for an eye?a tooth for a
tooth?blood for blood?was the instinctive outcry of popular fury;
and if he could, like the wretched parricide, Damiens, have been torn to
pieces by the force of horses driven furiously in opposite directions, to
which his limbs were attached, and had had melted lead poured into his
eyes and ears and veins, the multitude, exasperated at the fate of so
innocent a victim, would not have bestowed the slightest sympathy
upon his agonies. But we live in a Christian age ; the criminal code
of enlightened nations no longer sentences the infliction of torture; for
justice must ever now be tempered with that divine mercy which
becomes
" The throned monarch better than his crown,
* * * *
And is the attribute of God himself."
There are, it is true, some persons, and we have met with several, who
contend that, sane or insane, every man who takes away human life
should himself be put to death; which summary judgment would cut
the Gordian knot of every medico-legal difficulty; but, in accordance
with the milder dispensations of Christian jurisprudence, it behoves us
to take into consideration all the exculpatory and extenuating circum-
stances which might have existed. We agree Avitli Herr Heinroth,
that in such a case as the above, sin and madness Avould appear to be
identical, for avIio can determine the exact point at which the poAver
of self-control may cease to influence human actions 1 True, many
criminals are hurried onwards by an impulse Avhicli they cannot
repress; but avIio can determine the resisting powers of motives
Avhicli must escape analysis 1 Hoav can Ave decide, Avithin the secret
sphere of another man's mind, Avliere his responsibility ends and his
irresponsibility begins 1 We would repudiate entertaining or pander-
ing to notions of false humanity ; the poor Avretcli we have described
upon the scaffold trembling on the brink of eternity may have deserved
his fate, and Ave will not in that case join the sympathies of the
unthinking crowd of spectators; but Avlien the existence of insanity is
clearly proved, and its symptoms have been as unequivocally manifested
as those which characterize any physical disease incident to the human
body, then Ave hold that the plea of insanity ought to be unequivocally
430 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
admitted. How does it happen that crime appears to be so often here-
ditary, independent of the force of example, unless there were a pre-
disposition in the human mind to succumb to its evil influences 1 The
members of one particular family will, through a whole generation, be
found to have been addicted to incurable drunkenness?those of another,
successively imprisoned or transported for theft or burglary. There
can be no doubt that insanity is hereditary; and so are the vices of
successive generations; but it deserves to be noticed particularly, that
insanity, in its transmission, will assume different forms. The mono-
mania of one man may be on religion; his next of kin may have the
disease under the form of suicidal or homicidal mania : which is the case
with one of the patients above referred to, who has a near relation at
the Agapemone, who believes in the inspiration of Mr. Prince, and the
divine ordinance of playing at "blind hockey."
To proceed with the history of Jobard. He was conducted a prisoner
to the Hotel de Ville, and placed in one of the dungeons, where his
first care was to take the sleeves off" his paletot, to prevent them being
soiled, and then he fell on his knees in prayer. He conducted himself
during his examination before the " Juge d'Instruction" with great
calmness; his countenance maintained its usual expression, and his
pulse was regular, and between 65 and 70 in the minute. When
informed of the death of Madame Ricard, he said, "Dead, is she??so
much the better; since I wish them to put me to death." He then
asked if there had been time for her to see a priest before dying, and
upon being answered in the affirmative, and informed that he had
prayed for her, he expressed his satisfaction, and added, " I am sorry I
was obliged to put her to death ; I pity her and her family, and in
that senije I regret it; I shall repent before God ; as for me, I cannot
make myself better understood than by saying,?I regret nothing." In
his first examinations he persisted in the same tone, confessing but not
regretting the act; on the contrary, he said, " I always knew, even
when I contemplated it, that it was a crime for which I was responsible
before God and man." He confesses, " I bought the knife as coolly
as I would a crayon, or anything else. I struck her as I would have
done a block of wood " ("je la frappai comme faurais frappe un mor-
ceau de bois"). At another time he said, " I committed it without
reflection. If I had reflected properly?if I had confided in any one?
if they had made me reflect upon it?I should have desisted." The mur-
derous weapon was produced before him ; he looked upon it with indif-
ference. The distressed husband was confronted with him, and he
evinced very great emotion. He was then conducted into the presence
of the dead body, and when he beheld his victim, he appeared on
a sudden horrified, became extremely agitated, and his pulse rose,
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 481
gave 88 pulsations in the minute, and was thready and intermitting.
He appeared unable to support himself, but nevertheless he almost
immediately recovered his self-possession, and spoke with his usual
calmness. Upon leaving the room he again appeared much affected;
bewailed the fate of his victim, and the distress of her family, but for
himself, he again added " I regret nothing." The following day he was
again examined at the Palais de Justice, and now, he altogether altered
his tone; " If my time," he exclaimed, " were this day to come over
again, I would not commit the deed I have done; yesterday I endea-
voured to render my condemnation inevitable;?to-day I would desire
to live; if that were permitted me (he continued, with apparent
emotion), I would seek the frere Manuel, and lay my heart open to him
as I now do to you ; my repentance would then, I think, be complete ;
I cannot yet sufficiently explain my conduct, but I feel myself already
so far changed." Since his imprisonment, it should be observed that
he had experienced nasal hemorrhages, which may have relieved the
brain, and conduced to the return of a more natural state of feeling.
He now appeared to be more afraid of death than he had ever before
been ; he continued restless and agitated, and his sleep was disturbed by
frightful dreams; nevertheless, after he had confessed himself, and
received absolution, he informed M. D'Artaud "that his mind had
regained its composure." " Do you think," he was then asked, " that
after having premeditated and committed so atrocious a crime, con-
fessing it, and receiving absolution, is a sufficient reparation ?" "Yes,"
answered Jobard, " lorsque faurai termine ma penitence ! "
We have hitherto not alluded to one very striking feature in the
character of Jobard?viz., his consummate hypocrisy. We have seen
him while yet a boy preserving outwardly the most exemplary and
virtuous conduct, yet indulging at the same time secretly in the most
vicious habits; hurrying, after assisting at mass and at vespers, from
the church to the brothel; and when we read the confessions which he
made before the magistrates, and particularly in the letters lie addressed
to his family, we shudder at the expressions connected with religion
which are interwoven, as if to palliate his wickedness. He tell us that
the hypocritical life he had led weighed (as well it might) upon his
conscience; he determined, therefore, to become really religious, and
endeavour to ensure his salvation. "It was impossible for me," he
writes to his sister, " to expect salvation from the conduct I pursued;
I had not force of resolution enough to change my mode of life, and I
therefore said to myself, if I once kill a person, I should repent, I
would do penance, and God, who is good, would forgive me." One of
his first resolves, then, he pretends was to assassinate a priest as he
was leaving mass; his soul, he tells us, would then have mounted
NO. xx. f f
432 HOMICTDAL MONOMANIA.
directly into heaven, and he would have prayed and interceded for the
forgiveness of his assassin. He then proposed to enter upon a soldier's
life, with the idea of being killed in action, and so ridding himself of
his burtliensome life; but his mother, Ave are assured, dissuaded him
from this project. He next thought of selecting for the sacrifice he
meditated, some infant, the soul of which, never having committed sin,
would enhance its powers of intercession on his behalf. Once also, it
is said, that he thought of joining in a conspiracy to assassinate the
President of the French Republic, and meet his death as a regicide.
The idea of committing suicide also occurred to him, but a pious
horror of self-murder restrained his hand from the poisoned cup or
dagger; so he ascribes to his sense of religion the merit of having
resisted this evil suggestion. "We candidly confess, however, that we
place no reliance upon these different confessions, which bear upon
their face the evidence of being, as far as his motives are concerned,
tissues of contradictions. The apology for his crime, the idea "fai tue
pour etre tue" never peeps out until after his arrest; and upon his
trial it will be found that he endeavoured to repudiate that explanation
in his anxiety to make the act appear, by his answers to the court,
not to have been premeditated. We have, as a general principle, no
confidence in the last dying speeches and confessions of criminals,
which are concocted in the condemned cell, to justify or palliate their
crimes; many of them are suggested by a very natural desire to appear
in their last moments to the best advantage, and excite the sympathy
of the public; and many, perhaps the greater number of men in such
an appalling situation, are so confused and bewildered, that they are
unable to give any true or accurate history of the motives which
influenced them. We believe Jobard to have been not less a hypocrite
after than he was before he perpetrated the assassination; and his
whole conduct appears to have evinced a sense only of guilty cowardice.
He trembled at the prospect which awaited him; he coquetted with
religion and prevaricated with truth every time he opened his lips.
Immediately after the crime was committed?within a few hours?
the medico-legal question arose as to the condition of his mind :
When he perpetrated the act, was he sane or insane 1 An ordonnance
was issued immediately by the Juge d? Instruction, requring Dr.
Magaud to examine and report upon his physical and moral state;
and Messrs. Tavernier and Gromier, physicians frequently called upon
to give medico-psychological evidence before the criminal tribunals,
received the same mission. The conclusions arrived at by Dr. Magaud
were, that the act was premeditated; the motive alleged in his declaration
was insufficient to prove any aberration of the intellectual faculties;
that there was a continual conflict between his religious ideas and
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 433
sensual instincts, which may in some degree liave obscured his under-
standing ; but that his sense of moral responsibility, although
enfeebled, was nevertheless not destroyed, therefore the evidence was
not sufficient to be placed in justification of the crime, although it
might be urged in mitigation of the punishment. The report of the
Doctors Tavernier and Gromier, in which they also recapitulate all
the circumstances of the case, terminated in opposite conclusions.
1st. They were of opinion that at the moment Jobard committed the
act he was in a state of dementia (monomania homocido-suicido).
2nd. That Jobard could not be considered responsible for an act which
he committed without the participation of his will. 3rd. That as this
description of insanity leads to disastrous consequences, society should
exercise its right of placing Jobard in a situation to prevent him com-
mitting any other outrage, and that he should be confined for life in a
lunatic asylum.
The result, therefore, or rather the opinions expressed in both of
these reports, are thus far approximative; the one recognises en-
feeblement (affaiblissement), the other derangement of the moral sense.
The one pleads for mitigation of punishment, the other recommends
deprivation of liberty, and confinement, for life, in a lunatic asylum.
The view taken by Dr. Arthaud, who has been at the pains of collect-
ing the whole evidence in a very circumstantial manner?not, indeed,
omitting the most trivial circumstances that could be interpreted in his
favour, is, that Jobard, when he committed the act, was insane?and that
his insanity was characterized by a general disturbance of the intel-
lectual faculties ; in support of which opinion he refers to the fact, that
insanity, in different forms, had declared itself both on the paternal and
maternal side of his family. His grandfather, at the age of fifty or
sixty, upon the loss of an action at law, was for several months
insane. His disease assumed the form of lypemania. He continually
cried " I am a lost man," believing he was about to be arrested ; at
length, after obstinately refusing food for a fortnight, he died of inani-
tion. His grandfather's brother also died in a melancholic state, and
the cases were very analogous. His cousin Rosalie Jobard, when twenty
years of age, had an attack of acute mania. She was confined in the
lunatic asylum of Mareville between two and three years, when she was
discharged cured. On the maternal side, one uncle became insane at an
advanced age, exhibited symptoms of lypemania, and died of senile de-
mentia. Another was affected by melancholia, Avould associate with no
one, ate the roots of vegetables as he pulled them out of the ground,
and wild fruits, and threatened to injure those who approached him.
Another uncle, in a state of ordinary insanity, was confined in the
lunatic asylum at Besan9on, where he died. Again. One cousin was an
f f 2
434 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
epileptic?and another, imbecile from birth ; Dr. Arthaud traces these
and some other examples in the family of Jobard of mania, lypemania,
dementia, epileptic mania, and idiocy. It is impossible, he then adds,
that the hereditary transmission of insanity can be doubted.
Pinel, Esquirol, Marc, Falret, Descuret, Baillarger, Moreau, and all
modern writers on insanity, consider hereditary transmission one of the
most ordinary predisposing causes of this deplorable malady. Accord-
ing to Esquirol, one-sixth of the cases of this disease which occur
among the poor, may be attributed to hereditary transmission, and the
proportion, he adds, will be found still higher among the higher classes.
With him, I am disposed (says Dr. Arthaud) to think this calculation
is below the actual proportion found. Physicians who are indeed
specially connected with asylums, know how difficult it is to arrive at
any exact statistics on this point. M. Michtia goes further. He states
we must agree in admitting that at least one-half, not to say three-
fourths of such patients have had, or still have, some members insane
in their family. By Marc, also, hereditary transmission is considered
to be the most predominating of all the causes of insanity; "it plays,"
he observes, " so important a part in the production of this disease, that
whenever its existence can be proved in a medico-judicial inquiry, it is
almost sufficient to establish the reality of some lesion of the under-
standing," (p. 118.) We are not, be it observed, disposed to doubt the
moral of insanity of Jobard, and that his vicious habits undermined
the healthy functions of the brain and nervous system, and impaired
generally his intellectual faculties; but sufficient powers of mind still
remained, which he might, we suspect, in the beginning have controlled.
The false appearances under which he contrived to disguise, before his
preceptors and employers, the real features of his character, and his
punctual attention to the outward forms and ordonnances of religion,
may be referred to in support of this opinion. He was sincere enough,
doubtless, in his devotions, so long as the excitement which prompted
them, under the influence of his imagination, lasted; but when this
intellectual effort was over, he then gave unbridled sway to all his worst
passions. - " Quand je priais," said he, 11 je priais comme un saint; un
instant apres, le vice m entrainait, et je me laissais aUer sans resistance
possible" We have dwelt emphatically upon his self-acknowledged and
habitual hypocrisy, and have furthermore expressed a general disbelief
in the statements he made at different times, explanatory of the motives
which actuated him in his guilty career. This description of deception,
it should be remembered, is one of the most prominent characteristics
of moral insanity. Under this form of disease, a young man will
endeavour to appear exceedingly circumspect in his outward conduct,
while, at the same time, his perverted feelings prompt him to commit
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 435
all sort of delinquencies; he will invent mischievous stories respecting
persons he has no particular enmity to; he will tell the most abominable
falsehoods in apparently the most truthful manner, and is always pre-
pared with some plausible reason and ingenious fabrication to account
for any misconduct which he may have committed.
On the 23rd of March, 1852, Jobard was arraigned before the Assize
Court of the department of the Rhone for the murder of Madame
Ricard. Upon examining the body, it was found that the knife had
penetrated between the second and third ribs of the left side, traversed
the anterior part of the corresponding lung, and piercing the left ven-
tricle of the heart, the point of the weapon terminated in the interven-
tricular wall of the right ventricle. The facts of the case were too
evident and incontestable to admit of any doubt, therefore the medico-
legal depositions, which were endorsed at the back of the indictment,
respecting the state of the prisoner's mind, constituted the principal
evidence. During the trial, the prisoner maintained his self-possession,
but was manifestly anxious respecting its result, and endeavoured, by
the answers he gave to the interrogatories put to him, particularly to
remove the idea that the act was premeditated. He was ably defended
by M. Dubost, his advocate, and after the President of the Court had
carefully summed up the evidence, Antony Emmanuel Jobard was
declared guilty of having voluntarily, and with premeditation, committed
a homicide on the person of Josephin Annals Chabert, the wife of Ricard,
whereupon he was condemned to hard labour for life?" aux travaux
forces a perpetuite."
We do not impugn the justice of this verdict, or consider that it was
an aggravated sentence ; because the homicidal act was clearly neither
instinctive nor impulsive, but the result of premeditation and pre-
arrangement, although the particular victim had not been selected for ,
the assassination until a few instants before the act was committed.
Furthermore, we fully admit that Jobard was morally insane; but there ,?l
was not such an amount of intellectual aberration as to obscure or
pervert the understanding; on the contrary, he himself acknowledged
that he was conscious he was about to perpetrate a crime, and he knew
that he would be responsible for the deed before both God and man.
Hence we recognise?in the derangement of his moral or affective
faculties and propensities only?attenuating circumstances which very
properly suggested to the jury the recommendation to mercy; but we
do not see sufficient evidence to justify the full exculpatory plea of
insanity. There can be no doubt that a person so dangerous ought to
be deprived of his liberty, and, provided the hard labour which he is
condemned to perform be not incompatible with health, or likely to
shorten the duration of life, we would raise no objection also to this
430 HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA.
part of the sentence. Indeed, we often, in visiting the criminal wards
of Bethlem, St. Luke's, and some of our public county asylums, have
been struck at observing so many strong and healthy-looking criminal
lunatics sauntering, with their hands in their pockets, idly about the
corridors and courts of the building : how much better would it be for
these men to be obliged to work at some compulsory labour?some
occupation adapted to their particular capacities and previous conditions
in life. Assuredly it would be beneficial to their bodily and mental
state, and conduce materially to their recovery: for whether they are
destined to remain under surveillance or not, their restoration to sanity
is to themselves, and all around them, of equal importance. The man
who may, under some delusion consequent upon cerebral disease, have
attempted even the life of his sovereign, may recover liis reasoning
powers, and it is manifestly important that he should do so before his
death; wherefore he is entitled to receive as much care and attention
as any other patient who, upon recovery, becomes entitled to his
liberty.
To return to the point from which we started. We commenced the
present article by describing a spectacle which is too frequently
exhibited in our densely crowded metropolis. Whilst the multitude
assembles round the scaffold to witness an execution, from an epidemic
feeling of excitement which gives rise to motives they do not them-
selves understand, the medico-psychologist is, we have stated, called
upon to view the object of popular curiosity with very different feelings.
It is his duty to ascertain, as clearly as he can, by the history of the
case and his own observations, the state of mind which may have led to
the perpetration of the act for which the criminal has been condemned.
In a state of health, as we have premised, " man is complete in every
individual manit is the same in disease?one disorder, bodily or
mental, is the type of the same disorder throughout the world. In a
psychological view, the actions of all men may be regarded in a two-
fold light; they are suggested either by his moral or affective faculties?
his feelings, desires, passions, and propensities?or they are the result
of intellectual motives, originating in the powers of the understanding.
The moral may, it is true, blend, and that almost imperceptibly, with
his intellectual nature; but it is proved, beyond a doubt pathologically,
that the moral and affective faculties may be perverted, and that morbid
states of the feelings, and diseases, passions and propensities, may exist
without any concomitant affection of the intellect or disease of the
brain and nervous system. On the other hand, the intellectual faculties
may, individually or collectively, be deranged, and the powers of per-
ception, reason, and judgment so much impaired as to obscure the
understanding and lead to the belief in delusions and hallucinations
HOMICIDAL MONOMANIA. 437
which may suggest very insane actions. The one, as we have explained,
constitutes moral, the other intellectual insanity; but they frequently,
although originating separately, run into each other and become com-
bined?hence moral often ends in intellectual insanity; but we believe
that, vice versa, intellectual as often conduces to, and ends in, moral
insanity. Applying these remarks to the form of monomania we are
now considering, it appears to us that homicidal mania may be sub-
divided into three varieties:?
1. Moral Homicidal Mania?arising from perversion and a morbid
state of the decrees, feelings, passions, and propensities, which the
powers of the understanding, reflection, reason, judgment, &c., can
neither control nor counteract. Acts of impulsive homicide come within
this category.
2. Intellectual Homicidal Mania?arising from some disease of the^
imagination?some delusion or hallucination?or misapplication and
perversion (which often happens in religious monomania) of the reason-
ing faculties. This variety of the disease is always primarily dependent
on some lesion of the understanding.
. . ... N
3. Moral and Intellectual Homicidal Mania?arising from some
morbid state of the feelings, passions, and propensities allecting and
impairing the controlling influence of the intellectual faculties.
But we have already exceeded our limits; the subject of homicidal
mania is extremely important, and we shall ere long again return to it;
in the meantime the u Examen Medico Legal" relative to the criminal
prosecution of Jobard, by Dr. Artliaud, is so valuable an addition to
our medico-legal literature, that we recommend it not only to our
medical brethren, but to the attention of those members of the legal
profession whose practice should interest them in the progressive prin-
ciples of medical jurisprudence.
