Additional Notes on Provincial Asylums For the Insane in France J With A Brief Report of the Institution at Illnau, In the Grand Duchy of Baden
================================================================================================================================================

853
Original (Communications.

BY JOHN AVEBSTER, M.D., F.R.S., FELLOW OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS;
CONSULTING PHYSICIAN TO ST. GEORGE AND ST. JAMES'S DISPENSARY, ETC.
(Concluded from page 255.)
STEPHANSFELD ASYLUM.
This public institution?appropriated for the reception of indigent lunatics
belonging to the two departments of the Upper and Lower Rhine?is situated
on a sandy, well-aired, and open plain, near the commune, or small town of
Brumath, lying about ten miles north-east of Strasbourg, and adjoining the
railway leading from thence to Nancy by Sarrebourg. Previous to 1S3G,
departmental insane patients were usually consigned to the city general hospital,
or Hotel Dicu, where they lived in a most deplorable condition, having neither
garden nor court-yard for recreation; and, although some of these unfortunate
inmates were most improperly allowed to associate with ordinary hospital
patients, a large proportion always remained in rigid confinement. Since the
period when Esquirol pointed out, and condemned these improper proceedings,
the new asylum of Stephansfeld has been constructed; which is truly, and
without exaggeration, highly creditable to the public authorities of Alsace.
The situation selected occupies a level country, which affords varied but
agreeable prospects on several sides, with a forest, at a little distance, fronting
the fapade and main entrance. Being thus pleasantly situated, and not over-
looked by neighbours, the asylum exhibits altogether an agreeable appearance.
In addition to these advantages, as the space occupied by the dormitories and
court-yards is ample, whilst the latter are airy and spacious, visitors very soon
become favourably impressed with the superior capabilities this establishment
possesses, particularly, when compared with various more anciently constructed
institutions.
Unlike many public asylums in England, instead of being one large
building, having occasionally a palatial elevation?which attribute, however
pleasing it may appear to spectators from without, does not augment, nay,
even sometimes diminishes the residents' comfort, who are thus sacrificed, as it
were, to architectural display and ornament?Stephansfeld consists of a large
central structure, containing the chapel and official residences; from whence
various dormitories, having their respective court-yards, branch off on each
side. The division for male patients lies on the right hand: whilst that for
females occupies the opposite. The sitting or work rooms are large, lofty,
exceedingly well ventilated, and conveniently arranged; and the dormi-
tories being equally spacious and well aired, with windows on each side, the
entire arrangements really looked cheerful. No iron bars appeared anywhere;
and, as every room possessed an agreeable, if not always an extensive view of
adjacent gardens or fields, few structures could be better adapted for the objects
proposed than the new sleeping-rooms and court-yards which had been recently
completed. The place really looked more like a factory, or rather an exten-
sive agricultural establishment, than a madhouse, Additions, with varied
NO. XIX. A A
354 dr. Webster's additional notes.
improvements, were still in progress; and, amongst the former, it may be stated
tliat a new building intended to contain numerous workshops for employing
patients had been commenced only very recently, whilst the dairy-house, and
an inclosure for feeding pigs, would be soon enlarged. Additional gardens
were likewise projected, and a mount for patients was being constructed in an
adjacent field. In short, activity and judicious advancement in the right direc-
tion seemed everywhere observable.
Each court-yard being large, and ornamented by parterres of flowers or trees,
formed agreeable promenades for patients; and, as the adjoining fields were
visible through open railings, whilst the sunk fence, or intervening hedges, did
not obstruct the prospect thereby afforded, inmates could see several miles into
the country: or, if they ascended any mount made in nearly every inclosure.
the high Schwarzwald mountains of Baden, beyond the Rhine, might be dis-
tinguished. Even in the division appropriated for excited lunatics, shrubs,
trees, and flowers, embellished the court-yards: where, it should be mentioned,
very little damage is seldom if ever committed, particularly on the male side.
The cells for secluding dangerous or agitated patients appeared few in number,
but even these apartments rarely had occupants. Their construction, was,
however, so very superior to any heretofore inspected that some special notice
thereof becomes appropriate, along with a strong recommendation to construct
similar rooms in other establishments. Each cell was cheerful, well ventilated,
and had two opposite doors. Besides the above, they also possessed separate
skylights, which opened into a large upper apartment, only used as a store, and
where one attendant could easily overlook the entire series of apartments,
should all be ever in requisition at the same time. These openings were
protected by an open wire frame, and had also a sash-window containing
variously coloured glass: and both being moveable, either could be used as
seemed most expedient, whilst any interference by patients was impossible.
The soothing effect produced by variegated light shining through such skylights
into the space below, made it appear more like a boudoir for repose, than a cell
for the temporary seclusion of excited maniacs. Indeed, the arrangement
appeared novel, whilst its application seemed judicious.
Whenlvisited Stephansfeldlast September, the total resident lunatics amounted
to 441; comprising 220 male, and 221 female patients. Amongst the above
number, 61 were classed as pensioners?34 males and 27 females?who paid from
400 to 2400 francs annually; with G57 francs additional, when the inmate had also
an attendant. Besides these 441 lunatics, if the officers and every other person
resident within the premises be enumerated, the entire population would then
comprise 517 individuals. Believing it may prove interesting to give some
details respecting the 70 officials constituting the executive of this asylum, in
order to describe, as it were, the effective machinery moving so large an
establishment, I would briefly remark that, 18 were sisters of charity, belonging
to the religious order "St. Vincent de Paulc;" 35 were male and female
attendants, including 4 superintendents; whilst 17 persons acted as gardeners,
labourers, barbers, dairymen, or in other menial capacities. To these must be
added the director, 3 medical attendants, the receiver, and a steward, making
in all G officers who superintended their respective departments.
The two districts to which the indigent lunatics of this asylum chiefly belong,
viz., the Upper and Lower Rhine, being different in various respects from other
departments of France, I am therefore led to suppose, a few particulars
respecting several existing characteristics may be interesting. Eor instance, in
this province, which constituted ancient Alsace, the German and French
languages, are generally spoken; its population comprise both Catholics and
Protestants, whilst many of the inhabitants may be denominated a mixed race,
seeing they arc often the descendants of French and German progenitors.
STEPHANSFELD ASYLUM. 355
Nevertheless; considering it would be rather out of place to discuss, at any length,
how the influential causes here shadowed forth may have affected the general
population, I will merely allude, at present, to one or two interesting pecu-
liarities noticed amongst the insane residents of Stephansfeld; in order to illus-
trate several features, whereby other foreigners may be able, perhaps, to unravel
questions which otherwise seem intricate, if not obscure.
My present object being rather to record facts than to enunciate speculative
opinions, or even to deduce general inferences, unsupported by sufficient evi-
dence, I at once proceed to state that, amongst the whole insane residents
under treatment, at the period this asylum was inspected, 308 were Catholics,
comprising 151 male and 157 female patients; 111 belonged to the Protestant
church, 51 being males and 57 females; 21 were of the Jewish persuasion, con-
sisting of 14 male and 7 female patients; and lastly, 1 male was an Anabaptist.
With reference to the language of residents, 224 persons, both sexes included,
spoke German exclusively; 47 could only speak Trench; and 1G3 were able to
converse in both these dialects indiscriminately; the other 7 inmates being
idiots or dumb persons. Again, in regard to the elementary parts of educa-
tion, 201 were able to read German, 38 only French, and 131 read both
languages; which left 71 individuals utterly unable to decipher any book
whatever. Lastly, respecting caligraphy, 16S wrote German, 34 Prench, and
125 could do so in either language; whilst the remaining 114 were wholly
ignorant of that useful qualification. Respecting the social position of the
lunatics under treatment, it is interesting to remark that, 295 were single,
comprising 356 male and 139 female patients; about one fourth, or 105 were
married persons, including 55 men and 50 women; besides which there were
9 widowers, and 32 widows. Again, as to age, it deserves notice that, 23 male
and 26 female inmates were less than 30 years old; 153 men and 121 women,
or upwards of 02 per cent, of the entire insane population, ranged from 30 to
50 years of age; 40 men and 06 women were between 50 and 70; whilst 8
female and only four male lunatics had passed the latter period. According to
these authentic data, it therefore appears that, insanity attacks the male part
of the population in Alsace more frequently during the prime of life, than it
affects females; whereas, when young, or arrived at advanced years, the pro-
portion of women labouring under mental maladies is comparatively larger than
of the other sex, and they also live longer, although insane.
Occupying the lunatics being a prominent feature in the system pursued at
the Stephansfeld institution, it cannot but prove highly interesting to all
advocates of similar proceedings, to learn some details respecting the employ-
ments usually patronised. To illustrate this important point, I select the day
previous to my visit, when the official report of the different occupations con-
tained the following statement. The total number of patients then employed
amounted actually to one half, or 220 individuals, who were thus distributed:
?Forty-seven women were engaged in sewing or mending clothes, 27 in
knitting, 16 in the culinary department, 14 in domestic duties, 12 in the
laundry, 4 in spinning, and 2 in making list-slippers; thereby giving 122
females at work, out of the 221 inmates of that sex. Amongst the 220 male
lunatics 98 were occupied; of whom 24 acted as servants in different divisions,
18 worked in the garden, 16 were cutting and storing firewood, 8 were engaged
in digging the foundation of new workshops, 7 in cleaning the premises, 6
laboured at the farm, 4 in the stable, 4 in carding wool and hair for mattrasses,
3 worked as masons, 2 assisted in the kitchen, 2 were busy at bookbinding, 2
in weaving, 1 was mending clothes, and 1 acted as bath-house attendant. In
addition to the 98 lunatics employed as now detailed, it ought to be further
mentioned that, 8 male patients were then enjoying a promenade by way of
recreation in the adjoining forest. Perhaps the above minutiae may appear
A a 2
856 dr. Webster's additional notes.
tiresome, although instructive; but believing they will convey some notion of
the manner in which the labour system is carried forward ?in a large Trench
lunatic asylum, I have been induced to state various details, even although
doing so may be considered as somewhat supererogatory. To most minds, few
spectacles seems more interesting than to contemplate frail human beings
deprived of reason, and separated from the active world without, thus busily
and often agreeably engaged; seeing their attention is thereby occupied, whilst
listless time does not then hang so heavily on their hands. Besides which
advantages, physical health being always promoted, the patient's mental malady
often derives decided amelioration.
Having a farm of 62 acrcs belonging to the asylum, this, with extensive
gardens adjoining, supply ample scope for out-door occupations. After con-
siderable experience, the director, M. Richards, and Dr Dagonet, the physi-
cian, are both strong advocates for employing lunatics in the open air,
especially by means of agricultural and horticultural labour. The latter officer
considers such employments often produce real benefit to insane patients; since
in some, out-door work essentially promotes recovery, whilst in many, physical
exertion materially improves their bodily health. Seeing a large proportion of
the lunatic inmates?about four-fifths?are incurable, it consequently becomes
a matter of essential importance how to improve their bodily condition; hence
order, labour, and discipline, constitute essential adjuvants; at the same time
that judicious hygienic measures are also put in requisition.
As might be expected, after perusing my previous remarks, readers will
likely anticipate that most inmates of this asylum generally enjoyed good bodily
health. Such was the fact: and very few patients occupied the infirmary.
One peculiar adjunct to the female sick ward here deserves special notice,
from its novelty and really useful purposes;?namely, an airy and spacious
gallery or verandah, which could be shut up close, or freely exposed to the
external atmosphere, as circumstances might require. Being on the samc.level
with the infirmary, patients who were improving in health, and for whose com-
plaint a change from the confined air of their ordinary dormitory to an open
atmosphere, with moderate bodily exercise, would be advisable, might here
obtain both, without descending stairs, or incurring the fatigue of making
much alteration in their exterior appearance or habiliments. The important
benefits derived from such a succursal apartment, for persons approaching con-
valescence, are so evident that, the same plan might be very judiciously
adopted at other institutions for the insane, as also in hospitals and in-
firmaries.*
Respecting the application of personal restraint in an asylum where so much
liberty is otherwise enjoyed by patients, the cheerful appearance of the entire
* Being much impressed with the many advantages convalescent patients would derive
from having an apartment like the one alluded to, and in which they could at any time,
when considered advisable, take bodily exercise, or inhale an atmosphere entirely diffe-
rent from the confined and often vitiated air of their ordinary dormitories, I mentioned
to Mr. Johnson, the treasurer, and committee of Bethlem Hospital, the above novel feature
characterising Stephansfeld, at the same time recommending its adoption as an appendage
to the new infirmaries about to be ercclcd. My proposition seemed so satisfactory, that
Mr. Smirke, the able hospital architect, was requested to prepare plans accordingly.
These were in conscquence made, and subsequently approved; whilst contracts have been
since accepted for erecting suitable infirmaries, including two promenade apartments or
verandahs. The contemplated expenditure will amount to about 5,000/. But the gover-
nors being always anxious to ameliorate in every way the afflictions, whether physical or
mental, of inmates sent to this institution, expense is never considered, if necessary or
judicious. Desirous of conveying to readers of these notes some general idea of the pro-
posed erection, I wrote to Mr. Smirke requesting he would kindly favour me with a
STEPHAiS1 SFELD ASYLUM. 357
establishment, and the principles actuating its executive, must have already
led to the surmise that, any kind of physical coercion, or the use of camisoles
are very rarely employed. Such was the case; and it is highly satisfactory to
report, on the day of my visit, no female patient was in any manner restrained,
throughout the entire establishment. One mail was, however, partially con-
fined by a camisole; but in this case it ought to be added that, the restraint
used was chiefly employed to prevent the patient from deranging the dressings
applied to one of his legs recently broken. Notwithstanding this solitary ex-
ample of partial bodily coercion, Stephansfeld asylum stands prominently forward
as a gratifying illustration, not only in reference to the decided disuse of physi-
cal restraint, but it may likewise be quoted as remarkable for the tranquillity
very generally prevalent throughout the institution; particularly, amongst
insane female patients, who certainly are often, especially in the southern and
central departments of Trance, much more noisy and excitable than in either
Alsace or Lorraine.
The medical staff of this institution consists of one physician, Dr Dagonet,
who is a practitioner of much promise, and well known to the profession. He
was very recently an interne at Mareville, and obtained his present appoint-
ment through merit. There arc besides two internes, one of whom is likewise
a Doctor of Medicine. This gentleman, Dr Weill, had performed his own
duties so well and assiduously that, he was charged with the whole medical
superintendence of the establishment, during Dr Dagonct's recent absence
at London, where he had gone to visit the great Exhibition.
For 1850, the following statistical return exhibits the movement of patients
at the Stephansfeld asylum:?
Males. Females. Total.
Admitted  82 .... 73 .... 155
Discharged cured. . 17 .... IS ... . 35
Died  17 .... 15 ... . 32
Amongst the 155 lunatics admitted, 100 belonged to the Lower, but only 13
to the Upper Hhine department; the remaining 12 patients being from other
districts. This fact either shows the greater prevalence of insanity in the
former department, or that the public authorities were more assiduous in send-
ing recent cases to the asylum, contrasted with those of the Upper lihiue;
from whence a large proportion of the insane persons received were chronic
brief outline of tlie building it was intended to construct. The subjoined is that
gentleman's reply:
" Berkeley-square, May 18,1852.
" Dear Dr Webster,?The following short description will explain the nature of Ilia
provision soon to be made at Bcthlem Hospital, for enabling convalescent patients to
take bodily exercise in the open air, before they can be allowed to go out of doors. On
the upper story of the infirmary about to be built, on both the male and female sides,
there will be "an apartment 41 feet by 24, and 13 feet high, reached by stairs leading
from the rooms appropriated as infirmaries. The roof is of copper, with a plaster ceil-
ing: three sides of the apartment are wholly of glass, with iron pillars and sashc3. The
glazing consists of long uarrow vertical louvres of glass, each of which turns on a centre,
so that they can be all opened, wholly or in part,?one movement opening sixteen
louvres simultaneously?much in the manner of common parlour blinds: the clear space
between each louvre, when open, is about five inches: by this arrangement all three sides of the
apartment will be perfectly open for the admission of fresh air, without any possibility
of danger to the patients. The bottom of these glazed louvres is three feet from the
floor, and they extend up to the cciling. liain cannot enter, and the sunshine may be
modified, if necessary. Very faithfully yours,
" Dr Webster, &c," " Sydney Smiuke,"
358 dr. Webster's additional notes.
cases, of whom nearly all exhibited very little prospect of ultimate 'recovery.
Respecting the varieties of mental disease they manifested, 61 of the cases
admitted?or two-fifths of the entire number?were attacked by mania, 37
laboured under dementia, 37 suffered from lypemania, 8 were monomaniacs, 8
epileptic patients, one was an idiot, whilst the disease of the remaining three
inmates had no specific denomination. According to these official data, it
appears evident a large proportion of the residents were incurable patients;
especially, seeing one third of the whole number suffered from dementia, or
epilepsy, few or none of whom afforded the slightest prospect of recovery, or
even of any improvement.
Adding the 372 insane patients remaining under treatment, on the 1st of
January, 1850, to the 155 admitted during that year, the following figures
indicate the various types of mental maladies by which the 527 cases thus
enumerated were afflicted. It should likewise be remembered, as unfortunately
every year, most of the new admissions appeared of a very hopeless description,
from including idiots, epileptics, and demented persons, about two-thirds of
those enumerated in the table were considered incurable.
Type of Mental Disease affecting 527 Lunatics under Treatment
during 1850 at the Stephansfeld Asylum :
DISEASE.
Mania
Lypemania
Monomania
Dementia
Mania, complicated with Epilepsy
Imbecility and Idiocy ...
Total under Treatment
55
33
25
95
30
15
253
F.
101
43
17
85
9
19
274
156
76
42
180
39
34
527
According to the above statement?which I compiled from official documents
??it appears mania and lypemania were more common in female than male
patients; whereas dementia, monomania, and mania, complicated with epilepsy,
oftcner affected men than women; whilst imbecility and idiocy ranged nearly
equal in both sexes. Viewed in the aggregate, female patients predominated
over male inmates; the excess of the former being 21, or 8'30 per hundred
cases then under treatment. This fact deserves remark, as insanity is believed
to prevail more frequently amongst males than females in the northern depart-
ments of France; which opinion is, however, not supported invariably by the
evidence I have been yet enabled to compile from various sources. The large
number of epileptic patients, in the male division, likewise merits special notice;
more particularly, when contrasted with the much smaller ratio of similar cases
amongst female inmates. Thus, 1 person in nearly every eight male patients
was affected by epilepsy, contradistinguished to one case of the same severe
disease recorded .in about 30 female lunatics. Consequently, that malady
proved nearly four times more frequent amongst the former, than the latter sex.
All practitioners conversant with mental diseases know, from experience, that
the sooner an insane patient is placed under judicious medical and moral treat-
ment, the greater probability prevails of subsequent recovery. This axiom being
well established, and universally admitted, scarcely requires any proof or evi-
dence. Nevertheless, it may be now stated, in corroboration of the above
STEPHANSFELD ASYLUM. 359
opinion that, the resnlts obtained at Stephansfeld fully bear out such con-
clusion. For example, of the 35 patients discharged cured during 1S50, more
than half, or 20, left the institution convalescent before their malady had con-
tinued three months. Age likewise materially influenced similar favourable
results; seeing 4 were cured before they were 20 years old; 8 from 20 to 30;
21, or two-thirds, ranged from the latter period to GO; whilst only two persons
seemed restored to sound mental health, who had completed their fiftieth year.
Based upon these statements, a physician may therefore safely infer, the older
a patient lias become, and the longer an attack of insanity may have continued,
so much more likely should ultimate recovery be reckoned improbable.
In referring to the various forms of mental disease affecting the 32 patients
whose deaths were recorded, it appeared that, 15 laboured under dementia, 10
died from mania, 4 by lypemania, 2 from monomania, and 1 by epilepsy. Again,
respecting the duration of their treatment in the asylum; one-third of the
cases, or 12 patients, died under a residence of three months, 6 from that period
to six months, whilst in the remaining 14 deaths, the party had resided at
least one year. Another point of importance also deserves special notice, since
it materially concerns the medical treatment of insane patients; namely, the
nature of the bodily disease from which death evidently ensued, in the whole
32 fatal cases now recorded. On this instructive subject, the register of
autopsies kept at the asylum supplies ample information, and from which I
quote the following details:
According to that authentic record, 11 patients died through affections of
the head and nervous system; of whom 5 were reported in consequence of
apoplexy, 3 from softening, and 3 through inflammation of the brain. Again,
12 inmates died from pectoral disease; amongst whom 7 deaths arose from
consumption, 4 by inflammation, and 1 through gangrene of the lungs; whilst
7 cases terminated fatally from disease of the abdominal viscera. Besides
these deaths, two fatal casualties are classed under the denomination of
" asphyxia by suffocation."
Unlike the results recorded at several asylums, especially that of Dijon,
which I especially mentioned in a previous page, the above details show the
great frequency of phthisis as one of the diseases proving very fatal amongst
the Stephansfeld patients, seeing 7 cases were reported by that malady, whereby
it occupied the highest position in the mortuary scale. In every example of
that description, considerable disorganization of the lungs was observed, whilst
the paranchyma exhibited large purulent cavities, exhaling a fostid odour, lle-
garaing the pathology of insanity considered as a general question, and in
order to aid other investigators, who have most laudably endeavoured to asso-
ciate the different morbid appearances observed on post mortem examinations,
with the symptoms previously observed, and thus foretel from the specific type
of mental affection manifested during the patient's life time, those diseased
structures which would be found on dissection, the following valuable re-
ports illustrating so very difficult a subject, lately made by Dr Dagonet in
reference to the pathological examinations recorded at the Stephansfeld
asylum, deserve mention. Prom the autopsies performed in 1850, tubercles
appeared in five instances of mania, in one of monomania, and in another
case of dementia; whereas, pneumonia seemed to occur indiscriminately.
On the other hand, softening of the brain always supervened in patients
affected with mania, dementia, or epilepsy; whilst, in three cases of fatal
meningitis, two laboured under mania, and the third had dementia.
Formerly, intermittent fever and intestinal affections occurred more fre-
quently in the asylum and its neighbourhood, than of late years. This result
arose, in great part, through much new ground having been exposed to solar
action conjoined with moisture, during the construction of the Paris railway;
800 DR. WEBSTER S ADDITIONAL NOTES.
but especially, from excavating tlie canal betwixt tlie Marne and Rhine. The
consequents thus produced were particularly disastrous to the inmates of
Stepliansfeld during 1847, as also in several other districts of Alsace: which
were literally ravaged by these diseases, almost like a pestilence. Tor instance,
in the commune of Bollwiller?situated in the Upper Rhine, and having 1400
inhabitants?not less than 1103 persons were attacked by ague. Although the
railroad and canal are now both completed, still, the latter not being yet
opened for traffic, and as it contains several stagnant pools from whence
malaria is said to emanate, considerable predisposition to intermittent fever
prevailed last year; but only then amongst patients previously attacked by
that disease, all other persons having remained unaffected.
Considering some account of the causes which apparenl ly produced attacks
of insanity in the 155 cases admitted last year, at this institution, may be
instructive, it should be stated that, 20 patients became insane through grief
or anxiety, 8 from the passion of love, and 8 by religious fears: thus making
42 cases of madness produced by moral influences, From physical causes, the
number of cases amounted to 43, of which 21 were in consequence of bodily
disease, 17 arose from intoxication, and 5 through sensual excess. Again,
from hereditary tendency, 35 cases were reported: thereby leaving 35 patients
in whom the apparent cause was not correctly ascertained. One point in these
statistical details, however, deserves special remark, namely,?the number of
instances where drunkenness is stated to have produced attacks of mania. To
find so many as 17 persons, out of 155 admissions, lose their reason by intoxi-
cating spirituous liquors, certainly furnishes strongly condemnatory evidence
respecting the intemperate and irregular habits of the lower classes resident in
this province. That 8 individuals became actually insane through religious
fears is, however, not surprising, considering the different sects resident in this
part of France; seeing controversies on sacred subjects arc by no means un-
common, where Catholics and Protestants are thus often placed inimicallv in
juxtaposition, and whilst they frequently entertain very opposite sentiments
respecting questions of the greatest import to man's present welfare, and future
salvation.
According to Dr Dagonet, religious mclancholy seems to have become more
frequent at Stepliansfeld than at any other French asylum for the insane.
This unfortunate result, no doubt, arises from the superstitious practiccs and
erroneous notions often prevalent amongst the ignorant portion of the Alsacian
population. In proof of such remarks, I would refer to a recent official report,
because it expresses the opinion of a physician who is fully competent to speak
on these subjects, both from ample personal experience and intimate knowledge
of his countrymen. Dr Dagonet says, in reference to this matter, "The
numerous religious sects domiciled face to face in the two departments of
Alsace, and who arc thereby constantly in communication with each other,
occasionally engender troubles and disorder in certain localities. Passion pro-
duces a state of irritation which, by repetition, goes so far in some cases as to
affect reason: especially, as it is known that religious divisions, even more than
political dissensions, awaken the most violent feelings, where superstition has
taken a strong hold upon the susceptible minds of a large number of the rural
population." No observations could be more explicit or decisive; and, coming
from such an authority, any further argument respecting similar questions
appears superfluous.
Hereditary tendency to insanity seems likewise to have materially promoted
the accession of madness in numerous cases admitted, which influence always
acts more powerfully upon the human frame, when conjoined with other exciting
causes. Under this category, two very melancholy illustrations of hereditary
predisposition to mania, affecting particular families, occurred some time ago at
STEPHANSFELD ASYLUMi 3G1
this asylum, which deserve record, 011 account of the number of persons who
became attacked. In one of the families, originally consisting of seven chil-
dren, it happened that two members came, during the same time, under treat-
ment at Stephansfeld, after three other relatives of the identical stock had died
insane. In the second example referred to at present, two twins were also
inmates along with the previous patient, so that both instances appeared more
remarkable from appearing, as it were, consentaneously. Taking the above
facts into consideration, besides many similar examples met with in almost
every lunatic asylum, it cannot be too strongly urged upon all parties, whether
private individuals or legislators, the absolute necessity, nay, imperative duty,
of always discouraging the intermarriage of members belonging to any family,
in which decided hereditary tendency to insanity prevails. Cases of that
description, where one side of the house is tainted seem bad enough, although
such calamities may be often greatly ameliorated by proper education, as also
through judicious management; but if two parents, equally affected with here-
ditary predisposition to madness have offspring, the ulterior consequences fre-
quently become most calamitous. Indeed, so many serious social evils may thus
supervene that, it would be humane towards individuals, and certainly more
beneficial to the community, were these unions always interdicted. In Great
Britain, the legislature have, very properly, enacted and said, lunatics shall not
dispose of any property by will, nor be allowed to execute legal documents, and
cannot be punished for crimes, even of the greatest enormity; how much more
necessary, then, does it not appear for efficient steps being taken to prevent
the occurrence of so great a calamity as the former contingency!
In order still further to exemplify the disastrous consequences often super-
vening through hereditary tendency to mania, it should be added that,
during last year, there were under treatment at Stephansfeld?1. a mother
and daughter; 2, a brother and sister; 3, two sisters; 4, three sisters;
5, two cousins; G, an aunt and niece: 7, a religious monomoniac female, in
whose family seven relatives were actually insane; and, S, a husband and wife,
who, although not relations by blood, in regard to their descendants were
perhaps even worse. The melancholy illustration previously quoted, of three
sisters being under medical treatment, appears so very remarkable a coin-
cidence as to deserve special notice, particularly as they all arrived at the
asylum on the same day, and had been seized with mental alienation almost
simultaneously. The above patients were members of a numerous family who
exhibited a strongly marked hereditary predisposition to lunacy, and had
been, it was reported, unfortunately led astray by deep but mistaken devotional
feelings: or rather, to speak more correctly, through their excessive supersti-
tion. Amongst other fancies, they held frequent conferences with wandering
gipsies who pretended to prognosticate future events, and whose confident
predictions?however absurd, they implicitly believed; consequently, the credu-
lous dispositions of these poor creatures were taken advantage of by cheating
jugglers and mountebanks, even now often met with in many rural districts of
Alsace, where they practise their tricks and avocations upon the ignorant
populace. Having bccome the victims of strange delusions, the sisters began
to pray together, and to perform various mystical ceremonies, whereby their
fanatical exaltations augmented in force more and more every day, until one of
them actually believed she was the Virgin Mary, and hence insisted upon the
other two acknowledging the accuracy of her conviction. Subsequently, the
youngest sister being supposed enchanted, or possessed by some demon, she,
in consequence, became the object of such excessive personal violence and
outrage, on the part of her two relatives, that death followed very soon after-
wards. In these sad cases, now related, hereditary tendency to madness, and
superstitious ideas were materially influenced by that predisposition to irrita*
362 dr. Webster's additional notes.
tion, which so often exercises considerable power over individuals, as even to
produce something like contagion, more especially in exciteable temperaments,
or delicate physical organizations; whereof, marked and instructive examples
arc occasionally recorded in the annals of science.
The above deplorable history, and its concomitant evil consequences?derived
from an authentic document?has been thus minutely reported, in order to
exemplify the baneful results sometimes following fanatical notions, when
acting upon credulous imaginations; especially, were the parties implicated
unfortunately had decided hereditary predisposition to mental disease. Besides
being highly instructive, on account of that peculiar feature, and the violent
symptoms each of the three cases portrayed, they also furnish most important
evidence with reference to the difficult legal question adverted to in a previous
paragraph.
When perambulating the different apartments of this asylum, I was much
pleased on remarking the elegance with which several dormitories and day-
rooms were embellished. Instead of showing dead unmeaning walls, which
elsewhere possessed no attraction for the eyes of even a passing stranger, and
much less residents, various apartments were tastefully covered with orna-
mental paper, which produced, through the objects there delineated, often
pleasing impressions upon the minds of spectators. This agreeable feature may
be best exemplified by brieflv describing one of the female work or sitting
rooms which I visited. In tliis apartment, each of the four walls exhibited
views of beautiful country scenery. One was a landscape of some place in
France, another contained a view of Switzerland, and a third represented
romantic looking lakes and a valley in Scotland, where stalwart highlanders?
wearing bonnets and dressed in tartan philabegs?seemed gaily sporting over
their well known land of the mountain and the flood. At one side of this
agreeable room, an elegant clock not only indicated the hour to the different
inmates then busy at work, but it played an exhilarating tune on our entrance,
which could be at any time varied, or repeated, by touching a spring to set the
machinery again in motion. Other ornaments I noticed might be also men-
tioned, but it seems unnecessary: however, one feature of a temporary cha-
racter should not be forgotten on this occasion, as the circumstance was
exceedingly pleasing to witness, besides indicating much good feeling which
seemed to actuate the inmates. In the centre of this apartment, a kind of
drawing, or picture, had been made with sand of different colours, but so
arranged as to look like wreaths of flowers, in the same manner as London
ball-rooms are chalked when a gay party assembles. In the middle of these
arrangements, which had been all made by inmates, the words, " Vive la famille
Dagonet," were accurately traced in variously coloured sand. This motto wTas
intended by the female lunatics occupying that division as a welcome to their
worthy physician, who had only returned the previous night from visiting the
British metropolis; and, I must add, the compliment thus paid was highly
creditable to all parties concerned.
Throughout the entire establishment, great cleanliness and apparent comfort
prevailed. Ventilation was excellent; whilst the inmates everywhere con-
ducted themselves with order and quietude, all having an appearance of being
contented, quite as much as lunatics could be expected to exhibit in their
peculiar position. The bedsteads were generally made of wood, but iron were
also used, especially for dirty patients. IN one of the dormitories appeared
crowdcd, although some will be considerably relieved in that respect, by trans-
ferring a section of the private patients to their new residence, so soon as the
building now in progress shall be completed. When this is done, a separate
court-yard will be also appropriated lor the epileptic patients, who are at
present rather numerous.
STEPHANSFELD ASYLUM. 3G3
Exercise in the open air being considered most essential, and, as it often
proves highly beneficial when treating insane patients, the farm now belonging
to the institution affords an excellent locality for carrying out that principle.
_ Besides these means of employing patients in out-door labour, the gardens,
piggery, and cow-house?immediately adjoining the asylum, greatly conduce
towards attaining the same object. According to the extended experience,
both of the physician and director, bodily labour in the open air is found to be,
in many instances, of real benefit to the insane. In some cases, it becomes an
important means of cure; in others, the exercise improves their physical health;
and, in many, it even appears to be a fruitful source of contentment. Such
gratifying effects are frequently noticed at this asylum, where a number of inmates
may be seen engaged in different kinds of work; and often with as much, if not
even sometimes more assiduity than ordinary workpeople.
Physical labour is, however, not the exclusive kind of employment encouraged
at this asylum, and patronized with zealous energy. Intellectual exercises of
various kinds being, likewise frequently and systematically, brought into opera-
tion; for which purpose, an able schoolmaster has been especially appointed on
the male side, whilst one of the sisters of charity acts as the teacher in the
female division. Through the assiduous exertions of both these efficient and
most useful assistants?who always act under the superintendence of the
physician?different kinds of intellectual exercises are daily put in requisition;
which occupy the lunatic's attention, and thereby withdraw the patient'3
weakened mind, if possible, from contemplating those morbid ideas, or delusive
fancies, which characterize, or appertain to the particular form of mental
malady then present. Having that object constantly in view duriug the treat-
ment, conversations on history, instruction respecting the physical and natural
sciences, translating interesting works, analyzing instructive publications,
reading aloud, and, lastly, exercising the memory by repeating from authors
passages previously learned, are zealously promoted as the chief means likely
to fix the mobile mind of an insane person. Other patients, less advanced, are
first taught the elementary parts of education, in a somewhat similar method to
that already mentioned as now adopted at Armentieres and Auxerre, with so
much advantage.
Besides these often useful adjuvants in the management of lunatics, music
and singing have also been frequently employed with very beneficial conse-
quences, whilst even plays were acted on two occasions, one by female, the
other by male lunatics, who appeared as performers. Respecting the latter
kind of amusement, I ean say nothing from individual experience, never having
been present at any of these histrionic entertainments; nevertheless, their utility
seems doubtful, if the effect be not injurious. In reference, however, to the
former, and correctly speaking, certainly more intellectual occupations, I can
assert with some confidence, after personally witnessing both male and female
insane residents, in their respective school-rooms, when occupied with the tasks
assigned, that the impression made upon the audience then present appeared bene-
ficial, and must have produced sanative consequences. In one of the apart-
ments I visited, whilst these exercises were proceeding, about forty insane
pupils had assembled. Some read aloud, whilst others listened; several
afterwards recited; then a party sang in chorus, accompanied by the teacher
011 a fiddle; and, lastly, questions in arithmetic were asked, to which, if one
lunatic could not answer correctly, another was requested to reply; two
inmates were also making drawings at a separate table, and I would add, that
one of the monitors, who appeared at the time particularly zealous in teaching
several pupils placed under his special superintendence, was himself a lunatic.
Altogether, the scene here exhibited appeared most interesting, and was also
exceedingly creditable to the asylum executive authorities. In carrying
364 DR. WEBSTER'S ADDITIONAL NOTES.
forward the varied intellectual occupations, only now briefly described, tlic
director and physician?who both take the liveliest interest in the scheme pur-
sued and its success?are most ably assisted in their endeavours to improve the
condition of numerous lunatic inmates under treatment, by the meritorious
exertions of M. Gruckcr, the present schoolmaster, who is deservedly esteemed
as one of the most efficient officers in this establishment.
After passing nearly an entire day, greatly to my own satisfaction and
improvement, in the company of M. llichard and Dr Dagonet, whereby I
gained much practical and valuable information respecting the excellent
asylum under their respective management, I left the above-named gentlemen
late in the afternoon, and returned by railway to Strasbourg.
However, before concluding the report of my visit to Stephansfeld and its
activc executive, of whose courtesy, kindness, and civility, the most agreeable
reminiscences will always continue; one important, although final remark, must
be made, namely,?whatever sentiments may have been excited in Esquirol's
mind on inspecting the former and very objectionable receptacle for lunatics,
in the ancient capital of Alsace, these feelings would be no longer applicable.
Were that eminent physician and philanthropist now alive, or could inspect the
new asylum in this district of France, assuredly, any anathema formerly
expressed by so very high an authority, would be amply neutralized by the
decided approval which he, doubtless, would then proclaim respecting various
internal capabilities characterizing the present building: as also in reference to
many benevolent exertions recently and successfully made in order to improve
the mental condition, besides materially to augment the bodily comforts and
social condition of its often psychically afflicted insane population.
ILLNAU ASYLUM.
Having arrived near the confines of Germany, and knowing the institution
for lunatics recently established at Illuau, in the Grand Duchy of Baden, was
considered by medical observers as one of the best constructed asylums east of
the Rhine, besides being so well conducted as to have merited the approval of
various foreign visitors, who had inspected that establishment, I therefore
resolved to follow their example, and so judge for myself. Although not
strictly within the original scope proposed in these desultory notes 011 French
provincial asylums, I have nevertheless been induced to add a brief notice of
the institution now named, to the various sketches already submitted for the
perusal of my professional brethren; but Iioav far such a step may accord with
previous proceedings, others, not the writer, must determine. This much I
would still anticipate, viz.,?that the facts and figures about to be detailed, for
the use of those readers who may peruse this narrative, will be received as some
apology for thus attempting to occupy further attention.
Influenced by the above motives, and hoping the objects proposed in this
extended communication will be deemed in part satisfactory, I therefore pro-
ceed at once to remark, in reference to Illnau that, formerly lunatics belonging
to the Grand Duchy of Baden were placed under medical treatment, first in the
town cf Pforzheim?containing about G000 inhabitants, and situated at the
conflucncc of the rivers Enz, YVurm, and Nagold?until 182G, when they were
transferred to Heidelberg. This change was, in many rcspccts, considered an
improvement, as the vicinity of an university of celebrity served to dissipate
various prejudices previously entertained by the public respecting insanity,
whilst it increased the zeal of attendants. However, the place selected being
surrounded by buildings, having 110 adequate space for the inmates, either to
take bodily exercisc, or of being employed, it was soon found to be most
objectionable. Besides these grave disadvantages, seeing it became wholly
ILLNAU ASYLUM, 8G5
impossible to prevent frequent communication between the lunatics and residents
of several houses, in immediate contact with the asylum; and being also im-
practicable, owing to the limited accommodation afforded, to classify the
patients judiciously, or even to separate both sexes sufficiently, tlie public
authorities resolved to select another and more appropriate site, whereon to
construct an entirely new institution; in the interim, about GO patients beiug
taken back to Pforzheim. In 183G, the Baden government decided upon con-
structing the present asylum of Illnau, which was commenced immediately;
and having been finished in 1S42, when lunatic patients were first admitted, the
establishment has now continued open about ten years.
The situation chosen is near the small town of Achern, nearly eighteen miles
north-east from Strasbourg; and placed almost in the centre of the Grand
Duke of Baden's territories. The actual position of the Illnau asylum is cer-
tainly fine, if not beautiful; since it has on one side the extensive plain in
which the Rhine flows, and on the other, but close behind, is bounded by lofty
_yet highly picturesque mountains. At a distance, but beyond the fertile
Briesgau, the Yosges hills in Trance are seen; whilst those of the Black forest,
sometimes rising precipitously to an elevation of 4000 feet, limit the view in
an opposite direction. Altogether, the landscape thus afforded appears most
splendid, and may well bear comparison with many scenes often much lauded
by travellers, who have visited the Alps or Pyrenees. This German institution
is, however, not only remarkable for the magnificent and varied surrounding
scenery, but likewise for its salubrity. The soil is dry, sandy, and free from
damp, or marshy ground, besides being sufficiently covered with trees; and as
the neighbouring fields are productive, many of the articles required for food, by
a large population, can be easily obtained and in abundance. The healthy looks
of most country people resident in this district of Baden, also furnish conclusive
evidence that, the legislature and government acted judiciously, when they
resolved to furnish the supplies necessary to build a large public lunatic asylum
near Achern. Although neither marshes, lakes, nor any large river are found in
the vicinity of Illnau, nevertheless, the establishment is abundantly supplied with
water; not only from springs within its precincts, but likewise by a moderately
deep, yet rapid rivulet, which meanders in the immediate neighbourhood. The
water obtained from this source is of excellent quality, and being besides amply
sufficient for every necessary household purpose, it is also collected by a pond,
made expressly in one of the fields adjoining the asylum, for the purpose of
enabling patients to bathe in the open air, or of learning to swim; analogous to
the conveniences reported in a previous page, as peculiar to the Dijon depart-
mental institution for lunatics.
Somewhat similar to the asylum at Stcphansfcld, the Illnau establishment
consists of a series of separate buildings, having gardens and airing grounds
adjoining, but so entirely disunited as to prevent, if necessary, any communica-
tion. Tlie court-yards amount to twenty : ten being 011 the male side, and ten
attached to the female division. Possessing such ample means for proper classi-
fication, it therefore becomes an easy proceeding to subdivide the patients into
numerous sections, according to their individual maladies, and other distinctive
qualifications. Each sex, therefore, comprise ten subdivisions, five of these
sections being appropriated for curable, and five for incurable lunatics, whilst
agitated patients are always placed in the ground-floor apartments. Generally
speaking, every dormitory has from eight to twelve beds, although sometimes
only four of these are occupied.
The central building contains a large chapel, in which the Protestant and
Catholic services are performed alternately on Sunday, by the respective clergy-
men of both persuasions; of whom two are attached to the establishment.
Underneath this sacred part of the edifice, a spacious ball or conccrt-rooin has
3GG DR. WEBSTER'S ADDITIONAL NOTES.
been arranged, wliere dancing and musical re-unions of tlie insane residents are
held frequently and periodically. This large apartment, or hall, seemed well
adapted for the purposes proposed, although it looked rather sombre, in conse-
quence of the paucity of windows, through which, besides admitting more light
and air to the assembled audience, a fine view of the mountains and neighbour-
ing scenery would have been also obtained. Apparently some fete had been
very recently celebrated in this locality of mirth and amusement; seeing a huge
letter L, intended to represent the reigning grand Duke's cypher, composed of
flowers, with festoons of evergreens, hung opposite the music gallery. The
idea thus portrayed was pleasing to contemplate; whilst the use to which this
saloon-looking apartment was dedicated produced equally agreeable impressions.
Nevertheless,' I could not avoid thinking simultaneously that, the chapel and
concert-room appeared thus too intimately united, since religious services and
gay music, or dancing parties, are decidedly different in their object and nature.
Neither ought they ever to appear in any way physically conjoined, since each
are morally separated, and otherwise in opposition as to their effects upon
society, wholly irrespective of much higher considerations.
The asylum's exterior is agreeable; and as no iron bars are seen 011 any win-
dow, the entire structure looks more like an ordinary factory, than a building
for the accommodation of lunatics; whilst an open lawn in front, with the
residences for officers and domestics on each side of this enclosure, give to the
institution a cheerful appearance. Nevertheless, if disposed to be hypercritical,
it would be respecting the numerous trees which have been planted, in some
places, rather too near the dormitories, and hence to interrupt free ventilation;
or perhaps to produce damp, which must prove injurious to the health of
inmates. Should such effects follow the cause assigned?and that notion is by
110 means visionary?such influences could be easily remedied by thinning the
adjacent plantations.
Prom Achern to the principal entrance of the asylum an excellent highway,
having a gravel footpath, with rows of trees on each side, has been made for the
convenience of visitors; and as this avenue leads through fertile green fields, from
whence lofty hills are seen looming in the back ground, travellers cannot feel
otherwise than much pleased with the impressions produced, on approaching
this lunatic institution. Such, at least, were the sensations affecting my own
mind the day I visited Illnau, when the weather was fine, and the sun shone out
in splendour. A delightful breeze fanned the luxuriant foliage around, which
then cast a deep shade over the road perambulated; whereby, the morning's
walk became exceedingly agreeable, whilst various surrounding objects took
strong hold of my feelings and senses, however devoid I may be of any poetical
imagination. Notwithstanding the magnificent weather ana splendid scenery,
seen everywhere,with the comfortable-looking people I occasionally encountered,
still, being a solitary foreigner about entering a German madhouse, in which
all would be entire strangers, there appeared such an unusual interest round
present proceedings, as to make me pause and contemplate. Now, I was
quite a free agent, in excellent health, and permitted to admire nature in true
magnificence, without any molestation; but a few moments afterwards would
exhibit afflicted fellow creatures in various respects entirely different, although
many outward things might seem nearly the same. Such is, however, the
chequered life of man. Consequently, persons ought to feel grateful for what-
ever advantages they may individually enjoy, when contrasting then- particular
lot?especially if fortunate?with that of less happy or prosperous members of
the great human family.
According to existing regulations at Illnau, curable and incurable lunatics
of both sexes, and belonging to all classes of society, are admitted as patients ;
but parties, not natives of Baden, are only received when there is sufficient
ILLNAU ASYLUM. 367
room in tlie dormitories. Idiots, epileptics, and cretins, as also lunatics affected
with any loathsome disease are, however, inadmissible; the old asylum at
Pforzheim being especially consigned for their reception. Indigenous curable
insane patients arc uniformly admitted in prefcreuee to any other persons; but
incurables can be only received as inmates when indigent, and considered dan-
gerous. An important rule in reference to the admission of curable pauper
lunatics deserves particular notice, on account of its beneficial operation:
namely,?wherever application has been made for admission in such cases before
the patient's mental malady has continued six months, then no payment is
exactcd from the commune for their maintenance during the first half years'
residence. The object of this excellent regulation being to induce relatives, or
others, to send sucli insane persons to the asylum without delay, so as to aug-
ment the probability of ultimate recovery.
The medical staff attached to the Illnau institution consists of one chief
physician, Dr Roller, who is also director; two physicians, one being for the
female, and another for the male division, with two internes; all being resi-
dent. Besides the above officers, there are occasionally medical pupils in
attendance, who may also reside in the establishment, on paying a fixed sum
for board and lodging. This feature in the arrangements at Illnau originates
from a recent law made by theBadish legislature, which makes it imperative for
every medical practitioner?desirous of obtaining any official appointment under
government?to have first attended as a pupil in some lunatic asylum during at
least three months, in order to acquire practical knowledge based upon ex-
perience, respecting the nature and treatment of mental diseases. This consti-
tutes an admirable and most useful regulation, which ought to be adopted
everywhere, and enforced by all licensing medical colleges and corporations
throughout the British dominions.?
At the period of my visit to Illnau, the iusanc residents amounted to 410;
of whom 206 were male, and 204 female lunatics. Amongst the entire number,
about one-sixth were pensioner patients, paying from 400 to GOO "guilders,"
that is, 32Z. to 50/. per annum; but where the inmate was a foreigner, the
annual payment then varied from 500 to 750 "guilders," or 40Z. to G0Z.
Althougli many were classed as incurable lunatics, still about one-third of the
total patients appeared curable cases, their mental malady having only recently
supervened. Several paralytics were likewise under treatment, although that
form of insanity seemed by no means frequent in this asylum. In nearly every
part of the establishment, the bedsteads were principally made of wood; iron not
having been to any extent yet introduced. The cells for the reception of
excited lunatics, when seclusion was considered advisable, seemed well ven-
tilated, and even cheerful-looking apartments, being by no means like the dun-
geons which were so common during olden times in most countries of Europe.
Indeed, these receptacles appeared superior to many seen elsewhere, although
they certainly cannot be placed upon a par with the cells recently constructed
at either Chalons or Stephansfeld.
Judging from their outward physical aspect, when perambulating the various
divisions of this institution, most of the residents seemed to enjoy good cor-
poreal health; whilst very few inmates were observed then under treatment in
* Since writing the preceding paragraph, I am much pleased to report, through the
recommendation of my experienced friend, Dr Scott?examining physician to the East
India Company, the hoard of directors have decided that, in future every medical officer,
nominated for their service, must have attended as a pupil at some public lunatic asylum,
in order to study insanity and its treatment, during at least three months, previous to
undergoing an examination for such appointments. This new regulation is highly com-
mendable : and I trust the governing authorities at home?naval as well as military?
will soon imitate so excellent an example.
508 dr. Webster's additional notes.
the infirmary"for any bodily disease. Respecting the application of restraint in
excited maniacs?which is always a true indication of the system pursued in
treating lunatics?although not so frequently employed as in several French
and some German asylums which I could indicate, still the proportion of cases
where personal coercion was used seemed greater than the ratio recorded in
previous pages, at various public institutions : seeing five female and three male
patients were confined by strait-waistcoats on the day of my visit to Illnau.
All were otherwise free and unrestrained; but, in extenuation of such practices,
it should be remembered that, many foreign physicians sincerely believe there
is greater liberty, if not kindness and safety towards the patient, when an
excited maniac is restrained by a loose camisole, than if placed in solitary con-
finement, or even committed to the spccial care of one or more attendants.
This mode of proceeding they consider often proves in a higher degree irritating,
than using a strait-waistcoat. At least, such is the conviction of some distin-
guished continental practitioners.
During the year 1850, the following official return exhibits the movement of
insane patients at the Illnau asylum :?
Males. Females. Total.
Admitted ? 8(5 ... 71 ... 157
Discharged Cured ... 3.'} ... 2S ... 01
Died 10 ... 9 ... 25
From the above statement, it appears that, more male lunatics were admitted
into the institution than females; but, although the comparative ratio of
recoveries in both sexes were nearly identical?about 40 per cent, compared
with the admissions?a much larger number of the former died during last year
than amongst the latter class; the relative proportion of deaths being 18-00
per cent, of male, and only 11'2G per cent, of female patients, both being calcu-
lated according 1o the actual amount admitted. Besides the practical im-
portance of these data, the figures now quoted are also instructive in another
respect, seeing the number of male lunatics received, confirm the accuracy of
the opinions enumerated by various observers respecting the greater frequency
of insanity, met with amongst men than women, in many districts of Germany.
As further evidence, in proof of these conclusions, it may be also stated, when
the insane patients were removed from Heidelberg and Pforzheim, during 1S22, to
the new asylum at Illnau, they consisted of 181 male, and 133 female inmates.
Again, two years afterwards, when the total residents of the latter institution
amounted to 382 lunatics : they comprised 20S males, and 174 females, whilst
the additional patients admitted during that period, comprised GO of the former,
and 00 of the latter sex; thus giving corresponding results to those more
recently recorded. From these facts, it therefore seems established that, mental
disease oftener affects the male than the female portion of the population, in
this part of Deutschland.
Possessing a small farm of forty acres, in addition to the gardens adjoining,
means are thereby supplied for employing patients, to a certain extent, in agri-
cultural and horticultural pursuits, especially, as the out-door occupations are held
in considerable repute at this asylum; not only for both sexes belonging to the
lower ranks, but likewise for patients in even the more elevated class. Besides
different employments in the open air, having various workshops attached to
the institution, numerous inmates may be frequently seen busily employed in a
variety of trades and handicrafts. Thus, tailors are often observed at work,
also shoemakers, carpenters, locksmiths, turners, cartwrights, and bookbinders;
in short, every means are adopted to occupy patients, compatible with their
physical powers and mental health; seeing such proceedings often prove
highly beneficial. The work thus performed is also of great importance to the
ILLNAU ASYLUM. 369
institution in regard to economy, as, for instance, most of the wearing apparel
required by inmates is made upon the premises. Cutting and storing the
large quantity of firewood, used in such an extensive establishment, also occupies
a number of male patients during the summer season. The female inmates
likewise labour with as much zed as the other sex; many being constantly
engaged in ordinary household duties, others are busy at various kinds of
needlework, or in plaiting straw, which forms a common and favourite
occupation to females in the Rhenish provinces.
But mere physical labour is not the only extra-medical measure employed to
aid other means of treatment. Excursions beyond the asylum precincts, besides
various kinds of amusement being often called into requisition : whilst music,
and different varieties of intellectual occupations are frequently used with
advantage, especially to rouse and strengthen the lunatic's dormant faculties.
Hence, musical reunions assemble under the direction and tuition of professional
instructors, which not only become the source of great gratification to a people
like Germans, who are all lovers of sweet sounds, but the effects prove other-
wise salutary. With reference to intellectual pursuits, those in most repute at
Illnau, seemed to be reading, writing, arithmetic, and geography. Besides the
above accessories, frequent promenades take place, which are occasionally, in
fine weather, so numerously attended that the establishment has been left
almost empty of occupants. These excursions are not always confined to the
vicinity of Illnau?however beautiful the surrounding scenery?as they are
sometimes extended as far as Kehl, or even to the environs of Strasbourg,
eighteen miles distant, which is remarkable for its unrivalled spire?the highest
structure in the world?besides extensive, and almost impregnable fortifications.
Parties of lunatics, occasionally, also visit the beautiful cascade, near an old
convent, denominated " All Saints," which is situated high up in the neigh-
bouring mountains, and from whence may be seen one of the most interesting
prospects throughout Rhine-land.
Reviewing the various impressions produced upon my mind when visiting
Illnau, I can justly say they were favourable to the establishment; whilst the
conclusions then formed have since been strengthened by subsequent reflection,
and additional information more recently obtained. The inmates appeared to be
sedulously superintended, looked healthy, and in good bodily condition; at the
same time that order and tranquillity seemed to reign throughout the institu-
tion. To say the court-yards and dormitories were less noisy, especially on the
female side, than in several French asylums, might be anticipated almost as a
matter of course: considering the marked difference manifested in some essential
peculiarities of character, which distinguish the two people. Betwixt the
imaginative, ardent, and often volatile but intelligent natives of France, and
the phlegmatic, contemplative, laborious, and domestic Germans, there often
prevails such decided discrepancies of conduct and disposition, that it is quite
natural to expect residents in lunatic asylums will behave, under similar cir-
cumstances in both countries, as unlike each other as they generally do in sane
society. To Stephansfeld and its inmates the population of Illnau, as also the
various buildings, undoubtedly exhibit considerable resemblance; but this
feature becomes less remarkable, when it is remembered the residents of both
asylums possess many peculiar features in common; seeing they were originally
almost the same people. Compared, however, with the lively and impression-
able natives of the Orleanois, of A-njou, or those dwelling farther south, it
cannot appear singular if lunatic patients, belonging to Alsace and Baden,
should be more sedate, even when confined in a madhouse, than persons afflicted
with insanity who were born in warmer regions, besides being endued with very
different feelings, temperaments, and physical constitutions.
Contrasted with many similar institutions for the insane in Germany, that of
Illnau is far superior, both in respect of accommodation, mode of management,
and the moral treatment now pursued. I might allude to several, from personal
NO. XIX. B B
370 dr. Webster's additional notes.
observation made during former years; but great improvements having been
effected since that period in most of these establishments, any comparison, at
present, would therefore be neither correct nor equitable. Nevertheless, in
reference to the public lunatic asylum of Vienna, which constitutes a separate
division in the large " Krankenhaus" of that city, there is less objection to my
comparing the two together, seeing the latter establishment was, recently, very
much in the same condition it exhibited many years ago, when I visited the
Austrian capital. The " Irrenthurm" of Vienna then appeared the very worst
receptacle for lunatics I had ever, previously or have since, inspected; manyof the
inmates being bound by chains, and howling in dens, more like wild animals in
cages than christian men: whilst numbers had almost nothing but straw for
their covering. Being a circular tower, five stories high, any noise made in
the lower part of this building could be easily heard in every upper apartment;
so that, however quietly the residents of that portion might behave, it was
nearly, if not utterly impossible to remain tranquil, or enjoy repose. Further,
as a court-yard for patients taking exercise occupied the centre of this cylinder-
like structure, its position hence became, in every way, most objectionable.
Again, the floors, as well as the ceilings of the cells, being stone-arched, the
whole arrangements were cold-looking, sombre, and truly comfortless. Indeed,
I may assert, without exaggeration, nowhere else has such a badly adapted
institution for the reception and treatment of lunatics ever come within my
personal observation in any part of Europe I have visited : and it is hoped fate
will never let me see the like again.
Having been built in 1784, when public asylums for the insane were often
much worse than prisons, generally unhealthy, usually very imperfectly ventilated,
and always filthy, the fact cannot therefore appear surprising, should the old
madhouse of Vienna still exhibit, according to observations published by late
travellers, some of the revolting features which were so forcibly portrayed at
the period of my visit to that institution. A new asylum having, however,
been recently built in this capital, at an expense of ?80,000, it constitutes the
largest, and one of the best conducted receptacles for insane patients through-
out Germany; and, as Dr lliedel?formerly medical director of the lunatic
establishment at Prague?has been appointed the chief officer, that seems a
sufficient guarantee this asylum will be so managed, in future, as to place it on
a level with many others of the highest repute, whether in France or England.
Believing such will be the case, and trusting also, that farther ameliorations
will be likewise made at the old " Irrenthurm" of Vienna, I must here conclude
this rather brief report respecting lllnau, by remarking, as the latter asylum
excels many other insane institutions of Germany, which might be easily named,
its superiority consequently confers greater honour on the government and
legislature of Baden, by whom this pubhc receptacle for lunatics was established:
but especially upon Dr Roller, who has so materially contributed to place the
asylum in the high position it now, deservedly, occupies throughout Europe;
to say nothing of the new efforts continually made to accomplish additional
improvements.
GENERAL REMARKS.
Having now brought to a close my rather lengthened report on the respective
asylums inspected during last autumn, before considering the facts obtained at the
different institutions, in the aggregate, I would make one preliminary remark that
several of those which have been oidy recently constructed were, if compared with
others built at an earlier period, of a very superior description. This opinion ap-
plies especially to Chalons, Auxerre, Dijon, and Stephansfeld, as also to Uhiau.
Considered as a whole, in reference to structure and internal arrangements, Ste-
phansfeld was, however, superior to all the others, according to my judgment;
although the new dormitories at Chalons appeared certainly of a better description,
GENERAL REMARKS. 371
than similar apartments elsewhere. At Auxerre, the female division is excellent;
and when the proposed new buildings are completed, that asylum, I feel con-
fident, will then become one of the best in all Trance, from its superior accom-
modation. The exterior of Illnau, and the judicious arrangement of its various
court-yards deserve much praise; but, internally, it must yield the palm to
Stephansfeld and Auxerre. Again, Dijon and Auxerre possess great advantages,
in having an ample supply of water in each court-yard; whilst, at the first-
named institution, it is even conducted by pipes to the different dormitories.
The important benefits consequent upon always possessing an abundance of water,
in every receptacle for lunatics, are so universally acknowledged, that visitors will
admit these two asylums should be held up as models for others to imitate, if
unable to surpass them both, in respect of that most essential element in popu-
lous establishments.
Although the asylums enumerated in the previous paragraph were considered
superior to many others in respect of their physical capabilities taken alto-
gether; nevertheless, in one or two points, several of the other lunatic institu-
tions are indubitably excellent, and deserve commendation. For instance,
the dormitory and really beautiful garden, for dirty female patients, at Mare-
ville, surpassed anything of the kind observed in other asylums; whilst some of
the court-yards at Clermont appeared more open, spacious, and better adapted
for their specific purposes than similar enclosures in several other localities.
Fains was truly fair, and its gardens beautiful; but Armentieres certainly
could not be put in comparison with any, being much inferior; whilst Lille,
notwithstanding the zeal and attention of various officers, seemed totally unfit
for the purposes of an asylum: not only on account of many irremediable
inherent defects, but from its objectionable situation. These evils have been
recently rendered much worse than before, by the new station of the northern
railway, whereby incessant disturbance and confusion prevail in the streets,
which bound three sides of that asylum. All this the lunatics hear, at the
same time that their screams, and the agitation incident to 335 noisy female
lunatics, may be frequently recognized by crowds of passengers. Comparisons
often appear odious, but justice to all parties must rise superior to such consi-
derations; therefore, when placing Lille at the bottom of any comparative
scale, and Stephansfeld on the pinnacle, it ought to be always remembered, the
former was anciently a religious house; whereas the latter is a new asylum,
built expressly for the reception of insane patients.
, Considering it might likewise prove instructive, and, at the same time, enable
inquirers to deduce inferences respecting the several institutions referred to in
previous pages, with greater facility, if the various facts now recorded were
arranged in such a manner as to present, at one view, a general statement: I
have, therefore, compiled the subsequent table. Seeing the returns embrace
so large a number of patients as 4604 resident in the different asylums, at the
period of my recent visit, and that it likewise gives the total admissions, cures,
and deaths actually reported during 1850, 1 trust the document will be consi-
dered interesting, even although some readers may only see therein a mere
repetition of figures, with which they were before sufficiently familiar.
B B 2
Table shelving the Movement of Patients in Nine French Provincial Asylums, and one Gorman, (luring 1850. Also, the total Insane
resident Population, when visited in August or September, 1851; with the Number of Persons under restraint.
NAME OF ASYLUM.
Armentieres . .
Lille ....
Clermont . . .
Chalons . . .
Fains ....
Auxerre . . .
Dijon ....
Mareville . . .
Stephansfeld . .
Illnau ....
Totals
MOVEMENT OF PATIENTS IN 1850.
ADMITTED.
M.
123
132
37
36
36
42
108
82
86
682
F.
84
134
36
24
39
50
90
73
7J
601
Total.
123
84
266
73
60
75
92
198
155
157
1283
M.
29
20
30
15
11
15
24
17
33
194
F.
16
33
15
9
11
13
17
18
28
160
Total.
29
16
53
45
24
22
28
41
35
61
354
M.
58
68
13
22
15
6
44
17
16
F.
25
85
8
8
10
14
40
15
9
259 214
Total.
58
25
153
21
30
25
TOTAL POPULATION
IN THE
AUTUMN OF 1851.
M.
496
390
145
186
109
20 101
84 471
32 220
25 206
473 2324
F.
335
486
164
155
157
153
405
221
204
2280
Total.
496
335
876
309
341
266
254
876
441
410
4604
PATIENTS UNDER
RESTRAINT.
M.
15
1
5
30
F.
28
14
56
Total.
15
28
18
5
3
1
8
86
GENERAL REMARKS. 373
According to these statistics, speaking generally, a larger number of
male patients were admitted than female; the excess being 81, or 13*47 per
cent, of the former over the latter sex. More males than females were also
cured; the ratio being 28*44 per cent, of that class against 26*62 per cent, of
the opposite. Again, the proportion of deaths predominated amongst male
lunatics, of whom 37'97 per hundred admissions died; whilst the mortality
amongst female inmates amounted to 35*60 per cent, similarly calculated.
Respecting the total population, at the period of my inspection, although con-
siderable discrepancies prevailed in particular establishments, male patients on the
whole predominated; the excess being 44, or less than 2 per cent. In reference
to the aggregate number of inmates under treatment, it may be noted as a
rather curious coincidence, that the two largest asylums named in the table
contained identically the same amount of patients, although the ratio of the
two sexes was different. Thus, Clermont and Mareville have each 876
lunatics, the majority in the former asylum being female patients; whereas,
at the latter institution, male inmates were most numerous. On the other
hand, in the great valley of the Rhine, which comprises Alsace and Baden, it
certainly appears very remarkable that, in the only two public asylums for the
insane of these provinces, which are, in many respects?both physical and
moral?very similar, the sexes of patients then under treatment should be ail
but equal; seeing, at Stephansfeld and Illuau 425 lunatic females were then
resident, whilst the number of males similarly afflicted was 426 at both places.
It is also worthy of notice that, the total admissions were nearly the same in
amount at these two asylums, whether compared in reference to sex or
number; since the new patients admitted into the former establishment were
reported to be 155 against 157 received at Illuau during the parallel year. The
gross mortality, however, varied considerably in the different institutions, cal-
culated according to the number actually admitted. Thus the ratio of deaths
ranged so high at Clermont as 57*51 per hundred admissions; whereas, at
Mareville, where the residents were exactly the same in number, it amounted
to 42 "42 per cent. At Armentieres, into which only male lunatics are received,
the mortality was 47*96 per cent.; whereas, amongst the male patients at Dijon,
the proportion was less than one-third that amount, or 14"28 per hundred cases
admitted. Further, at Chalons, the deaths amounted to 22*76 per cent-;
whilst at Auxerre the ratio was 33*33, or one-half more than the latter pro-
portion, speaking comparatively; consequently, the highest mortality recorded
took place at Clermont, the lowest being observed at Dijon; in which asylum,
both sexes included, the ratio of deaths was 21*73 per hundred admissions.
llespecting the all-important question of personal restraint, a single glance
at the previous table speaks more eloquently, and to the point, than any
lengthened dissertation. In that document, Auxerre stands pre-eminent, no
case whatever being in camisole. Stephansfeld, in which only one patient was
partially restrained amongst 441 lunatics, comes next, being almost on a par
with the former institution; whilst Lille occupies the lowest position in this
comparative scale, seeing 1 patient, in every 12? inmates under treatment was
confined by a strait-waistcoat. English physicians cannot approve of similar
proceedings; but then it should be always remembered, the feelings, constitu-
tions, and habits of the Erench and English people are different in many
particulars. In this country, the temperament of most persons appears less
excitable, and more sedate; they are usually very obedient to law and order,
although real freemen; besides being oftener submissive to the control of
public opinion, and under the guidance of leaders in whose judgment, honesty,
and experience they repose conlidence. Such are the natural characteristics of
most Englishmen when in health, and which seem even to influence their ordi-
nary conduct although insane ; whereby they become more readily obedient to
superior authority. Beyond the opposite shores of " La Manche," matters
have generally a very different aspect. Endowed by nature with much more
374 dr. Webster's additional notes.
excitable temperaments and vivid imaginations, being less willing to obey law,
excepting through the strong arm of power, having more confidence in their own
individual superiority, than willingness to place themselves under the guidance
of other men, or submit to external control, the natives of Trance do, when
labouring under mental derangement, frequently show that such motive springs
of action still predominate. To my mind, at least, it has hence appeared as if
sufficient importance was not always assigned, by foreign observers, to the
difficulties now described, but against which French medical practitioners have
very frequently to contend, during the treatment of excited maniacs. Conse-
quently, when recording the greater application of personal mechanical coercion
in that country, critics ought never to forget the above manifest discrepance of
character, which distinguish the respective nations. On that account, greater
credit is really due to MM. Girard, Dagonet, and Morel, for the very successful
efforts they have recently made in promoting the non-restraint system. Like
the learned Baglivi, when alluding to the diseases of Rome, a Frenchman
may justly say, in reference to the camisole, which is still too often applied by
his countrymen, ' Scribo in aere romano.5"
The greater liability of one sex to insanity more than the other, has lately
occupied consi erable attention, both in this country and on the continent.
From official data recorded in a previous page, it has been shown that, through-
out several districts of France male lunatics were most numerous. Since
geographical position would seem to exert considerable influence respecting
this question, I have been induced to construct the subjoined table, which
includes four lunatic asylums in the northern departments, so as to contrast
the results thus recorded, with four similar institutions belonging to the central
provinces, although some were, however, visited during my previous excursion,
published in a former volume of the "Psychological Journal."
Table illustrating the liability of the two sexes to Insanity in Northern
and Central France.
Northern France.
Asylum.
Armentieres
Lille . .
Fains
Mareville .
M.
496
186
471
1153*
F.
335
155
405
895
Total.
496
335
341
876
2049
Central France.
Asylum.
Nantes . .
St. Gemmes
Orleans. .
Dijon . .
M.
181
161
246
101
689
F.
210
179
275
153
817+
Total.
391
340
521
254
1506
From the above statements, there cannot remain any doubts respecting the
greater tendency of females to be attacked by mental disease, in the central
than northern departments; where an opposite result generally obtains. The
larger number of insane females under treatment, compared with male lunatics,
at the public establishments of Charenton, Bicetre, and the Salpetriere, also
indicates the same peculiarity prevails in Paris. Thus, on the 1st of last
January, the total number of male lunatics in the two former asylums, and at
the succursal farm of St. Anne, were 1,082; contradistinguished to 1543 insane
females under treatment, at the same date, in Charenton and the Salpetriere;
thereby showing an excess of 461 patients amongst the latter sex, or 42'60 per
* Giving an excess of 258 males, or 28*22 per cent.
f Giving an excess of 128 females, or 16'04 per cent.
GENERAL REMARKS. 375
cent throughout the department of the Seine. Such result being nearly similar
to the observation recently made in the British metropolis, where, female luna-
tics likewise predominate considerably.
Political and religious excitement, or important questions which intensely
occupy public attention often produce, it is well known, marked impressions
upon the minds of large classes of people; consequently, it cannot seem sur-
prising, should the susceptible organizations of certain individuals suffer during
popular commotions. At the period of the crusades and great Reformation,
during the first French republic, or subsequent wars in Italy and on the Rhine,
the truth of this observation was unequivocally demonstrated; especially in
reference to the production of insanity. When the Emperor Napoleon upset
dynasties, and overran Europe, imaginary kings and princes were numerous in
the asylums of Germany and Erance, of which various examples have been
recorded by authors; amongst whom may be cited Pinel, who states that, three
Louis the Sixteenth maniacs were at the same period under treatment at
Bicetre. Again, during the recent revolution in Erance, similar results have
been observed in reference to the origin of mental disease; and I may mention
that, in several asylums, imaginary Prefets, self-styled representatives, and
other fictitious high personages, who had lost their senses during the late po-
litical disturbances, were met with amongst the inmates. At one institution
described in previous pages, there recently existed three maniacs who believed
themselves to be Louis Napoleons, and consequently all presidents of the
Republic. In another institution, one ideal Louis Napoleon, was also under
treatment; whilst candidates for the presidential chair, or seats' in the legisla-
ture, and others who believed they occupied official appointments?each poor
creature being insane upon a particular subject?were occupants of departmental
asylums. These facts are instructive, and shew, wherever the population of
a country become excited by exalted predominant ideas, especially amongst
persons predisposed to insanity, and otherwise of weak nervous organization,
they will, most likely, suffer from the influence of such causes, which have
been occasionally considered by some philosophical observers, as a mental
epidemic.
Although it was not originally proposed in the present remarks to discuss
the medical treatment usually pursued at French asylums, one point seems,
however, of so much importance that, it deserves some notice in these pages;
particularly, as great unauimity of opinion prevails amongst the physicians of
departmental institutions, with whom I had an opportunity of conversing upon
the question. I now refer to employing blood-letting as a remedy, in cases of
insanity. Without an exception, every practitioner was decidedly opposed to
the general abstraction of blood in maniacal patients; as they considered it
not only unnecessary, but often highly injurious. In many cases, venesection
produced so much subsequent depression, that attacks of mania, which otherwise
might have been of short duration, under a different, but more judicious mode
of treatment, were thereby prolonged, and even ended in fatuity. N umerous
examples were pointed out, during my recent and former visits, of insane
patients being bled previous to their admission into asylums, but who, instead
of losing blood, ought rather to have been better nourished, in order to restore
their physical strength, besides having tonic remedies prescribed to counteract
the existing nervous debility, which produced their delirium, and consequent
excitement. Of course, particular instances of insanity presented themselves
where inflammatory symptoms appeared so decided, or in which apoplectic
congestion existed to such an extent that, local or general abstraction of blood
was then absolutely necessary; nevertheless, these examples were exceptional,
and only confirmed still further the observations made by the most experienced
medical officers of French asylums, respecting the baneful consequences of
blood-letting, in most cases of mental disease, which came under their cogni ?
3~G dr. Webster's additional notes.
sance. Indeed, one gentleman remarked, " the delirium of insane patients was
never modified by frequent and copious bleedings, but often the reverse."
Being supported in these practical conclusions, by the opinions of many
English physicians, it cannot be too strongly impressed upon the minds of
young practitioners, or of those who may not have had much experience in
treating cases of insanity, to be always exceedingly chary of using the lancet,
as blood once abstracted, cannot be speedily replaced; while the depression
thus produced upon the system is not temporary, but often very permanent,
and hence highly detrimental. Where blood-letting is thought necessary,
tartar emetic will frequently prove in a higher degree advantageous; seeing the
debility thereby produced, and its peculiar action upon the patient's frame
soon cease, whenever the remedy is discontinued. This preparation of anti-
mony is also very useful in both apparently and really inflammatory cases of
mania, aifecting strong muscular or plethoric patients; and I firmly believe, if
tartar emetic was oftener used, instead of abstracting blood, the results would
be much more satisfactory.
ADMINISTRATION OF DEPARTMENTAL ASYLUMS IN FRANCE.
Considering it will be esteemed interesting to English readers of these notes, if
some details respecting the executive, and mode of administering public
lunatic institutions in France, as now generally pursued, were added to previous
observations, 1 have been induced to make inquiries on such subjects; in order
to point out several evident defects in the present system, although
at the same time various matters deserve marked commendation. Should
my subsequent observations be ever noticed by Erench authorities, they must be
taken merely as the independent, but well-meant criticisms of an Englishman
anxious to correct proceedings which he thought defective; especially, in refe-
rence to the position of professional gentlemen attached to these institu-
tions, who, speaking from frequent personal interviews, are truly a most
meritorious class of officers, and through whose continued exertions, many of
the public lunatic asylums of Erance have chiefly attained the prominent
position they now occupy in Europe. Nay, I sincerely think, were these de-
voted public servants more liberally remunerated, possessed greater executive
power, and were less trammeled by local functionaries?sometimes wholly
ignorant of insanity?the afflicted patients committed to their medical sur-
veillance would be materially benefited.
Without including such institutions as Clermont, which is private property,
or Bon Sauveur, at Caen?belonging to a religious body?whereby large sums
are realised from lunatic persons placed in similar establishments, there are at
present forty departmental asylums throughout Erance, appropriated for the
reception and treatment of insane patients. Some of these public recep-
tacles have been constructed since the new laws respecting lunacy were passed
in June, 1838 ; although a considerable number were formerly civil hospitals,
mendicity depots, ancient convents, and even military barracks, which had been,
more or less appropriately, altered for receiving lunatics. Upwards of half
the existing asylums are situated in or quite close to the capital of its own
department; others in the chief town of an arrondissement; some even in a
cantonal village; whilst a very few are located in rural districts. These insti-
tutions are departmental property, having been purchased or constructed at
the public expense: and their annual revenue consists almost solely of the
payments received from different communes, or other parties, for the main-
tenance of and treatment of lunatics there resident: which allowance, in the case
of indigent patients, amounts, upon an average, to one franc per diem. Private
patients, however, pay much higher sums, as already frequently stated in the
previous narrative.
The lay administration of public asylums consists of one resident director,
who receives a fixed annual salary. He is assisted by the committee of sur-
ADMINISTRATION OF ASYLUMS. 377
veillance, which comprise five members; the latter, however, give tlieir services
gratuitously. In twenty institutions amongst the forty now enumerated, the
chief physician also fills the office of director; and this arrangement is considered
judicious, whenever the total patients do not exceed 350 or 400 inmates. At
many establishments there is a receiver and steward; but in some instances
both these offices are united, similar to the physician-directors. Such an
union seems, however, highly objectionable, and it is even said, has been occa-
sionally productive of serious abuses. The Minister of the Interior appoints
every director, physician, receiver, and steward, besides the committee of
management; and all internes, excepting in cases where the budget of expenses
does not exceed 100,000 francs: under which circumstances, the prefet of the
department nominates. The almoner is always elected by the bishop of the
diocese, and he must reside in the asylum. In a number of institutions
religious sisters, assisted by laical servants, superintend the laundry, kitchen,
dormitories, and even the pharmaceutical department; although there are
various asylums without any sisters of charity, all the domestics being then of
the ordinary description.
According to these statements?obtained from an authentic source?it there-
fore appears, that the personal staff of a lunatic institution varies considerably,
and hence it would prove very difficult to introduce everywhere any uniform
system, which has, it is said, occupied the serious attention of government
during the last twelve years; notwithstanding this fact, parties are disposed to
believe, even if uniformity were more generally introduced, the plan would not
long continue.
With such an organization as now described, besides the heterogeneous
elements often composing local authorities, conflicts of interests or opinions
frequently become inevitable, and have therefore unfortunately occurred at
several establishments. Even instances might be cited where, from the first
opening of the asylum, now eight or ten years, a kind of domestic warfare has
constantly prevailed. Resignations, changes, and even dismissals, have super-
vened in asylums disturbed by such feuds; so that, nothing is often so uncer-
tain, as the position of a medical officer. Seeing the modern treatment of
insanity does not consist solely in the administration of medicines: but to prove
efficacious, constant attention must be also given to patients during the hours
of work, at meals, and in their recreations?nay, even during sleep,?these
important questions a non-medical superior officer cannot comprehend. Conse-
quently, in order to prevent misunderstandings, and likewise that the executive
of large lunatic establishments, may act harmoniously : it has become the practice
of recent years to appoint medical men to the office of director, who are hence
able to understand, besides their own administrative duties, questions of
hygiene, and those ameliorations which may be proposed by the attending phy-
sicians. This plan has been advantageously adopted at Mareville, where Dr.
Ilenaudin is now director, having been formerly the chief physician of another
asylum : and also at Saint-Yon, near Ilouen, in the person of Dr De Boutteville,
who was recently attending physician of an asylum, but is now director of that
extensive establishment. In both instances the alteration thus effected has
proved highly beneficial.
Although, in many respects, useful officials at lunatic asylums, the religious
sisters, and even the almoners, are occasionally carried away by too great zeal,
which leads them injudiciously to interfere with the physicians' proper pro-
fessional duties. In some cases, images, pious books with engravings, beads,
scapularies, and so forth, are improperly given to patients, without the medical
attendant's knowledge, whereby injurious excitement may be produced, especially
when the lunatic is affected with religious delirium. Should the physician for-
bid such proceedings, the cry of impiety is raised, and even quarrels ensue.
Sometimes also the efl'ects of religious exercises are exaggerated, and improper
interference made to promote their continuance, which proves equally hurtful.
378 dr. Webster's additional notes.
Being members of a body who have interests and inclinations beyond the
asylum, and are often actuated by a desire to support the privileges of then-
order, some religious sisters hence become like persons serving two masters?
the one worldly, the other of a more sacred character. This feeling tends to
inconvenience, and may induce such parties to endeavour to counteract the
chief authority, of which the following example will supply an apt illustration.
Some years ago a new director was appointed to an important asylum. When
on his way to take possession of office, he first paid a visit to an old friend
residing at a neighbouring town, where he happened to meet the superior sister
of charity attached to the establishment in question. The host having purposely
avoided introducing the new director and superior to each other by any official
designations; they consequently were ignorant of their respective positions; at
the same time, however, he led the conversation, so that the asylum and its
management soon came under discussion. Amongst other remarks, the lady
naively said, "Apropos, a new director is expected; but we shall continue to
keep the upper hand, as they say he is a mere man of straw." Subsequently,
when they became better acquainted, this speaker was undeceived, as the
director?an energetic officer?soon got rid of her manoeuvres, as also of others
similarly disposed, although the disagreement thus created only terminated by
his accepting another appointment. This anecdote?quoted on good authority
?shows how the system sometimes works injuriously. However, the worthy
sisters are frequently meritorious assistants in public establishments, and often do
much good; nevertheless, it seems undesirable they should be connected with
any power acting externally, or, as it were, behind the throne, that being
detrimental to true discipline, essential in every lunatic institution. To my
mind, all the sisters of charity, or upper attendants, should be like those at the
Auxerre asylum, where they do not belong to any religious corporation out of
doors, but are entirely amenable to the resident authorities. This had the
happiest results, since matters proceeded much more amicably; whilst there
was no restraint at that institution.
Disagreements also arise betwixt the executive and the committee of sur-
veillance, owing to the dislike provincial powers generally entertain against
centralization. Tor example, the "director or physician appointed by the
Minister is often a young man without much status or fortune, and frequently
a perfect stranger to the place, or even altogether unknown in the department.
He arrives, and takes possession of a post where he has often no friends, or
persons likely to give him support, in the performance of often arduous duties.
.Being thus circumstanced, and perhaps occupying a situation which was much
coveted by the protegee or relative of some person having considerable local
influence, he receives the reverse of a warm reception; and instances are even
upon record, where councils-general have printed in the official report of their
proceedings that, they accepted the appointment of M. X as , only
in consequence of his having been imposed upon the department by central
authority. To indicate the annoyance which the superior officers of asylums
sometimes endure from such refractory powers, I may mention that the very
day of my arrival at Nancy, previous to visiting Mareville, the council-general
of the Meurthe?then in deliberation?refused to allow 600 francs for the salary
of a third interne, recently appointed by the Minister, although his services
were absolutely required in an asylum having 876 patients. However, the
young official cannot ultimately lose his allowance, seeing he held the appoint-
ment under government, and would receive the amount due by an order of the
Minister, which must be obeyed!
The committee of management is usually composed of rich proprietors in
the neighbourhood, of members belonging to the council-general, judges of the
Court of Appeal, attorney-generals, and other high functionaries, who frequently
wish to govern everything, or to act independently of the directing authority.
The receiver-steward is almost always a native of the department, and lie
ADMINISTRATION OF ASYLUMS. 379
generally looks to the committee of surveillance as sole superior, or masters;
who in turn favour his pretensions, so that he becomes a very independent, if
not often the most influential personage in the asylum. Hence, he is apt to
interfere in the director's department, or even with the resident physician.
Such results are not uncommon; and in ten establishments which could be enume-
rated, it is stated, eight have become the arena of similar unpleasant dissensions.
When these disputes attain to any height, the Prefet is sure to receive com-
plaints, or confidential communications, and then voluminous reports follow,
in short, the household being divided, the Prefet becomes mystified as to who
is in the wrong, which proves always detrimental to the director or physician's
position and authority. Sometimes he sternly turns a deaf ear to these
intrigues, or honestly seeks to know the truth. Being, however, often sur-
rounded, or earwigged by influential parties in the locality, who anxiously wish
to get rid of the foreign official, he becomes constrained to interfere, and at last
applies to the Minister to remove the obnoxious functionary. Occasionally, the
persecuted party ends the matter by resigning, and retires to private practice.
In other cases it has occurred that the Minister, justly annoyed by such
references, decidedly supports his nominee against the manoeuvres of provincial
schemers, and will neither remove the officer complained against, nor separate
the functions of physician and director when united; which frequently forms a
bone of contention amongst conflicting powers.
As examples are better than assertions, I will relate two illustrations which
actually occurred. In a certain asylum, whose name it is unnecessary to
mention, the committee of surveillance, the receiver-steward, and sisters of
charity, having obliged the physician-director to resign, the council general of
the department, amongst whom there happened to be one or two members of
the managing committee, petitioned the minister to separate the duties of
director from those of the physician, saying this alteration would end all
disputes, and be otherwise useful to the establishment. The minister having
yielded, he nominated a director from a distant part of Prance, and a new
physician also, from another locality. Nevertheless, peace was not obtained,
as discussions immediately arose with both functionaries. The committee
determined not to be out-generalled, prepared a code of regulations, without
consulting the new physician, which was afterwards submitted for the minister's
approbation; but this was refused. A member of the council, who also had a
seat in the legislative assembly, then undertook to arrange matters, and accord-
ingly set off to Paris for that purpose. However, on arriving at the bureau of
the Interior, he learned that the committee of surveillance of tiie asylum was dis-
solved, and that the Prefet had been ordered by the minister to present a fresh
list of members to government for approval. At another asylum, where already
two director-physicians had been obliged to yield to powerful local coteries,
the same parties even attempted to dislodge a third occupant of the joint
appointments, by demanding a separation of offices. The Prefet being con-
strained, brought the question before the departmental council general, in
order to make an impression upon the minister, and so induce him more readily
to comply. The matter came under discussion; but although a member stated
at this meeting that, the ministerial circular opposed any division of these two
offices, unless the patients exceeded 300 in number, and notwithstanding there
was no residence for another officer, which the ordonnances required, the vote
for a separation was nevertheless carried, and afterwards transmitted to head-
quarters. It proved perfectly nugatory, as the minister paid no attention to
their recommendation.
Centralization, however productive of various benefits, still, in the
opinion of some intelligent medical men, often wants unity of march, and
sometimes energy in its measures; consequently, such parties believe that
numerous asylums in Prance are not so perfect as they might be made, were
official intrigues less frequent and influential. A friend who knows the subject
380 dr. Webster's additional notes.
well, and takes great interest in the management of asylums, when alluding
to the defects of several institutions, thus remarked, " At one place the
patients are well fed, but badly clothed; while, in another asylum, they have
no variety or amusement. Musical entertainments, promenades, gymnas-
tics, and literary occupations, are too often deficient. In some institutions
the occupations of patients are not sufficiently organized; and often the
patients who work are not properly encouraged, or receive any gratification for
the labour performed. As a consequence of this mode of proceeding, no
savings become realized, and the inmates suffer in various ways; whilst the under
servants, being often interested in the disputes amongst their superiors, disor-
der and insubordination supervene." To remedy existing defects, some parties
have suggested considerable modification, if not the total abolition of councils
of surveillance, seeing many institutions have no fixed property to administer;
besides which, as the Prefet, sub-prefets, attorney-generals, mayors, presidents
of the court of appeal, and of inferior tribunals, as also both inspectors-general,
have their eyes constantly upon departmental asylums, the committee in many
cases becomes superfluous. Where such a body is considered necessary, it
should always consist of practical members accustomed to business. Some
should be certainly medical men, although atpresent?and singular enough?they
are nearly always excluded. Architects, merchants, and persons in trade like
the former, are also rarely appointed.
Without disparaging present functionaries, none are better qualified for
investigating hygienic improvements, renovating old, and deciding upon new
constructions, or for inspecting the stores supplied, and seeing the provisions
consumed were of good quality, without being overcharged, than the individuals
just named, who would be far better superintendents than parties otherwise
constituted. In the opinion of another intelligent friend, many of the existing
evils would be in a great part remedied, were the official allowances and salary
more under ministerial control, besides being at the same time susceptible of
advancement. The authority now quoted further says, " The directors, physi-
cians, stewards, and receivers, according to their respective merits, and the
duration of service, should pass from inferior establishments to those of higher
importance, with increased remuneration. This plan wTould put an end to
various intrigues, and prevent locally connected stewards or receivers from
obtaining too much inliuence, to the detriment of directors and physicians;
who, from being often strangers to the locality, are consequently sacrificed.
Such changes in the system pursued are indispensable, in order to elevate and
improve the administration at present pursued in various asylums; whereby,
some have hitherto failed in regard to regularity, dignity, and philanthropy."
Similar sentiments are also entertained by other individuals; and, conceiving
it might prove advantageous, I have given their opinions a place in these notes;
trusting the remarks now made may induce those who have official power,
to correct whatever is still defective in a system which certainly possesses
many advantages, and has already effected much good to the lunatic population,
throughout most parts of Prance.
As some readers may not be altogether cognizant of the formalities required,
when it becomes necessary to place lunatics in an asylum, before concluding
my observations on these establishments, I would remark that, the certificate of
only one medical practitioner is demanded. Which, however, must be accom-
panied, if for a private person, by a petition from a near relative, authorizing
the party's reception; but, if otherwise situated, an order from the Prefet
must be procured prior to the patient's admission. Within twenty-four hours
after the lunatic's arrival at an asylum, the resident physician must make a
report to the prefecture, containing the chief symptoms of the patient's disease,
which he is required to repeat in a more minute manner fourteen days after-
wards, as likewise every six months during the inmate's residence. When
an insane pensioner is placed by a relative, he may be removed at any
ADMINISTRATION OF ASYLUMS. 381
time by the same party; but where the case was admitted " d'office," as it is
called, the Prefet's permission is then necessary, previous to removal, even
where the disease has been cured; but in every instance, whether a private
patient or otherwise, if considered dangerous by the physician, none can
leave the institution, without the Prefet's express order to that effect.
By these regulations, whilst the lunatic is properly taken care of, and cannot
be confined longer than the nature of the case warrants, society is also pro-
tected against demented persons, who might cause injury to others or
themselves.
In consequence of largesums beingannuallyreceived from private patients under
treatment in several departmental asylums, these items often form a very im-
portant portion of the ordinary revenue. For instance, at Auxerre, 43,550 francs
were obtained daring 1850, from this source; and at Mareville, the amount
paid by the pensioners, in that year, was 56,837 francs. The profit derived, in
this manner, is applied towards improving the respective institutions; and at
Mareville, many of the recent alterations have been defrayed by the savings
thereby effected. At present, most of the public insane establishments of Prance
are both institutions for indigent lunatics, and " maisons de sante" for mem-
bers of the upper classes. This arrangement prevails, no doubt, in several
asylums of England, but especially in those of Scotland, and proves often advan-
tageous to all parties; although, amongst our neighbours, the medical officers are
much more illiberally treated in regard to remuneration received, for
the onerous duties thus imposed upon them by the authorities, in attending
ladies and gentlemen, at the same time with pauper patients. If the great
reputation of Dr Girard or Dr Morel, brings many private patients to the
institutions of Auxerre or Mareville; whilst the experience of Dr Bouchet
induces rich persons to place their insane relatives under his care, at the
Nantes public asylum, the government ought, on that account, in common
justice, to grant additional allowances; especially, as throughout every depart-
mental lunatic establishment of Prance, the medical officers receive inadequate
salaries, even where they are, at the same time both director and physician.
Taking into account the very responsible position in which physicians of that
description are placed, the arduous labour they have to perform, and the large
revenues often obtained through their professional skill and knowledge, whilst
each are debarred from all private practice, it is mistaken economy, if not great
injustice, to pay many of these eminent gentlemen with only three or four
thousand francs per annum. Sucli parsimony is wrong. And should these re-
marks ever come under the notice of French authorities?whether departmental
or belonging to government?as an impartial foreigner, I would strongly impress
upon their special attention, the propriety of making some change in this
respect; but particularly to take into account the prolonged services of various
medical officers in departmental asylums, by whose exertions several institu-
tions have attained the deservedly high position they at present occupy, and to
whom much of their actual prosperity may be justly ascribed.
Amongst numerous features usually noticed at the establishments under dis-
cussion, and which merit decided approval, none is more beneficial than the ap-
pointment of internes to reside in such asylums.
Besides being an excellent practical school?where future practitioners can ob-
tain most important knowledge and experience respecting mental diseases?these
junior medical officers become in many ways useful to the physicians, and beneficial
to the patients. Having alluded especially to this subject in my former notes, it
appears almost unnecessary again to investigate the question, further than briefly
to remark that, no public establishment for the insane ought ever to be without
resident medical pupils, more or less numerous, according to circumstances. In
every case, where internes were attached to French asylums, invariably the
duties then seemed performed with greater regularity, and the patients received
better attention; whilst the case-books?to say nothing of minor details?
382 dr. Webster's additional notes.
were more accurately kept than otherwise. Upon no point was the utility of
internes so remarkably shewn, as in reference to the diminution of personal
restraint, amongst the inmates of particular institutions. Wherever an asylum
had no resident pupils, as part of its medical staff, camisoles were much more
frequently in requisition. Take as examples, Bon Sauveur, having eighteen
patients so confined; or St. Gemmes,which had twenty-seven residents in strait-
waistcoats, and Orleans, where twenty-five inmates were also personally
restrained. To none of these asylums?described in my former notes?were any
internes appointed. Again, amongst the institutions alluded to in previous
pages, in which these useful pupil-officers formed no part of the establishment,
mechanical coercion was uniformly much more frequent, than at asylums other-
wise constituted. Thus, at Armentieres, fifteen patients were in confinement;
and at Lille?also without internes, I saw twenty-eight inmates bound by cami-
soles. Whereas, at Auxerre, no individual whateverhadastrait-waistcoat, and only
one patient was so treated at Stephansfeld; both the latter institutions having,
it should be always remembered, intelligent int ernes. I am therefore so thoroughly
convinced respecting the great importance of similar assistants in every lunatic
asylum that, none ought ever to be without one or more of these officials. As well
might general hospitals be deprived of house-surgeons, clinical clerks, or
dressers. All being, as every person knows, not only most advantageous ap-
pointments to the youngmen so employed, but likewise producing greatTbenefit to
the patients generally. Uniform observation, throughout Prance, shews the
marked utility of internes; hence, every English asylum should adopt a
system which comes recommended by the best of arguments?well-established
experience.
CONCLUSION.
Previous to drawing these general remarks regarding French asylums for
the insane to a close, I would observe that, since my recent inspection?de-
scribed in the preceding pages?an important alteration, in reference to the ap-
pointment of physicians to these establishments has very lately been made by the
present government, which merits, at least, a passing notice; since it has
already created considerable sensation amongst the profession, " d'outre mer,"
and may eventually produce important consequences, in regard to the treatment
of lunatics consigned to departmental institutions. Instead of being nominated,
as heretofore by the Minister of the Interior, all medical officers of insane
asylums will be appointed in future by the Prefet, who is also empowered to
settle their salary and allowances. Under the former regime, those gentlemen
who had specially studied mental diseases at Paris or elsewhere, were almost
invariably selected by the central authorities, devoid of any local interest;
whilst the zeal or ability they manifested, in the discharge of their professional
duties, often insured an advancement to more lucrative or important situations,
as the reward of continued services. According to the new regulations, it is
feared, on the contrary, if physicians of asylums are not only appointed, but placed
solely under the Prefet's control, their administrative functions and professional
influence will be materially curtailed by these local dignitaries, which may
become detrimental to patients, besides diminishing the medical officer's prospect
of ever being translated to another establishment, and so obtaining a larger
salary with additional attributions.
Writers of eminence in Prance, besides anticipating the consequences now
shadowed forth, likewise think the new decree of the 25th of March, 1852, by
which every new medical officer of asylums is made the absolute nominee of
" Monsieur le prefet," will, amongst other evils, resuscitate the almost forgot-
ten feuds, formerly too prevalent betwixt the medical attendants of lunatic
establishments and religious corporations. An able practical authority, in
every question respecting insanity and its treatment?Dr De Boismont?says,
when discussing this subject in a recent publication, " Tout partisan que nous
sommes de leur adjonction aux asiles d'alienes (meaning priests and sisters
CONCLUSION. 383
of charity) nous avouons que, quand les attributions ne sont pas suffisamment
delimitees, les corps religieux ont une tendance a s'cmparer de la direction de
l'administration. Cette remarque a d'autant plus de force, que plusieurs
aumoniers n'ont pas hesite a dire que, le traitement des alienes devait etre
exclusivement religieux et moral. Cette opinion est une veritable heresie."
Trusting the gloomy anticipations which some have prognosticated, respecting
the future administration of departmental institutions for the insane, may
prove erroneous; it must be acknowledged, although centralization in many
other matters paralyzes individual exertion, and often becomes injurious;
nevertheless, it has conferred incalculable benefits upon the lunatic population
of France; and that every year, since the law of 1838 was promulgated, impor-
tant ameliorations have been introduced into provincial establishments, through
the medical officers, aided by central power; whilst ancient prejudices are now
much more rare; and thousands of unfortunate lunatics have received, as it
were, a new life, often rendered more comfortable from improved treatment
combined with humane protection. The proposed changes will likely become
very disastrous, should the independent authority of the inspectors-general
be at all infringed, either in regard to visiting provincial asylums, or in sanc-
tioning and suggesting farther improvements; more especially, since it has
been mainly owing to the supervision and controlling influence of these high
official gentlemen that, unity of action is now happily established throughout nu-
merous institutions, the zeal of local functionaries excited, merit encouraged and
ultimately rewarded, by promoting the most efficient medical officers to other
appointments ; where they receive better remuneration, besides being placed in
a higher public position.
Although not strictly appertaining to lunatic asylums, still, another inno-
vation, which materially affects the profession, deserves being also mentioned;
since it shows other organic changes have been made by parties now in power,
regarding various responsible offices occupied by physicians. I here allude
to the great alteration very recently decreed in reference to supplying future
vacancies, amongst professors at universities and colleges, whether medical or
otherwise. Henceforth, instead of obtaining those appointments by "concours"
amongst competitors, when any chair becomes void, the Minister of public
instruction proposes a doctor of medicine who is thirty years of age to
the Prince president for election, if the vacant office belongs to the medical
department. The minister may, however, select another person from a double
list of candidates which is demanded from the faculty where the vacancy
occurs; but this proceeding being a mere formality, the choice rests entirely with
government. Farther, as Louis Napoleon at present constitutes the chief execu-
tive, and of course commands ministers to yield obedience, that autocrat or his
satellites will consequently engross the whole patronage. The effect of such
regulations can be easily foretold; while they must, doubtless, very seriously
influence professional independence, which ought ever to characterise men of
science and education.
