Nervous Influence
==================

Art. III.-

This is a remarkable book. An English work on Psychology, printed
in Paris in 1836, and written by an English lady, is not likely to attract
attention in 1852, unless it has considerable merit; and we confess we
took it up from the table of a friend who knew and valued the authoress
with that amount of scepticism as to its merits with which those who are
trained to any calling are apt to view the productions of amateurs, and
in addition with that doubt as to the probability of a lady treating phy-
siological questions with any other foundation than the uncertain one of
a knowledge of words and not of things. A hasty glance at a few pages
induced us to borrow it, and a second perusal of the whole volume (the
best compliment a reader can pay a writer) was the preparation for this
review. That a book with such a title, without the name of the writer,
f Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the .Nervous Influence, and its connexion
with the Vital, Moral, and InteUectual Operations. By Mrs. Carleton. Galignani,
Paris. Bailliere, London. Svo. pp. 238.
222 NERVOUS INFLUENCE.
printed in Paris, and not advertised in tliis country, sliould have re-
mained unknown for a long period, is to be expected; but we have no such
superabundant supply of sound, well-considered, and original thought,
in the present day, to justify our still neglecting it; and we are simply
doing justice to its gifted authoress, and a real service to those of our
medical brethren who take some delight in psychology, by informing
them of its existence. After reading it, few will (we believe) deny that
among the able professional writers of the day, there are many who can
put their contemplations on man's mind and its connexion with bodily
states, in clearer, simpler, fuller, choicer language; who can clothe
their thoughts in a purer or more graceful style: most professional
writers have a larger amount of acquired knowledge, and a more
extended acquaintance with the whole subject, owing to the care with
which physiological facts have recently been both accumulated and
diffused; but few bring to their materials the power of a more deeply
contemplative mind, or show higher ability to think for themselves.
There are certain defects of scientific form which many could gloss
with more circumlocution; but those who judge a book by its merits
and not by its defects, and Avho know the difficulty of the subject, will,
we are sure, pass but one judgment upon it. From the book having
been printed in Paris the errata are numerous, and a mistake has been
made in placing as heads of divisions what were intended to be mar-
ginal notes of the subjects, but essentially there is much order and
clearness of arrangement. The first part contains a theory of nervous
and vital actions, which, considering it was the work of a woman, and
was written many years previously to the date of publication, and that
was sixteen years ago, shows the writer to have approached very nearly
to those views which sound thinkers are now adopting, and to be gifted
with insight into deep physiological principles; an insight which, had
it been trained by experiment, would have probably produced an
original physiological discoverer. The writer candidly brings these
views forward merely as opinions which may eventually be proved to
be correct by experiment. Her theory is a bold, a large, and an
ingenious one, and we take it to be this : That the nervous power is
analogous to the electric power, and that this nervous power as well as
the other vital powers are kept in action by a constantly acting external
stimulus, which is electricity; that it is the electricity, combined with
the oxygen gas we breathe, as well as the uncombined electricity in the
air, which is the effective vital stimulus; and that animal heat is an
electrical operation also, because it is a chemical one; for all chemical
changes (according to Sir H. Davy) are owing to the union of opposite
electricities. This was written, we believe, nearly thirty years ago,
and we will compare it with the view to which those physiologists have
NERVOUS INFLUENCE. 223
arrived who are conversant with modern physical discovery, as well as
with physiological science. Faraday has proved the truth of Davy's
hypothesis, that galvanic action is merely chemical action, acting in a
continuous line returning into itself, instead of between particles at
insensible distances. He has proved experimentally that galvanism
and electricity are one and the same thing. Now, if chemical action
will produce galvanism, galvanism, as is well known, will produce heat,
light, magnetism, motion, and chemical decomposition; and, what is
more curious, either of these in its turn will produce all the rest. Pro-
fessor Grove, who has most ably theorized as well as experimented on
this subject, regards all these forces as correlated, or having the relation
of mutual dependence.
If, then, chemical action is thus convertible into galvanism, magnet-
ism, heat, light, and motion, there is no difficulty in conceiving that in
the body it is convertible into vital actions, and that the various vital
forces are mutually dependent on the physical forces, as these are
dependent on each other. Dr Carpenter has ably followed out Pro-
fessor Grove's theory, and has shown that the vital forces are convertible
into the physical forces, as these are into the vital. By this theory it is
not affirmed that the vital forces are the same as the physical, but that
they are correlatives, or virtually dependent. As electricity is con-
vertible into magnetism, but is not magnetism, so chemical action may
be converted into nervous action, but is not nervous action. It is
clear, therefore, that there is no discrepancy, but a remarkable agree-
ment, between the theory of our authoress and the present doctrine.
In both, the vital actions, and especially heat, are regarded as the
sequence of chemical actions, and these chemical actions are electrical
phenomena.
There are two points in this theory well worthy a strict experimental
investigation, and these are, the influence of the uncombined electricity
in the air we breathe on the body, and also the effects in health and
disease of that magnetic atmosphere in which we live. The following
observations on this latter subject are suggestive :?
" I am inclined to think that the various nervous states of the body
at different periods of the twenty-four hours, are connected with the
variations in the magnetic force of the earth at such times. It has been
ascertained by Professor Hanstein, that the magnetic intensity of the
earth is subject to a diurnal variation, decreasing from day-break till
ten or eleven o'clock a.ji., when it reaches its minimum, and from
thence it increases until it reaches its maximum, about three
o'clock A.M.
"Now I have observed that morbid affections which arise from too
great an irritability in the system, as catarrh, fever, &c., increase in
violence towards the time that this magnetism is rising to its maximum,
224 NERVOUS INFLUENCE.
and this period being passed, viz., three o'clock a.m., sleep and perspira-
tion will succeed to the heat and restlessness of the first part of the
night. I have also observed that in some complaints arising from
languor and a deficiency of nervous action, the distressing feelings pro-
duced by it have been most apparent when the magnetism was at its
minimum, and that the strength and spirits have risen when it was
advancing to its maximum, after which the inclination to drowsiness
has returned. These facts I have noticed in some very marked cases
for months together. The increased rapidity of the circulation and
development of heat towards evening, cannot, I should think, be attri-
butable to the state of the digestive organs after a full or late meal, for
it takes place independently of this circumstance, both in the healthy
and feverish state, and in the latter, the little nourishment which is
taken is frequently no greater in quantity at one period of the day than
the other."
The second part treats of the connexion of the nervous influence
with the mental operations. At a time when materialism was the
fashion, our authoress, whilst recognising that the material part of our
nature is indispensable in this state of existence to the performance of
the mental functions, clearly distinguishes the two principles:
" One, dignified in its nature, unknown in its essence, characterized
by the three general powers of feeling, vrilling, and understanding: the
other subservient to the former, constituting the materials upon which
it acts, and the tools by which it operates, and possessing at the same
time the capability of acting upon and influencing it to a certain
degree."
The emotions, feelings, passions, all that is commonly termed the
heart, being that part of woman's nature which is most highly developed,
is, as might be expected, ably treated. The feelings include the most
material as well as the most spiritual part. They are, as a whole, most
intimately connected with the body ; more evidently so to the conscious-
ness than the intellectual faculties. Mrs. Carleton distinguishes clearly
the physical and moral sensations, the physical being the action of the
nerves of sensation from without inwards, excited by external stimuli;
the moral sensations being similar nervous actions called out by ideas
of the mind. But why?and what physiologist has not often asked him-
self this question?why are those feelings, emotions, passions, which are
included in the term moral sensations, located commonly in the heart ?
Even our harder, less impressible sex occasionally feel, or have felt,
that emotions call out sensations in the left side of the chest, that Ave
can localize them there with even more certainty than we can fix the
seat of thought in our foreheads. From watching in herself these
feelings, Mrs. Carleton, with much ingenuity, and, we think, truth, refers
the sensation to the par vagum. The conscious feeling, the distribution
of that nerve coming directly from the brain, and the effect of these
NERVOUS INFLUENCE. 225
emotions on the voice, heart, and stomach, render it very probable that
it is the channel by which those thoughts which call out emotions and
passions affect the vital organs of animal life, and explain why these
feelings are popularly referred, not to the head, in which they undoubtedly
originate, but to the heart. Mrs. Carleton describes a form of nervous
disease which simulates successively an affection of the lungs, of the
heart, and of the stomach, and which is attended with a potent effect on
the feelings, irascibility, agitation, melancholy, anxiety, arousing
passions which do not belong to the character, and which she refers
to an excited state of this nerve in those of ardent temperament; whilst
in the phlegmatic and hypochondriacs, the habitual melancholy is con-
sidered to be owing to a deficient excitability of the same nerve.
We direct attention to a lengthened description of this affection, as it is
evidently drawn from close (and probably self) observation, and on this
account valuable, though the seat may not be admitted.
It is the third part, which is devoted to the effect of nervous influence
upon the moral and intellectual character, where Mrs. Carleton is most
at home, and which would have probably commanded much attention
had it been addressed to the general public. Throughout, the close
union of the nervous system and the mind is insisted on without any
approach to materialism, and this union and the varieties in power of
the two principles in different individuals are made the foundation for the
distinction of temperaments.
Mrs. Carleton recognises an original mental as well as physical con-
stitution; but, as in every mental operation two powers must combine,
one physical and the other intellectual, the difference in the strength of
these powers in themselves and relatively, is one source of variety of
character, and in this difference she founds the distinction of tempera-
ments. Her views on this subject are evidently founded on original
observation and are true to nature. We do not say that they include all
varieties of temperament, but they describe accurately four varieties of
the nervous temperament.
" The strength or feebleness of the nervous action produces two
temperaments, which I shall distinguish by the appellation of the ardent
and the phlegmatic: each of the temperaments may be united to a strong
or a feeble intellectual power, and these four combinations, with the
several gradations from one extreme to the other, form the varieties of
the natural mental constitution."
" ARDENT TEMPERAMENT.
" An energetic nervous action (which I am inclined to attribute to an
abundant secretion of the nervous fluid,) produces a rapid circulation of
the blood, a quick evolution of animal heat, with some tendency to
inflammatory diseases, a certain degree of muscular power (independently
NO. xviii. Q
226 NERVOUS INFLUENCE.
of the strength or weakness of the muscular fibre), and a sensibility of
the nerves, which gives vehemence to the feelings, warmth to the
temper, and quickness and acuteness to the senses."
" PHLEGMATIC TEMPERAMENT.
"The slow nervous action is shown by a tranquil circulation, a low
temperature of the blood, a moderate portion of physical strength, an
absence of irritability in the nerves, and consequently in the temper."*
"COMBINATIONS OF THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION.
" The ardent temperament may be united, first, to a firm muscular
fibre; and secondly, to a lax muscular fibre; and the phlegmatic
temperament may also be combined with a strong or weak muscular
system. Of all the constitutions, the ardent temperament combined
with the lax muscular fibre is the most irritable: its physical strength
is entirely derived from the vigour of the nervous action, and this is
often irregularly distributed, and subjects the frame to various morbid
affections, particularly of the nervous kind: the sensations are acute,
and the mind partakes of the sensibility of the body, and is very liable
to a morbid degree of irritability. The ardent temperament combined
with a firm fibre, exhibits the greatest degree of physical strength: the
constitution is vigorous, but liable to inflammatory diseases. The
phlegmatic constitution united to a lax fibre exhibits the greatest
deficiency of physical strength, but it does not seem particularly liable
to disease until the strength is reduced below its natural standard by
external circumstances: the nerves are not irritable, consequently the
sensations are not acute, and the mind is usually placid. The phlegmatic
temperament united to the firm fibre is the most desirable of all consti-
tutions, as it gives the advantage, of strength, without irritability : an
athletic form, robust health, and an even temper are its usual con-
comitants."
" CLASSIFICATION.
" In enumerating the various combinations of the mental and physical
qualifications with the two temperaments, I shall class them under the
four following heads: 1st, the strong intellect combined with the ardent
temperament; 2nd, the same united to the phlegmatic temperament;
3rd, the weak intellect combined with the ardent temperament; 4th, the
same united to the phlegmatic."
Ardent temperament with weak intellect may deceive, from the
quickness and facility of the nervous operations, but " the test of a good
understanding is the reasoning faculty;" and the distinguishing charac-
teristic of this temperament is "a natural want of judgment."
* " The richer the blood is in red globules, the stronger is the vital power, and the
power of producing heat in the system. In the temperaments which physicians call lym-
phatic, in opposition to sanguine, and which I call phlegmatic, on account of its influence
on the temper, the blood contains fewer of the globules which give it colour. It is more
cold and watery, hence probably results the fairness of hair and skin, which is the usual
external token of this temperament."
NERVOUS INFLUENCE. 227
" Of all mental constitutions that which, unites weakness in the imma-
terial principle, and strength in the nervous action, is the least calculated
for its own happiness, or that of others; for it is subject to the greatest
?excess and variety of painful sensations, both mentally and bodily, Avith
the fewest means of defence, that is, with the smallest share of firmness
to control the one, and of patience to allay the other. The mutability
of the human feelings, also, is particularly manifested in this character.
Steadiness depends more upon the regulating power of the immaterial
principle, than upon the nature of the feelings themselves?if the
impulse of the present moment is habitually obeyed without reference
to a settled line of conduct, no dependence can be placed upon the prin-
ciples or affections, changeable in their direction as the waves of the
watery element; without solidity, without a fixed foundation, the affec-
tions of a weak mind are at the mercy of every gale that blows: if the
tide turns, it flows perhaps as strongly in an opposite direction, and the
bitterest hatred succeeds the tenderest love. In short, instability is the
characteristic of mere feeling. Maternal love alone forms an exception:
this lies imperturbable in the hidden depths of the human heart, beyond
the reach of the warring elements that disturb the surface.
" The errors which result from the weakness of the mind may be
traced?1st, to an incapability of taking a general and extended view
of things; 2nd, to a liability to be deceived by external appearances;
3rd, to a limited power of acquiring knowledge and of applying judi-
ciously what is acquired. Those which are the consequences of immo-
derate activity in the sensitive department are to be traced, 1st,
to hastiness of decision; 2nd, to the formation of strong prejudices;
3rd, to the habit of judging of the feelings of others by our own.
Knowledge and experience are indispensable to an individual of this
temper, so liable to err, so often blind to his own failings, and so
exquisitely susceptible of suffering from their evil consequences."
In the ardent temperament with strong intellect, is found the highest
intellectual perfection, " for both the material and immaterial parts con-
tribute to the production of the talents." As, however, the feelings are
also powerful, moral perfection, though not incompatible, is not a natural
attendant. Great vices exist here as well as great virtues. To such a
mind, sound religious principle is indispensable. We have not space to
quote the admirable sketch of the good and evil qualities of this tempera-
ment, or of its intellectual characteristics.
In the phlegmatic temperament there is a nervous system without
much activity, so that the share of talent depends on the active power
of the intellect, for it obtains little or no assistance from the nervous
energy.
" A deficiency of intellect in the phlegmatic temperament must
therefore produce absolute stupidity. The first gradation above stupidity
displays a plain, straightforward understanding, entirely destitute of ima-
gination : this forms the class of the ennuyants. The next degree shows
good sense, with a quicker pe: ception, and a more lively imagination;
Q 2
228 NERVOUS INFLUENCE.
but still tlie operations of the intellect are slow, and performed with,
difficulty, owing to the sluggishness of the brain, and the weakness of
the memory. As we advance, the feebleness of the mechanical action
is compensated by the increase of intellectual power: its highest degree
of perfection shows a clear understanding, a sound judgment, an acute
discernment, strong powers of reasoning, and a mind vast and compre-
hensive, noble and elevated. Here the habit of methodising and ana-
lysing assists the memory; the systematic arrangement of the ideas aids
the reasoning faculty; the absence of passion gives correctness to the
judgment; and the coolness and deliberation with which all the mental
operations are performed give clearness to the discernment. Never-
theless the brilliancy of talent displayed in the ardent temperament
cannot be attained in the phlegmatic; for, supposing the powers of the
intellect to be equal, the latter must always lack the fire and energy
which give force and rapidity to the operations of the former."
This sketch is worked out fully and with great ability; we find so
great a difficulty of selection, and so impossible to condense or abridge,
that we must refer our readers to the book itself.
It may be of interest to our bachelor readers to know that so good
an observer warns them if they " value a peaceful life, not to select a
short woman, with black hair and a strong fist," but that the phlegmatic
temperament, the blue eye, light hair, round limbs, slender shape, and
fair complexion, give a man a better chance of a quiet life.
As the ardent temperament is marked by quickness, and the phleg-
matic by dullness in the talents, so they are distinguished by warmth
and coldness in the feelings. And as in the phlegmatic the feelings are
most under restraint, the most faidtless characters belong to it; but
still Mrs. Carleton considers the balance of evil belongs to the phleg-
matic, as their errors are less excusable, and are derived from a worse
origin?selfishness; " and from this foul source proceed the most evil
feelings of which our nature is susceptible." The examination of selfish-
ness and the sketch of a purely selfish character, are drawn with a power
of mental dissection and demonstration only attained by those who
ponder on the evil in their own hearts, and reflect on the excesses to
which, if unrestrained, it might lead. The following definition of sen-
sibility strikes us as excellent and true:?
" It is, I apprehend, the combination of a quality of the mind, and a
peculiarity of the nervous constitution. When a benevolent turn of
mind is united to a strong nervous susceptibility, it constitutes genuine
sensibility. Benevolence, without delicacy of feeling is mere good
nature : susceptibility of feeling, without benevolence, is mere irri-
tability."
Mrs. Carleton's sketch of the four kinds of sensibility in the four
different classes of character, is a discriminative piece of practical
NERVOUS INFLUENCE. 220
metaphysical writing of a liigh order, showing her power of entering
into the highest and noblest as well as the weakest feelings of our com-
pound being. But Ave must conclude with an assurance that the praise
we have bestowed is merely from a strict sense of justice to a writer of
rare merit, and that our quotations, though enough to justify our
opinion, are not the best bits, but the average of the whole composition.
We regard it not as a complete disquisition on psychology, but as an
? important original fragment of that large subject, the result of the
attentive observations of very many years of the nervous and mental
actions of a highly cultivated mind, and a most delicately organized
body: of one whose deeply contemplative nature has been impelled by
a ceaseless internal impulse, (the origin of which we cannot trace,) to
seek to explain to herself the secret of the connexion of those nerves
with that mind; of one who has viewed her thoughts, feelings, emotions,
all the valuable experiences of a woman, a wife, and a mother, all her
delicate observations of others in the society of the higher classes (for
there is internal evidence of this in the delicate handling, the impos-
sibility of a lady's nature to be otherwise than graceful) as experiments
to elucidate this her life-problem.
