Private Asylums
================

Several correspondents have written to us, complaining of the unprofessional
conduct of a few proprietors of private asylums. This is a subject into which we
cannot now fully enter. We have no hesitation, however, in expressing our
concurrence in the view taken by nearly all who have addressed us on the subject,
and of protesting against the quaekish mode which some adopt to puff them-
selves and their establishments into temporary notoriety. The system pursued
by these men is, we admit, calculated to injure materially the character of all pri-
vate establishments, to limit their sphere ot usefulness, and to degrade the propri-
etors in public and professional estimation. All respectable men shoidd set their
160 TO CORRESPONDENTS.
faces against the disgustiiig practice referred to. If aman imagines that by invest-
ing 300?. or 400 Z. a-year in puffing advertisements, he will be able to escape from
his legitimate insignificance, and fill his asylum with patients, he will find, to his
cost, that lie has much overrated both the credulity of the public and profession.
Unless proceedings like these are discountenanced, men of character, experience,
and delicacy of feeling, will retire altogether from the management of these
institutions, and they will be left solely to the conduct of any ignorant monied
adventurer who may consider this a good mode of investing his capital. The
profession, as a body, should refuse its support to men who by their proceedings
thus degrade an honourable professional occupation. A correspondent has re-
ferred to the proceedings of one proprietor of a private asylum, who is in the
habit of visiting occasionally provincial towns, calling upon the resident medical
men, and introducing himself and puffing his establishment. In some instances,
where this person is refused admission into the hall, he satisfies himself with
impudently pushing under the front door a large card, upon which is engraved
a sketch of his "splendid establishment," with a quantity of letter-press
descriptive of the wonderful capabilities of himself and his house. This man
has, in his proceedings, gone somewhat in advance of "Professor Hollo way'5
and "Messrs. Morison and Moat;" for these pill-mongers satisfy themselves
with advertising their nostrums, whilst the party to whom we refer travels
about the country like a hawker in search of stray lunatics. We have heard
of a London physician of some standing repudiating, in indignant language, the
assumption that he was "specially engaged in the treatment of the insane;"
and we heard a physician, also of position, say, that he should consider it
less degrading to keep a public-house than an asylum.
Why should this feeling exist ? Is it not in the main owing to the dis-
reputable proceedings of a feio illiterate pseudo-medical men who have embarked
in this speciality, with no other object than that of self-aggrandizement ? If
medical men, of whose sagacity, learning, and even existence, the profession and
public are, alas ! in a state of lamentable ignorance, think it necessary to adver-
tise themselves and their asylums, they should do so decently. The occasional
announcement of the name and locality of the house ought to be deemed suffi-
cient; but when they attempt to throw Mr. Robins in the shade by olfensive
puffs of themselves and exaggerated descriptions of their establishments, and do
this continually, it cannot prove otherwise than derogatory and degrading to
the profession. To the public wre say, beware of the men and asylums thus
constantly obtruded upon your notice. The profession will, we have no doubt,
exercise a just discrimination in the matter.
