Medical Evidence for Mrs. Cumming
===================================

Robert Barnes, M.D., examined by Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Q. I believe, sir,
that you reside at No. 63, Gloucester Terrace, Hyde Park. A. I do. ? Q. I think
that lor some years you have lectured on forensic medicine? A. Yes, I have.?
Q. How long have you been in the profession ? A. I have been studying it and
in practise nearly twenty years?eight years in practice, and twelve in study.?
Q. When did you first see Mrs. Cumming? A. At the time of the commission in
1846, at York House. ? Q. I believe that at that time you visited her at the request
of Mr. Haynes? A. I did.? Q. For what purpose did you visit her? A. 1 was
requested by Mr. Haynes to visit Mrs. Cumming, I believe with this intention. He
told me?
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?Never mind with what intention you visited her.
The Witness.?But I wish to explain the precise reason why I went.
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?I object to your stating the reason?it is quite
immaterial what your reason was.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?I submit that it was of the utmost materiality.
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?I must take my objection in form. His intention
is a matter which must rest in his own mind. What passed with Mrs. Cumming
is another thing.
The Commissioner.?What his intention was it cannot be important to the jury
to know. '
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?I submit to you, sir, that it is most important.
The Witness.?I was requested?
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?You heard the commissioner decide that you were
not to state with what intention you went.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?I must not take anything ex cathedra that comes from
my opponent. I submit to you, sir, in order to ascertain the accuracy and the amount
of attention which this gentleman exhibited upon the occasion, it is of the
greatest importance to know with what direct intention he went to that place.
The Commissioner.?It is not necessary, at all events, in the present stage of his
examination.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Very well, sir. ? Q. At what time in the day did you
visit her? A. I think on an afternoon. I can't be quite sure of the time of day.?
Q. How long did the interview last ? A. I"first saw her for two hours. ? Q. Can
you remember the day, or not ? A. Icould, by referring to a note. ?Q. How
long did that interview last? A. Two hours; not less, I should think. ? Q. First
of all, let me ask this, what was the result of the opinion you formed after those two
hours as to the state of her mind ? A. The opinion I formed on my first interview
was a cautious and guarded one. I did not wish to commit myself to a positive
opinion. ? Q. How many interviews had you with her? A. Three, certainly,
before I became confident in my opinion.? Q. At the end of those three interviews,
what opinion did you form as to the state of her mind ? A. My decision was, that
I could find no evidence of insanity; I was not prepared to say that she was not of
unsound mind, but I could find no evidence to satisfy my mind that she was. ?
Q. Did you observe her deportment? A. I did, very attentively, and Icould
perceive no difference in her deportment from what I have ordinarily observed in
other people in society. ? Q. I do not know whether you were present at any time
when the jury went to see her ? A.I was present during the time of the commis-
sion. ? Q. Were you present lately when any of the jury went to see her at all?
A. No ; I was not. ? Q. Did you enter into any conversation with her ? A. I did,
at considerable length. I conversed with her on all occasions on the subject of the
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING. 93
alleged evidences of insanity which had been advanced, and as to her past history, and
her health especially, in order to see if anything had occurred in her past health
?which could have left any disposition to insanity, and I could discover none.?
Q. Did you think all these inquiries essential ? A. Yes.?Q. Did she talk rationally ?
A. Perfectly so. ? Q. And calmly? A. Calmly, and with remarkable coherence
and command over the flow of her ideas.? Q. Did she complain of the place?
A. She complained very much of the associates she was obliged to mix with in the
asylum. ? Q. Did she complain of its being dull and gloomy ? A. Very much so;
she felt very much her being secluded as she was. She was accustomed to society,
and it seemed to prey a good deal upon her mind. ? Q. Did she complain of her
friends being denied access to her? A. She did. She particularly mentioned
that. ? Q. Did she say anything about her anxiety? A. Yes; she said it was
such that she had hardiy had any sleep, or tasted any food since the commission had
been adjourned three or four days before, and she was in great anxiety as to the result
at that time. ? Q. Were you present at any time when Mr. Haynes had a con-
ference with her with reference to her property? A. I was. ? Q. Did he at that
time consult her as to the measures necessary for her defence for her case?
A. He did. During the time I watched her attentively, in order to see how she
behaved herself, and to see whether she understood clearly the questions which he
put to her, and her position generally. ? Q. Were papers and documents read to
her ? A. Several documents were put before her. I stopped her, and asked if
she understood their contents and their nature, and she read them over herself
attentively, and understood them fully, and assented to their propriety.? Q. You
have attended her, and been acquainted with her occasionally from that time down to
the present ? A. I have, with a break perhaps of more than a year before I saw
her in August last.? Q. Had you interviews with her on the 3rd and 6th of Septem-
ber, 1846? A. I had on those occasions. ? Q. Did you inquire of her whether
insanity had made its appearance in any other part of her family? A. I did. I
traced every member ot her family, and could get no evidence of anything of the
kind; nothing that she could inform me of. ? Q. When you were making inquiries
as to whether there had been any symptoms in her family before that, did she say
anything about her daughters? A. She made a remark which struck me. After going
through all the other members of her family, and when speaking of her daughters,
she said they were not insane, but that" the imputation of insanity might be as well
transferred to them as be imputed to her." ? Q. After she came out of the asylum,
did she give you any particulars of excursions that she had made? A. She did. She
said that she had been out from the asylum for a drive on two or three occasions. She
seemed to be annoyed at the precautions by which she was surrounded when she
was out. She said that one person would go out of the door first and see that she did
not escape, and she seemed to feel that sort of annoyance very much. ? Q. Did she
say anything about being deterred from going in the front garden? A. Yes ; she
said she had been forbidden to go into the front garden. ? Q. From the inter-
views which you have had with her up to this time do you believe her to be of sound
or unsound mind? A. I may speak with all the confidence which one person
can have when speaking of another after an intimate acquaintance, and I can speak
to her soundness of mind on the same principles that I would speak of the soundness
of mind of any person L might meet in the ordinary intercourse of society, my ac-
quaintance with her extending now over a period of five years. ? Q. Did she say
anything to you as to her house being ill furnished ? A. In 1846 she did. That was
one of the grounds alleged, and I questioned her about it. She said her furniture was
not safe where her husband was, and that she did not feel disposed to lay out any
money in cutting up carpets in a place she did not mean to stay in. ? Q. I believe
that another topic urged against her was her aversion to her family. Did you
probe her afterwards upon that point? A. I did. She principally referred on that
occasion to the marriage of Mrs. Hooper, which seemed to rankle most in her
mind, and she expressed at the same time a personal dislike to Mr. Ince; but with
regard to her two daughters especially, my opinion was, that she did not entertain
any decided animosity against them as her daughters individually, but it was
chiefly on account of the dislike which she had taken to their husbands. ?
Q. Whom did she describe as the principal instigator of the proceedings which
had been taken against her ? A. She always referred to Mr. Ince. ? Q. Did you
speak to her about her property?about any neglect of her property? A. I did?
9i THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMIN6.
Q. What was it that you said to her? A. She said that at that time that she had
never had the means of repairing her property; that she had always been kept so
close by the necessary expenses attending her husband's debts; and that she had
taken some steps to have the repairs made when she was seized and carried away.
? Q. Did she say that she was short of money? A. Yes, that she was always
kept short by difficulties of one kind and another. ? Q. Did she complain of Mr.
Dangerfield? A. She told me that Mr. Dangerfield had deceived her, I think. ?
Q. Did she say whether she could get any account from him or not? A. Yes,
that she could not get an account from him, or else that she could not get a satis-
factory one. ? Q. Did she say an account, or a satisfactory account? A. I cannot
say; it was some dissatisfaction of that kind Q. Did she say anything to you
about her husband's gallantries? A. Yes; she said that about fifteen years before
that time (that was in 1846) her husband had an illegitimate child, and I ques-
tioned her as to his more recent gallantries, and she said that she did not impute to
him connexion with the nurses in the ordinary sense of the word, but there were
certain indelicacies which he was addicted to with them which she did not like to
specify. ? Q. Did you say anything to her about violent language which had been
attributed to her? A. Yes; she told me she had always been rather of a hasty
temper, and that when she was angry, she generally made people aware of it: that
is what I heard from her. ? Q. Did you say anything to her about her alleged
habits of intoxication? A. With regard to that, she denied the imputation of
being addicted to intoxication, and said that if it were true that she were addicted
to intoxication the effects would be seen in her countenance, and she said it was
very likely she would not confess it to me if she were. ? Q. Did she complain of
any servants ? A. She complained of her servants?of having had many bad
servants. ? Q. Did you find that, although she seemed to brood over her wrongs,
she had not any difficulty at all in detaching herself from those topics ? A. None
at all. She would turn to any subject which I mentioned to her with perfect
facility. There seemed to be no engrossing attachment to any one idea or series of
ideas. ? Q. Had you an opportunity, at the inquisition on the 7th, and 8th, and 9th
of September, of watching her demeanour during the sittings of that commission?
A. I had. ? Q. Did you hear her questioned upon different topics connected with
herself and her property ? A. I did. I heard the Commissioner's examination.?
Q. What do you say of the answers which she gave to those inquiries ? A. I found
that her answers almost invariably agreed closely with what she had previously
told me, and that they evinced the powers of memory, perception and attention to
what was going on. ? Q. Did you take notes of the evidence as it proceeded ? A.
No, not of that particular examination, but generally I did. ? Q. At the time you
have seen Mrs. Cumming at your different interviews, was there anything to inti-
mate to you that she was a lady of dirty habits? A. Certainly not; I always
assumed the contrary as far as I had opportunity of observing. ? Q. Do you
remember an interview she had with you on the 15th of September at York House,
with Mr. Haynes, in your presence ? A. I cannot be quite sure of the date. ? Q.
Do you remember her complaining of her health? A. Yes, I do. ? Q. To what
did you attribute that? A. To her confinement. She was then evidently suffering at
that time from confinement and anxiety. Her health was beginning to shake the last
time I saw her there. ? Q. From the time of Mrs. Cumming's release from York
House did you attend her as her medical man ? A. I attended her constantly for the
remainder of the year 1846, and throughout 1847, and I think I attended her a few
times in 1848.? Q. Did you attend her at Mrs. Hutchinson's ? A. I did; also at
Camberwell-road, and at her present residence, St- John's Wood. ?Q. Have you
visited her lately in the present year? A. I saw her on the 25th of August last,
at Worthing, and I have seen her four or five times since November last, since
these proceedings. ? Q. Have you a memorandum of a conversation which took
place between you and her on the 25th of January, 1847 ? A. I have considered
its purport pretty well. I have it not by me, but a conversation which seemed to
indicate the state of her mind, and I took a note of it at the time. ? Q. Do you
remember the effect of it ? A. She was afraid then, I think, of some proceedings
or other, and she thought she had seen Mr. Hooper, I think, the night before, but
she expressly stated afterwards she was not sure she had seen Mr. Hooper.?
Q. Was that in consequence of anything you had said to her about keeping her
gate locked? A. That gave rise to it. I was some time in getting in, and I asked
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 95
her why the gate was locked, and why she was so careful, and she said she
thought she had seen Mr. Hooper about there, but she was not sure of it. She
said she was aware that her mind had become unusually suspicious in consequence
of what had occurred to her, and she might fancy that she had seen what she was
afraid of seeing. She seemed to me to have a watchful care over her mind, and a
power of analysis which seemed to me to be a strong indication of a sane mind. ?
Q. Has Mrs. Cumming conversed with you on the subject of her property ? A.
Occasionally. ? Q. Has she talked to you about her property in Wales, and as to the
difficulty of getting her rents ? A. She has mentioned it from time to time. ?
Q. Did she say anything to you about her children's claim to her affections ? A.
She seemed to think that they had forfeited all claim to her natural affection. ?
Q. Did she say anything to you about her grandchildren? A. I think that was
the only occasion on which I suggested anything to her with regard to her pro-
perty. I said that her grandchildren were innocent, that they, at all events, could
not have given her any cause of offence, and I suggested, in as delicate a way as I
could, that she need not extend her animosity to them, that she might make some
provision for them. ? Q. What did she say to that ? A. Her answer was very
short?that the grandchildren must take their lot with the children ; that the object
of her children would be partly accomplished if they could effect such a settlement
upon the grandchildren, and that she would not be coerced into any proceeding of
the kind.
The Commissioner.?Do you say that their object would be answered, or partly
answered ? A. Answered, or partly answered.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Did she say anything about visiting the sins of the
parents upon the children? A. Yes; she made use of an expression of that kind,
that the sins of the fathers should be visited on the children.
A Juryman.?That they were? A. That they were, or should be; I will not
pledge myself to the exact words. That was the expression used.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?I believe that through the month of September, 1847,
you were attending her for an attack of bronchitis? A. I was.? Q. Do you
remember on the 5th of October, the following month, finding her in bed? A. I
do. ? Q. On that morning did she say anything to you about poisoning fowls?
A. Either on that morning or on one or two mornings previously. I cannot re-
member the exact day on which the fowl was found dead. ? Q. What did she say
?did she say anything about the milk ? A. On the 5th of October there was
some milk in the room, which they had offered to the cats, but which they had
refused to drink.
Sir F. Thesiger.?She said so? A. She told me this herself.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?And she said that the cats had refused to drink it? CA.
Yes, that they had refused to drink it. That was after the fowl had been found dead.
? Q. The fowl had been found dead a morning or two before? A. A morning or
two before. ? Q. By her instructions did the servant give you a packet of crystal-
line substance, which was said to have been found in the fowl house? A. She did;
and I inferred that it was found there because it was stained with fowl's dung. ?
Q. The paper was? A. The paper was which contained it.? Q. Was some milk
also shown to you,in a saucer? A. Yes, it was. ? Q. Did you pour that in a clean
bottle ? A. I put it in a clean bottle, and took it home with me, at Mrs. Cumming's
request. ? Q. What did you find the crystalline substance to be which was given
you in the paper? A. That was acetate of lead. ? Q. And what was that which
was found in the milk ? A. It contained a considerable quantity of Epsom salts. ?
Q. What dues acetate of lead look like in its crystalline form ? A. There are
three or four crystalline substances which are very much alike?it is like Epsom
salts. ? Q. Would the acetate of lead given to the fowls be in appearance like the
salts found in the milk? A. In its natural state it would, and it would also be like
oxalic acid?they have all a general appearance very similar. ? Q. At that time,
did Mrs. Cumming appear to you to be very much excited or not? A. She cer-
tainly was very much agitated, and very much annoyed at the occurrence. ? Q.
When did you tell her it was acetate of lead? A. A morning or two afterwards ;
when I had examined it. ? Q. What did she say about it? A. She, at first, was
inclined to think that her family had been the means of having it placed there to
kill the fowls, for the purpose of annoying her. ? Q. Did you afterwards ascertain
how it was the Epsom salts came to be found iu the milk? A. No, I did not; not
'96 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
that I remember?I merely remember the fact of examining it. ? Q. I believe that,
from the beginning of 1848, Mrs. Cumming has been attended either by Dr Hale
or Dr Caldwell? A. I believe so. ? Q. Did you also visit her occasionally in
your professional capacity down to the endof June in that year? A. Yes,in 1848,
I did occasionally, but very seldom. ? Q. Have you occasionally, during the years
1849 and 1850, visited her? A. I have when I have been in the neighbourhood, I
have called upon her, and she has sometimes called upon me. ? Q. Did you observe
anything in her conduct and conversation different from that of a sane person?
A. Not at all. ? Q. Did you notice whether she maintained perfect control over
her own household, and over her own affairs ? A. I did; and I am perfectly
satisfied that she did, from my observation. Everybody in the house was attentive
to her orders, and solicitous about her. ? Q. Did any one, as far as you could dis-
cover, treat her as a person incompetent to manage her own affairs ? A. Not that
I ever observed. ? Q. Was she somewhat of an imperious disposition? A. She
certainly was. ? Q. Did she exact much attention from her servants? A. Avery
great deal; and I have no doubt it was often annoying to them. ? Q. Did it
appear to you that she was sometimes more authoritative than there was any occa-
sion for? A. Yes, I certainly observed that. ? Q. From the middle of 1850, to
August 1851, you did not see Mrs. Cumming at all, I suppose? A. I think not; for
more than a year I lost sight of her altogether. ? Q. On the 25th of August you
visited her at Worthing? A. Yes. ? Q. Was that at her request? A. I under-
stood it was at her request. ? Q. When you got there, did she say anything about
her family ? A. She said she was at Worthing in order to escape from their pur-
suit?that she was then under the feigned name of Mrs. Cleveland, the better to avoid
detection. ? Q. Did you find Dr Caldwell there? A. Dr Caldwell was there
when I arrived. ? Q. I believe you waited until his interview was over? A. I did.
? Q. Did you then go in her bed-room ? A. I did. ? Q. Was she dressed? A.
She was dressed neatly, as usual. ? Q. How was her health then? A. It was very
good, comparatively speaking; I had seldom seen her better, in my judgment.?
Q. Did you then enter into a conversation with her upon the proceedings that were
taking place against her? A. I did; she referred to it herself. ? Q. Did she talk
clearly concerning them? A. Quite. ? Q. Did she tell you of any measure she
had taken to escape from her relations? A. She did; she told me that she was
alarmed at some irruptions into her house. I cannot precisely fix what the irrup-
tions were that she alluded to, and said she was very uneasy at staying in the house
where she was, and that she had got up early one morning, I think at seven o'clock,
and went to ask Mr. Haynes' assistance to get away from the place. ? Q. Did she
relate to you a visit from Mrs. Ince to her residence in the Edgware Road? A. She
did; I can't say that it was in the Edgware Road, but she related au interview
with Mrs. Ince. ? Q. Would you have the goodness to describe it? A. She said
that while some proceedings were being taken, Mrs. Ince rushed suddenly into her
room, without any announcement or preparation; that she was alarmed at her
entrance, and that Mrs. Ince threw her arms round her neck; that her first impulse
was that Mrs. Ince intended to do her violence, she was so little prepared for any
act of apparent affection; but she told me plainly that she afterwards dismissed
that idea, and attributed it to the anxiety and alarm which she was under from the
conduct of her children. ? Q. That was at the same interview ? A. At the same
interview; she dismissed the idea, knowing her mind to be in such a state that she
might be attributing motives which perhaps were not just. ? Q. You say she got
lip one morning at seven o'clock to send for Mr. Haynes ? A. To go to Mr. Haynes,
if I understood her rightly. I am not sure how that was. ? Q. Did she say why
she had come to Worthing? A. To escape from her family. ? Q. Did she say
anything about the length of time she had been kept in a state of alarm? A. She
seemed seldom to have been altogether free since the time of the first commission.
? Q. Did she say whether she had requested any person to stay with her? A.
Yes, she did.? Q. Who did she say she had requested to stay with her? A. Mr.
Jones, who was going there by the name of James. ? Q. Did she say why she
wished him to stay with her ? A. She said she felt desirous to have some one by
her who would be watchful, and in a condition to protect her. ? Q. Did you say
anything to her about the protection of the law ? A. I explained to her, generally,
that the law would protect her, and that she would have nothing now to fear?that
any steps that could be taken would be taken under legal authority. She said I
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING. 97
might have told her that live years before?at the time of the former commission.
She said they had taken measures against her then, and -would probably do it
again. ? Q. Did she say anything about her courage? A. When I took leave of
her, I said she might have occasion for further courage to undergo any further
trial. She said she "hoped she should be equal to it, but constant dropping would
wear away a stone." ? Q. Did she say anything about her determination to resist?
A. Yes, she said she would resist to the last. ? Q. Some time after this, had you an
interview with her in the presence of Mr. Hutchinson and Mr. Jones ? A. Yes.
? Q. On that occasion did she appear to you to be mistress? A. Perfectly.?
Q. And to have control over all the persons in the house? A. Perfectly so.
I had the fullest opportunity of seeing that, and was perfectly sure of it.? Q. On
the 2nd of September, I believe you attended the Board of the Commissioners ? A. I
did. ? Q. Where was that? A. At Spring-gardens. ? Q. I believe you made a
statement to them? A. I made a statement to them of the interview I have just
mentioned at Worthing.? Q. On the 27 th of November, did you visit Mrs. Cumming
at the house at St. John's-wood, after her release from the Brixton asylum ? A. Yes,
I did.? Q. Was she sitting by the fire in the bed-room? A. She was on that
occasion. ? Q. You had seen her, you know, before she was taken ? A. I had, on
the 25th of August. ? Q. And you saw her again on the 27th of November ?
A. Yes. ? Q. Was she then altered or not ? A. She was very much altered, indeed,
for the worse ; her health was shattered in a great degree; and not only her health
but her mind was evidently also affected to a certain extent. ? Q. Do you mean that
her memory failed her ? A. Her memory?that is what I chiefly observed; for
a time she was a little confused, and also a little disturbed. ? Q. Did she possess
animation and readiness on that occasion in conversation ? A. She was glad to see
me; towards the end of the time she seemed to recover a little; as she regained
confidence, and had got a little better, she conversed with much more fluency and
accuracy than she did at the beginning of the interview, and I could see a difference
even then. ? Q. Did she recount to you all that had passed to her since you had
seen her before? A. She recounted the fact of her having been taken to the
asylum, and generally what had taken place. ? Q. Although you discovered this
alteration in her memory, did that impairment of memory amount to anything like
insanity ? A. Most decidedly not; I consider it, to a great extent, the result of her
recent confinement, her severe illness, and the mental shock she must have under-
gone on that occasion. I considered I was fully borne out, in this conclusion, on
seeing her subsequently, on the 30th of November, and once or twice in December,
when I found her recovering still more, and when her memory, which had been
impaired on the 27th, was comiDg round very much as her health improved. ?
Q. Did you see her on the 17th of December? A. Yes. ? Q. Did you find an
improvement then ? A. Yes. ? Q. Did you visit her on the 9th of December, 1851 ?
A. Yes, I did. ? Q. Did you still find a progressive improvement in her health?
A. Yes; she was still improving. ? Q. On the day that you called, did you ascer-
tain that Dr Diamond and Dr Davey had seen her in the morning? A. She told
me so. ? Q. Although her memory is improving, still is it defective with regard to
recent events ? A. 1 should say it is. ? Q. Do you think that at all material ?
A. It is what every one must anticipate?it is quite natural. ? Q. In proportion as
her health has improved, and personal comforts have increased around her, have
her anxieties since that diminished? A. They have. ? Q. And has her mental
vigour returned ? A. Certainly. ? Q. Is it your opinion that, supposing her mind
was released from the anxiety attendant on an inquiry like this, she would recover
her usual equanimity and intellect? A. I think she would entirely, except so far
as age may tell. ? Q. We are told that your name is mentioned in her will?when
did you first ascertain that? A. In August, 1851.? Q. Had you never heard it
hinted at before then? A. Never; I was quite ignorant of any will that she had
made, or the contents of it.?Q. I believe you declined being executor when you
did hear of it? A. I did.? Q. Have you a list of the different times that you
visited Mrs. Cumming? A. I have?producing a paper?(the witness recited the
dates of his visits to Mrs. Cumming from September 184G to June 1848, amounting,
altogether, to about one hundred visits).? Q- Then you saw her at Worthing?
A. August 25th, 1851; November 27th and 30th; December 17th and 29th.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?When was the last time you visited Mrs. Cumming ?
A. I saw her, for a few minutes, last night. ? Q. Did you converse with her then?
G
98 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
A. Shortly. ? Q. Is your opinion unchanged: are you still of opinion that she is
of sound mind? A. Quite. I am quite of that opinion.?Q. On all occasions
?when you have visited Mrs. Cumming, whether she has been in her room, or in
any room, have you found her neat, clean, and orderly in her person and in her
house? A. Always.
Cross-examined by Sir F. Thesiger.?When did you become a doctor of
medicine? A. I became a doctor of medicine in 1848. I was a bachelor of
medicine in 1843. ? Q. Have you had much experience in cases of insanity, or
has your practice been more general ? A. I have had considerable opportunities
of observing insane persons. ? Q. From what time should you say ? A. During
three years that I was a pupil I was constantly in the habit of seeing a pauper
asylum containing forty patients; and I was subsequently a student at the
Salpetriere, in Paris, for a whole year. ? Q. And during your pupilage you had
opportunities of seeing cases of this kind? A. Constantly. ? Q. Since you have
been in practice for yourself, have you had experience in cases of insanity ?
A. Not especially; it is since I have taken my diploma that I have had the
opportunity which I have spoken of in Paris. ? Q. But it is not your particular
calling? A. It is not my particular calling. ? Q. You probably will be able to
give us your definition of a delusion ; what do you consider a delusion? A. Per-
sons are suffering under delusions when they believe in things that flo not exist,
and draw wrong inferences which are not justified by the premises. But insane
delusion is also associated with a diseased mind, depending on a diseased state of the
brain. ? Q. That is the cause; I am asking you to give me a definition of a delusion ;
is the definition of a delusion believing that which is not true, and drawing wrong
inferences from it ? A. That would not constitute an insane delusion; certainly
not. ? Q. Is it not rather believing things which do not exist, and drawing right
conclusions from them, that is, drawing conclusions from them as though they did
exist ? A. Not necessarily. I should not take that as an indication of insanity,
not even the existence of a delusion absolutely.? Q. You do not consider a person
labouring under a delusion is in an unsound state of mind? A. Not necessarily ;
there must be some evidence of a diseased judgment; there must be diseased
operations of the mind as well. ? Q. Do you mean, that when a person is labouring
under a delusion, that is, under the belief of that which is not the fact, and which
never existed, is not in a diseased state of mind? A. Not necessarily so. ? Q. Is
it your belief, that a person may labour under a delusion?under the most striking
delusion imaginable?and yet may be all the while of a sound mind ? A. I would
instance the Mormonites, or any other general delusion ; we are all under some
delusion or other.? Q. Then it is your opinion that there is not such a thing as a
sound mind ? A. No, I have said nothing of the kind. ? Q. What is your parti-
cular delusion ? A. I say, a delusion in itself is no test of insanity. ? Q. As we are
all under a delusion, may I ask what is your delusion ? A. I do not feel called
upon to expose my own infirmities Q. But you have delusions? A. No doubt;
I do not pretend to be wiser than others. ? Q. What did you receive for going to
Worthing? A. I have not received any fee for that; of course, I expect my
expanses; but there is nothing else due. I have no clear expectations at all. ?
Q. I merely want to know whether you have been paid your fee, or not?you
are to be paid for going to Worthing? A. I have not been paid for going to
Worthing. ? Q. You will have what is right, no doubt; how much are you to
have, how much do j'ou expect? A. I do not know that I can be fairly called upon
to state what fee is usual for a physician going to Worthing.
Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.?Pray, do not object to it.
Witness.?I have no objection to state it; but it appears to me to be a question
not relevant to the point. I will state, that whatever I expect will be the usual fee,
and no more. ? Q. I understood you to say that you were attending Mrs.
Cumming in the year 1847, and that there were various occasions on which you
did attend her, and saw her, and had conversations with her at those times; is it
so? A. Those are the dates of my professional attendances.-?Q. When you paid
your professional visits, did you talk on other subjects with her? A. Yes, I
very often talked on other subjects, of course.? Q. Attending her in the years
1847 and 1848, am I to understand that Mrs. Cumming ever spoke to you at all
about her will? A. Never, except perhaps the occasion I have referred to when
I talked of her grandchildren; but she never consulted in any way on the
subject. ? Q. She never asked you to be trustee, did she? A. No, she never
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 99
asked me that. ? Q. Or executor ? A. No, she never asked me to be her
executor. ? Q. She never told you that you were a legatee under her ?will ?
A. Never. ? Q. You say, that on the 5th of October, 1847, she told you about the
milk ; you say, you ascertained that that which was said to come out of the milk
contained Epsom salts; and that in what was represented as having been found in
the fowl-hoase there was acetate of lead ? A. Yes Q. Who analyzed it with you?
A. The acetate of lead being in a substance, the analysis is easy, requiring only
about five minutes, and I did it myself. With reference to the milk, I was very
much engaged at the time, and I thought the milk might change a little ; I gave
half of it to a Mr. Spencer, whom I had known at the College of Chemistry,
where we had been students together, to analyze for me; and I analyzed the
other half on another occasion. ? Q. Did you tell Mrs. Cumming that the
milk contained Epsom salts ? A. I have very little doubt that I told her what I
found. ? Q. Did you tell her that the milk contained Epsom salts, and that the
other matter found in the fowl-house contained acetate of lead? A. I have no
doubt of it at all. ? Q. Are you sure that it was on the 5th of October, 1847, that
this happened? A. That is the date I have. ? Q. You have made an affidavit
upon this matter, and there is a copy of it (handing the same to the witness); look at
it, and say whether you did not state that it was the 5th of October, 1846 ? A. If
that is so, it must have been an error in copying, for in 1846 she was in Camber-
well, and at Mr. Hutchinson's, and this was in the Queen's-road. ? Q. You are
sure it must have been in the Queen's-road? A. Yes. ? Q. Did she refer to this
circumstance about the milk afterwards? A. She did, once or twice afterwards.
? Q. What did she say about the milk at that time ? A. She said, that she
thought it was done to annoy her, and to irritate her. ? Q. Did she say, she
thought it was done to poison her? A. No, she did not say that.? Q. Then she
was quite satisfied at those subsequent times, at all events, that there was no
poisonous substance in the milk? A. She might, and did, forget sometimes that
the acetate of lead was a distinct substance, and that it was not that that was found
in the milk. ? Q. But at other times did she understand that there was no
poisonous substance in the milk at all ? A.I am not sure that she did understand
thoroughly ; it is some time ago, and I do not recollect the conversations accurately.
? Q. Suppose she talked to you on the subject of the milk, and you found her
under the impression that there had been poison in it, did you endeavour to
remove the impression ? A. I have no doubt I should have corrected the impres-
sion.? Q. I understand you to say, that in one of your interviews with Mrs. Cum-
ming she spoke of her daughter rushing into the room in the Edgware-road, and
embracing her; that she believed, at first, she meant to strangle her, but that
her impression was removed when she came to consider, and that nothing of the
kind could be intended? A. Yes. ? Q. Her first impression was that there might
have been such an intention? but you say that that impression was entirely
removed from her mind? A. Yes; on subsequent consideration. ? Q. Will you
be good enough to tell me when it was she said so? A. That was on the 25th of
August, 1851, when she was relating the whole circumstance to me?she related it
in that way.? Q. Has she since that time ever spoken to you upon the subject of
her daughter's visit to the Edgware-road? A. Yes, on a subsequent occasion she
mentioned it again. ? Q. What has she said to you upon the subject? A. She has
given verv much the same account?substantially the same account. ? Q. Then
she has never since that time stated to you that her daughter intended to strangle
her? A. No; she never stated it to me in such a way as to lead me to suppose
that she entertained that idea now. ? Q. That is, then, she never stated to you
anything to lead to the impression on your mind ? that she believed her daughter
was going to strangle her ? A. Not that she believed it at the present hour, or
that she believed that, at the time I spoke to her. ? Q. Do you believe that she
ever entertained that impression ? A. Only during the time of the occurrence.?
Q. Then at that time when you saw her she entertained that notion ? A. No. ?
Q. But she has invariably told you pretty much the same thing?that although she
might at first have believed it, yet, on consideration, she thinks she must have been
wrong?that it must have been her suspicious mind? A. That is the account she
gave of it.? Q. Has that been invariably the tenor of her remarks? A. I do not
remember any other account of it. ? Q. Now, suppose she told you she was per-
suaded in her mind that her daughter had attempted to strangle her, and asserted
G 2
100 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
it over and over again, would you have considered that a delusion, or not ?
A. I do not know that I should, if she were prevailed on by reasoning a second
time afterwards, to dismiss the idea.? Q. Your opinion is, that if she confidently
asserted to others, over and over again, that her daughter did intend to strangle
her, that is not a delusion, and indicates no unsoundness of mind? A. It might
he a delusion. ? Q. But not an unsoundness of mind ? A. Not necessarily an
insane mind. ? Q. Does it indicate an unsoundness of mind ? A. What I mean
hy an insane mind, is a mind under the influence of disease?a disease of the brain.
? Q. A disease of the mind is a metaphorical expression; what do you mean by a
disease of the mind ? is a mind, which is not in a sound and healthy state, diseased
or not, in your estimation? A. A mind that is not in a sound condition may be
supposed to be diseased. ? Q. Do you consider a mind, labouring under a delusion,
to be in a sound condition, or not? A. Under the ordinary acceptation of the
words, a person may be in a sound mind, not diseased, and yet under a delusion.?
Q. Then do 1 understand you to say, that you consider that although a person is
labouring under a delusion, he may still be of a sound mind? A. Taking the
general phrase I would certainly say that; but not an insane delusion?I would
make that distinction.? Q. What do you mean by an insane delusion? A. A
delusion occurring in an insane mind. ? Q. You will distinguish between a delu-
sion and an insane delusion; will you tell to the jury what distinction you make
between the two? A. It is difficult to do it. ? Q. Explain, if you please, the dif-
ference between a delusion and an insane delusion? A. It is difficult to do it; but
what I understand by an insane delusion is, one influenced by some striking lesion of
the ordinary processes of thinking. ? Q. But there again you get figurative; what
do you mean by lesion of the ordinary processes of thought? A. When you
observe that a person shows some breach of the ordinary connexion between cause
and effect, which is different from what ordinary persons exhibit; it is not a purely
metaphysical question, but what we observe in the daily occurrences of life. ?
Q. I want you to give us the distinction which you have given, because that is one
which I do not understand, and which my learned friend, Mr. Serjeant Wilkins,
does. A. I think those forms of delusions are very rare where the general facul-
ties of the mind are not obviously impaired in other matters as well. ? Q. You
consider, then, an insane delusion is when there is a lesion of the mind; is that
your distinction ? A. A lesion in the reasoning process. ? Q. A lesion in the
reasoning process, which is a break, or rupture, if I may venture to call it so, in
the reasoning process ? A. I will not adopt your expressions. ? Q. Is it a wound
in the reasoning process?
A Juryman.?Will the Doctor inform us what he means by lesion?
Witness.?It is something very different from what we observe in the reasoning
powers of ordinary individuals, from which we get our opinion, perhaps a very
general one, of soundness of mind. ? Q. Lesion is a word which has a meaning,
has it not? A. Yes. ? Q. Yes; and it has a meaning in your mind; will you
give us the meaning of the word lesion, as you use it? A. A distortion, or disease;
something strikingly different from what is observed in ordinary individuals.?
Q. Is lesion a distortion or disease ? A. It is the result ofa disease; you may take the
word you use?a hurt if you like. ? Q. A break, or hurt, or a wound, is it not ?
I know that a definition is a perilous thipg. A. I do not consider that in forming
my opinion of the sanity of a person I am bound to enter into definitions; I formed
my opinion of Mrs. Cumming's sanity upon the same grounds and principles as
those which I should apply in any other case. ? Q. You are not here to form an
opinion as to the sanity of Mrs. Cumming, but to give your opinion to the jury, in
order that they may form their judgment upon it. A. I have formed it from having
observed the operations of her mind, and they are in no respect different from those
which I observe in other persons every day. ? Q. Then do you mean to say that
because you have found Mrs. Cumming rational on many subjects, although she
may be labouring under various delusions, if there is no lesion she is perfectly
sane? A. I do not think I am bound to take your hypothesis, for I do not think
she does labour under those delusions. ? Q. But you must take my hypothesis, as
the question I put to you is one of science ; 1 ask you, supposing it should turn out
that Mrs. Cumming was labouring under several delusions, although she might be
perfectly rational upon many other subjects, and most other subjects, is it your
opinion that, notwithstanding those delusions, she is a person of a sound mind?
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. J O I
A. I should like to be certified, before I gave an affirmative opinion on that point,
as to the nature of the particular delusions, and I could not answer the question
generally. ? Q. I will take the idea that her daughters are going to murder her,
and the idea repeated over and over again?I will take that? A. I am not sure
that I can admit that, if I disassociate it from any other evidence of a diseased
mind ; I do not see how I can admit it. ? Q. How do you mean disassociate it
from any other idea of a diseased mind ? A. I can find nothing in her mode
of thought different from that of sane persons; and I cannot see, because a
person fears that another is going to murder her, that in itself is a sign of
her insanity. ? Q. Do you think it is no ground for it? A. That I can say
nothing about; what may appear grounds to one person may not appear grounds
to another. ? Q. Then you consider that if there is any, the slightest occasion,
upon which any suspicion may arise in the mind of a person, that would justify
a belief that the person against whom the suspicion is entertained is capable
of any act however atrocious against her? A. Not necessarily; it might, or
might not, according to the tone and disposition of the person in whom that
cause might operate ; some persons entertain the most violent and outrageous con-
ceptions from a cause which would not strike another as deserving of attention.
? Q. You consider that it is a mere difference of mind, that where a person enter-
tains these extraordinary suspicions, without anything but the slightest foundation,
that is merely the particular character of the mind ? A. It is not necessarily a
proof of insanity?certainly not. ? Q. Then I understand you to say, that where
delusions prevail on particular subjects, that is not necessarily a proof of insanity?
A. Certainly, you may take that as my opinion. ? Q. Suppose the delusion should
be as utterly groundless as possible?suppose it has nothing whatever to rest upon,
what would be your opinion then? A. It might show some impairment of mind.
? Q. It might show some impairment of mind? A. It is impossible to state these
things generally. ? Q. You qualify so much? A. I must qualify to a certain
extent.? Q. Would it show unsoundness of mind? A. Every impairment indi-
cates unsoundness of mind, but there are degrees of that. ? Q. Give me my own
word which I put to you, which is, unsoundness of mind ; why shift the term.
Would it in your judgment be considered unsoundness of mind ? A. It might with
that qualification. ? Q. With what qualification? A. A certain degree of unsound-
ness of mind might not indicate insanity, that is, not necessarily. ? Q. A certain
degree of unsoundness of mind, what do you mean by that ? A. There are dif-
ferent degrees and different stages of insanity, and different varieties of insanity.
? Q. Do you mean that a mind can be sound and unsound at the same time ? ?
A. What I have stated does not involve that absurdity. ?Q. Is it your judgment
that a mind may be sound and unsound at the same time; I want to know that ?
A. I think there is in every mind soundnesss and unsoundness. ? Q. Is it your
opinion that a mind may be sound and unsound at the same time? A. If you will
take my answer in the words I give you, I will adhere to that answer; there is
some soundness and some unsoundness in every man, inasmuch as no mind can be
perfect. ? Q. No doubt some parts of the mind may be sounder than others, but I
am speaking of a mind which is diseased, and I ask you, whether it is your opinion
that a mind has been sound and unsound at the same time ? A. If by an unsound
mind you mean a diseased mind, you beg the question. ? Q. I am obliged to beg
the question, and beg very hard too ? A. Then I must give it up to you in that sense.
? Q. Is it your opinion, at all events, that a mind can be sound and unsound at
the same time ? A. Except with the qualification I have over and over again stated
to you.? Q. Did you state to Dr Winslow that there was acetate of lead in the
milk ? A. I did not state that to him. Dr Winslow must have misunderstood me in
conversation. When I saw Dr Winslow's report, I made an affidavit afterwards
to correct that.
Re-examined by Mr. Seijeant Wilkins.?Q. Youjsaid just now that there are delu-
sions and insane delusions ? A. I did. ? Q. And I think you began by making a state-
ment which might have rendered all this vehemence unnecessary. Did you not
say something about the Mormonites? A. Yes. ? Q. As far as your reasoning
enables you to judge, can there be any doubt that the Mormonites labour under a
delusion ? A. That is certainly my belief. ? Q. Would you, therefore, pronounce
the Mormonites to be insane? A. No, that could not be done. ? Q. There are
some gentlemen who believe in clairvoyance, do you believe them to be insane ?
102 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
A. No; although I believe them to he under a delusion. ? Q. There are some
people who believe that they have cured patients by means of mesmerism ? A.
That also is a delusion. ? Q. Would you say that all those persons are insane ?
A. No. ? Q. Some years ago there "was a sect who made a great noise in this
kingdom, who believed that Johanna Southcote was going to give us a Shiloh, do you
believe that all the followers of Johanna Southcote were insane ? A. No. ?
Q. Suppose a person to labour under a palpable delusion, and afterwards to reason
herself into the belief that it is a delusion, does that show unsoundness of mind ?
A. That would not indicate unsoundness of mind. Q. Suppose Mrs. Cumming
did at one time think that her daughter meant to strangle her, and afterwards
stated she was convinced that that impression was erroneous, would that indicate
anything like unsoundness of mind ? A. On the contrary, I think it would show
the integrity of the ordinary faculties of the mind.
Examined by the Commissioner.?Q. You say you do not believe delu-
sions to be insanity, but do you believe them to be tests of insanity ? A. Not
absolutely, certainly not.? Q. Not tests? A. No, there are .many insane persons
?who have delusions, and others who have not. ? Q. What do you consider a test
of insanity ? A. An obvious impairment of the reasoning faculties, and the other
powers of the mind, generally evidenced by other tests. Q. Different circum-
stances might drive you to the conclusion? A. Yes.? Q. You do not think that the
existence of delusions is a test which would drive your mind of necessity to that
conclusion ? A. Not necessarily, although undoubtedly in many cases they are
the indication of insanity. I say there are insane persons who have no delusions,
and sane persons who have delusions, therefore delusions cannot be absolutely con-
sidered as a test of insanity. Q. Would you draw a distinction between a diseased,
mind and an unsound mind? A. No, I do not draw that distinction myself, I
use the terms synonymously.? Q. If a man's mind is diseased is it unsound?
A. Yes.
Robert James Ilale, Esq., M.D., sworn, examined by Mr. James.?Q. I believe
you are a doctor of medicine, and a licentiate of the College of Physicians? A. I
am.?Q. Do you know this lady, who is the subject of inquiry here, Mrs. Cum-
ming ? A. I do. ? Q. When did you first see her? A. In the latter part of 1847.
A Juryman.?What month? A. It was either November or December.?
Q. Last year? A. 1847.
Mr. James.?Q. Upon what occasion did you make your first visit to her ? A. I
"was sent for in a hurry; she was in a fit. ? Q. Where was she then residing? A. In
the Queen's-road. ? Q. Where she is now? A. Where she is now.? Q. When
you went there, in what state did you find her; what was the fit? A. I found her
on the ground ; it was of an epileptic character ; very slight. ? Q. Did you attend
her for some little time ? A. I paid her one or two visits, and discontinued my
attendance. ? Q. Before you discontinued your visits she was perfectly restored to
health ? A. Yes. ? Q. It was merely temporary ? A. Yes.
Mr. James.?Now, on this occasion, you say you had not much conversation
"with her, but was there anything at all about her conduct that struck you as strange
or remarkable. A. Not at all. ? Q. When did you next see her? A. January
the 24th, 1848. ? Q. Upon what occasion did you see her then? A. She was
suffering then from an affection of the bladder. ? Q. She has paralysis, has she not?
A. Yes ; slightly so. ? Q. All that you attended her for was physical infirmities?
A. Yes. ? Q. How long did you see her then ? A. I saw her to February the
23rd. ? Q. Did you see her daily ? A. Yes ; or nearly so. ? Q. Had you the
opportunity of conversing with her then? A. Yes. ? Q. Just state generally ;
perhaps you had heard at this time, which may have directed your attention to it?
had you heard she had been the subject of a Commission in 1846 ? Did you know
that fact at the time? A. Yes. ? Q. Then you knew you were attending a lady
?who had been the subject of inquiry in 1846 ? A. Yes. ? Q. And were you aware
of the fact of the Commission having been withdrawn ? A. Yes; I was not aware
of so much as I am now. ? Q. Did that attract your attention more than if you
had been called to an ordinary person? A. Yes. ? Q. During the whole of that
time, from January to February, did you converse with her? A. Yes, I did; in
fact, she is a very conversant old lady. ? Q. Did you see anything about her at
that time to indicate that she was of unsound mind? A. Not at all. ? Q. Did she
ever at that time talk about her children ? A. Oh, yes. ? Q. In what way did she
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 103
speak of her children in 1848? A. I do not know that I can relate any conversa-
tions, but she spoke a great deal about her children, the way in which they had
acted towards her, and stated that although nominally she had been put into a
lunatic asylum by her husband, he was a very old man, and could not be the mover
in anything of the kind, and she had to thank her daughters for it. She was always
very violent in her expressions against her daughters in consequence. I am not
recollecting exactly the words, but the substance of what she said. ? Q. Is she an
irritable purson? A. Very.?Q. Would her diseases physically render the mind more
irritable? A. To a certain extent they would ; I should say she was naturally so.
? Q. And is she a woman who would express herself strongly on any subject.
A. Yes; always something superlative. ? Q. She spoke of her children in the way
in which you have told us, and spoke of their treatment of her? A. Yes.?
Q. Upon any other subject was there anything that struck you? A. She spoke of
that matter about the milk. ? Q. What did she tell you about that? A. She told
me at that time that the poison was in the milk, and that she had given it to her
cats to drink, and that the cats would not take it, and that roused her suspicions;
and the same day, or day after, I forget which, she said a fowl was brought up to
her dead ; and that Dr Barnes had analyzed and found poison in the milk. That
was her statement then ; it is somewhat modified now. ? Q,. Should you call that
an insane delusion if there were any foundation for the fact? A. Not if there was
foundation for the fact. ? Q. Have you heard Dr Barnes's statement about the
analysis he made ? A. I have spoken to Dr Barnes several times concerning it.
? Q. Before you arrived at an opinion that that was an insane delusion, should you
not institute an inquiry as to whether there was any foundation, or existence, or
supposed existence for the fact? A. Of course ; because it would depend upon that
whether the delusion was a mere delusion or an insane delusion. ? Q,. All, or many
individuals reason differently from certain premises ? A. Certainly. ? Q. Some
arrive at right and some at wrong conclusions? A. Certainly; the mind is not
constituted alike. ? Q. Do you, having ascertained the fact, and conversed with
Dr Barnes, consider that to be an insane delusion ? A. Certainly not. ? Q. Have
you given us, as nearly as you can, the general outline of her conversations with you
up to that time. A. She used to talk to me sometimes an hour at a time; I had a
great many conversations with her. ? Q. Loquacity on the part of a lady is not
insanity ? A. Certainly not; if so, I have a great many insane patients. ? Q. Now,
as to her cats, did you observe at that time her fondness for her cats? A. Yes ;
she was very fond of her cats. ? Q. You attended her frequently; I presume in
her bed-room ? A. Always in her bed-room. ? Q. What did you observe about
her bed-room? A. I observed nothing particular at all. ? Q. Was that from
January up to February, 1848? A. Yes. ? Q. Have you seen sometimes her cats
in her bed-room. A. Oh frequently; I have often had to let them in and out of
the door; they used to scratch the door when they wanted to come in or go out.
Mrs. Cumming has frequently asked me to let them out. ? Q. Did you see anything
in her bed-room to justify the statement as to the state of filth in which it was?
A. No; certainly not. ? Q. Nothing of the kind? A. Nothing of the kind.?
Q. And you were in her bed-room constantly? A. For a year and a half.??
Q. Now, what was the next time you were sent there? A. Next time I was sent
for to see her at St. Leonards-on-Sea; that was September 4th, 1848. ? Q. The
same year? A. The same year. ? Q. What was the cause of sending for you then?
A. She was suffering then from fever?a little delirium. ? Q. A temporary deli-
rium ? A. Yes; consequent on fever. ? Q. How long did you attend her then ?
A. I remained with her the whole of that day, and came back in the evening, and
I recommended her to remove to Brighton, because St. Leonard's was a very incon-
venient distance for me to come and see her ; I could not get back to do anything
for myself. ? Q. When did you next attend her? A. I saw her then at Brighton,
in September, 16th and 17th.
A Juryman.?In the same year? A. Yes ; the same year ; she went from St.
Leonard's to Brighton.
Mr. James.?When did you see her again in London ? A. Then I saw her occa-
sionally in November and December, in the Queen's-road. ? Q. What year ?
A. The same year. Then I was called up in the middle of the night, on the 1st of
January, 1849. ? Q. Was she then in the Queen's-road? A. She was then in the
Queen's-road; she was then suffering from extensive inflammation of. the lungs,
104 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
and pleurisy; sitting up in bed she could hardly breathe, and I attended her from,
then to February the 15th. ? Q. It may be considered, I fear, a little tedious, but
I must ask you these questions. Now, from January 1st to February 15th, did you
see her nearly every day? A. Every day; sometimes twice, sometimes three
times. ? Q. Now, we will ask you, as we have heard evidence upon that, what
was the state of her bed-room as to filth? A. Nothing of the kind. ? Q. What?
A. There was no filth at all The room felt close, in consequence of her never
having the window open; in fact, she was very subject to a chronic affection of the
eye. ? Q. That is visible now, is it not? A. Yes, the slightest thing affects her.?
Q. The room was close ? A. Yes; and not only that, but she has bodily infirmities.
Q. Was it a fact, that she was labouring under bodily infirmities, which rendered
those sort of transactions perfectly involuntary on her part? A. I believe so;
I have always looked upon it as so. ? Q. You have heard the statements given
by some of these servants as to the state of the rooms; as far as you observed
it, from January down to February 15th, 1849, is there any ground for such
statements ? A. I do not believe there is a word of truth in it. ? Q. Was
there any filth that you observed ? A. None. ? Q. You say the room was
close from the windows not being opened ? A. Yes ; and from her bodily
infirmities. ? Q. You observed, I suppose, her partiality for the cats ? A, Yes.?
Q. Was there anything in it that struck you as strange? A. No, not the slightest.
? Q. Do you remember who the servants were? A. No, I do not. ? Q. Was
she living comfortably and respectably, as far as you observed? A. Yes, always.
? Q. Was there at that, time anything in her manner, tracing it from January to
February the 15th, was there anything in her manner that indicated any un-
soundness of mind? A. Quite the contrary. ? Q. Will you be kind enough to
tell us when you next attended her ? A. She had a relapse on March the 10th,
and I attended her then till the 27th. ? Q. March the 10th in the same year?
A. Yes. ? Q. The 27tli? A. Yes; that was the last of my attendance.?
Q. June, 1849 ? A. 1849. ? Q. Pleurisy, was it ? A. Inflammation of the lungs
and pleurisy. ? Q. When did you next see her? A. I saw her then at Brighton,
October the 28th, 1851.? Q. Were you sent for? A. Yes, it was a message
conveyed in a letter to Mr. Haynes, in which there was a postscript for me to go
down immediately to Brighton. ? Q. Did you go down? A. I went down by the
twelve o'clock train. ? Q. Where did you find her ? A. In the back drawing-room,
which was her bed-room. ? Q. In what state of mind did you find her? A. She
was exceedingly excited and frightened; in fact, when I was in the room there were
one or two knocks at the door, and she started and said, " There now, they wilL
take me to a lunatic asylum." ? Q. Have you seen any keepers there ? A. Down
stairs. ? Q. Keepers? A. I could not say they were keepers; I saw four persons
there. ? Q. Do you know who they are? A. Not of my own knowledge; I was
told one was Mrs. luce, two of them were keepers, and the fourth was, I think,
Mr. Turner. ? Q. Were they men or women keepers? A. I think it was a man
and woman keeper. ? Q. Mrs. Ince, a man and woman keeper, and Mr. Turner,
the attorney? A. Yes. ? Q. You said she was excited and alarmed? A. Yes,
of course; I will not vouch who they were. ? Q. You found her very much
excited and alarmed? A. I did. ? Q. What passed; what did you say to her;
did she describe to you what had happened? A. Yes ; she told me that her door
had been broken open violently, and that she had been examined by Sir Alexander
Morison and Dr King and Mr. Turner. She complained very much of the mode
in which the examination was conducted. ? Q. What did she say about that, as
nearly as you can remember ? A. She said that a great many very coarse ques-
tions were put to her, and some she said she would not answer. To ascertain the
truth of this, I asked Watson, who was in the room, what was the nature. ? Q. In
her presence? A. Yes, in Mrs. Cumming's presence. ? Q. What was the nature
of the conversation ? A. Of the questions. ? Q. Well ? A. And she did state
things to me that somewhat surprised me, and which I had rather not repeat, rela-
tive to her husband. ? Q. Were they, in your opinion, coarse and indecent ques-
tions to put to a lady? A. Mrs. Watson stated to me that they were put by Mr.
Turner. ? Q. I am afraid we must have what was said? A. I had much rather
not repeat the expressions.
A Juryman.?We are not here to try Mr. Turner's conduct. I do not think it
has anything to do with the question.
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING. 105
The Commissioner.?How this lady was treated by Mr. Turner may be material.
Mr. James.?Most material, sir.
Witness.?She was asked about her husband, if he was not a very gay man, if
he had not connexion with the servants and nurses, and the different persons; to
which Mrs. Cumming did not reply.
Q. State it shortly, if you please? A. And then Mr. Turner, so Mrs. Watson
said, asked Mrs. Cumming, "Did you not see Captain Cumming do the thing?"
Of course, I do not vouch for the truth of this. I have nothing to do with it.
The Commissioner.?Q. You were present when this was told to Mrs. Cum-
ming? A. Yes, there was a good deal in the same kind of strain. ? Q. In an
offensive and indecent manner? A. Yes. I expressed myself at the time, that it
was bad enough for a physician to ask those questions.
A Juryman.?Did she answer while this was going on? A. Yes, she said it
was so. ? Q. And you say she stated she refused to answer ? A. She did. ?
Q. Now just state as shortly as you can what passed? A. I was in the room for
some time, and after that I left with the intention of calling upon Dr King. I went
to his house, but I did not see him. ? Q. Did you leave her at Brighton that day ?
A. No, I returned again, and found Mr. Elliott in the drawing-room with Mr.
Haynes, that is the keeper of the Effra Hall Lunatic Asylum.? Q. You gave a
certificate that she was not fit to be removed ? A. Yes, I did. ? Q. And at that
time, before you gave that certificate, you saw Mrs. Cumming ? A. I did. ?
Q. Did you believe, at the time you gave that certificate, that she was not fit to be
removed ? A. Yes.
Mr. Petersdorff.?It had better be put in.
Witness.?I gave that certificate to Mr. Elliott. ? Q. I believe you made an
affidavit in verification of it. A. I did. ? Q. Was she in your opinion at that
time in a fit state to be removed ? A. Clearly not; and what made me give a
certificate more strongly was this, that I was told that she was to be removed by
the railroad, and I had heard Mrs. Cumming express herself so many times of her
aversion to railroads, that she had never been on one, and she hoped she never
should, and I think, if I remember right, there was something of that kind men-
tioned in the certificate. ? Q. You made an affidavit that she was not then in a
fit state to be removed as she was ? A. Yes. ? Q. How long did you remain with
her? A. I saw her that evening, and I remained at Brighton that night.?
Q. That was the night of the 28th. A. Yes, and I saw her on the morning of the 29th
early. ? Q. Where ? A. On my visit then I saw either one or two persons in the
parlour who had remained there all night, I was informed.
Mr. James.?Q. Who were they? A. I was told they were the keepers
from the asylum? Q. Were they the same people you had seen before? A. I
imagine they were. ? Q. Did you see Mrs. Cumming? A. Yes, I did. ? Q. In
what state did you find her on the 29th. A. I found her rather quieter than she
was the day before, but she was in great fear, she knew that directly I went to
London they would take her off to an asylum. I said what I could to pacify her.
I stated they would not do anything of the kind. ? Q. You did what you could to
pacify her ? A. I did. ? Q. Did you then leave Brighton ? A.I left Brighton.
I made an affidavit the same day in London, and I did not see her again till
November the 26th, after her removal from the asylum? ? Q. Where did you
see her? A In the Queen's-road, where she is now. ? Q. After she had been
taken to the Asylum at Effra Hall, and brought back to the Queen's-road, you saw
her on the 26th of November. A. Yes. ? Q. Have you seen her constantly since?
A. I have seen her about three times a week since.? Q. Up to the present time ?
A. Yes. ? Q, You have had many opportunities of seeing her and ascertaining the
state of her mind? A. Yes, I have.? Q. Is it your opinion that she is of sound
or unsound mind ? A. It is my opinion that she is of sound mind. ? Q. I will
first ask this question as to her physical state on the 26th of November. Did you
find her then altered after she had.been at the Effra Hall ? A. In fact she was suf-
fering greatly from exhaustion, she could really answer no question whatever.
?Q. What day had she come from the asylum ? A. I do not know, she had been
removed some few days. ? Q. She was very much altered ? A. Yes. ? Q. Suf-
fering greatly from exhaustion and could hardly answer you ? A. Yes. ? Q. Was
she suffering pain did she say ? A. Yes, great pain in her bowels. I think she
had diarrhoea. ? Q. And nervousness ? A. Very much. ? Q. And her nerves had
106 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
been shaken ? A. Very much ; in fact, to use her own expression, she wished that
she might be left to die. ? Q. That she stated to you when you saw her when she
first came from the asylum ? A. That was the first visit; I said very little to her.
Cross-examined by Mi*. Petersdorff.?You say that you first knew Mrs.
Cumming in 1847 ? A. I did. ? Q. Where were you yourself residing at that
time? A. I resided?in fact, I had been only in St. John's Wood about a month,
in the Quecn's-road. ? Q. Were you living near Mrs. Cumming? A. About
twenty yards off, perhaps. ? Q. From her present residence? A. Yes; imme-
diately opposite. ? Q. Was your first knowledge of Mrs. Cumming derived from
her accidentally sending to you? A. Yes. ? Q. You had no introduction at all?
A. No. ? Q. Were you at the time acquainted with Mr. Haynes? A. No, I did
not know Mr. Haynes for a month afterwards. ? Q. Have you directed much of
your attention to cases of insanity ? A. I have seen a great deal of it. ? Q. What
opportunity have you had of seeing a great deal ? A. I was a pupil of the cele-
brated Dr Pritchard, of Bristol, and attended Saint Peter's Hospital, where there
are several wards devoted to insane cases. ? Q. Then, as I understand you, your
knowledge of insane cases was derived from the information you got during your
pupilage? A. No; I have had several cases, and even now. ? Q. How many
cases do you think you have had under your own superintendence ? A. Really, I
cannot say. ? Q. How long have you been in practice on your own account?
A. About twelve years. ? Q. And have you had about thirty patients? A. Yes,
private patients. ? Q. Have you no public institution under your arrangement ?
A. Yes, I have; I am physician to the Western General Dispensary, not an insane
institution. ? Q. You are not connected with any public institution for the reception
of the insane? A. No. ? Q. You have stated that a number of times you have
seen Mrs. Cumming, and given us a long list of dates. Will you tell me whether
during the time you were attending her there was any other medical attendant
besides yourself? A. Not perhaps at the precise time I was attending. ? Q. But
about those times? A. Yes. ? Q. Can you fix about the time there were other
medical persons attending the patient besides yourself? A. Dr Caldwell, I
imagine, attended her in 1848, from about March to about August or September.
? Q. Were you in the habit of meeting in consultation on this occasion? A. No,
not at all. ? Q. Can you give me other times at which you know Dr Caldwell
or some other medical man was attending as well as yourself? A. I believe Mrs.
Cumming was exceedingly fond of having medical gentlemen. I am sure she has
had enough of it lately. ? Q. Will you be kind enough to tell me if you can fix
on other times when other medical men were attending her as well as yourself?
A. I imagine Dr Caldwell might have attended her after September perhaps, to
November or so; I think she has told me she had seen Dr Caldwell, she made no
secret of it. ? Q. You have said that you attended very frequently indeed upon
Mrs. Cumming?about what time used you to go ? A. At all times. ? Q. Were
you ever there early in the morning? A. I have been there very early in the
morning?six o'clock in the morning, when she has sent for me. ? Q. What was
the time of your ordinary visits? A. About eleven or twelve. ? Q. I suppose at
those times when you called it was an understood thing that you would make your
visits about eleven or twelve ? A. Yes. ? Q. When you went at eleven or twelve
in the day the room was to rights? A. Yes, exactly. ? Q. Did you at any time
visit Mrs. Cumming on the footing of an acquaintance, or was it always professional
visits you paid her. A. I used to see her often upon the footing of an acquaintance;
frequently I called without expecting any fee at all. ? Q. Have you ever dined
"with her, or drank tea? A. I think I have dined with her once. ? Q. In the
course of all these visits, did not Mrs. Cumming frequently introduce the names of
her daughters? A. Frequently. ? Q. Was not that a prevailing topic when she
had these conversations for an hour or two hours together, and she was very
chatty? A. It was not what I could call a universal topic. ? Q. Was it not a
very prominent topic in her conversation? A. Sometimes it was, but not always.
? Q. Will you, then, be kind enough to tell us whether you have not heard Mrs.
Cumming, over and over again, express the strongest feelings of prejudice against
her daughters ? A. I have heard her express very frequently, and in very strong
terms, her feelings against her daughters, in consequence of things that had
occurred. Q. Did you ever hear her adopt at any other time a manner except
that of very strong prejudice and dislike. A. I think her remarks, generally
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 107
speaking, were directed against the husbands of her daughters. ? Q. Did you ever
hear her assign, for instance, any reason against Mr. Ince for her detestation of
him? A. The reason that she assigned for her disliking Mr. Ince, that she
believed he had been, in a sense, instrumental in persuading her daughters to take
proceedings against her and putting her in a lunatic asylum?that was the notion
she had?and against Mr. Hooper, she disliked him because he was a trumpeter,
she called him. ? Q. In these conversations, when she mentioned the name of Mr.
Hooper, did she always persevere in charging him with being a trumpeter.
Mr. James.?He was a trumpeter.
Mr. Petersdorff.?At the time you heard Mr. Hooper's name mentioned,
was not her complaint against Mr. Hooper that he was a trumpeter ? A. That
was one of her complaints. ? Q. Do you remember any other complaint she
brought against Mr. Hooper ? A. That she thought it was a very great degrada-
tion for her daughter to marry him. I need not tell you Mrs. Cumming is a
Welsh woman. ? Q. What inference we are to draw from that I do not know ?
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?Because they are fond of their pedigrees.
Mr. Petersdorff.?Did she boast at all of her exalted descent? A. She was
very proud. ? Q, Was there any other ground of complaint against Mr. Hooper
than as being a trumpeter? A. A trumpeter, and being in station beneath her
daughter. ? Q. In these conversations, did you hear from Mrs. Cumming that she had
been perfectly reconciled to Mr. and Mrs. Hooper for several years ? A. I think I
did hear something of the kind. ? Q. Having heard that they were reunited, did
Mrs. Camming at any time suggest to you any reason why she renewed her feelings
of hatred against Mr. Hooper? A. Not that I remember. I do not charge my
memory with it. ? Q. Did you not learn from Mrs. Cumming that the marriage
of Mrs. Ince was with her perfect consent and approbation, and the consent and
approbation of Captain Cumming ? A. I really do not know. I should not like
to answer. ? Q. You have said that Mrs. Cumming was a woman of an irritable
temper, or only at times ? A. No ; very affable occasionally. ? Q. When she became
irritable did you observe that there was any reason for her change of manner ?
A. I think she generally used to get so from her own description of her wrongs. ?
Q. Am I to understand she worked herself up in a passion in that way ? A. Yes,
frequently. ? Q. When she talked about this proceeding of the milk?you say she
mentioned that very often?did she say who she thought had introduced the
poison ? A. No, I do not know that she ever showed it to me. ? Q. Will you
undertake to say that she did not state who it was that she suspected of having
poisoned the milk ? A. I will say that I do not recollect Mrs. Cumming saying to
me who she thought it was. ? Q. Will you swear she never expressed to you her
suspicions on that subject ? A. Certainly I will. ? Q. You represent to the jury
she never on any occasion at all intimated to you whom she supposed poisoned the
milk? A. I do not believe she ever did. She stated to me often that there was
poison in the milk, and that her fowls died. ? Q. Did she ever suggest to you how
she thought the poison had been introduced into the milk? A. No. ? Q. Did you
never ask her ? A. Not that I know of. I may; but I do not remember. ? Q.
Will you undertake to swear that when she made that statement about the poison
in the milk, your information did not suggest questions to her? A. I should be
sorry to say at this distance of time. I did not ask the question at the time; but
my impression is, that she never did state to me who she suspected, most certainly.
? Q. You have stated your opinion that Mrs. Cumming is of sound mind. Will
you have the goodness to explain what is your definition of a sound mind, as con-
trasted with an unsound one ? A. I take it, a person is of sound mind whose
conduct, thoughts, actions, and affections, are in accordance with those of the great
mass of mankind. As regards the standard, it is a very uncertain thing to talk of
a standard of unsoundness, because we generally take ourselves as the standard,
which is rather a fallacious thing, so that I should not take a person of unsound mind
who differed from myself Q. You would take as a test of perfect soundness of
mind, your own natural mental capacity ? A. I would. ? Q. Now supposing you
were to labour under some delusion, not as a theory or speculative doctrine, but
with respect to a physical fact, and that no reasoning or evidence could remove the
erroneous belief from your mind, would you say that was indicative of soundness
of mind, or the opposite ? A. There are many delusions. ? Q. Answer the ques-
tion, if you please ?
108 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
Mr. James.?He must finish his answer.
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?It was perfectly clear that he was not about to give
an answer to my learned friend's question.
Mr. James.?He may give an answer, and if it is not an answer, he may repeat
the question.
Witness.?I never answered it.
The Commissioner.?Put the question again.
Mr. Petersdorff.?I take your mental capacity as a test of soundness ? A.
You may, if you like. ? Q. I dare say we cannot have a better. Supposing you
believed the existence of a physical fact which was shown to you by demonstrative
evidence did not and could not exist, would you say that a permanent belief in its
existence was consistent with that soundness of mind you perhaps justly attribute
to yourself? A. It might or might not, under particular circumstances, according
to what that fact was. If you will mention what it is, I will tell you; there are so
many physical facts. ? Q. I will illustrate what I mean. Suppose you laboured
under a delusion that the table at which those gentlemen are sitting is not a table,
and you persevered, year after year, in defiance of the physical evidence of the
existence of the table, that it was not a table, would you say that was indicative of
insanity or not? A. A person who believed that which was acknowledged by all
the world to be a table, and who could not be reasoned out of it, that would be a
delusion. ? Q. And it would be evidence of insanity ? A. It would be an insane
delusion. ? Q. Supposing you were reasoned out of the erroneous belief as to that
not being a table, and after the lapse of a year or two, were to return again to that
delusion, would you say that that was [indicative of returning insanity ? A. It
frequently is the case in insane cases. ? Q. As to the test of insanity, is there not
a distinction between a disbelief in an ascertained physical fact, and a disbelief with
respect to a mere theory or doctrine? A. Yes, there is a difference.?Q. With respect
to a want of evidence as to a theory or doctrine, would you say that was indicative
of insanity ? A. Certainly not. ? Q. But if it related to a positive doctrinal fact,
it would be? A. I imagine it would. ? Q. You have obliged the jury, though it
was rather an incidental remark, as to the distinction between delusions and insane
delusions ? A. Yes. ? Q. Will you point out to the jury the difference between a
delusion, and a delusion which constitutes insanity, according to your notion ? A.
I take it, an insane delusion is the expression as to the reality of things which do
not really exist and the action of the person in accordance with that belief, or you
may have an insane delusion where there is some foundation in fact, but the ideas
are carried out to an absurd and extravagant extent: those are insane delusions.
Mr. Petersdorff.?Q. I suppose you would not call it an absurd delusion for a
person to keep two or three cats ? A. Certainly not. ? Q. But would you call it an
insane delusion if some person kept five or six cats, kept them in her bed-room,
and scarcely ever allowed the door to be opened?
The Commissioner.?Q. Is keeping cats a delusion ? A. Certainly not.'
Mr. James.?The keeping a live cat cannot be a delusion.
Re-examined by Mr. James.?Q. Keeping a cat, or five thousand cats is not a
delusion ? A. No. ? Q. And that would rather range under an eccentricity bor-
dering on extravagance of mind ? A. Yes. ? Q. I asked you whether you think
keeping six cats is such an extravagance as would be a test of insanity ? A. Cer-
tainly not. ? Q. My learned friend put Bishop Berkeley's theory, the belief of a
table not being a table. I suppose if a person stated to you that a table, which you
yourself thought was a table, looked like a sofa, before you pronounced that it was
a delusion, you would inquire whether there was any disease in the eye? A. Yes.
? Q. If a person whom you were called on to Attend, said, " That table is not a
table, it appears to me to be a sofa," would not the first thing you would inquire
be, whether the eye was in a healthy state? A. No doubt there are many
speculative delusions. ? Q. If a person told you it was not a chair, but it was a stool,
would not your first question be to inquire what was the state of the retina of the
eye? A. No doubt Q. Must it not therefore depend entirely upon circumstances ?
A. No; every case must be judged by its own merits. ? Q. Another question was
put to you, which a little unintentionally and unfairly represented your answer. I
think you said that an examining party called in to test insanity, naturally takes as
the standard of sanity his own case? A. Of course. ? Q. You do not set up your
own state of mind as the standard of sanity, but as a standard of sanity by which
THE CASE OF MES. CATHERINE CUMMING. 109
the examining party tests the examined party ? A. Yes. ? Q. Perhaps the same
things must be said of a jury ? A. Yes. ? Q. And to some extent, therefore, you
set up ,the standard which exists in your own mind, of what seems to be, to you, to
be sound? A. Yes; but I stated that that must be a fallacious standard.? Q. You
have given a definition of delusions which are insane, there are delusions which
are not insane, are there not? A. Certainly. ? Q. Will you give us an instance,
if you please, of a delusion which you do not believe to be insane ? A. Speaking
professionally, I should say that I believe mesmerism to be a delusion?
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?That is not a fact, but a theory.
Mr. James.?Q. May not that theory be so strongly existing in the mind of
a person as to be what is properly called a delusion ? A. Certainly. ? Q.I believe
the mesmerites alleged it to be a theory supported by facts? A. Certainly.
? Q. And you believe it to be wrong. A. Certainly; I do not believe persons
who believe in mesmerism to be insane; there are many sects in the world, too,
that suffer from delusion.?Q. You have been asked as to a disbelief of an ascer-
tained fact, that must depend, must it not, very much on circumstances ?
A. Certainly.
A Juryman.?I do not understand what you said about'the next generation,
that would be disproved in the next, consequently they are no longer facts.?
Q. Would you believe a person mad whom you could not convince that George
the First lived historically ? A. Certainly not. Speaking about facts, there are
many things now stated as facts, which, by further experience, will be proved to
have exceptions to them, and a thing which is an exception cannot be a fact.
Sir F. Thesiger.?That is the progress of science ? A. Exactly.
Mr. James.?You were to put a general question. Would a permanent dis-
belief io, and ascertained, be an insane delusion, and your answer was, it might,
or it might not. Must it not depend upon the ascertainment of the fact, and the
agreements you bring to the mind of the individual for its existence?
The Commissioner.?So long as the fact remains a fact, the inference to be
drawn from it must be the same ? A. Yes.
Mr. James.?And you would make a great distinction between the disbelief, in
fact, permanently brought to the mind of the individual, of the existing means on
which she had more evidence of its existence. For instance, suppose a person
who did not believe that the " Amazon" was lost the other day, would you believe
that person was mad ? A. No. ? Q. Should you say Joshua was mad because he
demanded the sun to stand still ? A. No. ? Q. Must it not depend upon the
ascertainment of the fact as brought to the mind of the person? A. Certainly ?
Q. Would you say a person was mad who would not believe that the " Amazon"
was lost? A. No. ? Q. But if that person saw the vessel go down, and would
not believe it was lost, you would? A. Yes.? Q. Must ic not depend upon the
existence of the fact, as brought to the mind of the individual? A. Certainly.?
Q. Did you frequently call upon her without her knowing you were coming?
A. Yes, at all times. ? Q. So that you found her in her bed-room without any par-
ticular care to receive you? A. Yes, I have been there as late as ten or eleven.
? Q. And at six in the morning ? A. Yes; I never went at six or seven, unless
I was sent for. ? Q. Have you been at all times ? A. Yes, at all times.
A Juryman.?In all your conversations with this lady did you ever have any
conversations about her property ? Yes. ? Q. Will you state what she said to you
about her property? A. She has merely told me that she had estates in Wales. ?
Q. Did she ever tell you about selling any of her property? A. Yes: she told
me she had sold three or four places, and about the railroad. ? Q. Did she say
what she sold them for ? A. I do not know that she mentioned the amount. ? Q.
Did you not ask her what the railroad gave her? A. I think I have asked her
lately. ? Q- Did she ever tell you the amount she got from the railway and water-
works. A. I think about ?6000. ? Q. For the four? A. Yes Q. Did she say
how much for each ? A. I think Bassaleg she said 2000/. There were two and
2000/. and 3000/. or a little more each. ? Q. Did she ever talk about a will ? A.
Yes ; she often told me she had made a will, but she had never signed it. ? Q. Did
she tell you when she made the will? A. It was a very long time ago?I think it
was about, or shortly after, the former commission. ? Q. After the commission
she spoke about having made a will? A. Yes.? Q. Did she positively tell you
she had never signed it? A. No. ? Q. Did she tell you she had ever burnt a
110 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
?will ? A. No; I think not. She told me she had not left her daughters anything.
? Q. Did she tell you who she had left her property to? A. She said she had left
her property to those people who stood by her in the former commission. I had
often spoke to her about her living, as I termed it, so very fast; but she said she
never intended to leave any money behind, so that there should be no litigation
about it. She always had the determination not to leave any money; she said
she never would. ? Q. On the 24th September you attended this lady at Has-
tings? A. September 4th at St. Leonards? Q. And there was delirium tremens ?
A. Yes, she was suffering from fever. ? Q. Was it delirium tremens she had at
that period ? A. I can only go by hearsay. I was told that that fever was brought
on by her drinking a little too much wine or brandy, or something of that sort.
The Commissioner.?Do you mean that you made the inquiry when you were
down there ? A. Yes. ? Q. So as to satisfy your mind as a professional man ?
A. Yes. Before you could begin any treatment you must find out what is the
matter with your patient.
A Juryman.?Since that period you have attended her, have you had any
reason to believe she was under a similar influence? A. I have not seen her what
you would term intoxicated, but I believe that I have seen her some few times when,
perhaps, she has taken a little more wine or brandy than was of service to her?
nothing further than that. ? Q. Do you know what quantity of wine or brandy she
-was in the habit of taking in the course of the day. A. I think she takes some
few glasses of wine. ? Q. What quantity of wine? A. I should not think a third
of a bottle, or half a bottle, at least. ? Q. What quantity of brandy ? A. I imagine
at that time it was a couple of glasses. ? Q. In the course of the day ? A. Brandy
and water I am speaking of. ? Q. Do you suppose a person in her delicate state
of health taking that quantity of wine and brandy, that it would produce the effect
of delirium tremens ? A. Yes, I think so; more especially as Mrs. Cumming's
digestion very frequently is very bad, and frequently she eats very little, conse-
quently. ? Q. But, by taking the quantity you have alluded to, it might have, up
to the present time, the effect of causing a derangement of her intellect ? A. I
-would not say that. 1 think it may account in a great measure for her burst of
passion. I think that is very possible.
The Commissioner.?You think the quantity of wine, or brandy and water,
might account for it? A. For her passion. I do not exactly understand you. ?
Q. You said something might account for these ebullitions of passion? A. I
imagine that all persons who take little alcoholic stimulants makes them rather
irritable.?Q. The nurse says she takes a bottle of port in a day and a half; is that
too much ? A. It is a very large quantity ; I should not like to take it myself.
The Commissioner.?Would you recommend it for her? A. No; certainly
not. There are cases I know of. A lady I attend, with a member of the College
of Physicians, and the lady took nothing but gin, and I think she took a quart of
gin daily; and as regards anything solid, there was not half an ounce of food
taken, and she lived for six weeks upon it, and it was the thing that sustained life.
A Juryman.?Would not taking that quantity of gin produce continued weak-
ness? A. It would eventually exhaust the powers of life; there is no question
about that; but it sustained life for a time.
The Commissioner.?You gave a certificate that she ought not to be removed
from Brighton ? A. I did. ? Q. She was removed ? A. Yes. ? Q. Were you sur-
prised that she suffered no material injury from it ? A. I was very much surprised.
A Juryman.?Did you ever hear her state, out of the money she received from
the sale of her property she had paid for law expenses? A. I think she has told
me, two or three thousand pound the inquiry cost. ? Q. You were never told it
was ?5000? A. No; I am speaking merely of the Commission. ? Q. I am
speaking of the money she has received from her estates, how much money she
has paid for law expenses? A. What I was statiDg was merely the commission,
to which she said there were law expenses since.
The Commissioner.?She told me she had 2000/. to give her daughters. A com-
promise that she had piven her daughters 2000/., and that she abused Mr. Haynes
very much for it at the time. She said he was only making bullets for her daughters
to fire at her. You have heard her abuse Mr. Haynes? A. She abused Mr.
Haynes for it. ?Q. Did you ever hear her abuse him for anything else? A.
Ready I do not know?I may or may not. I do not remember the circumstance.
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. Ill
Q. Yon seem to uiive seen her in different kinds of illness. Do you think
her memory is still affected? A. Now? ? Q. Yes. A. It is not the same as
when I attended; it is very much impaired lately. ? Q. Her mind? A. No, her
memory is very much impaired. ? Q. Since when do you think this has been ? A.
The last time I saw her was March the 27th, 1849, except lately. ? Q. Are there
not other circumstances that lead you to the conclusion that a person is in a wrong
or right mind. A. Certainly.? Q. A question of fact. A. Yes.? Q. Did you
ever see any person have strong opinions with reference to their children, who were
considered to be in their right mind? A. Provided there is no cause. ? Q. No
original foundation ? A. No original foundation. ? Q. Supposing there to have
been a good original foundation for that unfortunate hatred, and you find your
patient becomes suspicious, and applies suspicion to everything unconnected with
those same individuals, is that any symptom at all, I will not say a test, of sanity or
insanity ? A. 1 do not understand the question. ? Q. Suppose a person has a
great hatred against her children ? A. Without a cause. ? Q. Without a cause ;
and you find that take such possession of the mind that other people are looked on
with a jealous eye, and supposed to be in connivance with those daughters. A. A
morbid perversion of the affections no doubt is an unsound state of mind; morbid per-
version of the affections I am stating, of course, without foundation. ? Q. Suppose
Mrs. Cumming has an aversion to her children without foundation; then she sees
them, and is on good terms with them, and on a sudden, without real cause, she takes
an impression that other persons are connected with her children,?is that any
symptom of insanity ? A. It is not. Her mind is so engrossed with the notion
that the daughters are persecuting her, and that originates in actual facts and not
assumed. I think that the mind of a person so constituted maybe induced to regard
other persons whom she may imagine friends of these parties with suspicion.? Q.
If you can lead a mind on under such circumstances ? A. I hardly think if you
could, that it would be sufficient grounds for saying that person was unsound. ?
Q. Would it be, to a certain extent, a test. A. It would lead one to pause; and
then, if you had other circumstances to back it, it would strengthen you in your
opinion. ? Q. You must have many things which draw you to the conclusion?one
would not satisfy you.
A Juryman.?If you were called upon to ascertain whether Mrs. Gumming was
of sound or unsound mind, you would question her as you have done, in order
to come to that conclusion? A. I would put as many questions as I possibly
could.
The Commissioner.?When did you first observe her memory fail? A. I only
had an opportunity of seeing her since her return from Shoreham. ? Q. When?
A. In November. ? Q. Did you observe any failure in her memory about Novem-
ber ? A. I have not seen her since November, 1849, not once ; I have never seen
her from March 27th, 1849, till she removed from Shoreham, in November, 1851. ?
Q. You were sent for to Brighton ? A. Yes?Q. Did you observe any alteration
in her memory then ? A. I had not an opportunity ; I was only sent down for a
specific purpose. ? Q. When you first saw her, after her return to Queen's Road,
was it the first time you saw an alteration in her? A. Yes.
A Juryman.?Did you ever, in your experience, see a similar case where a
mother, whose feelings were so strong on such a subject ? A. Speaking from my
own personal experience, I do not think I ever did.
The Commissioner.?If you had been asked when you saw her come home
from Effra Hall, to have attested a will, in which she had given her property from
her relations, would you have assented or dissented ? A. She was not in a fit state
to do anything then; she was a person suffering from extreme exhaustion, and, in
fact, I could hardly get any words from her at all. ? Q. You say she has improved
since ? A. Very much improved. ? Q. When did you see her last ? A. I saw
her yesterday. ? Q. How long were you with her ? A. I saw her yesterday, twice.
In the morning. ? Q. What time ? A. About?I think it must have been about
ten or eleven o'clock ; 110, by the bye, she sent for me at nine o'clock. I saw
her about nine o'clock, and afterwards went with Dr Caldwell to see her; but that
was merely because she was suffering from diarrhoea.
A Juryman.?If the Commissioner questioned Mrs. Cumming as to her know-
ledge of what property she had sold, and if on the first day she told us that two
112 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
lots had been sold for 2000/., and a third for 3000/., and called those three lots
9000/. instead of 7000/., and if on the second day she was questioned, and then told
him there had been two lots 3000/., and never mentioned the other two, would
you draw the inference that she was capable of judging of her property. A. I
should draw the inference that her memory was not correct; loss of memory is no
test of insanity, especially as she is seventy-six years of age.
The Commissioner.?A total loss of memory may, or may not be? A. Yes.
? Q. A total loss of memory is a defect of mind ? A. You cannot have a perfect
mind with perfect loss of memory; only a great many things are to be said with
regard to the age of the person. Now I know several relatives of mine, not so old
as Mrs. Cumming, and have not the slightest idea of their property, or very little
memory; but I do not imagine I should be justified in saying they are of unsound
mind. ? Q. Would you allow those persons to make a will with your sanction ?
A. Not unless it was thoroughly explained; otherwise, if they are not allowed to
make a will, you would deprive a number of persons from the just exercise of their
rights.? Q. It requires very great caution ? A. Yes; no doubt it requires great
caution.
Walter John Bryant, sworn. Examined by Mr. James.?I believe you are a
member of the Royal College of Surgeons? A. I am. ? Q. In the year 1846,
while the commission was pending against Mrs. Cumming, did you go over to the
Horns Tavern and see her? A. I did. ? Q. I believe the first time you saw her
was in the room while the inquiry was going on ? A. I was sitting beside her in
the room. ? Q. I believe you were taken over there by Mr. Haynes. I believe
Mr. Robinson is a patient of yours, his partner? A. Yes; I received a letter from
Mr. Robinson, desiring me to go. ? Q. Had you then conversations with her ?
A. I had several conversations with her. ? Q. Did you form any opinion of her
soundness or unsoundness of mind? A. I formed an opinion that she was of sound
mind. ? Q And I believe you were prepared to give evidence of that kind if it
was required ? A. I was. ? Q. When did you again see her ? A. I saw her
again on the 25th of December last. ? Q. Where did you see her ? A. At her
house in Queen's Road, St. John's Wood.? Q. The same house as she is in now ?
A. I believe so. ? Q. You learned, of course, at that time, that she had been to
the asylum at Effra Hall ? A. She had come from an asylum. ? Q. When did
you see her alone ? A. I saw her on the 6th of January. ? Q. I believe you
wished to see her alone? A. I wished to see her alone. Q. Had you conversa-
tion with her with a view of forming your judgment as far as you could of the
sanity, or soundness or unsoundness of her mind, on the 6th of January, 1852?
A. On that day I merely had conversation with her in regard to her property, and
on other matters. ? Q. Do you remember, in the conversations you had with her,
saying anything about her children ? A. I told her it was alleged that she had an
unfounded antipathy towards her children. ? Q. What did she say? A. She said
it could not be expected that she could entertain that feeling of affection towards
her children she had hitherto done, as they had, on more than one occasion, placed
her in a lunatic asylum, and they still intended to do so, she believed. ? Q. Did
she allude to one child only, or to both, generally ? A. She spoke of her children.
? Q. Do you remember anything occurring about the poison, the analysis that
Dr Barnes made ; I may perhaps remind you you had seen the report which had
been made by Dr Monro and Sir Alexander Morison to the Chancellor? A. No,
I have not; I have heard these allegations, and I questioned her upon them.?
Q. Now, about the poison and analysis ? A. I said it was alleged she had stated
some poison had been placed in some milk, and I wished to know if that were true.
? Q. What did you say to her? A. That was my question to her; her answer
was, that her suspicion had been excited by the fact, that a cat, or cats, had refused
to drink some milk placed before it; that about the same time a fowl had died?a
white fowl, I believe she said had died?and that she was suspicious that poison had
been used for that purpose; that a servant had brought in a paper containing a
substance which, together with the milk, she had given to Dr Barnes, who had
analysed the milk and the paper, and had pronounced that it contained poison. ?
Q. Did you afterwards ascertain whether that was the fact, or did you know before
that Dr Barnes had made some analysis? A. I did not know that he had ; she
also mentioned some chemist, but at this moment I cannot recollect the chemist's
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 113
name. Some chemist had assisted Dr Barnes in the analysis. ? Q. Do you
remember her saying anything about strangling by Mrs. Ince ? A. I then said it
?was alleged that her daughter, Mrs. Ince, she had said, attempted to strangle her.
?Q. What did she say upon that? A. She said it was a falsity. ?Q. Did she
give you any description of what had occurred, and what was the foundation for
the statement? A. She did; I asked her if there was any foundation for such an
imputation, She then said, that for some time previously she had been living in
apprehension that her daughters intended to place her in a lunatic asylum; in fact,
that she believed it was their intention to do so; and that, on one occasion, Mrs. Ince
rushed, unannounced, into her room; pushing the servant rudely on one side, she threw
her arms about her neck. ? Q. Mrs. Cumming's neck ? A. Mrs. Ince threw her arms
round Mrs. Cumming's neck. She exclaimed at the moment, " Are you going to
strangle me ?" or some such expression as that. ? Q. She says she did ? A. She
says she did ; but recovering from the temporary or transient fear which she
experienced by the suddenness and abruptness of the act, she dismissed the impres-
sion as quickly. ? Q. She told you so ? A. Yes, that is the substance of what she
said; I do not mean to say that is the precise phraseology. ? Q. Did you say
anything to her at that time about its being alleged that she had attempted with a
knife to make some attack on one of the Hickeys? A. Yes; but previous to that
I said, it is also alleged you have attempted to cut the throat of one of your
servants. ? Q. One of the Hickeys? A. I believe it was Ann Hickey. ?Q. What
did she say to that ? A. Her answer to that was, " It is a falsity. I have been
brought up to fear God, and with principles far different to that, sir."? Q. That is
what she said? A. Those are her precise words. ? Q. Did you ask her who the
medical men were who had visited her on that day ? A. On the 6th I did.
? Q. Whom did she tell you had visited her on the 6th ? A. She informed me
that Dr Forbes Winslow and Dr Monro had seen her. ? Q. That day ? A. That
day. She expressed herself as feeling ill, and feeling exhausted from having seen
medical men previously to my visit at that time; she was partaking of some
refreshment.?Q. Do you remember anything that she said to you about Dr Monro?
A. She said Dr Monro had, on his introduction, expressed himself to the effect
that she was not to feel alarmed, that he came there in a friendly way towards her;
to which she replied, " I can scarcely consider that to be the case, Dr Monro, as I
believe you have signed an affidavit certifying that I am of unsound mind." ?
Q. During the conversation you had with her, from seeing her on these occasions,
did you form an impression as to whether she was of sound or unsound mind ?
A. From the conversations I had with her on those two occasions, I am certainly
of opinion that she is of sound mind. ? Q. You have been made aware of the facts, of
course, of the previous commission against her, and her being confined in the
lunatic asylum? A. I was aware of it. ? Q. Although she may entertain very
strong feelings of aversion against her children, do you call that a delusion, if there
is any foundation in fact for the aversion she has of their conduct? A. It could
not be a delusion if there is a foundation for it. ? Q. The mere fact of the aversion
is not evidence of insanity? A. No, it is a question of degree. ? Q. Having
ascertained there was some ground for the statement of the poison, are you of
opinion that is a delusion? A. No, it is not a delusion. ? Q. From the judgment
you formed, you believe her to be of sound mind ? A. I do. ? Q. Her memory is
impaired to some extent from age, is it not ? A. I could have no opportunity of
positively testing that. She did not immediately recognise me as having seen her in
1846. ? Q. She did afterwards ? A. Yes, she knew me upon that occasion; the light
was glancing into the room, and she was evidently suffering from some affection of
the eye.? Q. After you had conversed with her for some time, did she know you?
A. Not immediately; but she soon recalled to my mind facts that had taken place
when I saw her in 1846.
Cross-examined by Sir F. Thesiger.?Q. Have you considered from that that
her memory was not impaired? A. I could not say as to the amount of impair-
ment.? Q. You say, on the 28th December, I have had conversations with her;
I do not understand whether that was in the presence of Mr. Haynes or not ?
A. Mr. Haynes was present. ? Q. The whole time? A. The whole time.?
Q. How long did that last? A. I should think about an hour?quite an hour.
? Q. What were the particular subjects which were conversed upon when Mr.
H
114 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
Haynes was there ? A. Upon the different allegations as to the attempt of Mrs.
lnce to strangle her,?upon her unfounded antipathy to her daughters,?upon the
allegation that she had attempted to commit suicide,?and also to cut the throat of
one of her servants?and about the poison. ? Q. Did you converse -with her about
the same topics on the second occasion? A. No, 1 did not.? Q. What were the topics
on the second occasion? A. They were as to the property. ? Q. Nothing else?
A. Nothing else?when I say nothing else, I might recollect some things, but my
principal object in my second visit was with regard to her property. ? Q. What
did she say about her property? A. I asked her what her income was derived
from ? she answered, from the funds and from lands and houses. ? Q. Did you ask
her what amount of property she had? A. I did not ask her the amount of pro-
perty; but the question I asked her, " What do you think is the amount of the
annual income arising from this property? ? Q. What did she say?" A. She
said between ?400 and ?500 a year.? Q. I want to know whether she represented
to you that she had the notion of her daughter intending to strangle her when s}ie
came into the room in that way, but that the impression was almost immediately
removed? A. No, she did not say that; she said, it was in consequence of her
daughter throwing her arms round her neck that the notion was created. ? Q. Do
you mean she said the impression was removed during the visit of her daughter,
or that subsequently it was removed ? A. " She reflected," she said, "on recover-
ing from my momentary fear,"?those were her words,?she dismissed the impres-
sion that the daughter was about to strangle her.?Q. At the time ? A. At the time.
Sir F. Thesicer.?In answer to my learned friend, you have given a sort of
definition of a delusion, and you say that where there is any ground, any founda-
tion for it, you do not consider that a strong aversion is evidence of a delusion ?
A. If there be a ground for it. ? Q. But 1 want to know to what extent you
carry that opinion; suppose, for instance, the daughters of a mother had been
ungrateful to her, and she afterwards entertains the notion that they are going
to murder her, do you consider that the mere circumstance of their ingratitude
is a justification, if I may use the expression, for an opinion she entertains and
carries to that extent ? A. I should not call that a delusion. ? Q. Then you
think any feeling, however slight, would be sufficient to justify any opinion,
however strong ? A. No, I could not give an opinion, it must be regulated
hy other facts. I should have more evidence. ? Q. As yon have given us the
character of a delusion ? A. I answer it by saying I do not think it a delusion. ?
Q. Though there is not the slightest ground for it ? A. I understand there was
a foundation. ? Q. Not a ground for a belief they were going to murder her?
A. No, but there was a strong antipathy. ? Q. Do you consider the belief of in-
gratitude would be a sufficient justification of the belief that they were going to
murder her, so as to take that out of the character of a delusion. I put it thus?I
assume there is a foundation for the opinion of the ingratitude of the daughters, and
I want to know whether you consider that that would justify the belief, as a
rational belief, that they were going to murder her? A. I could not certainly say
it was a rational belief, but I should not like to call it to the extent of a delusion.
? Q. I do not quite understand you ; what do you consider a delusion? A. A
delusion, I should conceive, was the existence of something in the imagination
of a person, that did not exist in the fact, that only existed in the imagination.
I should not like to be so bold as to give a definition of a delusion, that is my
expression. Gentlemen who have paid more attention to diseases of the mind
than I have would be better able to answer that question ; but that would be my
own view. ? Q. Do you agree with Dr Hale, for instance, that if a belief or
opinion is very much exaggerated beyond what the truth of the fact warrants, that
that would amount to a delusion?
Mr. James.?His expression was to an absurd degree.
Witness.?I should not consider that a delusion.
Sir F. Thesiger.?To aii absurd and extravagant degree?
A. I should not consider to an absurd degree a delusion?it is a question of
degree, that is. ? Q. Suppose, for instance, that in some commercial transaction a
person had been over-reached; was he in a sound state of mind if he believed that
the other had picked his pocket as he was passing through the street? A. Yes. ?
Q. You would say that was rational? A. I should nut say it was.
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 115
Re-examined by Mr. James.?Q. Supposing a person narrating a commercial
transaction in which he had been over-reached, should you think that a delusion ?
A. No. ? Q. Supposing, narrating the transaction, he had told you I had picked his
pocket, should you say that was a delusion ? A. No. ?? Q. You have been asked
about her daughters going to murder her?supposing this lady had said that her
daughters entertained such a feeling to her, that they would murder her, should you
think that a delusion, or a mode of expression as to her opinion of her conduct to
her ? A. If the daughters had expressed that they would murder her. ? Q. Sup-
posing, Mrs. Cumming in describing the conduct of her daughter, that she enter-
tained such a dislike to her that they would murder her, should you consider that a
delusion or mode of description ? A. A mode of description. ? Q. Suppose she said
she entertained a feeling towards her that they would poison her, should you think
that a mode of description or a delusion? A. A mode of description. ? Q. Sup-
posing she said her daughters entertained a feeling that they would not hesitate to
murder her, or would murder her, should you consider that very different from the
assertion that they were going to murder her ? A. Certainly. ? Q. Do you con-
sider that a delusion if there is a foundation for it? A. It is a question of degree.
? Q. You have stated you have not turned your entire attention to this study, but
you have had the ordinary experience of a person in very considerable practice as
a general practitioner? A. I should say I have had a fair average.
A Juryman.?The interview you had with her was so recent as the evening
before this commission ? A. The very evening before. ? Q. At that time, in your
opinion, do you say she was of sound mind? A. Certainly. ? Q. During your
visits to this lady did you discover there was any presence of liquor ? A. At the
last visit she was taking her dinner?I presume so?it was about six o'clock. ?
Q. Your visit on the 6th of January was expressly to ascertain whether she was of
sound mind or not? A. Yes. ? Q. And did you conceive the inquiries about her
property you made, and the answers she gave, were sufficient to enable you to
judge? A. Yes. ? Q. Suppose she said she had sold property to the Water
Works property, and gave no account of what she had done with that property,
what would you say then?would you not have gone on further to say, what did you
do with it? A. I should not ask her what she did with it, as I should presume she
received it if she had sold it. ? Q. Would you not inquire what she had done with
it ? A. I should not consider that a test of the soundness of her mind.
George Simpson, sworn, and examined by Mr. Symons.?Q. Are you a member
of the Royal College of Surgeons in England ? A. I am a fellow of the College of
Surgeons. ? Q. Have you been in practice as a surgeon during twenty-seven
years? A. I have. I passed in the year 1824. ? Q. Have you been engaged as a
lecturer on anatomy? A. I have, some yfears since. ? Q. Are you the surgeon to
the National Vaccine Establishment and the Westminster General Dispensary?
A. I was for several years surgeon to the Westminster General Dispensary, and I
am now surgeon to the National Vaccine Establishment, a government appoint-
ment. ? Q. Do you recollect seeing Mrs. Cumming at York House, Battersea, in
1846. A. Yes.? Q. What time? A. On the 16th September in that year, in
September, 1846. ? Q. Did you see her with a view of examining her state of
mind ? A. Yes.
Wilness.?I think it right to explain that I was requested to attend at the Horns
Tavern to watch the proceedings, and to visit her professionally when the case was
adjourned at York House Asylum.
Q. You attended her professionally from the 16th September to the close of the
commission? A. Yes. ? Q. And attended the commission at the Horns Tavern?
A. I did so. ? Q. Did you have conversations with her upon the occasions of
your first visit ? A. I had. ? Q. Do you recollect the substance of those con-
versations ? A. I told her, on being introduced to her, that I had been requested
to attend her to examine into the state of her health. At first I did not immediately
allude to any particular subject, but entered into a general conversation as to the
asylum she was confined in, the number of patients that were there, and as to
whether she was under any medical treatment. ? Q. What were her answers to
those inquiries ? A. The answers that I should have expected?there was nothing
particular occurred. ? Q. But they were the answers which you would have
?expected from a perfectly rational mind? A. Yes. I then asked her how long
H 2
116 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
she had been in the asylum. She said she had been removed there in the month
of May, I think. I do not recollect the date, but she said the month of May. ?
Q. In that year ? A. In that year. ? Q. Will you proceed, if you please ? A.
She complained of the position in which she was then placed, and said that her
family had placed her there. I asked her who she meant by her family ? And
she said her daughters and their husbands. I think she said that her house had
been seized. She first said that her liberty had been taken from her; that her
house, papers and property, I think, had been seized, and that she was without
friends or money. ? Q. Did she describe to you the mode of her removal to the
asylum? A. No, she did not. ? Q. This was a general observation of hers?
A. This was an observation as to how she came there. She said that her
friends had been denied to her. I think she mentioned the name of Farrer
at the time that her friends had been denied access to her. She said, " I
have been associated with those people," pointing to two females who were
mad, who were walking in the grounds at the time. After this conversation,
I thought it right to touch on the points which I had heard before the learned
Commissioner, and I asked her as to her dislike to her children, and why she had
taken that dislike to her children. She said H that her second daughter had
married contrary to her wishes, and that her other daughter, Mrs. Ince, had
encouraged it." I think she said she either was married from her house, or that
she went to church with her. She became a good deal excited at that moment, and
appealed to me. She said, " Sir, I do not know whether you have daughters of
your own, but do you not think I have sufficient grounds of resentment? Would
you not have acted in a similar manner?" ? Q. Did she refer to her husband at
all ? A. I think she said her husband was an invalid at that time. I believe her
husband was dead, but she was not aware of the fact, nor was I aware of it till this
present inquiry. I have forgotten the circumstance. ? Q. Her husband was dead,
and she was not aware of the death ? A. She did not say her husband was dead.
? Q. Will you proceed if you please? A. She said that none of her family had
been there to make inquiries after her. I then referred to the infidelity of her
husband, which I understood she had mentioned. I believe I used the word
delusiou to her, and she said it was no delusion, that it was a fact, as she could prove
by witnesses. I now recollect that she did mention her husband, because she
brought up the charge by saying that she could prove it by the nurses who attended
upon him, for that he put his hands down their bosoms. ? Q. Will you proceed ?
A. I said I understood she had made use of very bad language, and she admitted
the fact. She said that she was of an irritable, to use her own term, temper;
and she added it was done under great provocation, but she was sorry for
having done so. ? Q. That was the language she had used? A. Yes; she had
spoken of her husband being a very irritable man, which led to my putting some
questions to her respecting a hot poker which I had heard mentioned at the former
inquiry. I was induced to put. those questions, having made minutes of them at
the time.?Q. You referred to the use of a hot poker? A. She said it was perfectly
true that he had made an attack upon her, and that the police were called in, and that
they would be produced before the Commissioner. ? Q. That he had made an
attack upon her with a hot poker, did she say? A. Yes; I think those were her
words. I remained about an hour and three quarters with her on each occasion. ?
Q. Did you refer to any other delusion at that time ? A. I do not recollect any-
thing particular that passed regarding that. ? Q. You remained an hour and three
quarters? A. At each visit, I think. ? Q. Had you conversations on other
subjects than this to which you referred? A. Yes; there was a general con-
versation. I did not dwell particularly, but previously to leaving, I thought it
necessary to put these questions. ? Q. Upon the occasion of that first visit, did you
form any opinion as to the state of her mind? A. Yes; I thought from what I
had heard that I should wish to visit her again, because I am quite aware on
visiting patients, it is sometimes impossible at one interview to arrive at any con-
clusion. ? Q. Before coming to any decided opinion you had a wish to see her
again? A. I did. I told her I should see her in two or three days. ? Q. Do you
recollect whether this first interview you had was during a period of some days
over which the commission had adjourned? This was after the commission had
been adjourned in the interval vou saw her again? A. I saw her on the 18th,
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING. 117
two days afterwards. ? Q. "Will you state what occurred on that interview? A.
She received me as before. She was very agreeable and ladylike. I think I told
her I had omitted in my first inquiry, to speak with respect to her fondness for
dumb animals, alluding to the cats and pigeons. She said it was perfectly true that
she was fond of dumb animals, cats, and that she also kept pigeons. But I said, I
am informed that you kept them shut up in the room and the windows closed.
And she said, " why, I had just removed to a new residence, and I was afraid my
pigeons would fly away, and that was why I kept the windows closed." I do not
know whether she had removed or not, but that was her reply. She said, " is
there anything extraordinary in my keeping cats or pigeons?" I said, " certainly
I did not think so." I then tested her numerical powers by setting her two sums.
I thought it was in division, but I find from minutes on each interview of what
passed, and I find they were two sums in addition. ? Q. Did you see anything
that occurred on the part of Mrs. Cumming during the progress of the commission,
to change the opinion you had formed and expressed in your report? A. Nothing;
on the contrary to confirm it.
Mr. James.?Have you any objection to take your report on oath, of what you
saw, to the conclusions on which you arrive? A. No. I made minutes of each
interview, and drew my report immediately. ? Q. On the third day of your seeing
her, that was the 15th, I believe ? A. The third day. I cannot speak correctly as to
the date. It was the Saturday following the 18th. ?Q. On that occasion did she
manifest some irritability of temper when you saw her. A. She did. I was shown
up stairs in the drawing-room, and she came up very much agitated and excited. I
asked her the cause of it, and I think she said, that she first saw me crossing the
garden or grounds, and the door which was on the right being open she saw me go
by, and observed to the matron that she was wanted; that the matron said it was not
the case, but that it was a gentleman for some other patient; she said that she was
fearful that the medical gentlemen who were about visiting her were about to be
denied, as her friends previously had been, which was the cause of her being so
much excited. She was very much excited, and trembled a great deal upon the
occasion. ? Q. Under these circumstances, did the excitement in which you
found her, strike you as being unnatural ? A. No. ? Q. Did she argue upon
the matter, and give you a reason? A. She said that her friends had pre-
viously been denied access to her, and that she was fearful the same thing was about
being adopted. ? Q. Did you upon that occasion allude to her alleged uncleanly-
habits? A. I did so. ? Q. What answer or explanation did she give you? A.
She denied them in strong terms, in fact, almost refused to answer them. I told
her that I had heard it from a gentleman who was at the head of the asylum, whom
I previously knew, and who, I ought to have stated, stopped me on my second visit
going down stairs; he met me with his case-book in his hand; it was Dr Millengen,
and he called me aside. I repeated to her at the third interview what Dr Millengen had
said as regarded a white cambric pocket handkerchief; she denied it most solemnly,
and said she had every convenience she could wish for, and was it likely that she
should have indulged in such filthy habits. ? Q. Did you see her afterwards in the
asylum? A. Not after that. ? Q. You saw her at the Horns'Tavern? A. I did.
? Q. Now, I will ask you again, the result of these interviews in your mind as to
her state of mind? A. I considered her in a perfectly sound state of mind after
the explanations she had given me on the matters which I considered it my duty to
touch upon. ? Q. Did you see her again on the 27th December, 1851 ? A. I did;
but I saw nothing of Mrs. Cumming, or of her solicitor, or of any of her family
whatever, until about a fortnight since. ? Q- You had not seen lier in the interval
at all ? A. No. ? Q- Nor any of the parties connected with her ? A. None what-
ever. ? Q. How long were you with her on that occasion ? A. About three-quarters
of an hour, I should think, to an hour. ? Q. What conversation had you with her on
your first introduction ? ? A. I said I was very sorry to be obliged to visit her on
the unpleasant affair of the previous inquiry, and I believe I said, " I am glad to
see you look so well, ma'am," and she said, " Well, you do not know what I have
gone through." I think that was her expression. I must state to you that at this
interview Mr. Haynes was present. Mr. Haynes went with me, and introduced
me. ? Q. What conversation had you with her? A. On Mr. Haynes introducing
me, he said, " Do you recollect this gentleman ?" and she stopped for a few moments
and did not recollect me, and he said, " This is Mr. Simpson," and she said, " Oh
1 18 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMIN G.
I remember, you visited mq at York House Asylum." ? Q. "Will you proceed ? A.
She stated that she had gone through a great deal during the six years?that her
family had not left her alone. She said she had been persecuted by them; that she
had two chancery suits brought against her, and had been indicted for perjury, and
had been brought from her residence in Brighton, by railroad, to -which she said she
had a great objection. " In fact," she says, " I am now considered a lunatic, for
that female who showed you upstairs is my keeper. That is a nurse," I think she
said, "appointedby the Lord Chancellor." There was a general conversation kept
up. I asked her as to her state of health?what it had been. I remarked that
one of her eyes was very much inflamed?that she laboured under chronic
ophthalmia; and I think she said it was of some standing; and I was about writing
a prescription, but she said Dr Caldwell was in attendance upon her, and of course
I did not interfere; and I said, " I remember our having a long conversation
respecting thecats and pigeons," and she laughed, and said," Yes; I remember it very
well."? Q. Did you allude to the previous conversation at York House ? A. Yes,
I was alluding to that. ? Q. Did she laugh? A. She laughed. She complained
bitterly of having been persecuted; that seemed to be her principal cause of com-
plaint to me. On leaving her, I explained to Mr. Haynes that on my next
interview I should wish to see her alone, and he said, "Certainly." ? Q. Was
there any other conversation on this occasion on general subjects that you have any
recollection of? A. Not that I can recollect. I think she spoke of her daughter
on this occasion. She still entertained the same feeling as regarded her children;
and I ought to have mentioned, that in the former inquiry she particularly alluded
to the marriage of her daughter with a soldier. That was in the first in-
quiry, and the same feeling seemed to exist in her mind as regarded her
family. ? Q. Did you attend her upon the occasion when an appointment was
made for your seeing her again? A. I did. ? Q. When was that? A. On
Monday, the 29th. ? Q. Of December? A. Of December, 1851. ? Q. What
time of the day did you visit her on that occasion ? A. I had made an appointment
for one o'clock with the footman or groom in attendance, and when I arrived, I found
two other medical gentlemen were in attendance upon her, Dr Diamond and Mr.
Davey. ? Q. Did you wait until those gentlemen had left her? A. I waited about an
hour, and rang the bell for the servant, saying my appointment was for one o'clock,
and that I had been in attendance an hour, and to know whether they would be
there long, and I think they left almost immediately afterwards. ? Q. Did you upon
that proceed to Mrs. Cumming's room ? A. I did. ? Q. Was anybody in the room
with you ? A. There was a lady sitting there, who I have since ascertained is a
Mrs. Moore, who came out of court yesterday; she said she was the widow, at the
time, of a medical man. ? Q. In what state did you find her when you got into the
room ? A. I was very much surprised to find her so perfectly calm and collected,
and in good humour, for she laughed on entering, and said, " Well, upon my word,
I think you doctors will drive me mad." I think those were her words. ? Q. Did
she recognise you? A. Yes. She begged I would be seated; and she was either
at lunch or dinner. There was some rumpsteak, I think, on the table, and I begged
her to proceed with her dinner; and she said, " No, she had quite dinner enough;
that the other gentlemen wished her to go on with her dinner, but that she could
not eat anything more." Our conversation principally was upon the questions
she related to me of what they had asked her. She said, Dr Diamond she
knew before, but the other gentleman she did not, Dr Davey. She said that
doctor had put questions to her, and wished her to recollect the dates when
she was taken to the asylum, and she said, " I knew -very well that those gen-
tlemen would bring everything against me, and I said to them, ' I would not be
fixed to a date, but I will answer it there, when in the presence of the judge and
the jury, as the inquiry will soon take place.'" That Dr Diamond was very anxious
that she should see her daughter, Mrs. Ince, and asked her if she would see her; that
Mrs. Ince was very much concerned about her, and would like to see her; and she
said, " Certainly not." She said Dr Diamond remarked to her, " I do not think
you seem well to-day, Mrs. Cumming, for you are not so communicative on this
occasion as when I last saw you." ? Q. Did she say what her answers had been?
A. She said, "Yes, I am quite well;" but she said, " I was aware that they were
sent by my family, and I wished to be particular and upright in everything I said."
? Q. Did you speak to her on this occasion with reference to her alleged delu-
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 119
sions ? A. I do not think I did. I think it was on the former inquiry. I cannot
recollect whether I did at this time. The conversation I had with her was prin-
cipally her telling me what had transpired between those medical gentlemen and
herself. ? Q. Did you, on the first occasion at the Queen's Road, have conversa-
tion with her with reference to her alleged delusions ? A. I did. ? Q. Did you
speak to her about the allegation that she had been endeavoured to be poisoned
by her children? A. No, she never mentioned that circumstance to me from
the commencement, and never once alluded to it. She spoke of persecution,
and her aversion to her children. I think she said they had hunted her from
place to place; and on one occasion, I cannot say which, she said, "It is my
money they want, and if they would only wait sufficiently long, they should have
it;" or something to that purpose, if they would only wait a sufficient time.?
Q. What was the length of the conversation you had with her on this second
interview ? A. Three-quarters of an hour, it might be an hour. She stated that
those medical gentlemen repeatedly said, " Why, Mrs. Cumming we cannot make
anything of you to-day; as it appears clearly to us, that you would rather see our
backs than our faces;" to which she replied, " It would be very unladylike in
me to express such an opinion, whatever I may think." Upon which, she said,
they left the room. ? Q. On the occasion of either of those interviews was
there any reference made to her entertaining the idea that her daughters had
endeavoured to strangle her? A. None whatever.? Q. Did you not refer to it
yourself, nor did she ? A. I did not, nor at the asylum either. ? Q. Have you
seen her since then ? A. I saw her in court the other day twice. ? Q. Have you
observed any change in her person since you saw her in 1846? A. I was not
aware that she was so helpless as I saw her when she was brought into court.
When I saw her in 1846, she walked up and down stairs the same as any other
person.? Q. From the opportunities you have had of forming an opinion of the
state of her mind, are you of opinion that she is of sound mind ? A. Certainly.
? Q. Perfectly sound? A. I consider her of perfectly sound mind.? Q. Have
you seen anything in her to indicate the existence of any delusion at all ? A.
I think without explanation they might be called delusions; but I think from what
she has stated, and what I have since ascertained of the facts, I do not consider
them delusions.
Cross-examined by Sir F. Thesiger.?Q. Without explanations, you say they
might be considered delusions? A. Without explanation. ? Q. Did you not
desire to see Mrs. Cumming without the presence of Mrs. Moore ? A. She was
sitting in the room. I was not aware she was there till I was shown in; and I
think I said at the time, " Who is this lady ?" and I do not know whether it was
Mrs. Cumming or the lady herself who said, " I am a friend of Mrs. Cumming, and
I have permission to visit her." ? Q. But you did not ask anything about her
daughter having attempted to murder her, or poison her, or strangle her. A. No,
I did not. ? Q. Did you on any occasion ? A. Never; for I was not aware of the
fact. Q. Did you ask her anything upon the subject of the milk being poisoned?
A. Oh, yes, I remember that very well. ? Q. On which of the occasions? A. I
think it was on the first occasion. ? Q. When Mr. Haynes was there ? A. Yes; she
said that her fowls, I think, not pigeons?that her fowls had been poisoned?that
there had been poison put. ? Q. Did she say where ? A. No, she hinted. She
said something that an attempt had been made to poison her?that her fowls had
died. ? Q. That an attempt had been made to poison?that her fowls had died ?
A. Yes. ? Q. You did not mention that ? A. No; your mentioning the circum-
stances reminded me of it. ? Q. You remember that? A. Yes, that was the first
time. ? Q. How came she to mention it ? Did you put in a question to her about
it? A. No; I was asking her how her general health had been, and relating cir-
cumstances connected with her family, and she said, " I have been attempted to be
poisoned, as I can prove," I think she said; and I think she mentioned Dr Barnes's
name: she did, for she said it was analyzed, and poison was ascertained to exist. I
remember her particularly stating that. ? Q. That you had forgotten entirely
before ? A. I did not know that it had been analyzed, or any thing concerning it.
i? Q. I want to know whether you agree that it has been observed by every medical
person who has the care of lunatics?" do they sometimes acquire the habit of con-
cealing their impressions, particularly if frequently questioned respecting them,"
120 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
and that it requires some art and address to bring them to the subject -without
putting them on their guard? A. I do agree in that opinion. I think I state so in
my report. ? Q. I understood you that, in the preceding inquiry in 1846, it had
been going on for some time before you were called in at all. A. It might, perhaps,
have been going on. I was present on two or three days, and then I was requested
to visit her at the asylum during the adjournment. ? Q. Was Mrs. Cumming
present during those three days ? A. I think every day I was there; and I was
really astonished at the manner in which she conducted herself. ? Q. She heard
the different points that were alleged ? A. She did, and I made dates and memo-
randums of circumstances that had occurred, and examined her on those at the
asylum. ? Q. She knew the grounds which were alleged to establish her insanity or
unsoundness of mind? A. She did. ? Q. And she knew perfectly well that the
inquiry was going on as to her state of mind? A. She did.
Re-examined by Mr. James.?I do not know whether you heard the medical
evidence on the other side ? A. I have. ? Q. Has there been from their evidence
any concealment by the lady of her delusions.
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?I do not know that my friend is at liberty to ask
him to form an opinion upon the evidence which has been given.
Mr. James.?No, you are right. ? Q. Have you, on her part, noticed any
studied concealment of any delusion? A. Never. I have always found her most
ready to give any answer. ? Q. You have been asked if you arrive at conclusions
without an explanation of the facts. If a person told you there had been an
attempt made to poison her, and alluded to the fact of an analysis being made,
should you not inquire into those facts before you arrived at conclusion whether it
was a delusion or not? A. Most certainly. ? Q. Now, although my learned
friend cited from some book
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?Dr Pritchard.
Mr. James.?That insane persons can and do frequently conceal their delusions,
is it not also a fact of disease of the mind, that where delusions exist they are con-
stantly haunting the mind, and constantly a subject of conversation? A. Yes,
constantly. ? Q. I believe in 1846, a delusion, or one of the delusions alleged,
was perversion of affection towards her children, and one of the main grounds ?
A. It was so. ? Q. We know now that Dr Barnes and the poison occurred
subsequently to 1846. A. I am aware of that. ? Q. Was there any allusion at all
of any attempt to poison her before these facts occurred ? A. There never was
any allusion made to it.
Mr. James.?I find that a question arose yesterday with reference to the identity
of Captain Cumming, as the party upon whom the order of affiliation was made,
and his notice was put in, and I now propose to prove that the signature to the
notice is in the handwriting of Captain Cumming.
Mr. Farrar re-called.
By Mr. James.?To the best of your belief is that Captain Cumming's hand-
writing ? (handing to the witness the notice of appeal.) A. It is.
Mr. James.?It is a notice of appeal, dated the 4th of October, 1822, against
the order of affiliation.
A Juryman.?That is thirty-five years ago?
Mr. James.?Yes, sir.
A Juryman.?That we have nothing to do with.
Mr. James.?Pardon me, sir; some gentlemen of the jury may consider it
material, and some may not. When we produced this paper yesterday, there was
an objection raised by my friend, Sir Frederick Thesiger, that there was no
evidence of identity?it is for the jury, by-and-by, to say whether this evidence is
relevant or not. It appeared to us, as the objection was made, to prove that
Captain Cumming was really the party named.
Henry Swan Caldwell, Esq., M.D., examined by Mr. James.?Q. I be-
lieve you reside at North Addington-place, Camberwell? A. Yes. ? Q. I
believe you are not a member of the College of Physicians ? A. Not of the
London college. ? Q. Have you graduated at any foreign university? A. I
graduated at the University of Paris and of Glasgow. ? Q. Have you been in
practice for many years? A. I have been twenty-one years in Camberwell and
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 12 L
practised previously at Paris. ? Q. When were you called in on the first occasion
to see Mrs. Cumming? A. On the 12th of May, 1847. ? Q. Where did youthen
see her? A. At Mrs. Hutchison's, at Vauxhall. ? Q. Was she then on a visit at
Mrs. Hutchison's, or residing there? A. On a visit there. ? Q. What did you
attend her for? A. For an affection of the stomach. ? Q. How long did you
attend her then? A. I attended her till the 4th of June.? Q. Did you see
her frequently at that period ? A. I saw her every day. ? Q. Did you know at
that time, when you were first called in, that she was the lady whose mind had
been the subject of inquiry and the commission of 1846 ? A. I did not till after a
few days. ? Q. I need scarcely ask you, if you directed your attention more par-
ticularly than you otherwise might have done to her state of mind and conduct
generally? A. She appeared then, very unwell and rather depressed. ? Q. Was
it the fact that, from having heard that her mind had been the subject of investi-
gation, your attention was more directed to her position and conduct than to any
other? A. Yes, it was. ? Q. Did anything strike you?I will not go into detail
here?did anything strike you as strange or remarkable about her conduct at that
time ? A. Not in her conduct; nothing in her conduct. ? Q. In her manner was
there anything; what sort of person did you find her to be? A. She seemed
rather depressed in spirit as well as infirm in her body. ? Q. When did you again
attend her? A. I attended her at Camberwell, Clifton-place, Camberwell, from
the 4th June to July 16th. ? Q. What for, then? A. She had not perfectly
recovered of her complaint for which I attended her at Vauxhall. ? Q. Did you
attend her every day ? A. Mostly every day, and sometimes every other day. ?
Q. When again did you attend her? A. At St. John's Wood, from August 1st to
December 17th. ? Q. What year; the same year 1847? A. The same year. ?
Q. What was she suffering from then ? A. She had various complaints?an
inflamed eye, which she had suffered from for a long time, and defective appetite.
? Q. Was that at the Queen's-road, St. John's Wood? A. Yes. ? Q. When
did you attend her again, that carries it up to December, 1847? A. From January
3rd to February 28th, 1848. ? Q. When again? A. From March 27th to
August 21st, 1849.
A Juryman.?Q. Just previous to her going to Wales? A. The next day she
went to Wales.
Mr. James.?Q. When did you attend her again? A. At Cheltenham, March
22nd and 23rd. ? Q. Was she en route then from Wales to London? A. Yes. ?
Q. When again ? A. At St. John's Wood, April 16th. ? Q. Was that at the
Queen's-road, where she is now? A. Yes; from April 16th to January 2nd,
1851. ? Q. Does that embrace any part of the periods of Eleanor Hickey and
Mary Rainey being the servants there? A. I believe they were there. I do not
remember Hickey, but I remember Mary Rainey being there. ? Q. You remember
her very well ? A. Yes. ? Q. Do you remember the woman Hickey ? A. I
scarcely remember her, but I remember the children that appeared here. ? Q.
That is Mary Ann Hickey and Ellen Thompson ? A. I remember having seen
children there, without knowing who they were. ? Q. But they are the same
children? A. The same children. ? Q. While Mary Rainey was there, were
you in the habit constantly of visiting Mrs. Cumming? A. Very frequently;
three or four times a week sometimes. ? Q. Do you remember the partiality of
Mrs. Cumming for her cats? A. Yes, I do. ? Q. Were you in the habit two or
three times a week of being in her bed-room ? A. Yes. ? Q. In what state did
you find her bed-room ? A. It was sometimes close when I went into it from the
fresh air. I found the difference as in other bed-rooms. ? Q. Was she suffering
at that time from inflammation of the eye ? A. Yes; and a rheumatic affection. ?
Q. In what state was the room as to cleanliness from these cats?we have had a
description of that ? A. It was pretty well. ? Q. Was there anything so filthy
about it? A. I never saw any filth in Mrs. Cumming's house but once, and that
was immediately taken away by the servant. ? Q. You mean from cats? A. From
cats. ? Q. Where was it you saw that? A. That was in the Edgware-road. ?
Q. What room was that in? A. That was in the sitting-room. ? Q. And that was
immediately taken away ? A. That was immediately taken away. ? Q. By whose
orders ? A. Mrs. Cumming pointed the servant to it, and it was immediately
taken away Q. Did you see in that room while you were attending her, during
the time Mary Rainey was there, heaps of dirt under the bed, or did you smell it?
J22 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMINGr.
A. I did not look under the bed. ? Q. But you could detect the presence of such
filth as that if it was there, could you not ? A. I do not imagine that such filth
was to be found there. ? Q. She left, if I remember rightly, somewhere about
the end of January ?
Sir. F. Thesiger The beginning of February.
Mr. James.?Did you attend to nearly the end of January? A. Herbert
Villa comes next. ? Q. When did you next attend her ? A. January 3rd to
February 9th. ? Q. We have got to the 2nd January, 1851. Did you resume
your attendance, or was there any break ? A. No break there. ? Q. And how far
did your continuous attendance go? You have told us the 2nd of January. Was
that broken off then, or did you follow her to her residence ? A. I recollect very
well that I went to Herbert Villa, expecting, from what she said to me the previous
time, that she would be there that day, and I found the coachman waiting there to
conduct me to her other residence, that she had not had time to remove. ? Q.
How far into the year 1851 did you attend her continuously? A. Stamford-street
comes next, from February 11th to March 10th. ? Q. What is the time of the
Edgware-road? A. March the 10th to June 9th.
Mr. James. ? Do you go on beyond the 9th of June? A. At Worthing,
August the 6th. ? Q. Well, were you examined before the Commissioners of
Lunacy? A. Yes. ? Q. When did you see her again? A. At Effra Hall.?
Q. After October that would be ? A. On the 9th I went, but they would not
allow me to see her. ? Q. When did you see her? A. 17th November. ? Q. You
went to see her, but they refused to allow you? A. On the 9th they did, but on the
17th I saw her. ? Q. And when again? A. St. John's Wood, November 12th to
January the 1st. ? Q. Did you hear the evidence of Mary Rainey ? A. Yes, I
did. ? Q. And of the children as to the dirt and filth? A. I did. ? Q. As far as
you heard that statement, from what you stated, was that true, or is it exaggerated?
A. I thought it very much exaggerated. ? Q. Was she labouring under disease,
that rendered it impossible that she could prevent a great deal of what they alleged
happening ? A. Yes; I have spoken to her about threats, from the description
given by Mary Rainey, and she alluded to her own infirmity. ? Q. Do you believe
that many of the things which have been stated occurred involuntarily on her
part ? A.I do. ? Q. You heard their evidence ? A. I heard their evidence.
? Q. And you say here, on your oath, a great deal of that is exaggerated ? A.
It is. ? Q. I ask you now, do you know, from attending her as a doctor, that she
was in that state of bodily infirmity, that filth of this kind would occur involuntarily
on her part ? A. It was for that very complaint I was attending her. ? Q. From
what you have seen of her so constantly as you have, and the opinion you have
formed, is she, in your opinion, of sound or unsound mind ? A. Of sound mind.
? Q. Have you heard her express herself strongly about her daughters; her
children ? A. Frequently. ? Q. Without going into the detail of every conversa-
tion, in what way generally has she spoken of her children, and their conduct
towards her ? A. They had used her very ill, by having her confined to a mad-
house, and not visiting her there while she was in confinement. ? Q. Did she
speak to you of the arrest for perjury, that was attempted upon her when she was
at Stamford-street ? A. Yes, when we gave the certificate that she was not fit to
be removed under that arrest. ? Q. Did you give a certificate that she was not fit
to be removed under that arrest ? A. Yes; conjointly with Mr. Johnson, a surgeon,
in the Waterloo-road; I saw the bed-room door had been forced. ? Q. Was she
at that time in a fit state to be taken to a police-office ? A. Not at all. ? Q. Have
you heard her speak about her children? Have you heard her mention the
subject of the poisoning and the analysis ? A. I never heard about the poisoning
all the time I was with her; she never mentioned that to me. ? What has she
chiefly mentioned about her daughters' conduct? A. What I have just stated. ?
Q. Where have the cats been generally ? A. Sometimes in the bed-room, sometimes
on the stairs, sometimes in the garden. ? Q. How many have you seen there ? A. I
once saw four and a kitten. ? Q. Did you see anything so extravagant or eccentric
in or about the attachment towards them, that struck you as a test of insanity? A.
No; I considered it was matter of choice.? Q. She was left very much alone
there when she was ill, was she not? A. Very much. ? Q. You say you attended
before the Commissioners of Lunacy, and was examined? A. Yes.? Q. I
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUM MING. 123
believe a complaint had been made to the Commissioners of Lunacy that Mrs.
Cumming was under duresse; that she was a person under restraint, and -wanted
force to go where she pleased ? A. Yes. ? Q. I believe you gave your evidence to
show she was, in fact, able to go where she pleased ? A. Yes; I gave my evidence
according to all the circumstances I knew about her. ? Q. And that, possibly, you
know led to a report which has been read here, to say that the Commissioners
refused to interfere because they found she was a free agent? A. Yes.
Cross-examined by Sir F. Thesiger.?On the 6th of August I think you
visited her at Worthing? A. I did.? Q. Was not there an application to you
from this gentleman (pointing to Mr. Turner's clerk) on the 16th of August,
and did you not refuse to give any information where she was? A. The
first time he called; he called twice. I do not know about the second time. I
asked him who he was; whether he was an officer or not. ? Q. Did you refuse to
tell him where she was ? A. Yes, because I thought it very rude for a professional
man to behave to another professional man in that way. ? Q. You refused to tell
him? A. I refused to tell him, and requested him to tell Mr. Turner never
to send again.
[Dr Caldwell was subjected to a long cross-examination, relative to some
acceptances he had received from Mrs. Cumming in payment of his bills for pro-
fessional attendance. We give this resume of a series of questions put to Dr.
Caldwell, which had direct bearing upon the question at issue.]
Re-examined by Mr. James.?Did you know at that time that they intended
to take her into custody, at Stamford-street, on a charge of perjury ? A. I did. ?
Q. Who was the gentleman who applied to you, is he in the room ? A. That is
the person (pointing to Mr. Turner's clerk) ; I asked him who he was, and he said
he was an Irishman. ? Q. This person called upon you and recommended himself
in the first instance, saying, he was an Irishman? A. Yes, and that if I would
call on Mr. Turner, at No. 9, Carey-street, Lincoln's-inn, he would tell me all
about it. ? Q. You are attending her professionally, and do you consider that she is in
a precarious state of health ? A. She is. ? Q. Do you know whether it is the truth,
that she does not take the physic you prescribe for her ? A. I think there is some
truth in that; but not all the truth. I have generally presented it to her myself
when I have found that to be the case, and she has taken it. ? Q. Have you
reason to believe that she takes, to use your own words, either wine or brandy and
water, on what is called " the sly ?" A. I think she takes each occasionally. I
have recommended it to her sometimes, when I have thought it necessary. ?
Q. You say you got inconsistent accounts from the servants ? A. Some have told
me that she does take it, and others tell me she does not take it.
Examined by the Jury.?During your visits to this lady, have you had to treat
her for delirium tremens ? A. No. ? Q. And would you consider it necessary she
should have a certain quantity of brandy and wine a day ? A. Not every day;
when occasions require it.
W. H. Hodding, Esq. examined by Mr. James.?Are you a general prac-
titioner in Gloucester-place, Portman-square ? A. I am.?Q. How long have
you been in practice ? A. Twenty-six years. ? Q. Do you know Messrs. Birch
and Davis, Solicitors, of Newport? A. I do not know Mr. Birch at all; I know
Mr. Davis. ? Q. Of the same firm? A. Of the same firm. ? Q. Do you remem-
ber being applied to in May, 1851, to see Mrs. Cumming, with reference to the
conveyance of some property to Sir Charles Morgan ? A. I do. ? Q. At whose
request did you see her? A. At Mr. Davis's request. ? Q. Upon what object
were you to see her ? A. To satisfy Mr. Davis that she was sufficiently sound to
execute a deed of sale. ? Q. A conveyance to Sir Charles Morgan? A. Yes.
? Q. Were they the solicitors at that time of Sir Charles Morgan in the purchase?
A. Yes.? Q. Where did you see her ? A. In the Edgware-road. ? Q. At her house ?
A. No; in apartments there. ? Q. Have you got the exact day you saw her?
A. No. ? Q. What month was it? A. In May, 1851. ? Q. What passed when
you saw her; what did you say to her to form your judgment? A. I asked her
several questions relative to the nature of the property she was about to transfer,
and of what property she was possessed, and a great many questions which I
considered necessary, and I left her under the impression she was a very com-
petent person to execute a deed; in fact, a very clever person.? Q. You believe she
124 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING.
is a person of cunning, active mind ? A. Yes. ? Q. Did you leave her under the
impression she was competent to execute the deed, and did you complete the pur-
chase? A. Yes. ? Q. You never saw her before, I believe ? A. I never saw her
before, or heard of her. ? Q. How long were you with her? A. I should think
half an hour. ? Q. Have you heard that her mind had been a subject of inquiry in
a previous commission? A. I did not hear there had been a previous commis-
sion ; but I heard from Mr. Davis, there was some doubt as to her mind being
perfectly sound. ? Q. And that directed your attention particularly to her?
A. Exactly.? Q. Have you seen her since? A. I have. ? Q. How often have
you seen her since? A. I have seen her three times very recently. ? Q. "Will
you give to the Jury the dates when you saw her? A. I think it was the day
after Christmas Day of last year. ? Q. The 25th of December ? A. Yes, about
the 30th and 31st, I should think. ? Q. I believe you not only reported she was
competent to sign the deed, but you attested the deed yourself? A. I did.?
Q. Was that deed read over to her? A. Yes. ? Q. Did she seem to understand
the purport of it ? A. Perfectly. ? Q. Or you would not have attested it ?
A. I would not have attested it. ? Q. Was the money paid to her? A. The
money was handed to her in my presence, and she was about to go, and then
I left the room ; I thought my business was done. ? Q. Did you leave with the
belief that, having attested the deed, she thoroughly understood what passed?
A. I did. ? Q. In your three last interviews with her in December, last year,
had you any reason, from your own interview, to alter your opinion ? A. Not
the least. ? Q. Did you talk to her at all about her daughters ? A. I spoke to
her about this coming commission, and that naturally led to conversation about
her daughters; she merely said they had treated her very ill, and I did not think
it necessary to pursue the conversation any further. ? Q. Is it your opinion that
she is a person of sound mind? A. It is quite so.
Cross-examined by Sir Frederick Thesiger.?Who did you see in London
before you went to Mrs. Cumming in the Edgware-road ? A. I was taken by Mr.
Davis; he came to my house and fetched me. ? Q. Was Mr. Haynes present
during the time you mentioned at Mrs. Cumming's? A. He was. ? Q. Was
anybody else present during that half-hour's examination? A. There was Mr.
Davis, myself, and Mr. Haynes, and a gentleman who I understood was a solicitor,
but whose name I do not know? Q. During the half-hour's conversation with
her? A. Yes. ? Q. Was the deed executed then at the same time after that con-
versation ? A. That was the only time I saw Mrs. Cumming? Q. You went
there with Mr. Haynes ? A. No, I did not. ? Q. I thought Mr. Haynes had sent
to you ? A. No; Birch and Davis. ? Q. You did not go with Mr. Haynes, but
found him there ? A. I found him there ; and I believe he objected to my being
there, as being unnecessary. ? Q. You left her counting the money ? A. She was
just about to do it. ? Q. Who did you leave with her? A. Mr. Davis, Mr.
Haynes, and this other gentleman, whose name I do not know. ? Q. I understand
in your three subsequent interviews she began to speak of her daughters behaving ill
upon the subject of the present commission, and you did not pursue the inquiry
further? A. Exactly.
Mrs .Elizabeth Davis, sworn. Examined by Mr. James.?Where do you reside?
A. At 27, Deane-street, Commercial-road East. ? Q. Were you at onetime, in
May, 1846, matron of the York House Asylum ? A.I was. ? Q. Where Mrs.
Cumming was confined ? A. I was. ? Q. That was kept at the time by Dr.
Millengen ? A. It was. ? Q. Did you read in the newspapers on Saturday last this
investigation that was going on ? A.I did yesterday. ? Q. In consequence of
reading the inquiry in the " Times" newspaper, what steps did you take ? did you
go to find out the counsel or the attorneys? A. I commissioned my son to do so.
? Q. Do you remember Mrs. Cumming coming to the York House Asylum? A.
I do. ? Q. How was she brought there ? A. By two nurses. ? Q. Do you
remember whether she had any strait-waistcoat put upon her? A. Yes.? Q.
Were you there when she was brought to the house ? A. I was there when she
was brought in the house, but I did not see her till she was brought in the parlour.?
Q. When you saw her, had she a strait-waistcoat on her ? A. No; but she informed
me she had had. ? Q. What did Mrs. Cumming tell you when you first saw
her in the parlour of the York House Asylum? A. That she had been very
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 125
unkindly treated ; roughly treated by the nurses -who took her. ? Q. And did she
tell you anything about a strait-waistcoat ? A. Yes, that she had had the strait-
waistcoat put upon her. ? Q. I believe you left the asylum early in August,
before the commission ? A. I did. ? Q. From the time that she was brought in
May up to August, a period of about four months? A. I left before August.?
Q. When did you leave? A. In July. ? Q. Was she there about five months?
A. I think about that time, I cannot say to a day or a week. ? Q. Did you attend
upon her as matron? A. I was the ladies' superintendent for the comfort of the
house, not in any particular position. ? Q. Had you many conversations with her
during the time you were there ? A. I was with her daily, and at every meal.?
Q. Did you ever see any violence upon her part which would require a strait-
waistcoat to be put upon her ? A. Oh, dear no. ? Q. What was her conduct, so
far as you observed it while she was there ? A. That of a highly respectable
lady. She conducted herself with great propriety, I considered. ? Q. Did you
form any impression as to whether she was of sound or unsound mind ? ? A.
I think she was of stronger mind than I am myself. ? Q. Did you form your
impression from her conduct? A. Yes; considering her years, I think she was of
very sound understanding. ? Q. Did she complain to you of the conduct of her
daughters? A. She lamented their cruel treatment to her in tears many times.
? Q. While she was there, did any of the daughters or her family come to see her,
to your knowledge ? A. I am not sure whether it was Mrs. Ince, but I think Mrs.
Ince came on one instance. I think I saw her; I did not know whether it was
Mrs. Ince or the other daughter, but it was one of them. ? Q. Did either of them
come upon more than one occasion ? A. No ; not that I know of. ? Q. Do you
remember whether the death of her husband was told while she was in the asylum,
or not? A. I think it was communicated.?Q. By whom? A. By Dr Millengen,
I think. ? Q. What were her habits as to cleanliness at the time she was there ? A.
She was more than cleanly, she was a nice lady. ? Q. You saw her every day?
A. Yes. ? Q. At every meal? A. Yes. ? Q. Did she take her meals with you?
A. Yes. ? Q. At what time did you form an impression in your mind as to whether
she was of sound or unsound mind? A. It never occurred to me that she was
still of unsound mind.
Cross-examined by Sir F. Thesigek.?What age did you consider her to be?
A. I thought her between sixty and seventy years old when I knew her. ?
Q. Because you said considering her age, you do not think between sixty and seventy
years of age an advanced age? A. It depends on constitution a good deal.?
Q. You say Mrs. Ince or Mrs. Hooper, you do not know which, called once ?
A. Yes. ? Q. Was Mrs. Cumming told of their calling ? A. Yes. No, she was
at the trial ; she was afterwards. ? Q. When she was told that her daughter had
been, what did she say ; did she express a wish to see her or not? A. No, she did
not. ? Q. Did she express a wish to see her ? A. I believe she brought some
articles of dress for her, but what they were I do not know.
Re-examined by Mr. James.?Do you remember whether she was told the
daughter was there while she was there or not? A. No, she did not know of it. ?
Q. When she was brought there had she clothes ? A. Scarcely anything ?
Q. How was she clothed during the four months she was there ? A. After a time
her wardrobe was sent. ? Q. Do you know who sent, it or who brought it ? A. I
think it was sent by the Inces' family, but what part I do not know. ? Q. How
long was she there without clothes, or comparatively without any clothes? A. Not
a week, I should say. ? Q.,Where were you when the last commission was executed
in 1846? You left before the commission ? A. I did. I knew nothing of it till it
was closed. ? Q, Did you read that in the paper ? A. No; I was informed of it
by some relatives.
Mr. James.?Did you know the commission of 1840 had been executed?
A. Not till after the business was terminated.
Examined by the Commissioner. ? Did you tell Dr Millengen your opinion
of this lady's state of mind? A. No, I was never asked. ? Q. But no person in
their right mind ought to be in an asylum ? A. But I could not control that. ?
Q. Were you a matron or superintendent? A. Yes. ? Q. Did you express any
doubt to Dr Millengen about it? A. Dr Millengen seemed so confirmed in his
own opinion. ? Q. Did you tell him your opinion ? A. No.
126 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
Forbes Winslow, Esq., M.D., sworn, and examined by Mr. James.?You reside in
Albemarle-street, and have directed your attention very much to cases of insanity?
A. I have. ? Q. I believe you were selected by the Lords Justices to see Mrs.
Gumming, and to report to their lordships your opinion of her state of mind? A. I
was requested to do so by an order of the Lords Justices. ? Q. When did you first
see Mrs. Cumming in consequence of that official order ? A. I would premise that
I was first consulted about Mrs. Cumming on the 29th of October (1851). ? Q. Last
year? A. Last year. I was requested to go to the asylum at Effra Hall, where
Mrs. Cumming was confined, for the purpose of ascertaining her actual condition of
mind. I went on the 30th of October, accompanied by Dr Barnes. On applying I
was refused admittance. I understood that the matter was subsequently brought
before the Lord Chancellor, and that, with the consent of counsel on both sides, it
was arranged that I should have free access to the alleged lunatic. ? Q. I believe
you were named in the order were you not? A. On that occasion, I believe, there
was no official order issued. I was informed that, with consent of counsel on both
sides, it was agreed I should have free access to Mrs. Cumming for the purposes of
my examination. On the day previously to my visiting her, Mr. Ince called upon
me in Albemarle-street, and I had a conversation with him in relation to her case.
On the 7th of November I went by myself to Effra Hall.
Mr. James.?Q. When did you first see her? A. On the 7th of November ?
Q. Were you alone with her, or with any other person? A. I was alone with her.
Perhaps I may observe, that I met on that occasion at the asylum two of the Com-
missioners in Lunacy, who were paying Mrs. Cumming an official visit, and at
their request I had a conversation with them in relation to the case. I felt an
anxiety to make myself acquainted with all the facts of the case before my inter-
view with her took place.?Q. You saw her officially ? A. Quasi officially. I had an
hour and a quarter's interview with her. ? Q. Just state shortly to the Jury what
passed? A. I observed that I had come to see her for the purpose of ascertaining
her condition of mind and competency to manage herself and her property. I
expressed a wisb that she would communicate to me, without reserve, anything
she had to say. She expressed a pleasure at seeing me; said that she presumed
my visit was of a friendly character. In her unhappy situation, she was glad to
see any one who at all appeared friendly disposed towards her. I asked her how
long she had been at Effra Hall, and where she had come from ? She replied, she
was brought to London from Brighton to the asylum; that she had been there
nearly a week. She then described to me what she alleged to be a very great outrage
upon the liberty of her person; told me the police had broken into her private apart-
ments at Brighton; that she had been subjected to several examinations ; and
that sbe had been forcibly dragged out of her house to the railway station, and
brought up to London. She said that it was done by the advice and with the
knowledge of her own family, of whose conduct she greatly complained. She
observed, that it was not the first time that they had treated her in that brutal
way. I said, are you not taking rather a harsh view of the conduct of your
children? are there not other parties implicated in this matter? they may not be
so bad as you appear to fancy them. She replied, that she was certain that her
children were implicated in the transaction; that they had behaved, on various
occasions, cruelly and unnaturally towards her; that they had made other attempts
to deprive her of her property and her liberty. ? Q. Did she allude, in the course
of this conversation, to the previous commission in lunacy, and the proceedings
in 1846? A. She referred to that circumstance in all the interviews I had with,
her. I am now merely generalizing what she said. I had an interview with
her again upon the 8th November. She then went over the same ground in
almost the same words. She complained of the irritation and anxiety to which
she was subjected by being confined in an asylum, and of labouring under con-
siderable bodily infirmity. She said that her health was declining ; that she could
obtain no sleep at night; thac she had not slept for one hour during the time she
had been in the asylum ; prayed that I would intercede on her behalf, and obtain
her release. She said, if she could be removed to her own residence, in St. John's
Wood, she would be willing to submit to any number of examinations that were
considered necessary for the purpose of satisfying the Lord Chancellor of her state
of mind, and her competency to manage herself and her affairs. ? Q. She said
that? A. She said that she did not wish to shrink from any examination that
might be considered necessary under the circumstances. She also remarked that
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 127
prejudice would exist against her if she were allowed to remain in the asylum, and
were to undergo the necessary number of examinations there. Perhaps I may be
allowed to state, that I made, previously to her removal from the asylum, an affi-
davit in the case, expressing no opinion of mine as to her soundness or unsound-
ness of mind, but stating that I did not consider that she was in such a condition of
mind as to justify her detention in a lunatic asylum.
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?That is not evidence.
Dr Winsloio.?I was merely stating that in the affidavit that has been referred
to, I gave no opinion of Mrs. Cumming's soundness or unsoundness of mind.
Mr. James.?Is it since then you formed an opinion ? A. Yes. ? Q. Upon that
occasion did you make any inquiry of the nurse whether her statement as to not
sleeping was correct? A. I did. ? Q. Did the result of that confirm what Mrs. Cum-
ming had told you ? A. She confirmed Mrs. Cumming's statement. ? Q. On what
day did you see her? A. I paid her a series of visits after receiving the order of the
Court of Appeal, extending from November 22nd to the day previously to this
inquisition, a series of twenty visits in number, after Mrs. Cumming was removed
from the asylum to her own residence, at St. John's Wood. I would premise, that
I considered it my duty to make myself acquainted, as far as I could, with all the
facts of the case, previously to my examination of Mrs. Cumming, with the view of
entering upon its consideration in the full possession of all the particulars I could
obtain with regard to it. The Lord Chancellor's Secretary of Lunacy forwarded
to me a number of affidavits which had been made on both sides for my perusal;
I had also interviews with Mr. Turner, the solicitor for the petitioners, with
reference to Mrs. Cumming. I also saw the medical men who had been acquainted
with her for a number of years, the servants, who knew her habits of life very
intimately, and I also had a conversation with Mrs. Moore, who, I have understood,
had been acquainted with Mrs. Cumming for a number of years. I had these inter-
views for the purpose of obtaining, as far as I possibly could, all the facts relating to
the past history of Mrs. Cumming's life. ? Q. Did you take all the pains you could
to ascertain all the antecedents? A. I did. ? Q. And I believe you also saw Mr.
Ince? A. I also saw Mr. Ince. ? Q. What was the substance of the conversation
which you had with Mrs. Cumming for the purpose of ascertaining her soundness
or unsoundness of mind ?
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?You read in your opening the whole of Dr.
Winslow's report.
Mr. James.?I know I did; but I would rather have this evidence on oath. It
will not occupy much time.
Dr Winslow.?Understanding that Mrs. Cumming had an unnatural antipathy
to her children, of course I referred to that point. She became a little excited
when I mentioned the name of her children, and complained of their unnatural
and cruel conduct towards her. She said that previously to Captain Cumming's
death, she had been dragged from her house to an asylum, after being put under
restraint. ? Q. Did she narrate again to you the circumstances of the commission?
A. She referred to the circumstances of her being dragged to the York House
Asylum, and being put under restraint while she was in the act of getting into a
carriage.? Q. Did she then speak to you on the subject of her antipathy to her
children? A. Yes, I attempted to ascertain whether I could not reason her out of
that antipathy, and I made some excuses for the family. I said it was the hus-
band's act, that it was legally his, and not the children's. She said, " No, it
was done by my children. He was my children's tool. He was an old man, and
was bed-ridden, and a willing agent in the hands of his daughters." ? Q. Do you
remember anything being said about some poison which has been charged here as
a delusion. Just tell us what she said to you about that ? A. She said that some
years ago, she had a suspicion that some extraneous substance was in the milk;
that her suspicions had been excited by the fact of some fowls having been found
dead, and on giving the cat the milk to drink, the cat refused to drink the milk,
and that excited her suspicion as to the existence of some poisonous substance in
the milk. I endeavoured to reason her out of that impression, but she said
thai such was the fact, that she had sent the milk to be analyzed, and that Dr.
Barnes had assured her that there was poison in it. ? Q. What other statement
was made? A. I then said, You have alleged that Mrs. Ince had attempted to
strangle you, and she said, "Ah! that is one of my delusions." Then, I said,
perhaps you may be able to give me a satisfactory explanation of the circumstance
128 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
referred to, -which has led to the impression of your being under a delusion on that
point. " One of my delusions ?" she said so playfully.
Sir Frederick. Thesiger.?Will you fix the date of this?
Dr Winslow.?On every interview I had with her I referred to these alleged
delusions.
Mr. James.?You alluded to these alleged delusions of which we have heard. It
is proper to do so when a medical man is endeavouring to ascertain soundness or
unsoundness of mind? A. I did, on every occasion. She said, some time back,
pending the proceedings which her children had instituted against her, when her mind
was very much irritated and annoyed at Mrs. Ince's proceedings, imagining that they
were anxious to confine her again in an asylum, and deprive her of the control over her
property, her daughter, Mrs. Ince, came to the house, knocked violently at the door
and asked if Mrs. Cumming was in. Without waiting to be announced, she rushed
up into her room, threw her arms violently about her neck. Mrs. Cumming made
an exclamation, "Oh! dear, you have come to strangle me," or " Have you come
to strangle me?" Then, I said, you are not under the impression that your
daughter in reality intended to commit any act of the kind? She replied that she
was very apprehensive at the time, considering the cruel and unnatural conduct of
her children. She did not consider that she was safe, and that no doubt she made
an exclamation of the kind. She then observed, that it was a foolish observation
for her to make, but in reality she did not believe that her daughter contemplated
so brutal an outrage; it was an unguarded, foolish expression of hers, which had
been seized hold ot' and adduced as evidence of her insanity. ? Q. In these inter-
views, am I right in stating that these were the three leading delusions which had
been alleged against her: aversion to her children, the question of the poisoning,
and the attempt on the part of her daughter to strangle her? A. The medical
certificates consigning her to the lunatic asylum referred only to these points.
? Q. And also in Dr Monro's and Sir Alexander Morison's report? A. Yes. ?
Q. I do not put it invidiously at all, but before ascertaining whether an impression
on the mind of a person is a delusion or not, is it not essential to ascertain whether
there is the existence of any fact which may be a ground of such delusion? A. It
is an important preliminary inquiry. ? Q. With reference to the antipathy to her
children, are you of opinion that it is a delusion under all the circumstances of the
case or not? A. Certainly not.
Sir Frederick Thesiger.?But what circumstances ?
Dr Winslow.?Under the circumstances she stated.
Mr. James.?Now, I put it thus: Under the circumstances of the commission'; of
the subsequent proceedings against her, and the conduct of her children, are you of
opinion that that really is a delusion or not. A. Certainly not. ? Q. Now, state
why not, if you please? A. I think that the course which has been pursued towards
Mrs. Cumming, has been such as to justify in her mind a natural antipathy and
dislike to her children; an antipathy the existence of which may be compatible
with a healthy condition of mind. ? Q. In one mind there would be an intensity
and feeling more than in another, in regard to the conduct of the children? A. It is
dependent on the natural constitution of the mind. ? Q. With reference to the ques-
tion of the poisoning, having ascertained the facts, are you of opinion that that is a
delusion or not? A. I do not. I think she had good reason for supposing that
there might be some extraneous substance in the milk. Being naturally suspicious,
and that element in her character having unfortunately been acted upon for a series
of years, by the unhappy circumstances of her life, an exaggerated development was
given to it ; and as she was informed, after her suspicion was roused, that poison was
discovered in the milk, after being subjected to chemical analysis, it was a very
reasonable and rational suspicion for her to entertain that itwas done so designedly,
and this led to the existence of the alleged delusion.
The Commissioner.?She had good reason,being naturally suspicious? A. That
feature in her character being operated upon unduly by the unhappy circumstances
of her life, gave to the fact referred to, an undue and perhaps exaggerated develop-
ment. Under these circumstances, it was natural for her to imagine?it was within
the range of possibility?that poison might have been introduced into her milk.
Mr. James.?A fowl had been killed? A. A fowl, she said, had been discovered
dead in the garden, and that of course gave force to her suspicions. She said most
distinctly to me on every occasion, on which I adverted to the topic, that she
accused no one of an attempt to poison her. ? Q. She said so distinctly? A. Dis-
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 129
tinctly, oil every occasion on -which I adverted to the topic. ? Q. Now, with
regard to strangling, the other delusion, which over and over again was made a
prominent part in this case, you say she stated her impression was removed ? A.
She said it was a foolish, unguarded expression of hers. ? Q. Did the mode in
which she stated that to you, argue sanity or insanity in your mind? A. I think
the explanation which I offered in regard to the alleged delusion about the poison,
admits of an application to the alleged attempt at strangulation. It is possible she
might, being under an apprehension that her daughters were ready at any moment
to remove her to an asylum, and being an old lady, not very choice and guarded
in the use of her expressions, very likely exclaim, "you have come to strangle
me!" and perhaps a few minutes afterwards admit the absurdity of the exclama-
tion. When she explained the fact to me, in the manner just stated, she added, it
constituted another illustration of the willingness of lier children to seize hold of
any unguarded expressions she might use, for the purpose of adducing them as
evidence of her insanity. I am now giving you the substance of what she said?of
course not in her own language. Having read the examination to which the learned
Commissioner subjected Mrs. Cumming, on a former commission, and having heard
from Mr. Turner that her mind was deluded in reference to some of her grand-
children, I thought I was in duty bound to examine her upon that point. ? Q.
Did you direct your attention to that point? A. I did. ? Q. It would serve to test
her memory, if it did nothing else? A. It tested her memory, as well as her sanity.
I told her I understood she was under some very erroneous notions with regard to
her grandchildren. ? Q. Mrs. Ince's children.
Sir F. Thesiger.?Some of her grandchildren ? Dr Winslow.?A. Some of her
grandchildren. I said, I had understood she had represented that one was not her
grandchild?and that the body of the child had been glazed over after death. She
said it was a falsity. I said," Are you certain that you made no observations that
would warrant such a construction ?" She replied, it is possible that she might have
said it was a handsome-looking corpse, and looked like some of the dolls in the shops
in Regent Street; but, beyond that, she was confident she never made any remarks.
She might have observed that it was a handsome corpse, and like some of the wax
dolls. ? Q. You perhaps have seen children?young children, infants, who have
died of scarlet fever? A. I have, but not many. ? Q. Is there any particular
appearance about a child that has died of scarlet fever? A. I think that under
these circumstances, the skin has a shiny appearance, from the fact of the disease
being a disease of the skin, and the natural exhalation from the surface having
been interfered with during the course of the disease. ? Q. Does the body of an
infant dying from that cause, present a shiny appearance of the skin, being some-
what glazed? A. It does. I have seen it in several instances, and I think it admits
of a physiological explanation. ? Q. So that the face in the shroud in the coffin
would present that shiny, glazed-like appearance. A. To a certain extent it would.
?Q. As to her property, did you inquire anything of her? A. I asked her as to her
property; she said that it consisted of landed property, household property,
situated in Monmouthshire, and her income ranged between 400/. and 500/. a year.
I then asked her some simple questions in arithmetic, apologising for asking ques-
tions which might appear very foolish and childish. I asked her the number of
shillings in the pound, and other questions, with a view of testing her capacity. I
put several questions to her, most of which she replied satisfactorily to; nothing
beyond that. I said to her, supposing you were to invest your capital in the purchase
of houses, what rate of interest would you expect for such an investment of your
property ? she replied, that would depend upon the quality of the house. ? Q. I
believe, without going into it more at length, I may ask this: you took every
opportunity within your ability, as a medical man of experience in these matters,
to test her as to whether her mind was sound or unsound? A. I did: I never
devoted more time or more pains to any case in my life. ? Q. She is a person of
naturally irritable temperament, is she not? A. So I should imagine. ? Q. Is it
your opinion that, after all the pains you have taken to ascertain this matter, she
is of sound mind? A. Undoubtedly so.
Cross-examined by Sir F. Thesiger.?Labouring under no delusions at all?
that is your opinion? A. No delusion that I could discover. ? Q. Is it your
opinion that a person who labours under any delusion is of sound or unsound
mind ? A. If a delusion in the proper acceptation of the term is found to exist,
I
130 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
undoubtedly it is evidence of unsoundness of mind. ? Q. A belief in the existence
of a fact which does not exist, is that, in your opinion, proof of delusion ? A. Cer-
tainly not. ? Q. Suppose, for instance, you entertained the notion that I had
endeavoured to murder you, would you consider that a delusion or not? A. Not
per se. ? Q. What do you mean by not per se ? A. Not taken by itself, and without
reference to other circumstances which may have induced that belief in my mind.
? Q. Supposing that we had met, and that I had offered you some insult, and that
afterwards you had entertained the notion that I had endeavoured to murder you,
would that, in your opinion, be a delusion ? A. No ; it may be a false impression,
arising from actual circumstances, and net a delusion in the right signification of
the word. ? Q. Without any other foundation than that an insult had been offered
to you?I put it in that way ? A. It is possible that it might be only a false im-
pression. ? Q. Is it your opinion that " insanity does not admit of being defined?
that it is not in the power of any human being to prescribe within the limits of a
definition all the peculiar characteristic symptoms of mental derangement ?" A. Such
is my recorded opinion. ? Q. " The malady assumes so many forms, and exhibits
itself in such protean shapes, that it is out of our power to give anything the sem-
blance of a correct or safe definition as could be referred to as a standard in doubt-
ful cases of derangement of the mind ?" A. Most undoubtedly. ? Q. I think the
passage I have just read is contained in a book, entitled the Pica of Insanity in Criminal
Cases, for which I return my thanks, it having been written some years ago and
presented to me by Dr Forbes Winslow. It is dedicated to Sir Frederick Pollock.
I mention this fact, because we shall see Dr Conolly presently. You have spoken
about the poison, and you have said she believed that the milk had been poisoned ?
A. So she said. ? Q. Did you apply to Dr Barnes upon the subject. A. I did. ?
Q. Your impression, I believe, was, that Dr Barnes stated that there was acetate
of lead in the milk? A. So I believe. ? Q. Do you not know that it was Epsom
salts, and not acetate oflead? A. So I have subsequently heard.? Q. Would it make
any difference, in your opinion, supposing you were now told that she had been
informed it was Epsom salts in the milk, and not acetate of lead, or any other
poison ? A. At the time she told me that she was informed that there was acetate
of lead in the milk. ? Q. Pardon me, I am putting a different question to you. My
question is this?Supposing you had been aware that she had been informed by
Dr Barnes, and repeatedly informed, that there was Epsom salts in the milk, and.
not poison of any description, would that change your opinion at all? A. Not to any
great extent.? Q. But would it change your opinion to any extent? A. I think
the fact of her milk having been drugged might, in a woman with a mind consti-
tuted like Mrs. Cumming's, and drugged, too, with a substance which in appearance
is very much like oxalic acid, convey to her mind a suspicion that there was some
foul play going on. It might tend, in her suspicious mind, to create considerable
alarm and apprehension.? Q. But you do not understand me, I think. Supposing
she was told by her medical man, upon whom she had the greatest reliance, that
there was no poison in the milk at all, but that it was merely Epsom salts, and
supposing she afterwards entertained the notion that there had been an attempt to
poison her, should you consider that that was a delusion or not ? A. No, I should
not think it was a delusion in the proper acceptation of the term. ? Q. Why not
in the proper acceptation of the term? What do you call the proper acceptation
of the term? A. I do not think that it was the creation of the mind de novo.?
Q. A creation de novo! What do you mean ? ? A. It was an idea which followed
actual circumstances. It might have been a mere mistake of hers. Having been
told.that the milk was drugged, she might have had an apprehension that some
attempt was made upon her life, and so believe the fact. This is possible, without
its justifying the belief, that she was therefore of unsound mind.? Q I think we
are at cross purposes. I am taking for granted that whatever impression was ori-
ginally made in her mind, that impression was removed by the commun cation to
her, that there was nothing but Epsom salts, which are harmless to a certain
extent, and that she, notwithstanding she was told to the contrary by a person on
whom she could rely, she still persisted in believing that there was poison in the
milk? A. Taking the case in all its circumstances, viewing the natural tempera-
ment of Mrs. Cumming, and the peculiar constitution of her mind, and all the prior
unhappy circumstances of her life, I should not be at all surprised if she were to
misstate and exaggerate actual circumstances, without the notion being the result
of a disordered condition of mind.?Q. You think so. A. I do.?Q. Do you mean
THE GASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 181
to say, that if a person has once entertained a suspicion of a particular fact, and
that suspicion is entirely removed from her mind, and the suspicion afterwards recurs,
that there is a justification for the suspicion, although her mind had been com-
pletely cleared of any such impression for a considerable time ? A. I think you
cannot form a correct opinion of the matter without reference to all the circum-
stances of the case.? Q. Then that is your opinion? A. That is my opinion.?
Q. Then if at one time she entertained a suspicion, no matter how it may have
been removed, the recurrence of that does not prove a delusion ? A. If she once
entertained the suspicion that poison was infused into her milk, and she was in-
formed that, instead of poison, the milk had been drugged, no matter how innocent
the drug might in reality be, it might, in a mind constituted like Mrs. Cumming's,
viewing all the prior events of her life, and her constitution of mind, give rise to an
impression of poison, which impression could be co-existent with a healthy mind.?
Q. With a healthy mind ? A. Yes. ? Q. Then you consider that a person who
has entertained suspicions, which suspicions had been entirely removed, and those
suspicions occurring again, may be in a sound and healthy mind ? A. A person
may be under an erroneous impression, and may arrive at a false result at one
period, and to a certain extent it may be justified; that erroneous impression
may subsequently occur to the mind from actual circumstances. ? Q. May sub-
sequently occur to the mind from actual circumstances? A. Yes. ? Q, That is
your opinion ? A. It is. ? Q. I am putting where the impression is entirely
removed ? A. It is possible even under these circumstances. ? Q. And no cir-
cumstance recurring to remove the false impression. Yet that impression recur-
ring, and recurring with great strength, so as to induce the belief that a great
crime has been committed, do you consider that that is explicable upon the
ground of the previous circumstances and character of the party? A. I think
you cannot arrive at a right result without viewing the case of Mrs. Cumming
in all its circumstances.?Q. I am not asking you as to the case of Mrs.Cumming?
A. Supposing an impression to have once existed, and for the party to have
been undeceived, I can imagine that there would be a recurrence under peculiar
circumstances of the false impression, such recurrence being consistent with
the existence of a healthy state of mind; the impression need not necessarily
be a delusive one. ? Q. Then I suppose when once an erroneous impression is
entertained, that erroneous impression depending on slight circumstances we will
say, but still an erroneous impression, when once that erroneous impression is
entertained, its constant recurrence does not indicate any unsoundness of mind at
all? A. Erroneous impressions are often entertained by very healthy vigorous
minds. ? Q. But an erroneous impression from slight circumstances, which im-
pression is entirely removed? A. I will illustrate what I mean. Take the case
of A, B, and C, as I am not permitted to mention Mrs. Cumming's case?take the
case of a person under a belief that certain poisonous ingredients had been infused
into an article of diet, prior circumstances naturally exciting suspicion in the party's
mind, and an apprehension that something of the kind might occur, it is possible
under those circumstances for the person to believe when so informed that he was
under a false impression as to the faot with reference to the poison. Subsequent
circumstances might, however, occur with regard to the same individual, which
would revive the previous false impression. The party might argue, and argue
reasonably, " I was under such an impression at a certain period. I was subse-
quently told it was a false impression. Circumstances have since occurred which
certainly do convince my mind that it is within the range of possibility that the
thing might have actually occurred. Under these circumstances, the party might
believe in the existence of the fact, that belief being consistent with the presence of
soundness of mind.? Q. You have put the case where the impression continued,
and where there are fresh circumstances. I put the case where there are no fresh
circumstances to revive the impression, that impression reviving to the extent of
supposing that persons were prepared to poison her. A. No, I do not think,
even in the hypothetical case which you have suggested, that under those circum-
stances we should be justified in believing the impression to be necessarily a dis-
ordered creation of the mind. ? Q. Now, I will put another case to you. Sup-
posing a person had employed an attorney, and has confided her interests entirely
to him?that that attorney had been in the habit of receiving money, and of
attending from time to time, and performing the part of a faithful agent, and
i 2
132 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUM MING.
that the principal -was aware of the faithful performance of duty by the agent.
Supposing, without any new circumstances occurring, she was at a subsequent time
to entertain the impression that the agent had robbed her of her money ; that he
had robbed her of everything she possessed, and left her penniless, and that he had
never rendered her any account at all, should you be of opinion that that indicated
a sound or an unsound state of mind? A. Those notions, I think, are consistent
?with soundness of mind, particularly if occurring to a person naturally of sus-
picious temperament.? Q. In a suspicious mind? A. Yes. ? Q. But observe, this
suspicious mind has been confiding for a considerable time, and relying confidently
upon the party, and then suddenly, and -without any reason at all, turns round, and
charges that party with having robbed and plundered her, with having rendered no
account, and having enriched himself by the spoils of her fortune? A. That shows
great caprice, but it is possible that such a feeling might exist apart from insanity.?
Q. Is that a " creation de novo" in your judgment? A. Certainly not. ? Q. That
is not a " creation de novo?" A. No; it'is an idea arising out of actual circum-
stances.? Q. I put my case guardedly. I put this case. The utmost confidence
is expressed from day to day, and manifested in every possible way; then there is
suddenly a new idea started up that the party so trusted had been false in every
respect, had plundered and left the person penniless, and was revelling in the spoils
of that fortune. A. That would show great caprice and an ill-regulated mind, and
a mind suspicious without reasonable foundation. ? Q. Then you will tell me what
you mean by a " creation de novo." A. An impression or notion arising in the
mind apart from the actual circumstances of life. ? Q. That is from the existing
circumstances of life ? A. From the existing circumstances of life. ? Q. That is
your " creation de novo?" A. Yes, and it is, to a certain extent, a scientific test of
delusive impressions. ? Q. Now I will put this case. Suppose he had faithfully ren-
dered an account, and money had been paid over, and a belief had been entertained
that no accounts at all had been rendered and that no money at all had been
paid ? A. The impression may have resulted from a mere failure of memory.
? Q. Do you suppose that such a person would be competent to the management
of his affairs ? A. That incompetency, if the incompetency existed, might be the
result of advanced age, or from careless habits of business, or from a natural
indisposition to attend to the ordinary business matters of life. It need not neces-
sarily be an incapacity arising from unsoundness of mind. ? Q. But I put the case
of a person. A. I think it is possible that such a condition might exist apart
from actual insanity or unsoundness of mind.? Q. Apart from a capacity to
manage the affairs of life ? A. No; I draw a distinction between the incapacity
and natural decay, which is, in many cases, the inevitable result of old age, and
the incapacity which is clearly the offspring of insanity. ? Q. But I am putting it
to you now?do not vary the ground. I put a distinct question, whether such
a person as I have described would, in your discreet judgment, be competent to
the management of his affairs? A. In the proper acceptation of the term, such an
amount of incapacity would not necessarily indicate unsoundness of mind or legal
incompetency to manage the business affairs of life. ? Q. Would such a person be
competent to the management of his affairs? A. Legally speaking, certainly.?
Q. Actually speaking would he? A. There are many sane persons who are in-
capable of managing their affairs and who leave all their business matters to their
solicitors.? Q. You are running away from my question. I have put a particular
case to you, which is clear and distinct. I have put the case of a persou who had
received from his attorneys accounts of monies faithful and true throughout, and
then believing that no accounts had been rendered and that no money had been
paid. A. I should say that such was a strange, but not necessarily an unsound con-
dition of mind. ? Q. Would you consider such a person?a person who had
received money and accounts, and yet believed that he had not received the money
and had not received the accounts, a person capable of managing his own affairs ?
A. I should say that such was a strange and unnatural condition of mind, but not
necessarily an unsound condition.? Q. I understand in one sense what a
natural mind is. A. You may have such an amount of incapacity coexisting
and consistent with sanity. That is what I mean.? Q. But I put a particular
case to you. Dr Winslow, I know you are a match for me, but do confine
yourself to the case I put. It is a very distinct oue?it is this. I ask you, in your
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 133
judgment (of course appreciating your character), whether such a person is, in
your judgment, competent to the management of his affairs ? A. I think the world
would say not. ? Q. What would you say?do you agree with the world or not?
A. I have seen cases of incapacity to the extent referred to by yourself, associated
with perfect soundness of mind. ? Q. You have told us that the world would have
an opinion upon that subject. Do you agree with the world or do you differ from
the world? A. I do not bow to the opinion of the world as an authority upon
points of abstract science. ? Q. Then you look down upon the opinion of the
world? A. Certainly not. I consider the question as one of science. When I am
asked whether, in a given case, there is an incapacity to manage property, my
object is to ascertain whether that incapacity is the necessary result of a diseased
mind or whether it is a natural incapacity arising from old age, decay of nature, or
from ignorance of the ways of the icorld and a natural careless indifference to the
affairs of life. That, in my opinion, is the scientific distinction. ? Q. I am putting
a case in which there can be no doubt about the moneys being paid and the
accounts rendered, and in which the party believes that no money has been paid
and that no accounts have been rendered, would you require to ascertain all the
circumstances respecting a person's mind before you could come to a conclusion
whether such a person was capable of managing his affairs or not? A. I think we
could not take as a rule an isolated feature in a particular case and draw safe con-
clusions from it. I should be very loth to say, if a case of great incapacity was
established, that that incapacity was necessarily the incapacity of an unsound mind.
Many men of mature age and vigour of mind are'not of business habits, and are
not capable of managing their property. ? Q. There are circumstances which do
not depend upon business habits at all. I put a plain and palpable case to you.
A. I think in the case put by you the circumstances of course would be suspicious,
but such an amount of incapacity might coexist with soundness of mind. ? Q.
Then you are of opinion that the case I have put to you is perfectly consistent
with entire soundness of mind? A. It may be so; I have no doubt upon the
point. ? Q. Now I will take the case of strangling. Suppose there is no truth
whatever in the daughter throwing her arms round her mother's neck, or her
mother having been at all alarmed by her appearance in the Edgeware-road, should
you consider that the absence of those facts would be sufficient to lead you to the
conclusion that she was labouring under a delusion when she stated her daughter
was going to strangle her ? A. If the facts as stated by her were not facts, cer-
tainly.? Q. Well, then, you would consider her under a delusion? A. It is
possible (admitting the truth of what you say), that her mind might be unsound
upon that point. ? Q. Did she tell you, at any of these interviews with her, that
Mr. Haynes had poisoned her fowls ? A. She said she understood that some of her
fowls had been poisoned by the order of Mr. Haynes.? Q. It was in allusion to
this poisoning of the fowls and of the milk it was in? A. Yes. With reference
to the alleged delusions with regard to the poison, perhaps I may be allowed to
state that one of my reasons for not considering it to be such at the time was this,
that if she had laboured under a delusion that an attempt had been made to poison
her, if it had been in reality a delusion?the product of a disordered mind,?and
the delusion in question had been persistent up to this period, still having its
influence upon her mind, according to my experience, admitting it to have been an
insane delusion, it would not have confined itself to an epoch or to an individual,
but so terrible would be its influence upon the mind, even at this moment
Sir F. Thesiger.?Stop, Dr Winslow, you are giving us a very long speech.
Mr. James.?He is answering your question, and I beg that he may be allowed
to finish his answer.
Sir F. Thesiger.?This is no answer to my question?this is something which he
volunteers. ? Q. I cannot permit you to go on in the way you were doing. I will
ask) you this question?suppose, for instance, with regard to the strangling, she
stated sometimes that it was at one place, and sometimes at another place; should
you consider that that was an indication of a delusion? A. No, not of itself, it might
arise from a failure of memory. ? Q. Although there were no facts to warrant it at
all? A. Of course, if there were no facts to warrant the impression, that would be
a circumstance justifying the suspicion of unsoundness of mind. Q. Suppose the
only fact was the visit of her daughter to her, and she received her daughter with
great kindness, should you consider that fact sufficient to warrant an impression
134 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
that her daughter had attempted to strangle her? A. Certainly not.? Q. Then I
understand it to he your opinion that if a person entertained any belief of a fact
which is entirely unfounded, that that is a delusion, and that if the party acts upon
that impression, or belief, that indicates unsoundness of mind. A. I did not follow
you. ? Q. If a person believes in the existence of any particular fact, without any
foundation for it, and acts upon the belief of that fact, does, or does it not, indicate
unsoundness of mind? A. Not necessarily so.
Re examined by Mr. James.?You have been asked whether it is not difficult to
define insanity: I believe you adhere to the opinion which you have always given
?that it is a most difficult thing to define? A. It is undefinable. ? Q. It may
exist in a thousand forms, may it not? A. Yes; in a thousand forms. ? Q. As in
the diseases of the body? A. As in the diseases of the body. ? Q. Is it a test of
insanity to suspect an attorney of cheating you? A. I should be sorry to propagate
such an opinion. ? Q. Suppose an attorney asserts to a person that he has only
received a certain amount of rent, and that he has rendered accounts, and faithful
accounts, would it be a test of insanity for a person to suspect that that was not
true, although the attorney made that assertion ? A. Certainly not. ? Q. Are
suspicions necessarily delusions ? A. They are not. ? Q. Is a jealous person, for
instance, a person of unsound mind?a person who suspects his wife without
cause ? A. Such a suspicion may co-exist with perfect soundness of mind. ?
Q. Extreme jealousy of a most virtuous wife may co-exist with perfect soundness
of mind? A. It does sometimes. ? Q. And suspicion? A. And suspicion.?
Q. Now, with reference to these three delusions, I will take first, the strangling;
has she not stated that fact to you, of the strangling, without stating also the con-
comitant circumstances at the interview from which she derived the impression?
A. Never.
Sir F. Thesiger.?Will you have the goodness to ask Dr Winslow the last
time he saw her.
Mr. James.?When was the last time you saw her? ? A. On the 6th of this
month; the day before the inquisition. ? Q. Has she ever stated to you the fact of
this strangling, without stating to you the concomitant circumstances which
induced the belief in her mind ? A. She never did. ? Q. Did she ever state to
you the fact of the poison without also stating the concomitant circumstances
attending it? A. Never. ? Q. You have been asked by my learned friend, Sir
F. Thesiger, as to the discovery of Epsom salts in the milk, and of acetate of lead
being found. That occurred at the same time that a fowl was found dead.
Sir F. Thesiger.?There is not any proof of that whatever.
Mr. James.?You will allow me to put it hypothetically. Q. My learned friend
put to you the case of the Epsom salts in the milk, only assuming it to be the fact that
a fowl was poisoned, and that deadly poison was found in a paper in a fowl-house;
that occurring at the same time that the milk was found to be drugged, though
with a harmless drug, does that justify her forming the opinion which she
expressed? A. I think it would. ? Q. Must not the impression on her mind be
taken with all the circumstances attending it? A. With all the circumstances
attending it. ? Q. And you think that the fowl being found dead, and poison being
found in a paper, and contemporaneous drugging of the milk, even by a harmless
substance, ought to be taken into consideration in considering the question whether
or no she was under a delusion ? A. Most certainly. ? Q. And I think you say
that, upon every occasion when she mentioned the circumstance, she always referred
to the facts attending it ? A. Yes, she always stated the concomitant circumstances.
? Q. Upon giving an answer which was stopped by Sir Frederick Thesiger, but
which appeared to me to be a most able and philosophical one, will you have
the goodness to repeat now ? A. What I wished to explain was this?that if
this belief in the poison had been a symptom of a diseased mind, admitting it to
be a delusion, and persistent, being still in existence, so terrible is the influence
which delusions of this kind exercise over the conduct and actions of insane persons,
that within the records of my experience, I have seen no case whatever where it
would be confined to one epoch, or to any one or two individuals, but it would
influence generally the conduct and character of the patients, and they would con-
tinue in the belief that their servants were trying to poison them, and would be sus-
picious, and perhaps refuse food altogether. I never knew any instance in which
that was not the case. If Mrs. Cumming, at this moment, laboured under a delu-
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 135
sion of the kind, in all probability, and I may say almost to a certainty, she would
decline her food in consequence of her being suspicious that Mrs. Moore, or some
of the servants about her, might poison her. ? Q. She relates it to you as a fact
that had occurred, and not as a present delusion haunting her mind? A. No; she
relates it as a fact that had occurred. ? Q. Does it not make a great difference in the
question -whether a person narrates it as a fact that had occurred and as an
impression that had existed, although a wrong one?is there not a great distinction
between that and a present delusion haunting the mind ? A. A most material
distinction. If the delusion existed at the time when the poison was alleged to be
introduced into the milk, it is quite clear that it does not exist at this moment. ?
Q. Is it not, therefore, rather the character of an impression, to some extent false,
from the facts from which once existed in the mind, than a present delusion
haunting the mind? A. Yes. ? Q. When she spoke to you of her aversion and
antipathy to her children, did she not narrate to you at each time that which had
been?whether properly or not?assigned as the cause of that aversion? A. She
did. She referred to her having been seized and carried before a magistrate on the
charge of perjury ; to her having been followed and dodged about by policemeD,
and to a variety of circumstances in reference to the alleged unnatural conduct of
her children, she always coupled these circumstances with the explanation of the
impressions which are alleged to be delusions. ? Q. To go back from this psycho-
logical discussion, is it your opinion, from the best judgment you can form, that
she is of sound mind ? A. I have no hesitation in saying that in all my expe-
rience of doubtful cases of insanity, I never met with, or examined a patient where
the result to my mind has been more clear and satisfactory.
Samuel Ashwell, Esq., M.D., sworn, examined by Mr. James.?You are, as we
know, a physician, and I believe you are practising in Grafton-street ? A. Yes.?
Q. You were for many years a lecturer at Guy's Hospital? A. I was. ? Q. I
believe you have not directed your attention exclusively to cases of insanity ? A.
No. ? Q. Has it occurred to you in the course of your practice to see many cases
of insanity? A. Many throughout the course of my practice. ? Q. And have you
seen in the course of your practice very many cases of female insanity? A.
Certainly. ? Q. I believe you were requested to see this lady? A. Yes, I was. ?
Q. When did you see her? You saw her yesterday, I believe? A. Yesterday. ?
Q. How long were you with her? A. I think nearly an hour. ? Q. Did you see
her alone ? Did you desire to be alone with her ? A. I was introduced by Dr.
Hale, who immediately left the room, and with the exception of a servant coming
in two or three times, I saw her alone. ? Q. There was nothing to interfere with
her examination? A. Nothing at all. ? Q. And you were with her an hour?
A. Nearly an hour. ? Q. You have heard, I presume, that the chief delusions
which have been alleged in this inquiry against her, were an aversion to her chil-
dren, the fact of her believing there had been an attempt to poison her, and the
attempt, or alleged attempt, which she said Mrs. Ince had made to strangle her?
A. Yes. ? Q. I believe you have read a good deal of the evidence. The case had
interested you, I suppose ? A. Yes, I had; the case had interested me, and I had
read a great deal. ? Q. Is the opinion which you are about to give founded
entirely upon the examination and your personal interview with her? A. Abso-
lutely. ? Q. Did you converse with her ? A. Very fully. ? Q. As a medical
man did you converse on these subjects? A. Very fully. ? Q. What topic did
you take up first of the alleged delusions? A. I began the conversation by asking
her how it was that the delusion or mistake arose about her children; she imme-
diately said there was neither delusion nor mistake, that her feelings in reference
to them were the result of their conduct towards her, that there was no delusion in
her mind about it. ? Q. She said so? A. She said so. She then went through
what I suppose I need not detail here, the whole of their conduct towards her.
She narrated the whole of their conduct towards her in reference to the commission.
? Q. The former commission ? A. The former commission?the transaction
about the perjury, on which she dwelt most vehemently. ? Q. That is her arrest on
the charge of perjury ? A. Yes, the arrest, and her determination to act as she
thought right in the distribution of her property. I alluded to the unfavourable
impression it -would make if she diverted that property from her natural heirs.
She immediately said, " It would be so if I had not good ground for it." Those
are her very words. She then said there were other people who did the same, who
136 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING.
did not leave their property in the ordinary way, but whose intellect was not there-
fore called in question. ? Q. She said so ? A. She said so. I then said, " Might
you not leave some to the grandchildren ?" ? Q. To the grandchildren ? A. To
the grandchildren?to which she replied, "that she did not feel inclined to do so."
? Q. Did you speak to her about the case of poisoning ? Did you take that next
in order, or which did you take in order ? A. I then commenced about the case
of poisoning, and I said, I had heard that she had been labouring under delusion as
to an attempt having been made to poison her. She said, " There was a mistake
about that." Those were the words she used. She said there was a mistake
about that. She thought she had sufficient ground at all events at the time. ? Q-
Did she tell you about the analysis? A. She told me that the analysis had dis-
covered that there was acetate of lead in the food. She said it had been discovered
by Dr Barnes that there was acetate of lead, or some other poison, from eating of
which the fowl had died, and that there was sulphate of magnesia in the milk pre-
sented to herself. ? Q. That is Epsom salts, is it not ? A. Epsom salts.
The Commissioner.?In the milk presented? A. To herself. She very mi-
nutely recapitulated all the circumstances as to the situation of the fowl-yard, the
poultry-yard, and the conversation which had taken place between herself and
servant.
Mr. James.?Did you then advert to the strangling at all ? A. I said, " I should
like you to tell me about the strangling." She told me that she had been alarmed
at the suddenness with which the movement towards her had been made by her
daughter, and for the moment she said, " I might have supposed I was going to be
strangled, so sudden and so violent was it." I then said, " Of course you do not
entertain that opinion now."
The Commissioner.?She said the movement towards her was so sudden.
A. So sudden, and I think she added, unexpected. I said, " Of course you do not
entertain that notion now.'' "Certainly not; it was clearly a mistake on my part."
Mr. James.?Did you then question her about her property ? A. She then told
me about her property. I said I should like to hear something about her pro-
perty. " Will you tell me its amount, its yearly value." She said, " It is worth
500/. or 600/. a year."
A Juryman.?Now? A. Yes, now, as far as I understood her. "Of course,"
she said, "it would have been worth much more, but for the expense of these
dreadful proceedings." She used the word " dreadful," or something to that effect.
? Q. From the statement which she made to you, whether her aversion to her
children may be rightly founded or not, should you call that a delusion ? A.
Certainly not; she made the distinction herself, it cannot be a delusion; it may be
wicked, but with that the law has nothing to do. ? Q. She said so? A. She said
so. ? Q. Is an aversion entertained by a person towards her children, who, from
a course of conduct they may think have acted most unkindly or most ungrateful
to them, is that a delusion? A. Certainly not. ? Q. It is a sentiment of the mind?
A. Certainly. ? Q. Not a delusion? A. Not a delusion. ? Q. Does the intensity
of the aversion show any evidence of a delusion ? A. I think that depends upon
the character of the mind. A person of quiet temperament would in all probability
be satisfied with a moderate expression of aversion, a person of strong feeling
would take a more emphatic form of expression. ? Q. With reference to this
person did you find that there is any delusion as to the poisoning at present
dwelling upon her mind? A. Not at all. ? Q. Am I right in stating it is an
impression of something past? A. I thought it was an historical expression past
and gone. ? Q. Not haunting her mind at the present time ? A. No. ? Q. Have
you any doubt at all about it ? A. The only doubt I have arises from this fact,
that she seemed to hope that she should not be dragged away again. ? Q. Did she
express to you any dread of a lunatic asylum? A. Yes, she said " I hope the com-
mission will terminate in my favour; if it does not, I shall probably not live three
or four months."? Q. She said so ? A. She said so. She said, " The shock will be
too much for me."?Q. Do you agree with Dr Winslow, that a delusion is the
test of insanity or the creation of a diseased mind, that one of the symptoms of that
delusion is its constantly haunting the mind and influencing their actions? A.
Certainly. ? Q. Did you find any delusion exist? A. Not at all. If I had seen her
without any reference to the commission, I should have seen her, as I should
have seen any other lady patient, and left her with a full impression that she was
THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE CUMMING. 137
perfectly sane in every particular. ? Q. Is it your opinion that she is of sound,
mind? A. Oh, certainly. I do not mean to say that she is a woman of the very
strongest mind, but of perfectly sound mind, and I think it very likely, if she were
to have questions brusquely put to her, and thirteen or fourteen people present, she
might show some alarm. ? Q. She is very old and feeble? A. She told me she
was seventy years only. ? Q. There is a distinction between a memory somewhat
impaired and a diseased mind? A. Oh, yes. ? Q. Have you not met any people
of her age and position, who cannot give you an account of their property when put
before them, who yet would be perfectly sane enough to dispose of it? A. Many; but
she has a great deal more than that. ? Q. I am putting a partial failure of memory in
a person of her age who has suffered so much, as no test of insanity ? A. Certainly
not. ? Q. Then it is your opinion that she is of sound mind? A. She described
to me very accurately the circumstances of her being dragged away from her
house in 1846; she described the two nurses, whom she called two great, large
women, sitting by her side. ? Q. That was effort of memory? A. That was an
effort of memory ; and the manner in which she was treated at Dr Millengen's: she
said she never was treated as an insane person while she was there. ? Q. Is it
your opinion she is of sound mind? A. Certainly.
Examined by the Commissioner.?Q. Did she seem to be under the impression
of being taken to an asylum? Did you attempt to soothe her? A. I told her I
did not think there was much probability of her being taken to an asylum. I went
as far as this, I said: " Even if the commission should be unfavourable, there is not
absolute necessity;" but she immediately said?" That will be equally fatal, giving
my property, or withholding my property as I think right."
Examined by the Jury,?With respect to the strangling, you say that idea has
gone from her mind entirely ? A. I thought so. ? Q. Did you take any opportunity
of expressing to her that it might have been over-affection ? A. I did not put it
so. ? Q. Did you say, As it is a mistake, perhaps you will have a more kind feeling
towards her daughter ? A. No.

Mr. James.?The great object was to hear her state her views ? A. Exactly.
A Juryman.?This lady is very much affected with paralysis, is she not? A.
I should say she is very much out of health indeed. ? Q. Is there any fear of her
being seized suddenly with apoplexy ? A. I think there is. ? Q. Do you think the
way she has been treated now, being in the habit of taking wine and brandy, and
other stimulants?do you not think, by being under that treatment, it is very likely
to bring on apoplexy very suddenly, and cause sudden death ? A. My visit would
not justify me in forming any opinion. She was not under the influence of anything
at the time when I saw her yesterday; but I should think, from the flabby con-
dition of her flesh, without the moderate use of stimulants, she would sink and die.
? Q. You think of the two evils, they choose the least ? A. I do not think I am
called on to speak to that alternative. ? Q. Did she know you were coming? A. I
think Dr Hale told her, but it could hardly have been a minute or two before. ?
Q. In your opinion, may a person under strong delusions, and having made un-
founded statements?is such a person, knowing she would be under the examina-
tion of a jury, capable of being tutored to conceal her delusion, and qualify any
statements she may have made? A. I think she was totally incapable of that kind
of delusion; but if so, it was an insane delusion.
The Commissioner.?After a certain time? A. I should say, after it has esta-
blished itself in the mind. After an insane delusion has established itself in the
mind, I think you could not tutor such a patient to receive safely the visits of any-
body Q. You could tutor her for a time, a very short time ? A, I doubt it. ?
Q. It would not be a permanent delusion? A. No. ? Q. Did you ever see a patient
with delusions, when you did not discover them for some time. A. I have never
seen a patient with an insane delusion, where, if you approached or alluded to that
delusion, tutor him as you may, you could get away from him the effect of that
delusion.

A J uryman.?Do you think if she thought it was affection on the part of her
daughter, when she bung about her neck, it would alter her mind ? A. Not now?
I think her feeling is too deeply rooted. ? Q. If she thought it was affection, it
would not alter her? A. Well, my opinion is not worth much on that point. In
conversation with Mrs. Cumming, her mind seemed so thoroughly made up, that
nothing I think could alter it very much.
138 THE CASE OF MRS. CATHERINE GUMMING.
Another Juryman.?But her mind could not have been thoroughly made up
when she stated she was mistaken. ? A. I do not think, in reference to that
absolute, single, isolated transaction of the strangling, Mrs. Cumming's mind rests
upon that only?she related to me a long series of circumstances. ? Q. But on
that point alone she stated to you, though she apprehended she was about to be
strangled at that moment, she had since found she was mistaken about it. ? A. I
think that impression is removed. ? Q. And you think that there is no cause of
enmity now ? A. Not at all; I do not think it has anything to do with the
enmity.

The Commissioner.?It rests on the other conduct which she mentioned?
A. Decidedly; and she made a very marked distinction herself.? Q. You did
not endeavour to convince her the issuing of a Commission of Lunacy was not a
bad act on the part of any one ? A. I think if I had, I should have had some
difficulty to convince her; she told me it had cost three or four thousand pounds.
? Q. Did you endeavour to convince her it was for her own benefit. You do not
consider a Commission of Lunacy a diabolical act? A. Not an unmitigated evil.
? Q. Then I suppose you would say it is for good? A. Yes. ? Q. Did you
endeavour to convince her mind there was no evil?that it was an attempt to find
out whether she was of right mind or not?not for her injury, but for her benefit?
A. I think I should have been convinced of that myself, which I was not.?
Q. It is not an evil of the daughters commencing the Commission of Lunacy,
unless it is proved to be one ? A. Exactly. ? Q. Not having been proved to be
one, yet did you attempt to satisfy her mind upon it ? A. Not at all.?Q. Did you
find out how recently she had found out she was mistaken about the strangling ?
A. No, I did not; it seemed to have passed from her mind entirely, she only
referred to it as a past circumstance. ? Q. You were not aware she had very
recently adverted to it? A. Yes; I alluded to these three great delusions I had
heard, and she treated them all as past things, and smiled about them, and said that
upon this the commission was founded of course; she said a great deal more than I
can detail now.

John Conolly, Esq., M.D., examined by Mr. James.?You have devoted much
of your attention to the study "of mental disease? A. I have.?Q. You are
physician of the asylum at Hanwell, and have also establishments under your
care? A. Yes. ? Q. When did you first see this lady? A. I first saw her
in September 1846. Q. At the time of the last Commission. ? A. At the time
of the last Commission I saw her at York House. ? Q. Did you examine her
then ? A. I had an interview of two hours with her, on the 6th of December, and
a second interview on the 18th. ? Q. I believe you were prepared on that occasion,
had the case gone on, to have given your evidence on her behalf? A. I was prepared
to do so. ? Q. From the examination you made of her you were then prepared
to have given your evidence on her behalf; I presume I am justified in stating
you were of opinion she was not of unsound mind at that time ? A. I was of
opinion that she was not of unsound mind. ? Q. When did you see her again?
A. I saw her when the Commission was resumed, after its adjournment at the
Horns Tavern, on the 21st and 22nd of September.? Q. From all you saw of her
at that time, the examination you made of her, the opportunity you had
of seeing her, were you prepared to have given your evidence then that
she was not of unsound mind? A. Quite so. ? Q. When did you see her again,
with reference to these proceedings? On Monday, December 1st, 1851.?
Q. You have heard, I presume, that she has been seen by a great many
medical men, and submitted to a great many examinations, in the course of
the investigation ; now, if these alleged delusions existed in her mind, could she
be tutored so as in any way to conceal them ? A. I think it quite impossible that
she could ; many patients will conceal their delusions, that is, they will not spon-
taneously avow them ; they will learn to do that; but if you examine and touch
on the delusion, with a little care and patience, one never fails to bring it out. ?
Q. And you have heard the gentlemen who have gone and submitted her to
examination on both sides, have at once put to her the alleged delusions, and
brought the mind to the topic distinctly? A. I believe, repeatedly, it has been
done. ? Q. Assuming the existence of a delusion as the result of a diseased mind,
and the mind brought to the topic, if it is the result of disease, it is not manifest
at once ? A. Perfectly so. ? Q. So that if you are unaware of the delusion of the
patient and speak in an hospital, or elsewhere, and do not touch on the particular
diseased chord, you may leave that person under the impression that they are
not insane ? A. Undoubtedly. ? Q. But if you do touch upon the delusion you have
discovered the disease; is not that so? A. Almost invariably, I should say.?
Q. Then is it your decided opinion that this lady ?I use the expression which
has been used or insinuated?could not have been tutored so as to suppress any
evidence of insanity in these conversations? A. I do not think it possible.?
Q. You saw her, I think you were saying, upon the 1st of December? A. Upon
the 1st of December. ? Q. I will not take you at any length through the dates ; how
often have you seen her altogether? A. Eight times, including her visits here,
and the visits when I attended the Jury to her house. ? Q. Were you with the
Jury on both occasions? A. On both occasions. ? Q. And you heard all the
statements which she made to the Jury? A. Yes. ? Q. You have, yourself,
examined her mind with a view of testing it? A. I have done so. ? Q. Fre-
quently? A. Not frequently. ? Q. How often? A. On the subject of the
delusions, not frequently, because I was not aware of them until recently; when
I first saw her some of those delusions did not exist, circumstances had not
occurred.? Q. When you saw her in 1846, the circumstance of the poison and
Dr Barnes had not occurred ? A. No. ? Q. And I believe the impression she is
said to have expressed herself, as to her daughter having attempted to strangle
her, that had not occurred in 1846? A. That had not occurred. ? Q. Have you
examined her upon these which are alleged to be delusions, the aversion to her
children, the alleged attempt to poison her, and the strangling? A. I have
examined her on all these points. ? Q. With reference to the aversion for her
children, what does she state to you generally upon that point? A. Her state-
ment now is quite consistent with her statement in 1846. She considers she was
treated with great harshness, great want of feeling; that she was taken unneces-
sarily, and violently, to a lunatic asylum. In 1846 it had occurred once, and now
it has occurred twice; and this in addition to various little cases of neglect, which
she sometimes alluded to. These are assigned as reasons for believing that her
children have no affection for her, and the things which seem to have alienated
her affections from them. ? Q. Am I right, do you agree with other gentlemen
?who have given their opinion, that an aversion to children entertained more
strongly by one mind than another, if there exists some foundation for it, is it
a delusion, or an intensity of feeling ? A. Merely an intensity of feeling. ? Q. Is
it a delusion at all as the test or as the creation of a diseased mind. I mean the
strength of the aversion ? A. Not where it is founded on any real cause. ? Q. With
reference to the poisoning, when you have put to her that which is alleged to be
her delusion, has she stated to you the facts always from which she derived that
impression? A. She has alluded to them repeatedly; her impression being that
the object has been for a long time to get possession of her money; and now they
would be glad if her life were sacrificed that the same end might be accom-
plished. These expressions are frequently used by her. ? Q. Now, the strangling ?
A. With respect to the strangling, she has given a very simple account of it; that
-when her daughter had not seen her for some time, when they were not on good
terms, her daughter suddenly rushed up-stairs, threw her arms about her neck,
?with a violent expression of feeling, and that it agitated and alarmed her, and
that she thought her daughter intended to injure or strangle her. But the idea
appears to have entirely gone away from her mind as a mere erroneous impression
at the time. ? Q. Do you find either of those delusions existing or haunting the
mind now ? A. Not at all. ? Q. And is not that one of the tests of delusion of an
insane mind, that it haunts the mind and influences their actions ? A. Certainly.
? Q. And you find neither of them ? A. I believe neither of them exist. ? Q. The
aversion to her children is not an aversion, it is an intensity of feeling ? A. An
intensity of feeling; and the circumstances which are known to have taken place
are in my mind sufficient to account for it. ? Q. Do you agree with Dr Ashwell in
the opinion he gave, that they are rather historical impressions than present
delusions haunting the mind ? A. Entirely. ? Q. I believe you have taken great
pains with this case, and given great attention to it? A. I have taken much pains
both in 1846 and on recent occasions. ? Q. Is it your opinion that she is of sound
or unsound mind ? A. I consider her of sound mind. ? Q. Do you give a decided
opinion ? A. A decided opinion. I never discovered in her any incoherence, or
+any symptom of a disordered understanding. ? Q. Perhaps you will allow me to
ask these questions:?You are a physician of the Hanwell Asylum; if she were in.
the Hanwell Asylum, would you retain her in that asylum as a patient of unsound
mind? A. Certainly not; I should recommend her for discharge. ? Q. That is
a public institution of which you are the public officer? A. Yes.
Cross-examined by Sir. F. Thesiger.?You have a private asylum of your
own? A. I have. ? Q. What is that? A. Where I live, on a very small scale;
I take a few patients at my own house. ? Q. How many ? A. Five or six ; never
more. ? Q. That is, of course, under the control of the Commissioners of Lunacy.
A. Entirely. I ought to state, that I am partly proprietor of another, where there
are about twenty received. ? Q. Where is that ? A. At the village of Hayward
End. ? Q. Is it your opinion " that all well conducted asylums have now become
places of protection, abounding in the means of diverting the thoughts and calming
morbid excitement, and soothing the depressed, and rousing the apathetic, and
restraining the lower propensities of the insane, and restoring the control of reason ?"
A. All well conducted asylums. ? Q. There are asylums under the control of the
Commissioners of Lunacy? A. Yes; nearly all; there are one or two excep-
tions?Bedlam is one. ? Q. Is it your opinion, that if there is something in the
character of a party's mind, it is not only the dangerous lunatic who requires to be
placed in an asylum, but the rule for safe general guidance must have a wider
extent ? A. Certainly. ? Q. Is it your opinion " that if there is something in the
character of a party's mind which renders him unable to take care of himself and
his property, or which is incompatible with his personal safety, or that of others, or
with the security of his property, or that of others, or with his own comfort or well
doing, if left to himself unprotected, that he ought to be carefully watched after in
a lunatic asylum ?" A. I think so.
Mr. James.?Do you put the pamphlet in ?
Sir F. Thesiger.?No.
Mr. James.?I should like to see it.
Sir F. Thesigek.?I am reading now from a pamphlet which you did me the
honour to send me, and for which I return you my thanks, in which, with reference
to the Agapemone case, you found fault with the opinion of the Lord Chief Baron,
as to the ground of there being no right to confine lunatics, except those dangerous
to themselves or to others. ? Q. I think you state that nothing is more clear or
certain, that that interference is not only justifiable but absolutely necessary in a
great many cases, in which neither the person of the lunatic nor that of others is in
any way endangered by his malady ? A. Yes ; undoubtedly. ? Q. " Is it your
opinion that there are many forms of unsound mind, which, although for a long
time unattended with actual danger to the lunatic or others, lead to consequences
so intolerable, that an asylum must be resorted to relief?" A. Yes. ? Q. And
amongst others, are there delusions as to property, as to money owing or with-
held ; is that your opinion ? A. Yes.
A Juryman.?If it is evidence, will you have the goodness to mark the passages ?
Sir. F. Thesiger.?I have marked them.
A Juryman.?They are the settled opinion of Dr Conolly, on oath I take it ?
Sir F. Thesiger.?Just so. I do not put it in.
The Witness.?Of course I answer the question in the shortest manner, to
save your time; but it would be very easy to illustrate almost all these by hypo-
thetical cases.

Sir F. Thesiger.?But I want to have on oath, your opinion now; that being
your opinion, will you allow me to ask you this?" whether there are not a large
number of patients who are properly confined in a lunatic asylum (I will take
Hanwell, as an instance) who would be able to execute a deed, to count the money
which they received, to work out simple rules of arithmetic and to conduct them-
selves in such a way as to lead even a professional person to believe that they were
of sound mind as regards those acts?" A. No doubt there are many persons who
are deranged who are still capable of certain exercises of intellect, those which
you have mentioned. ? Q. Have you found from your experience, that per-
sons who have been in confinement in lunatic asylums, have been able to give
a reasonable account of the grounds upon which they have been placed iu
confinement? A. Very often. ? Q. But you have found those instances
occurring in the course of your experience? A. Yes; certainly. ? Q. Have you
found that there are many persons who really conduct themselves with propriety
when they are under the control and discipline of an asylum ? A. There are many
such. ? Q. Did you converse with this lady upon the subject of her property at
all? A. In the first interview which I had with her at York House, in September,
1846. ? Q. Did you, upon these last occasions in December, and the other periods
when you have seen her, converse with her about her property? A. I have not
said a great deal about her property, but I have asked her, and reminded her that
she was accused of living beyond her income, that that was one of the things alleged
against her. ? Q. Did you tell her she was accused of living beyond her income ?
A. That she was accused of spending more money than she could afford ; I did
not say accused, but that that was one of the allegations against her, because these
allegations were the subject of every constant conversation on her part and mine.?
Q Did you put it to her in that way ? Do not suppose that I am imputing any-
thing improper to you ; I have too high a respect for your character and station,
but I want to know (for it is important to know) how you put your questions. Did
you say she was accused of living beyond her means ? A. I will not say that I
used the word " accused," but I certainly said that was one of the things alleged
against her. ? Q. What did she say about that ? A. She did not say a great deal
about that, certainly; she neither denied nor avowed it ; she said, they said a great
many things about her. ? Q. I beg pardon for fastening upon an expression, but
you said, she did not say a great deal about it herself, if some other person had ?
A. No. ? Q. Did you ask her the particulars of her property, and what she had done
with it ? A. No, I did not. ? Q. Did you. ask her anything about her will ?
A. No.

Re-examined by Mr. James.?You have done me the honour to make me a
present of this book ; this appears to be a pamphlet which was elicited from you ?
The Commissioner.?Are you going to put that pamphlet in ?
Mr. James.?If a portion of the pamphlet be read to the jury, the fairer way is
to let them have the whole.

Sir F. Thesiger.?I merely asked Dr Conolly questions from his pamphlet in
order to get his answer on oath.
Mr. James.?Very well, then I can do the same thing.?Is there anything in
this pamphlet at all at variance with the opinion which you have expressed with
reference to Mrs. Cumming's soundness of mind ? A. I believe not one word.?
Q. Is there anything in it which is in any way at variance with the result of your
examination, and with what I need hardly describe as being your conscientious
opinion as to the sanity of her mind ? A. Nothing. There is nothing at variance
with it. ? Q. I believe that this pamphlet was elicited from you in consequence of
the Lord Chief Baron laying it down that people ought not to be confined in a
lunatic asylum unless they were dangerous to themselves and others ? A. Yes.?
Q. I will read the paragraph. "In the report of a recent trial," &c. (reads the
passage.) I believe that your pamphlet was written to contest the proposition that
persons ought not to be put in lunatic asylums unless they were dangerous to
themselves and others ? A. Yes ; that was the origin of the pamphlet. ? Q. I will
assume a lunatic asylum a palace, and that every person in it is waited upon by six
footmen?is it the comfort of a lunatic asylum which ought to influence a mcdical
man in giving his opinion on the sanity or insanity of the patient ? A. No. ?
Q. You state here that well regulated asylums are very proper receptacles for many
persons of unsound mind? A. No doubt of it. ? Q. Would you put, or advise
the putting, any person of sound mind, but of feeble memory, into the very best regu-
lated asylum ? A. No. ? Q. Or have you in this pamphlet suggested such a thing ?
A. No.
Sir F. Thesiger.?Do not let it be supposed that I have attributed any such
intention to Dr Conolly.

Mr. James.?You have been asked, if in an asylum there are many people who
might execute a deed; there are many persons who are sane on some points, but
with clear delusions upon others? A. Many.? Q. And are their actions sane, or
their actions those of sane people, unless the existing delusion in some way or other
interferes? A. There are many persons precisely of that description. ? Q. But
in those cases do you find the existing delusion haunting the mind upon some
point ? A. In a good number of cases the delusion haunts the mind; but I need
not say there are many cases of insanity in which there is no delusion. ? Q. Do
you give a decided opinion as to the sanity of this lady? A. A very decided
opinion. I always had the same opinion from the first interview; and every inter-
view I have had with her has confirmed that opinion. ? Q. You have been asked if
you examined her and put questions as to her property ; did you hear all the questions
?which the Commissioner and the Jury thought proper to put to her with reference
to her property ? A. I heard those questions. ? Q. I presume there is a broad
distinction between the partial failure of memory, and insanity? A. Quite so; it
appears to me, that the state of Mrs. Cumming's mind at present in relation to that
particular subject is this, that she could understand any single or plain proposition
relating to any part of her property. ? Q. I think you -were saying on my putting
the question, which was objected to by my friend, Sir F. Thesiger, that there is a
broad distinction between feebleness of memory, or partial failure of memory, and
insanity? A. Quite so. ? Q. Have you found many persons in your experience,
?who, although they have a failure of memory as to their property, are of sound
disposing mind and judgment when that property is put before them and brought
to their attention? A. I,am sure that that is the case with a great many persons,
particularly at the time of life which Mrs. Gumming has attained. ? Q. And is
there not a broad distinction between a person having a delusion that he is pos-
sessed of a very large sum of money which he is not, and a failure of memory with
reference to property of which they are really possessed ? A. A very broad dis-
tinction.

The Commissioner The way in whicji a person manages property may be a
test of sanity or insanity ? A. Yes, it may be a test. ? Q. Is it not sometimes a
test? A. There are such various shades?it may be a test of soundness and
accuracy of judgment, without actual derangement of mind.? Q. Do you know,
without referring precisely to what took place, how this lady has managed her
property? A. No; I have no information upon that subject, except what I have
heard in court.? Q. I am not going to ask you for a definition of delusion, but I
will ask you this:?A.B. has a reason for believing that an attempt is made to
murder him?that belief upon his mind is a delusion ?
Mr. James.?No; if he has reason for believing it, it cannot be a delusion.
The Commissioner.?That is not a delusion?it is an existing fact? A. Yes.
? Q. That is not insanity ? A. No. ? Q. Insanity is one thing, but a delusion is
not insanity, it is only a test of it? A. Delusion often, I suppose, may be called a
mere error of judgment, but a distinct delusion is a thing so very different that there
can be no mistaking it; for instance, I would say that at Hanwell I have a number
of persons, poor people, who imagine that they are going to be married to the
Queen?that they are to be raised to the highest rank in the peerage to-morrow;
and on the other hand, we have excellent persons who think they have been guilty
of distinct crimes, which will be published in the Times newspaper to-morrow.?
Q. Suppose a person has an idea that he is going to be married to the Queen, and
that he has some ground for such a belief, that is not a delusion; but suppose the
mind is altogether divested of that impression at a particular period, but that a year
or two afterwards the mind reverts to the same impression without any fresh
justifying cause, is that any test? A. I should say there was disease of the mind
there. ? Q. You must account for that I am afraid in one of two ways; either that
the mind was never, in fact, divested of the original impression, or else that there
must be something like a disease; am I right in that? A. Yes. ? Q. If a gentle-
man has an impression that he is going to marry the Queen, from having received
an anonymous letter, or something of that kind, that is intelligible, and it is no
delusion ; but it is no test of insanity ; if, on the other hand, he is perfectly satisfied
that that was altogether nonsense, and then the mind having got into that state
without any cause arising whatever, the mind reverts back to the original im-
pression, would you say that is a test of insanity ? A. 1 should suspect it certainly.
A Juryman (to the witness).?Q. You have spoken of Mrs. Cumming's intensity
of feeling ; does that not generally exist in an unsound mind ? A. Intensity of
feeling, of course, according to the disposition of every individual, and there is no
particular mark or line which yon can draw ; you must take a number of circum-
stances into consideration. ? Q. It does not always exist? A. It does not exist in
the same degree; but where it exists on certain facts we do not look on that as
insanity, but as an excess of feeling, or perhaps an ill-governed feeling, according
to circumstances. ? Q. Do you think, from what you know of this lady, taking day
after day liquors and wine, and things of that description, potent drinks that would
cause at times a temporary derangement of intellect ? A. I think it would cause a
great variety of manner and mode of talking, and aggravate any eccentricity of
disposition so as to account for some peculiarities. ? Q. Do you think that at times
she, from taking these potent drinks, is under temporary derangement of intellect ?
A. JC have never seen her so. ? Q. Nothing like delirium tremens ? A. I have
never seen her in any condition approaching to that, and I have never seen her
in any state in -which I have thought her under the influence of wine or spirits,
never.
Forbes Winslow, Esq. M. I)., recalled, examined by Mr. James.?Q. There was
a question I omitted to ask you last evening; there has been a suggestion, or an
insinuation, made about this lady being tutored. You hare heard the number of
examinations from one side and the other, to which this old lady has been sub-
jected ? A. Yes, I have Q. And you have heard, perhaps, of the medical men
going with the knowledge of what are alleged to be her delusions, and putting
them distinctly to her, and hearing her answers and conversations on the subject?
A. Yes. ? Q. I will use the expression which has been insinuated, could she be
tutored to conceal her delusions on these examinations ? A. I do not think she
could. ? Q. For a period ? A. For a short period. I do not think in Mrs. Cum-
ming's case, she could. In cases of diseased mind, if you refer to the delusion, or
touch the chord that is diseased, or out of tune, the delusion becomes generally
immediately obvious.

Sir F. Thesiger.?That is what you asked Dr Winslow yesterday.
Mr. James.?I was told, and was surprised to hear, that there had been some
insinuations made, that this lady had been tutored to undergo these examinations.
Sir F. Thesiger.?No. The question was put to Sir Alexander Morison many
days ago, whether she was not a person who was capable of being tutored to undergo
the examination. 1 do not know why my friend should again call Dr Winslow
for this purpose.
Mr. James.?I have a right to recall the witness.
Sir F. Thesiger.?I beg pardon, it is not a matter of right; whenever it is
done it is always with the permission of the Judge, who allows it, or not, as he
thinks right.
A Juryman.?I do not put it that Mrs. Cumming had been tutored. I asked,
whether a person might be tutored.
Mr. James.?It was not your question, sir, but the evidence given by Dr Diamond
and Dr Davey, led to an insinuation, that she had been tutored in some way. ?
Q. Now 1 ask you, notwithstanding what a clairvoyant doctor may have said upon
the matter, in your opinion could she be tutored to conceal her answers under any
tutorage ? A. It is quite impossible ; in Mrs. Cumming's case it would be impos-
sible ; there are some cases where the lunacy on careful examination is not very
apparent, but if the party examining has a key to the aberration, and touches upon
the delusion, that must eventually become apparent.

The Commissioner.?Q. Supposing a man has reason to believe, from an anony-
mous letter, or anything of that kind, that he is going to be married to the Queen,
that is not a delusion, that is not a test of insanity? A. Not taken by itself.?
Q. Supposing a mind entirely gets rid of that belief for a considerable period, and
the mind afterwards, without any new or fresh facts arising, reverts back to the
same belief; in that case, should you say that mind is perfectly sane ? A. I should not
say that it would be an infallible test of insanity; it might excite a reasonable suspi-
cion as to the condition of a person's mind. ? Q. It raises some suspicion in our mind,
nothing beyond that? A. No; it would excite suspicion. ? Q. But you would
not be satisfied, in the generality of cases, with one delusion, or any one fact, pro-
bably ? A. If a delusion existed in the right acceptation of the term, one delusion,
and it was clearly the result of a diseased condition of mind, I should hare no hesi-
tation whatever in saying that the mind entertaining it was unsound. ? Q. You mean
that one delusion of a strong character would be sufficient evidence to lead you to
the conclusion that that man was of unsound mind? A. I do not confine myself
to the mere strength of the delusion. Supposing, for instance, a person imagined his
legs to be made of glass, and under that diseased impression or delusion, is careful
how he moves his legs, from a fear that he might break the brittle article;
that would be a delusion, irrespective altogether of its strength, degree, or influ-
ence upon the conduct of the person. ? Q. It would be to a degree a symptom of
au unsound and diseased mind ? A. It is not a question of degree at all; if the
delusion exists, it is a symptom of insanity. ? Q. The delusion is only evidence o
the disease of the mind ? A. It is a symptom of a diseased mind Q. It is evidence,
the same as if a man had no intellectual faculties ; it is not the disease, but it shows
the existence of the disease? A. It is an indication of a certain state of mind to
?which the term insanity is applied. ? Q. You know the case of a man -who fancied
that one leg -was his own and the other Madame Yestris's, and saying, when asked
to walk, that he could not do so, for that reason ; would that lead you to the conclu-
sion that he was of unsound mind? A. I should have no doubt that he was of
unsound mind if he entertained so absurd a notion.
Mr. James.?That, sir, is the case on the part of Mrs. Cumming.
