H.O Wildenskov
================

s v^are ot ivientai juerectives J
:Author: H. O. WILDENSKOV, M.D.
Medical Superintendent of the Keller Institutions for Mental Defectives, Brejning, Denmark.

Legislation
-------------

Prior to 1933 no special laws had been enacted by legislation concerning
the care of mental defectives. Before that year, the committal of mental
defectives to public care took place through the individual municipalities; the
recommending municipality had to pay about one-half of the expenses of
maintenance and the State paid the rest. As a result many municipalities
tried as long as possible to avoid such committal to public care and the
expenses involved in it, by placing defectives as cheaply as possible in poor-
houses or in cheap and inferior homes.

These unfortunate conditions were altered radically with the passing
of the Public Assistance Act in 1933, making the State responsible for the
education, training, maintenance, treatment and general care of all needy
mental defectives and for all the expenses connected therewith. In order to
avoid any long delay the Act provides that the State must assume respon-
sibility one month after a case has been reported to the Department for the Public
Care of Mental Defectives and it then becomes the task of this Department
to see that the defective is placed under suitable conditions. The Act takes
into account the present lack of accommodation in the existing institutions
and therefore lays upon the Secretary of Social Affairs the duty of providing
further institutional accommodation. The Act also decrees that all the present
poor-houses shall be abolished, and their mentally defective inmates trans-
ferred to the Department for the Public Care of Mental Defectives. In each
municipality a social committee has to be appointed to administer the Act
in the locality concerned. Finally the Act requires all doctors and teachers to
report mentally defective children to the social committee, which must then
arrange with the Department for the Public Care of Mental Defectives for
the proper placing of these children.

In carrying out this Act it was soon found, however, that other legislative
directions were required concerning the mental defectives provided for. A
new Bill covering these points was introduced in May, 1934, and passed by
Parliament almost unanimously (with only two opposing votes). This Act
gives directions for admission to and discharge from institutions and lays
down rules concerning sterilisation.*

Practice of the Public Care
----------------------------

In Denmark the public care of mental defectives is^ carried out by the
authorised institutions, with accommodation for 5,700 inmates?or one in
every 615 inhabitants. The greatest of these asylums is the Keller Institution,
with accommodation for 2,i00 inmates and a staff of 502. This is a general
" combined " institution, i.e., it receives all kinds of mental defectives?from
the lowest grade to the highest?distributed amongst the various houses
according to their mental condition, such provision ranging from wards for
idiots and villas for imbeciles, to schools and workshops for the feeble-minded.
It accommodates defectives of all ages from infancy to old age, and those
at each end of the scale are taken care of in special houses. Defectives given
to wandering and those with criminal and marked sexual tendencies are placed
in two branches of the institution on isolated islands, where they can move
about freely. The Keller institutions are under the management of a medical
superintendent who is responsible for administration as well as for the medical
care of the inmates.

When a defective is reported to this institution, our social worker is sent
out to obtain supplementary information about him and investigate the social
conditions under which he is living. The social worker then judges whether
the patient is likely to be susceptible to education, training and discipline,
negotiates with his family and with the local Social Committee, and reports
on the most favourable arrangement for the patient. The institution then
decides where the patient should be placed; in doubtful cases a staff physician
is sent out to make an additional examination of the patient and his conditions.
The institution provides the following forms of care :

1. Institutional care.

2. Care outside the institution; this is subsequently referred to as com-
munity care, comprising :

(a) Home care
(b) Family care
(c) Supervision without maintenance
(d) Care " ad mod." Gheel.

It will be convenient to deal with these forms of care separately.

1. Institutional Care

When the defective is admitted to the institution one physician enters all
the information obtained about him in his case record, another physician
* For further information on this point, see Eugenics Review, vol. XXVI, 1934, pp. 281-282.
submits him to a physical examination, and a third records the results obtained
from a very thorough neurological examination. When the patient is thought
to have got accustomed to the conditions in the institution, a physician carries
out a mental test, and the head nurse of the ward adds to the case record her
own observations on the patient. Then the record goes to the chief physician,
who goes through it as a whole and discusses the case with members of the
staff, with the principal of the school and with the head nurse, finally placing
the patient in the department where presumably he belongs.

In the institution, the education and training of the pupils is based on
the same principles as those adopted in England?so far as I have observed
from my visits to English institutions. I think, however, the English institu-
tions train many more pupils to operate machines in the workshops. We
find it impracticable to train a mental defective to operate a machine efficiently.
If he could do so, we should at once discharge him and return him to society
on the ground that his defect was one of character only, on account of which
he could not be detained in the institution, for we do not acknowledge the
English term " moral defective " as implying mental defect. In the " moral
defective " the defect is in the realm of character, not, or only in a small
degree, in that of intelligence. But seldom are we able to discharge mental
defectives who are able to work at a trade.

In the Danish industries there is so much unemployment amongst normal
workers that there is no place for our mental defectives. As Denmark is
predominantly an agricultural country with extensive subdivision of large
estates into small farms, we are able to place a great many defectives as farm
labourers and hence the training must be chiefly in farm and garden work.
The girls are trained in household work; and it is our experience that far less
intelligence is required for domestic employment than is required from the
men in obtaining places.

Our efforts are directed at keeping our patients away from the towns,
for then they get along better. It will be remembered that the Wood Com-
mittee actually found more mental defectives in the country than in the towns, and
we are merely following the line of their natural distribution.

As to the educational side of our work there is hardly any doubt that
the principal of our school, Mr. J. L. Varming, in recent years has devised a
particularly well adapted plan of education with a selection of apparatus and
methods of teaching that are highly suitable for attracting and retaining the
attention of the mentally defective child. lie has arrived at this result after
visits of observation in England, Sweden and Denmark, adopting the best of
the various systems employed in these countries and adjusting it for his
particular purpose?the education of mental defectives.

2. Community Care

This includes mental defectives registered under public care who have
never been in any institution, and mental defectives who have had institu-
tional care.

(a) Home Care

As already mentioned, the institution investigates the home conditions of
every reported patient. If the conditions in his home are found to be suffi-
ciently safe, if the patient is well taken care of, and if we find that there is
adequate provision for education and training, the institution places him under
home care. Now, it is a fact that the mental defective as a rule means a
greater expense to the home than does a normal child of the same age. The
mother, e.g., is prevented from going out to work as she has either to look
after the defective or get some extra help because of him, and the expenses
of clothing are higher on account of uncleanliness and the need for frequent
washing, etc. If the defective is under 18 years, the institution estimates how
much these extra expenses amount to, and this sum is paid to the family.
When the patient is 18 years old, the parents' duty of maintaining him ceases
and the maintenance paid by the institution is then assessed as equal to the
actual cost of the patient's living at home. The Ministry takes it for granted,
however, that this maintenance is considerably lower than would be the cost
of his institutional care. The maximum annual maintenance paid to the family
is generally set at 600 Danish kroner (about 600 shillings).

If the patient has no home, or if the institution considers the conditions
in his home unsatisfactory, he will either be placed in the institution, or pro-
vision will be made for suitable family care in co-operation with the local
Social Committee. Rut whenever the question does not involve the mental
defective's natural home, we are most cautious about placing him, and it is
only very seldom we place the lower grades of patients (idiots and imbeciles)
in the homes of other families.

(b) " Family Care"

It is a different matter in the case of feeble-minded persons who are able
to write, read and go about by themselves. These persons have a chance to
make written or verbal complaints if they are not treated properly?if, not-
withstanding our investigation and information, they are placed with a family
below the standard we require. Some of these feeble-minded persons are
placed in the homes of strangers, where they take part in the work and live
with the family; the head of the family and his wife supervise their daily life,
look after their health and cleanliness, keep their clothing in repair and pay
them some wages that may be spent on tobacco, etc. The institution pays
in such cases maintenance grants varying from 100 to 300 shillings a year.
A similar arrangement is made by the institution for all who have been
under institutional care in childhood and youth and whose conduct is so steady
that the institution finds it safe to allow them to live outside the institution.
We receive nearly every day some request for a man or a woman to help
a little in domestic work under family care. Our inspector visits the home
concerned and obtains information about it from the local Social Committee,
teacher or clergyman. The information thus obtained about the home is pre-
sented to the medical superintendent, who reviews it with the Inspector and
if the home is approved by him as suitable for family care, a defective is then
chosen who would fit in well in that particular home; the amount of main-
tenance is also decided upon according to the conditions of the home and the
mental condition, working capacity and character of the defective.

(c) Supervision without Maintenance

In a number of cases we judge the working yield of the feeble-minded to
be so valuable that it is not necessary to contribute any maintenance. For
the sake of regular supervision and control, however, these cases continue to
be kept under our supervision and if their conduct makes it desirable, they can
be recalled without any formalities and put again under institutional care.
Absolute discharge from public care seldom takes place direct from the
institution. We always employ community care for a probationary period,
and we try to make this period as long" as possible : we may allow the defective
towards the end of his probation to look for a job himself on condition that
he gives the institution precise information of his whereabouts. If he fails
to do so, we follow him up?if required, with the aid of the police.
Our experiences with absolute discharge are not so favourable that they
encourage us to follow that line. It is extremely difficult for the feeble-minded
by themselves to arrange their living conditions safely. They are lacking in
self-criticism, and they are too optimistic, always thinking they can easily
get a job with bigger pay; if left to themselves, they therefore keep going
from one job to another, till one day they find themselves without employ-
ment ; then they drift and from this stage to petty thieving is only a short step.

(d) " Care ad mod. Ghecl"

In recent years the Keller Institutions have adopted and further elaborated
a new form of care, called ad mod. Gheel after the great Belgian centre of
public care.* In the course of time a great institution will have an increasing
number of defectives who previously have done some work inside the institu-
tion and now are incapable of working on account of advanced age. They
take up space to no purpose in the workshops and other occupational depart-
ments of the institution, and previously we used to transfer them to our
departments for low-grade, non-working patients. They do not, however,
feel happy in those departments, and although they are no longer able to work,
they are too good to be there. Therefore we have placed some of them
(about 75) in special old age homes inside the institution; and we have placed
others in care ad mod. Gheel.

As the institution has developed, a veritable little town has grown up in
its vicinity, inhabited by married staff, tradesmen and others who make their
living by working for the institution. They build their own cottages and they
are well acquainted with the patients. In these homes, in the last two years we
have placed about sixty elderly and aged mental defectives at a maintenance
of 600 kroner (600 shillings) per year. They come to the amusements provided
by the institution and they visit their old wards; they get their weekly bath in
the institution, and if they are taken ill they are admitted to our hospital.
We do not consider care ad mod. Gheel to be advisable in more remote places
where we should not be able to supervise the patients properly, and where they
would not feel happy after being attached to the institution for a long span of
years.

Supervision of defectives in community care is always carried out by the
institution to which they belong. Only his " home institution " can have a real
knowledge of the patient's faculties and particular traits of character, and hence
it can best judge him and help him in any individual need. This is a point to which
1 attach great importance. For if the patient is to be corrected or guided by
persons who know him only from what has been recorded in writing, we know
from experience that the results will be less favourable.

To-day the Department for the care of Mental Defectives in Denmark has
about 3,000 patients placed under community care. The total number of defectives
provided for in institutions or outside, amounts to 8,700, or 1 per 400 inhabitants.
The Keller Institutions have 824 under community care; 365 under home care
(a) and 459 under family care, supervision without maintenance and care ad
* For information about Gheel, see Mental Welfare, vol. XIV, 1933.

mod. Gheel (b, c, and d). Including- the patients kept in the institutions, the
Keller Institutions thus have about 2,900 mental defectives under their care.
The supervision of the patients under care outside is carried on exclusively by
the staff of the institution; in addition we have an inspector appointed for this
purpose alone, who is ready at any time to go by car to any home where there
is difficulty or disagreement. Further, the local Social Committee supervises the
patient and his care, reports to the institution on any change or unfavourable
condition; in several instances we have appointed a local supervising visitor in a
parish or similar district.

To me there is no doubt that this community care can be developed further
and that the arrangement here outlined implies the possibility of a great reduction
in the demand on institutional accommodation.

But it must be realised that at the same time as we extend and amplify the
concept " community care" the quality of the patients in the institution will
naturally be modified greatly. Dr. Douglas Turner has said :
" The institution of the future should be a flowing lake constantly fed by incoming
patients, but just as constantly passing back to the world in several directions and by
several different methods many other patients who have been trained and stabilized
while under its care."*

In recent years the Keller Institutions have functioned as the " flowing lake"
mentioned above, and the experiences we have gained now tell us that Dr.
Turner's prediction is not likely fully to come true. The inflowing stream of
patients enters into the quiet waters in the bed of the lake (i.e., the institution),
where a considerable number of patients whose whole condition would always
keep them from thriving in the rapid streams (society) proceed to settle. Only
a minority of the incoming patients can be trained and stabilized so that they
will be fit to go out again. As a natural result of this?because the low-grade
patients must be retained permanently?all the places provided for this category
of patients will soon be occupied, and the institution will have to plan its new
extensions exclusively with a view to the accommodation of the lower grade
patients. This is the reason why the Keller Institutions in the last years have been
extended only by new additions for the lower grades, with accommodation for
about 400 patients. For the very same reason, we have to-day vacancies for
patients (men and women) capable of work; and it is getting more and more
difficult for us to find enough patients to do the menial work in the institution ;
it is a constant complaint that the quality is lowered so markedly because so
many are transferred to outside care.

Sterilisation
--------------

It is the general opinion of the medical staff of the institution that employment
of sterilisation has brought about the position indicated above by further increasing
the number of patients who may safely be discharged or transferred to outside
care, as able to work. We are cautious in the use of sterilisation, selecting the
cases very carefully; yet we have now got to the number of 240 sterilised women
and men, all able to work. After sterilisation the patients go over to outside care.
In Denmark we consider sterilisation a very great help in the care of mental
defectives which has now become indispensable.

In the last annual report from a great English institution (about 1,500
patients), sterilisation is looked upon as unnecessary and it is stated with a
certain degree of pride that in the seventeen years the institution has employed
discharge on licence, only three patients have returned on account of pregnancy.
* Journal of Mental Science, 1933, />. 573.

Our experience has not been so good, and I refuse to believe it is because mental
defectives in Denmark have stronger sexual appetites than mental defectives in
England. In that respect 1 think they are similar. I would rather be inclined to
look for the explanation in the fact that in the course of the last seventeen
years the English institution concerned had discharged on licence only 153
patients (i.e., 10 per cent.) and of these patients as many as eighteen were placed
in other institutions. That leaves only 135 ; and the report does not state how
many of these patients are men and women without the sex appeal that leads
to sexual temptation. If this English institution had attained our figures?800 (or
about 40 per cent.) in community care, not a few of whom have celebrated their
semi-jubilee as outside patients?I think we should find several cases in which
sterilisation would be a safeguarding measure.

I shall briefly mention three important experiences we have gained through
the employment of sterilisation :

(a) It is really a surprisingly small amount of intelligence (as low as
I.Q.45) that is required in women to make them useful for housework
under outside care.

(b) It is preferably the mental defective women who ought to be sterilised,
for they are attractive regardless of their intelligence quotient, not
only to the mentally defective male but also to the so-called normal
male. On the other hand it happens but seldom that the mentally
defective man becomes a father, for he cannot attract the normal
woman; as a rule the woman who responds to him is herself a mental
defective.

(c) Not a few mentally defective women of difficult character fail to settle
down in an institution where they may be teased and upset by other
patients and where they have but little opportunity to work alone and
to be left alone. We have sterilised several of them and then placed
them under outside care in more isolated districts, in small families
without children, and we have found that whereas these patients were
very troublesome in the institution where they hindered cur work
with the others, they have now settled down contentedly.

Occupation Centres
-------------------

In England I met with a special form of community care?viz., Occupation
Centres?in which I was very interested; and I have tried to introduce something
of the kind in Denmark. It seemed natural to begin this work in the largest
town in our district, and I negotiated with the Social Committee about the
establishment of an occupation centre. During these negotiations it was pointed
?ut to me that it would be very difficult to get parents to send to an institution
their mentally defective child, who was capable of education when their neighbours,
who had a child with a lower intelligence quotient, were allowed to keep the
child at home and send it to an occupation centre.* I had to admit the force
of this objection, and as I consider it most important that all educable defective
children should attend an institutional school?this principle being the keystone
in both English and Danish legislation concerning mental defectives?I have
temporarily postponed my plans about occupation centres.

Two experiences, gained on my visits to England, have been contributory
factors in this decision : (1) On my visits to occupation centres in London I
{n England this very real difficulty is largely met by the existence of Day Special Schools
inadequate though their number is.?Ed.


noticed a pronounced prejudice against sending- defectives to institutions, and it
was considered almost a confession of failure to have to refer a child for institu-
tional care. (2) One day, in 1927, I was visiting- a Special School in London, and
there I met an Australian physician who was on a study journey also. As we
left this school the Australian told me that he thought it was a forlorn hope to
educate and teach mentally defective children with intelligence quotients down to
50, for a small part of the day in a Special School of this kind and then send
them home to surroundings that were often quite unsuitable, where the little
progress made at school was lost again during the rest of the day. I have often
thought of this remark, and I have to acknowledge its correctness.

Statistics
-----------

The English reader would probably like to get some data on the movements
of patients in the Danish institutions for mental defectives, for the sake of
comparison with English institutions. I have, therefore, worked out the figures
for the Keller Institution in the last three years. In these three years a total of
1,204 new patients were placed under the care of the Institution, that is, more
than one patient was admitted every day from the outside world. Reckoning the
entire incoming movement, we get 2,353 patients, or more than two per day,
but 1,149 of these are transfers within the various forms of care. 465 patients
have gone out from the institution to outside care. Absolute discharge is rare.
A total of 330 patients have been discharged; of these 134 died, 85 went to other
institutions, 3 moved and were lost sight of and 41 were discharged subsequently
as they proved not to be mentally defective. This, leaves 67 who have been
discharged in the course of 2 years.

I have always been an advocate of the large combined institution, which
makes it possible to place the mental defective in that department where he
properly belongs, according to his faculties and age. It will often happen that a
patient has to be transferred because his case was judged incorrectly in the
admission papers or simply because he makes progress or falls off during his stay
in the institution. In the last three years we have made 1,066 transfers within
the main institution, or about one a day. Counting all the transfers within the
institution and its various forms of care, we get 2,163 transfers of mental
defectives, or two a day. Now if we had first to correspond with other institutions
about such transfers, I doubt very much they would have been carried out to
such a large extent; and that means that the patients would not have been
classified and distributed properly according to qualities and inherent abilities.

The expenses per patient in the institution itself amount to 983 kroner
(shillings) per year. The expenses per patient under outside care amount to 451
kroner (shillings) per year. In the establishment of a branch with accommodation
for 350 patients the expenses per patient have come to 3,057 kroner (about
?136) including furniture and other equipment.

I wish to thank Mental Welfare for inviting me to give an account of the
public care of mental defectives in Denmark. I am very pleased to do so, in
particular because I learnt so much on my study journeys in England and not least
because the Central Association for Mental Welfare gave me such valuable
assistance during my visits. There are many points of resemblance between the
English and Danish nations and their trains of thought, and I feel that mutual
visits and mutual exchange of experiences as to advantages and short-comings
of the systems adopted must prove profitable to future progress in the English
and Danish care of mental defectives.
