Contributed
=============

Nearly all German Hospitals, and Institutions are supported out of public
funds, many partially or entirely out of insurance funds. About 65 per cent, of
the patients are members of compulsory insurance societies and many others have
joined voluntary insurance societies. This makes the question of treatment and
disposal easier as questions of assessment for payments, etc., do not arise.
Mental Disorder

Legislative provision for the treatment of Mental Patients in Germany does
not differ widely from the provision made in England. Modern English Mental
Hospitals may well be compared with the German " Heillanstalten." There is how-
ever one outstanding characteristic of the German system not found in England.
All the large hospitals have their psychiatric wards; and every German University
has its clinic for the treatment of early mental cases. The clinics have no hard and
fast regulations for the admission of patients; a medical certificate is generally
all that is required and the paramount consideration is whether or not the Medical
Superintendent considers that treatment is needed. In the majority of Clinics, the
patient has to sign a Form of Consent during the first three days of treatment,
and it is found that as a rule he is more willing to do this after he has settled
down a little than he would have been before entering the Clinic. If he refuses
his consent " Kreisarzt " (a Government Health Officer) is called in and if neces-
sary the patient is certified as insane and thus deprived of his civil rights. But
in Germany, the question of certification is hardly a serious problem for it must
be borne in mind that the German submits more readily to restraint than does the
Englishman with his zeal for personal liberty. The aim however, everywhere, is
that as many patients as possible shall be treated voluntarily, and certification is
only resorted to where a patient's condition is dangerous to himself or to others,
or where he persists in refusing food. There is no provision for " Temporary "
patients similar to that made under the English Mental Treatment Act.

If a patient's condition is diagnosed as " chronic "?i.e., if these appears to be
no hope of recovery within a year or so, he is usually transferred from the
Psychiatric Clinic or the Psychiatric Ward of a Hospital to a Mental Hospital?
the so-called Provincial Hcilanstalt. For wealthy patients there are a great
number of very well-equipped " Sanatoria " providing excellent care both for
recent and for chronic cases.

It is true to say that nowadays the public no longer regard the Clinics or
the Mental Hospitals with fear or suspicion, but in some circles it is felt that
only Voluntary patients should be in private care in order that their possible exploit-
ation may be prevented.

The German Psychiatric Clinics and Mental Hospitals do not employ specially
trained Social Workers, but these play an important role in the Offene Fucrsorg<c
which is a combination of the English "After-Care" and, the Supervision of
Boarded-Out patients. For the training of Social Workers there are 30 different
schools in Germany?the Socialc Frauensclnden,?providing two year Courses,
but specialised training is only given during the last term. None of these Schools
are attached to Universities as these tend to have a purely scientific and academic
outlook and to hold the study of the practical application of knowledge in some-
thing very like contempt!

In addition to the system of the Boarding-Out of chronic mental patients,
which is more highly developed in Germany than in England, there are colonies
in which the patients are made as far as possible self-supporting. Professor
Keoppe started the colonisation of mental patients on a large scale on the estate
of Alt-Scherbitz in Saxony. At llten, near Hanover, an experiment is being
carried on, with considerable success, based on the Gheel method. Another very
interesting experiment is that of Professor Simon in Guertersloh; here all the
wards are empty during the day for everybody, even the oldest chronic catatonic
cases, is working, and no isolation appears to be necessary.

Mental Deficiency
------------------

Preliminary tuition in Mental Deficiency has for about 30 years been made
part of every course for medical students on Mental Disorder, and full use
is made of the clinical material available. The early recognition and disposal of
the defective has always been thought to constitute the greatest need in this field
of care.

The first Special Classes (Auxiliary Classes or Hilfsklasse) were estab-
lished as early as 1859, though recently the tendency in many German Towns
has been to establish centralised schools for defective children rather than separate
classes in the ordinary elementary schools. Berlin, however, is still in favour of
Special Classes.

J11 1900, the so-called Sickinger System was established in Mannheim,
which has continued to prove very successful. This consists of four parallel classes :
(1) The ordinary classes. (2) Backward classes for 10 per cent, of the slow
pupils who follow the same curriculum with special adaptations. (3) Auxiliary
ciasses for the Feeble-minded children who need an education of an individual
and non-academic type.

In some towns, the schools have as many as four parallel classes, amongst
which there is a free interchange of children, as nothing in the nature of
certification exists.

Private lessons are given without fees in suitable cases.

For the feeble-minded, the tendency throughout Germany is to appoint the
most successful of the young teachers who have taken a special course in the
Heilpa dag ogischc Seminar where they learn the fundamental facts about men-
tal defect and are taught special methods of handling defective children. These
teachers receive additional salaries. In many cases it has been found that a marked
temperamental change has taken place in a feeble-minded child on being released
from ordinary class methods and put in the care of a young specially-trained
teacher. These children are required to stay at school until they are 16.

The lower-grades of defectives are sent to special institutions. Here again
there is no fixed method of certification, and even in modern German textbooks
on Psychiatry no rigid distinction is made between feeble-minded, imbeciles and
idiots.* Nor are all defectives in Germany systematically tested. It is emphasised
that mental tests are only useful when every other aspect of the case has been
taken into consideration, and that in the higher-grade cases they are of secondary
importance, for a patient may be quite unable to manage his own affairs and
yet pass all the tests. " Life is really the only lest." Low-grade defectives are
as a rule kept under special care until they are 18 and they are afterwards
supervised by an After-Care service for the purpose of safeguarding them from
economic and moral exploitation. There is nothing comparable to the English
system of Guardianship and Custody, and although there is excellent care provided
for juvenile defectives things are not quite so satisfactory in the case of adults
and it has been shown in recent statistics that about one-third of lower-grade
imbeciles are not in institutions.

To-day there are over 60 large training institutions, some built on very
elaborate lines and regarded as model institutions. They are all under Government
control and all the teachers must hold special licenses from the Government. The
mistake, so often made, has been made here too?viz., that cf regarding a
feeble-minded person who had shown himself capable of working in an institution
as being capable of supporting himself in the outside world. Grotjahn, the late
* In his recently published "Practical Psychiatry," Schulhof contends that the degree of
defect is comparatively unimportant, and he himself uses the term "idiot" to denote
defectives who exhibit physical malformations.

Director of the Berlin Institute of Social Hygiene, pointed this out again and
again. He and many other leading specialists were in favour of permanent
segregation for all lower-grade defectives in Colonies where they could live a
comparatively free life and where many of them could do productive work. In
Germany, where only the State and the provincial councils are concerned with
defectives, a scheme of this kind could have been put into practice more easily
than would be the case in countries where this particular responsibility partly
devolves on voluntary or religious organisations.

Sterilisation
----------------

To-day, however, things in Germany are developing along altogether different
lines. The Act whose object is to "avoid the inheritance of disease in posterity,"
came into force on January 1st, 1934, and is bound to bring about great changes in
the treatment and disposal of Mental Patients and specially of the Mentally
Defective.

Introducing the Bill, Dr. Frick, Home Secretary, pointed out that modern
humanitarian ideas were in reality cruel?that to give exaggerated care to
the individual while neglecting the interests of the nation as a whole was a
form of madness, and that sentimental concern for the welfare of the unfit was
killing the Will to Work. Instead of protecting the unfit, the aim of the community
should be to support its healthy, useful members who were suffering in the
struggle of life. He stressed the fact that the cost of supporting the insane and
the mentally defective was about 4 RM daily; the cost of cripples and the deaf
and dumb was still higher (5 to 6 RM) and that of criminals about 3| RM,
and he contrasted these figures with the earnings of unskilled labourers which
amounted to only 2A RM. He agreed that the basic aim of racial hygiene methods?
the complete elimination of all those suffering from hereditary disease?could
not be achieved for many generations, but he insisted that a Government conscious
of its responsibilities had to think in terms of generations. He refuted the
opposition of the Church to this point of view by saying that the Christian
religion, although it taught the duty of supporting the weak and unfit, could
not contend that it was good that they should be born. Dr. Frick assumed that
about 20 per cent, of the whole German population showed symptoms of mental
depravity and that it was undesirable for them to have offspring.

Hereditary Disease, in the meaning of this Act, is defined as : Congenital
Feeble-mindedness, Maniac-Depressive Insanity, Schizophrenia, Hereditary
Epilepsy, Huntington's Chorea, Hereditary Deafness and Blindness, Hereditary
Malformations, Chronic Alcoholism. The Act does not as yet include the healthy
carriers of inheritable disease, but a supplementary Bill is planned for the future
when research is more advanced.

The "subject for sterilisation" may present himself, or?if has been declared
incapable of managing his own affairs?may be presented by his legal representa-
tive, a Medical Officer of Health or by the Governor of a prison. The proposal
74 M ENT A L W ELF A R E
then comes before the " Court of Eugenics," composed of a magistrate, a Medical
Officer of Health and a physician who has specialised in the study of hereditary
hygiene. The Court's decision, taken after a secret hearing, is subject to an
appeal to a " High Court of Eugenics." Only after this final decision does
sterilisation become compulsory, and only then is direct force permissible.
The Act does not include the castration of criminals as it was desired to
prevent the public from regarding it as a punishment. But there is a subsequent
Act giving to the Courts of Justice power to order the castration of persons
over 21 years who have been convicted of murder or manslaughter in which
sexual elements were involved, or who have had two or more convictions for
sexual offences. These sexual criminals who are convicted for the first time are
sent to Training (Concentration) Camps when discharged. To avoid this they
may apply for castration, which is regarded as " treatment."

Under "urgent cases" are scheduled the feeble-minded between 10 and 40,
juvenile schizophrenic patients, and maniac-depressive patients in the state of
remission. It is pointed out that 17 per cent of the siblings of mental defectives
are themselves mentally defective, and that 60 per cent, of their children in
turn are defective. Every case of Mental Defect is regarded as hereditary if
it cannot be proved beyond doubt that there are exogenous factors (syphilis in
the mother, infectious disease, or brain lesions). With few exceptions, all the pupils
in auxiliary schools and classes are regarded as congenitally feeble-minded or
imbecile and as subjects for sterilisation. (That is to say, 3 per cent, to 4\ per
cent of the population in the large towns, and up to 10 per cent, in some rural
areas!) It is assumed that of the 90,000 juveniles who are for some reason
or other under institutional control, almost 50 per cent, are feeble-minded and
must be sterilised before they can be discharged.
In those forms of congenital Mental Defect where as a rule procreation
is not possible?e.g., through early death or pronounced idiocy at adolescence?
sterilisation is, as a general rule, not to be applied. It is pointed out, in connection
with the Act, that it is the slight forms of mental deficiency which are to be
regarded as the most dangerous from the eugenic point of view, for high-grade
defectives usually associate with others of the opposite sex, they are lacking in
self-control and the number of their offspring is far above the average. The
natural elimination of these stocks, it is contended, is to-day prevented from
operating, by reason of our sentimental care of the individual.

The Mentally Defective group as a whole, is regarded as the one most
important for the purposes of this Act. Ruedin, Luxenburger and others who
have carried out investigations into the so-called "prognostics of heredity" for
more than 20 years, found that the conditions for the transmission of mental defect
were present in about 100 per cent, of their defective cases, which makes it very
likely that through sterilisation, the elimination of mental defect is really possible.
On the other hand they estimate that only 70 per cent, of persons with schizo-
phrenic dispositions become themselves schizophrenic and so subjects for sterilisa-
tion. This research has been, made in the course of studying identical twins
suffering from mental defects, etc. German investigators state that environment
plays no part whatever in the production or prevention of mental defect. Mental
Defect and Huntington's Chorea are placed at one end of the Scale (the so-
called " Pole of Heredity ") and Alcoholism at the other end (termed the " Pole
of Environment"). Schizophrenia, manic-depressive insanity and hereditary
epilepsy come midway between the two poles.

There are estimated to be in Germany, 300,000 congenital mental defectives,
280,000 schizophrenics, 100,000 manic-depressives, and 100,000 epileptics. Recent
figures as to the number of sterilisations are very difficult to obtain. The latest
official statistics cover the year ending February 1st, 1935?the first year of
the operation of the Act?when 120,000 operations were performed. Of these, 45
per cent, were on account of feeble-mindedness, 30 per cent, on account of
psychoses, 18 per cent on account of epilepsy, and 3 per cent, on account of
chronic alcoholism. The cost of the operation for men (vasotomy) is given as
20 RM, for women (salpingectomy) as 50 RM. Amongst the women, in whose
case the operation is more severe, there was a mortality of about 4 per cent.
The cost of procedure and operation is borne by the State, or for insured
patients, by the Insurance Companies.

Very few of the inmates of institutions have been sterilised as yet, and it
is not considered that by means of it, many discharges will become possible. A
new Bill is being prepared, to deal with the question of care after sterilisation.
The collaboration of Mental Health workers, the Fucrsorg.crinncn is con-
sidered to be of special value in the work of educating the general public in the
idea of sterilisation. The commentary on the Act says that great help can be
given by the social worker in close contact with the family in collecting details
about the health of each member, and in exacting secrecy as to the fact that
a patient has been sterilised in order that an increase in prostitution may be
avoided.

It should be understood that many psychiatrists were opposed to this Act, for
various reasons. Professor Muckermann, the famous Director of the Department
?f Eugenics in the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, resigned. Professor Bumke, the
President of the German Society of Psychiatry, was violently attacked for having
stated that Beethoven, whose father was a chronic alcoholic and a typical degen-
erate, would not have been allowed to be born in Germany to-day. He received
*he reply that the German people only wanted gifted men who came from a
healthy stock, and that genius could never be a contra-indication for sterilisation.
On the other hand, this Act was not so completely new a thing as it seemed
to the general public, for in 1932 a similar Bill had been under consideration in
Prussia; but it could never have been passed by any Parliamentary form of
government.

To-day in Germany, the State is supreme as never before, and it is using all
the mighty weapons of the Modern Age to enforce its Will. The population
is being taught to " think in terms of hereditary biology "; it is the duty of every
citizen to try to become a " first-class specimen of the human race," and so on.
Thus they can accept the idea of Sterilisation without difficulty, and compulsion
is seldom necessary.

A Survey of Mental Ability in a Rural Community*
------------------------------------------------

The purpose of this investigation was to make a survey of the intelligence
of the inhabitants of a rural area, by means of the intelligence testing of its
school children supplemented by an attempt to ascertain the incidence of mental
deficiency amongst persons of all ages and to collect the family history of every
school child and every defective examined. The area?a pre-dominantly agricul-
tural one, some 12 miles from the nearest industrial town?consisted of a small
compact town with three surrounding villages and outlying farms. Its total
population in 1931 was 1,534, and since the preceding census in 1921, had decreased
by 107.

The total number of children tested by the Otis Primary or Advanced was
187 with homes in the district and 15 who were boarded out and attending
the school. Every child between 8 and 10 years was also tested with the Stanford
Binet Revision.

In this pamphlet are to be found graphs and particulars of the results
obtained, which may be summarised as follows :?

(1) Of the 43 children tested with the Stanford Binet the Mean I.Q. was found to
be between 95 and 96, lower than that usually found in urban populations.
(2) The Mean I.Q. of the 25 children related to one another by consanguinity or
marriage was 95.4; that of 18 children whose families were unrelated was 95.7.
(3) The number of cases of mental defect ascertained of all ages was 24, giving an
incidence of 1.6 per cent of the whole population. Of these only 20 belonged to
the interrelated clan.

(4) Only one of the ascertained defectives was illegitimate, and the intelligence of the
illegitimate schoolchildren tested was slightly above the average. On the other
hand, indirectly illegitimate children (i.e. one of whose parents was illegitimate)
were found to be of poor mental ability.

(5) The total number of cases of insanity in the area was found to be 7, all belonging
to the interrelated group.

(6) Two thirds of the children belonged to a group of the population which was .
interrelated by marriage. The children of this clan were just as intelligent as
those outside it.

(7) The mean intelligence of children coming from the professional group was the
highest; the trading group second; the artisan group third, and the labouring
group fourth.

* By M. V. Matthews, D. A. Newlyn and L. S. Penrose. Research Dept., Royal Eastern
Counties Institution, Colchester. Published in The Sociological Review, January, 1937.
