The Therapeutic Value in Mental Illness of Physical Fitness through Exercise
=============================================================================

:Author: ROLF Strom-Olsen, M.D., B.Sc., D.P.M.
Physician Superintendent of Runwell Hospital for Nervous and
Mental Disorders, Wic\ford, Essex.

To say that our attitude towards the treatment of mental illness has
undergone a radical change during the last 15 to 20 years is to run the risk of
reiterating a saying which has now almost become a platitude. Nevertheless,
those whose business it is to look after the mentally sick know full well that
perhaps no other aspect of psychiatry represents more truly the outward mani-
festation of this changed attitude than the recent developments in occupational
therapy. To attempt to outline this development would go far beyond the
scope of this paper, but I propose to deal in a general way with a mode of
treatment which should form an integral part of an organised system of oc-
cupational therapy in every modern mental hospital.

The task of doctors and nurses in mental hospitals might perhaps be
summed up as follows: firstly, the treatment, and the promotion of the most
favourable conditions for the recovery of patients admitted to hospital;
secondly, the management and care of the chronic insane. Treatment may be
specific or general. In the specific treatment we aim at removing the cause
Paper read at Public Health Congress, London, November, 1936.

of the particular disorder where this is known (alas only too infrequently) or
at hastening recovery by applying special remedies (e.g., malaria). In general
treatment we have to fall back on empiricism by trying to improve the
patient's health, by treating symptoms, by attempting to increase his powers
of resistance and by endeavouring to resocialize him, notwithstanding the fact
that we may remain fundamentally ignorant of the cause of his breakdown.

For this purpose we make full use of fresh air, sunlight, diet, hydrotherapy,
actinotherapy, and last but not least, occupational therapy. In the periphery
of the latter we would include treatment by exercise and drill. For both the
above classes of patients the institution of physical exercise on a systematic
basis is of the greatest importance, because not only does exercise exert its influ-
ence on the physical health of the patient, but also, directly and indirectly, on
his mental health.

To enable us to understand more clearly how exercise exerts its thera-
peutic effect in mental disease it would be of advantage to summarise the
general effects on the body of muscular exertion. By exercise, of course, I do
not mean passive exercise (passive movements by means of manipulation, mas-
sage, etc.) which, though it has its uses in our branch of medicine, rather
comes within the specific realm of the trained physiotherapist. Our attention
is confined to active exercise which requires a definite exertion of the will
power. Active exercises may be sub-divided into two classes, firstly those in-
volving a single effort of one or more muscle groups, and secondly, those in-
volving endurance. As examples of the former one might mention weight-
lifting, feats on the parallel bars, a ioo-yards sprint. Here the exercises may
be more or less violent in character or compound in motion, each one beginning
from and ending with a period of rest. They may be simple movements, re-
quiring skill and accuracy as well as effort. In exercises of endurance the
variety and intensity of movement are, as a rule, much more limited, and arc
frequently composed of the natural movements of the body requiring little
skill, e.g. walking, running (not sprinting), rowing. In such instances each
movement comes well within one's reserve power, but the total amount of
muscular work is great. The effects on body and mind of these two varieties
of exercise have been known since the days of Hippocrates and Celsus; they
are of great interest from the point of view of demonstrating a possible ration-
ale in the physical education of nervous and mental patients. Qualities which
tend to become developed by exercises of effort, whether these are of skill,
speed or strength are particularly concentrating powers, alertness, improved
co-ordination of the neuro-muscular apparatus, together with a greater
economy in energy in the performance of difficult movements. Continual
practice results in the increase in bulk of the muscles involved. It is to be
noted, however, that the exercises of effort do not result in constitutional vig-
our to the same extent as those of endurance. The qualities produced by the
latter kind of exercise are different. No increased attention is required for the
easy movements, hence concentration is normal; moreover, the skill entailed
is not more than that necessary for natural movements, and individual muscle
groups do not tend to hypertrophy to a marked extent. On the other hand the
indirect effect on the circulation and respiration is greater than in effort exer-
cises, the individual developing a greater cardiac and pulmonary capacity to
deal with the removal of waste and fatigue products of muscular contraction.
In the long run exercises of endurance employed discriminately and in
moderation produce a constitutional vigour and physical robustness far greater
than those of effort.

Organisation of Exercises and Games.
-------------------------------------

The organisation of a system of exercises and games in a mental hospital
presents no great obstacles and the small expenditure involved on equipment
is amply repaid in the improved condition and behaviour of the patients, and
in fact, as I hope to show, may actually lead to an economy. The question of
staffing presents possibly the only slight difficulty. Usually instructors for
drill classes can be recruited from members of the nursing staff, male and
female. Very often a hospital possesses a young male nurse recently out of
the army, keen on athletics and sport and who has a good knowledge of gym-
nastics. With the right temperament and a spark of enthusiasm such a man
will in time make an excellent physical instructor. A keen member of the
female occupational therapy or nursing staff also will in a surprisingly short
time learn the art of drill instruction, though she will probably require some
tuition in folk dancing where such facilities are available. As regards the
equipment, I would venture to suggest that every mental hospital should pos-
sess a gymnasium, at least a moderately equipped one. This is a great boon in
the winter, as it offers a greater variety of exercises when, owing to inclement
weather, patients are frequently barred from taking part in outdoor games and
sport, and Swedish drill remains the only alternative. Parallel bars, flying
rings, the trapeze bar, vaulting box and spring board, ropes, high-jump outfit,
Indian clubs, dumb-bells, skipping ropes, medicine balls, and a sufficiency of
well-padded gymnasium mats form the most essential requirements. As far as
outdoor equipment is concerned there is scarcely any need to mention cricket,
football, croquet and tennis, for these facilities are usually supplied by every
hospital. Perhaps one might mention basket-ball as a useful addition to this
armamentarium, as it has the advantage of being both an outdoor and an in-
door game. The patients themselves will of course require the appropriate
clothing. For the men I have found white singlets and football shorts the
most economical and useful, whilst the women wear short gym. frocks.

Patients should be carefully selected and graded for the physical drill
class. Some must be excluded for mental reasons, for instance those suffering
from severe depression, maniacal excitement or well-developed confusion. Ii}
acute melancholia the extreme state of emotional depression tends to be ag-
gravated by forcing the patient to join a drill class; in maniacal excitement the
attention is too defective for any useful co-operation, in addition his restlessness
and exaltation would have too great a disturbing influence on the remainder of
the class. In confusional states the marked clouding of consciousness and in-
tellectual disturbance precludes the patient taking part for obvious reasons.

Physical infirmities and age will exclude others from most systematic exer-
cises, though by no means from all. I have found it a useful practice to issue
a table to the drill instructor showing the safe age limits of patients for taking
part in the various types of gymnastic exercises and atheletic games. This is
much appreciated by the staff and mistakes are avoided. Special significance
attaches to exercise in the large group of dementia praecox cases, recent and
chronic; here a great deal can be done to stimulate interest, break bad habits,
diminish sleeplessness, restlessness and violence, to divert the patient's psychic
(mental) energy from the unproductive phantasy life into more useful
channels and to rouse him from the complete inactivity of stupor. At the other
end of the scale there are the neurotic patients with their anxieties, fears and
obsessions; cases of reactive depression brought about by financial or domestic
worries, and other less malignant forms of mental disorder. With such vary-
ing types of cases it becomes essential to grade the classes according to the in-
tellectual state and behaviour of the patients. In my experience it is most
convenient to work with three grades: an " A " grade, consisting of a class of
newly admitted patients of the psychoneurotic type, those with mild psychotic
symptoms or showing good insight into their own condition, and convalescing
patients; a " B " grade consisting of chronic patients and those with more
severe symptoms who, though perhaps demented and displaying various mani-
festations of their psychotic disorder, are nevertheless co-operative and suffici-
ently interested to be able to perform the necessary exercises almost up to
average skill; and thirdly a "C " grade for excited, difficult and regressed
patients. It is of course necessary to hold these three classes separately, either
in time or place, according to the arrangements of the hospital. Immediately
after breakfast patients should take a brisk walk either within the ward
gardens or in the grounds, prior to attending the occupational therapy class or
other occupational centre. Most of the remaining time in the morning should
then be devoted to the grade " C " class with the simpler forms of Swedish
drill, marching exercises, skipping and throwing the medicine ball. These
exercises should be held in the open air whenever possible, usually on the lawn
of the ward garden (a cold morning with frost is no contra-indication); in
rainy weather the entertainment hall is probably the best place. The ac-
companiment of music to the rhythmic exercises is almost as important as the
drill itself. It has been found, particularly in negativistic and resistive patients,
that the desire to imitate and take part in gymnastic movements of a rhythmic
character is enormously enhanced by the addition of music. This is due to the
fact that the sense of rhythm is retained long after the intellectual and emo-
tional faculties have deteriorated, and in this way it can be used to direct the
patient's energies from morbid activities into the healthy channels of muscular
exercise. The size of such a grade " C " class should certainly not exceed 20
in number, about a dozen being the optimum, in order to enable the nurse to
give adequate attention to each individual member. In this connection it has
been found extremely profitable to have a nurse assisting the instructor, who
can walk around from patient to patient and encourage and help them with
the various movements. This class of patient is the most difficult to deal with
and requires considerable tact and perseverance on the part of the instructor
and nurse> but it is time well spent, for nowhere else do we see such surpris-
ing and gratifying results. Such patients as make sufficient progress are then
promoted to grade " A " or " B," according to their mental state.

The afternoon should be reserved for the better grades. Each class should
not exceed 30 in number, and the time allowed for physical drill is 45 to 60
minutes, followed by half an hour's complete rest. The first half of the period
is best devoted to some formal group exercises, such as Swedish drill, exer-
cises with Indian clubs or dumb-bells, marching, skipping, to the accompani-
ment of music. The second half can then either be spent in informal group
play (basket ball, throwing the medicine ball, a game of rounders) or in special
exercises on gymnastic apparatus (vaulting horse, flying rings, parallel bars,
high-jump). Certain patients from these groups showing special aptitude can
be picked out for the more difficult and advanced gymnastic exercises, particu-
larly those involving apparatus and movements of precision. Those who dis-
tinguish themselves and who possess the right temperament should also be
given the opportunity of acting as drill instructors at certain times and under
supervision. It is found that patients readily obey the commands of a fellow
inmate and perform their exercises just as efficiently as under the usual in-
structor. Of course many of the above exercises will be found unsuitable for
female patients, and alternative programmes must be adopted. One of the
most suitable substitutes is undoubtedly folk dancing, the learning of which
is perhaps laborious and tedious, but creates a genuine sense of satisfaction and
pleasure in a group that has learnt the art.

Following the rest after the afternoon session patients may then return
to their various occupations or to the wards as the case may be. After tea it is
an exceedingly good practice (weather and light permitting of course) to allow
as many patients as possible, apart from those on parole, to take a good walk
within or without the grounds accompanied by an adequate number of nurs-
ing staff. It is unfortunate that some hospitals are so cramped for space that
these walking tours are precluded, but I think most of my colleagues will
agree that a steady walk through the hospital estate or outside it is more bene-
ficial than the usual automatic tramp around the ward gardens, or " airing
courts " as they are sometimes termed. These walks should never last less than
an hour, and they are of particular value in cases of restlessness and insomnia.
As regards games such as cricket, football, tennis and croquet, these are already
utilized to the full in our mental hospitals. They should form an integral
part in any scheme of physical exercise and athletics, but on account of the
comparatively small number that can take part at one time they are of neces-
sity limited in scope. The watching of these games by a large body of patients
is a healthy and pleasant pastime but falls under the category of amusement
and recreation; certainly it is no exercise except perhaps that involved in their
vigorous applause of opponents at a hospital match.

The above remarks I think suffice to show the kind of scheme which the
average public mental hospital will find most workable, though the details
niay be varied to some extent. It follows in a general way the methods adopted
at one or two hospitals in this country, though it differs in that a greater use of
gymnastic apparatus is urged. This is an innovation which I venture to sug-
gest will be found attractive by many patients as it adds more variety to the
programme, and thus stimulates interest, a highly important factor in cases
with marked introversion and inhibition. It furthermore increases the scope
of exercises of precision, requiring for their preformance a certain degree of
skill in co-ordination and a good deal of mental concentration. A spirit of
competition often creeps in which lends zest to the execution of these exer-
cises. This is also true of competitive games and athletics, particularly when
the rivalry is between groups such as in the various ball games, tug-of-war, etc.
It must be emphasized, however, that competitive athletics, more especially
those of an individual nature, may have the very reverse effect of that intended
when they are employed without discrimination. I am referring to their use
in those patients whose psychosis is characterized by sensitiveness and marked
feelings of inferiority and who overcompensate for this by an over-indulgence
in phantasy life or day-dreaming, where all their fond ambitions find realisa-
tion. Well-meant but misdirected efforts to bring the patient into contact
with reality by placing him too early in a competitive milieu will only result
in his wiithdrawing completely into his shell. Such cases require delicate
handling and active co-operation on the part of the doctor in charge, so that
exercises may proceed in gradual stages from the elementary to the more
complicated, and from the purely objective to the more subjective forms.
In the light of the above-considerations it will now be easier to appreciate
The Therapeutic Value of Exercise in Mental Vatients.

Every scheme of physical training for mental patients should be organ-
ised so as to allow of an adequate proportion both of exercises of effort and of
endurance. The line of demarcation is not a hard and fast one, indeed many
exercises are a mixture of both, but on the whole there is a strong predomin-
ance of one over the other in each of the usual forms of gymnastics, athletics
and games. The optimum ratio is discovered with increasing experience, and
it is when that condition is fulfilled that we get the best results.

The therapeutic effect is both physical and mental. The physical effects
are well known to everybody; I will merely enumerate them. The bodily
weight is rendered more normal; the circulation is improved, respiration is
stimulated and breathing becomes fuller; the muscles become firmer and
movements more resilient and freer, and their tone is improved; the physical
reserve power is increased, in other words the patient is in " good training."
The appetite is increased and digestion improved; there is better elimination
both by the skin and the bowels; there is also a lessened susceptibility to colds
and a diminution in the incidence of such minor complaints as catarrh of the
upper air passages, headache, indigestion and lassitude. The net result is an
all-round improvement in the general health. In fact exercise acts in a way
which no physic does; it is, to use medical phraseology at one and the same
time a cardiac and respiratory stimulant, a digestive tonic and aperitif, a
diaphoretic, an analgesic, an aperient and a general tonic. Open air exercises
by their hardening effect on the constitution increase the powers of resistance
to disease, and will in the course of years quite perceptibly lessen the incidence
of morbidity from respiratory and catarrhal affections, digestive disturbances
and skin complaints.

Of the mental effects of exercise we can draw no such uniform picture.
So much depends on the type of disorder from which the patient is suffering,
on its duration and whether faulty modes of thought and action have been
allowed to become too firmly established. In the majority of cases great
improvement can be effected. Whilst the treatment is admittedly only
palliative, in some it is a definite aid towards recovery. Although, as is
generally the case in psychiatry, it is the individual who must be studied, we
are nevertheless able to make some generalisations of the therapeutic value in
each of the various mental types of illness. A few concrete examples offer
the best illustration of the mental effect. A young girl, a patient of mine, who
had been in hospital for many months, and whose illness dated back a year or
so prior to admission, had been tried on various forms of treatment, but had
in spite of everything steadily become worse. After about six months she
had merged into a condition of stupor in which she was completely inactive
and mute, negativistic and hostile to those around her, and in every way had
to be looked after like a child of two. Her regression was so marked that
she would do nothing for herself and all attempts at persuading her to do some
very simple task in the occupational therapy class proved futile. It was then
decided that she should join the physical drill class for difficult and regressed
patients. At first she remained inactive, but after some coaxing and steady
perseverance on the part of the nurse in charge she gradually started to per-
form the movements to the accompanying music. Once this stage was
reached progress was rapid and she went on to perform the more complicated
exercises (skipping, Indian club drill, folk dancing, etc.) with conspicuous
success. After a few weeks her habits had distinctly improved and though
she still would not talk she became more amenable, less negativistic, and was
able to look after herself. At this stage she was again tried in the occupational
therapy class and this time with greater success for she was first persuaded to
do sorting of coloured wools and later was transferred to basket making at
which she became quite proficient. This case illustrates very forcibly how a
stubborn attitude of negativism in a repressed patient can be overcome more
easily by approaching it through the more pleasant avenue of rhythmic exer-
cises. There must be thousands of such cases in our mental hospitals to-day
whose condition is or can be influenced in a similar way.

Then there is the restless case who is sleepless at night, often irritating
other patients by talkativeness and noisiness, and showing a marked pressure
of activity. He is too unsettled and impatient to be able to concentrate on
any occupational task and gives the impression that he is overflowing with
pent-up energy and cannot find a satisfactory outlet for it. Many such patients
gradually merge into a state of maniacal excitement with violent and destruc-
tive behaviour, and thereby become a special problem in treatment. I believe,
however, that this excited phase may often be prevented by judicious applica-
tion of physical drill at the right moment. They are difficult patients to deal
with and often will not conform to the discipline of a class, hence informal
exercises and play often work better than formal drill. An hour should be
spent at this every morning or afternoon to be followed in the evening by
an hour's walk in the grounds. In this way the restless patient obtains a
healthy outlet for his excessive energy, and his unpleasant feeling of repressed
activity disappears. I am sure many physicians and nurses have noticed the
contrast in the behaviour of these patients when such a programme is carried
out regularly and when these activities are restricted on account of rainy
weather. In the latter instance restlessness, irritability and quarrelsomeness
unfortunately are often only too conspicuous. Most significant of all, however,
is the fact that natural sleep is induced by the healthy fatigue engendered by
the daily exercises, particularly by the long evening walk. This is of import-
ance not only because it leads to improvement in the mental state and bodily
health of the patients, but also because it minimizes considerably the need for
the administration of sedative and hypnotic drugs, and thus efTects a not
inconsiderable economy in the long run. In the large mental hospital near
Constance a systematic attempt was made to treat patients of the disturbed
type with physical exercises and athletics, with a view to reducing or eliminat-
ing the need for narcotics. In the case of 60 female patients treated during
the course of a few months the average saving on narcotic drugs amounted
to .?15 per month, and no hypnotics were administered at all! To a less
extent economies are effected through the improved behaviour and better
discipline, lessened destructiveness and fewer breakages.

Let us also take the example of the young patient suffering from early
dementia praecox, with ideas of reference or delusions of persecution and
perhaps with hallucinations of hearing. These people are shy and seclusive,
usually roam about the wards preoccupied with their morbid thoughts or
absorbed in phantasy. They are often very sensitive and resent any inter-
ference; they answer questions curtly and without display of interest or
emotion, although their intellectual faculties are intact. They become
slovenly and neglectful and flare up into tempers without adequate reason.
If such a patient is allowed to deteriorate he withdraws more and more from
reality; the phases of impulsive behaviour become more frequent with the in-
creasing influence of his delusions and hallucinations, and reasoning powers are
distorted. Finally the emotions become severely blunted, intelligence is grossly
impaired, and during the course of a few years the condition issues into a
state of dull secondary dementia. All means at our disposal must be brought
into play to arrest this seemingly fated process of deterioration. Our aim must
be to bring the patient into contact with his surroundings, to evoke in him as
much social feeling as he is capable of displaying, and to stimulate his interest
in some form of occupation. Where occupational therapy fails to achieve
co-operation, physical exercises and games may succeed. This is in fact
borne out by experience both in this country and America. The appeal must
be made to the patient's instinctual life to rouse him. Music, rhythm and
the urge to imitation is more likely to break through the ice of negativism
than purely objective methods. Daily group drill to music and throwing
the medicine ball should be persevered with, but without unduly forcing the
patient. Ball throwing has been found a particularly useful exercise; there
are few patients who will not catch or attempt to catch a good weighty ball
when it is thrown at them. These exercises are a pleasant way of stimulating
their interest in the surroundings, and do not evoke antagonism. The daily
activities in a group have a socialising influence on the young shizophrenic,
and during formal exercise a certain degree of mental concentration is re-
quired which tends to direct his attention outwards and to divert his mind
from his delusions and hallucinations. Once the vicious circle of negativism
and self-absorption has been broken the time is ripe to send him to the occu-
pational therapy class, where if he is judiciously managed, the improvement
in behaviour and habits can be maintained.

Finally a few words about the value of exercise in the benign and
recoverable cases of mental disorder. It is undoubtedly a useful adjuvant to
supplement other forms of treatment, but its use must be subordinated to
the needs of the individual case. One may say without hesitation that it is
applicable to all varieties of neurosis, except perhaps in severe forms of
anxiety neurosis, where panic attacks are frequent. The effect of exercises
is to lessen the intensity of neurotic symptoms, and generally to produce a
pleasurable feeling which goes far to re-establishing self-confidence and dis-
persing morbid conflicts. The self-centred hypochondriac becomes lesss
absorbed in his imaginary bodily ailments, the obsessional has a smaller
chance of giving way to his compulsive urges, the hysteric becomes more
stable in mood and under the strong suggestive influence of a capable in-
structor he may be cured of his paralysis, his tremor or his tic. In the rather
larger group to which the anxiety neurotic belongs there is a definite tendency
to a diminution in the unpleasant feeling of anxiety or fear, and through the
concentration on the drill which he willy-nilly must maintain his mind is of
necessity diverted from preoccupation with conflicts. In most cases of mild
depression there is noticeable improvement, the patients themselves own to
feeling happier, there is a lessening or disappearance of the awful feeling of
inadequacy and constantly an increased feeling of self-confidence. It must
be admitted, however, that in severe cases of depression, this beneficial effect
is not produced, in fact as I have stated above exercise may lead to a worsening
of the condition. In considering the therapeutic value of exercise in neurotics
we must not lose sight of the fact that in some measure the improved mental
state may be a direct result of the effect on the physical health causing an
increased feeling of well-being, general toning up of the musculature, im-
proved circulation and better sleep through the fatigue produced.

I have described the therapeutic effect of exercise in several typical
forms of mental disorder, benign and malignant, and though I have by no
means exhausted the list, I feel sufficient has been said to give an indication
of its value. To summarise then, it may be said that the institution of a
system of physical exercises, both formal and informal, has a marked bene-
ficial effect on the general health of the mental patient. In the great majority
of cases it produces an improvement in his mental state and conduct. Its
socialising effect is a valuable means of combating negativism and faulty
modes of behaviour. The patient's mind can be diverted from his conflicts,
his delusions and hallucinations. It provides a healthy outlet for excess energy
in restless cases, and thus lessens both the frequency and the periods of dis-
turbed phases. It may succeed in bringing many a dementia praecox patient
into increased contact with his surroundings where other methods have failed,
with the result that he can be made sufficiently co-operative to become a
useful member of the occupational therapy class. In producing a healthy
fatigue physical exercise induces natural sleep in restless, nervous or appre-
hensive patients and in this way considerably lessens the need for administer-
ing sedative and hypnotic drugs. Powers of concentration, mental alertness
and capacity for work are increased, discipline is improved and a feeling of
well being and contentment is engendered. In the convalescing patient it has
the effect of hastening recovery and promoting constitutional vigour, and
may thus shorten his stay in hospital.

In conclusion I should like to put forward a plea for the adoption of
physical training on a systematic and extended basis in all our mental hospitals.
I feel that a method, so simple and inexpensive and yet so obviously beneficial
for the health and happiness of our patients, has won for itself an assured
place in modern psychiatric treatment.
