Adjusting the School to the Child
===================================

Practical First Steps. 

:Author: Carleton Wasliburne. 

Superintendent of Schools,
Winnetka, 111., U.S.A. Harrap & Co. 7/6.
This is an issue in this country of the
American edition of the book describing
what is usually known here as the "Winnetka
System," though the author disclaims any
intention of setting up anything so fixed as
a " System

The book describes not only the basic
principles which have for seventeen years
underlain the work of the schools in
Winnetka, a well-to-do suburb of Chicago,
but also gives details of the processes of
individualising the school subjects, which
will form the principal interest for readers
of this Journal.

Teachers who wish to break away from
class methods of teaching to something
freer, which will draw upon those sources
of non-academic interest which are often
found in even the dullest children, are
often attracted to project methods in
which children of varying capacities
co-operate in carrying out some investiga-
tion or making some model or in some way
learning by doing. They are, however, some-
times deterred from using the good in these
methods by the expressions of their more
uncompromising advocates, from which one
might gather that no other form of teaching
was necessary, for they cannot see how a
child can do without drill in the fundamen-
tals. On the other hand, there are those
who claim that because a backward child is
weak on his fundamentals, he, should be
given practically nothing except individual
work, with apparatus and books, until he has
reached a certain level of proficiency, and
can then go on to the studies of content,
such as literature, history, and so forth.

The Winnetka " System " ought to have
something to teach both. Briefly, Washburne
recognizes not only the need for concen-
trated individual work on the minimum
essentials, facts, skills, processes, but also
the need for situations in which the child
can use his acquisitions, while seeing their
bearing upon life, and learning to co-operate
with his fellows. The Winnetka child spends
a portion of each day in individual work in
arithmetic, reading, spelling and social
science facts, and the rest upon group
activities in the social sciences, music, art,
craft, assembly, drama, etc.

A large part of the book is taken up with
very detailed descriptions of the technique
of individual work. It is now acknowledged
that no teacher can keep a class of children
working profitably by themselves unless he
has a proper system?material prepared in
ad vance, records of past achievement, test
material. Willingness is not enough; there
must be technique, and of this every teacher
could learn from these pages : there is much
sound good sense amid a wealth of words,
and teachers on the look-out for " tips " may
Pick these up, even if they cannot adapt their
work in a more thorough-going way !
Some of the topics dealt with are : the
mastery of the addition, subtraction and
multiplication combinations, testing what a
child has learned before requiring him to
revise ", the prevention of failure rather
than its cure, and the order of difficulty of
arithmetical processes. Would that more
teachers of dull children would heed the.

sentence : " When a child has read at least
four or five easy books he is ready for
phonics " ! There is great emphasis on the
need for the use of tests of achievement.
Unfortunately we have little to help us here
except the pioneer (and somewhat old) work
of Burt and Ballard. There is a need for
the production of more tests on this side of
the Atlantic.

While much of the detail is applicable
directly only to American conditions, any
teacher who is willing to puzzle out the
meaning of the text will find much which
can be adapted to conditions in this country.
In this connection it should be remembered
that the American " grades" are roughly
comparable with our old " standards " with
a change of one figure, i.e., Grade 2 equals
Standard 1, and that "recitation" has nothing
to do with elocution.

There is a chapter on school administra-
tion which deals with admissions, records,
the vexed question of placing a child by age
or attainment, and time table making; and
a valuable section on teacher training after
college, which might have inspired the con-
ferences of teachers of special classes in
Leicester.

The chapter on the behaviour of the
individual child and the application of the
principles of mental hygiene to it, contains
nothing new, but gives some examples of the
good results of teachers' attempts to adjust
difficult children.

The book is worth reading both by
students of education who wish to have
details of the Winnetka system without
hunting for them in periodicals, and by
teachers who are not content with slipshod
attempts to import " interest " into the cur-
riculum at the expense of thoroughness.
J.L.
