Medical Superintendent, Lingfield Epileptic Colony
===================================================

By J. TYLOR FOX, M.A., M.D. (Cantab.), D.P.M.
There is a considerable epileptic population in institutions in our country.
Over 11,000 epileptics are to be found in public mental hospitals, perhaps
^,000?4,000 in institutions for mental defectives, and just under 4,000 in
colonies and residential schools for epileptics who are neither insane nor
mentally defective. There are no figures to show the number of epileptics
in general Public Assistance Hospitals and Institutions. It is probably pretty
considerable and includes many who are badly placed in general or in
" mental " wards.
The number of epileptics living in the community, no one can number,
nor is it likely that any accurate enumeration will be forthcoming, as cases
with infrequent or slight fits would always escape observation. It is generally
* Paper read at Public Health Congress, London, November, 1936.
MENTAL WELFARE n
recognized that there must be a good crowd of them, and that very many of
them must find their complaint a serious handicap. But there exists no
organization to help or advise them, no authority who has any knowledge
of the extent or nature of the problems to which they give rise.
Eight years ago the permanent Committee on Epileptics, a body which
has been dormant of late, instituted an enquiry into the number of epileptics
known to public authorities in the County of Surrey. The public authorities
who were approached included Mental Hospital officials, Poor Law Guardians,
Local Education Authorities, Mental Deficiency Authorities, Maternity and
Child Welfare Authorities and the Ministry of Pensions. Hospitals were not
approached. Out of a total of 781 epileptics reported there were 211 not in
institutions, 57 of whom were in receipt of out-door relief. Those not in
institutions were classified according to age and mental state as follows: ?
TABLE I.
Under School Age ...
School Age?
Attending Public Elementary
Schools
Not attending School ...
Over School Age
Imbecile or
Idiot.
7
11
19
M.D. or
F.M.
6
9
30
48
Mentally
Normal.
40
14
81
144
Total.
13
46
30
122
211
No reference is made to employment in the Surrey enquiry, but the
sources of the information make it likely that few epileptics in employment
would be reported. These 211 cases represent a proportion of .22 per 1,000
in the general population.
In the early part of this year, a wider enquiry into the number of
epileptics in the community, their mental condition, their social status and
their need for assistance was undertaken by the Central Association for Mental
Welfare, who liberated two trained social workers for the purpose. Certain
areas in the County of Essex were selected, with a total population of nearly
half a million. They included two boroughs, one new housing estate, one
rapidly developing country town and an urban area with a new building estate.
Cases were received from Public Assistance Committees with their hospitals
and institutions, Education and Health authorities, the Essex Voluntary Asso-
ciation for Mental Welfare, the Royal Eastern Counties Institution, certain
neurological and general hospitals and from private persons. As was to be
expected, the response to enquiry varied a good deal in different districts and
with different authorities, and the available information about individual cases
was not always accurate and complete. Indeed, the investigators modesdy
12 MENTAL WELFARE
claim that their report is only to be regarded as a body of miscellaneous inform-
ation which may serve as an indication of the state of affairs regarding epileptics
in general. Of the 565 cases reported, 125 were in institutions, and these may,
for our present purpose, be disregarded. The remainder of 440 living in the
community does not represent, for reasons already indicated, anything like the
total number of epileptics, which may very likely be twice as large. Even so,
it shows an incidence of over .9 per 1,000 of the population. At a conservative
estimate therefore there must be at least 50,000 epileptics living in the com-
munity in England and Wales.
An attempt is made to classify the 440 cases, according to the mental con-
ditions, into mentally deficient, unstable, sane and those concerning whose
mental state there was no information. The mentally defective group is well
defined, and consists almost entirely of cases already under voluntary or Statu-
tory supervision. The " unstable " group is not a homogeneous one. It includes
cases of marked mental deterioration, cases who showed the characteristic
irritability, egocentricity and quarrelsomeness associated with the " epileptic
temperament," and cases also with minor degrees of instability. That it is
most important to mark off a group like this, nobody who has any experience
of epileptics will deny. There must be very large numbers of epileptics who
are not gravely defective in intelligence, and who could most certainly not be
called insane, but who are so seriously handicapped by emotional instability
as to be complete social misfits, or, at least, to be a serious trial to those with
whom they live. Probably this group should be a great deal larger than is
indicated in the table. The " sane " group would perhaps be better desig-
nated mentally normal (after all what are the limits of normality?). This
group is, no doubt, far too large. Hospital and other records, painstakingly
complete with regard to family history, personal history and neurological signs,
often touch very lightly on a patient's mental state, and many of the mentally
normal should no doubt really be placed in the unstable, and possibly the
mentally defective group. The following table shows the classification by
mental condition, as well as age distribution.
TABLE II.
Age.
16 and under
17?50 ...
50 and over
Sane "
52
135
14
201
Unstable.
2
22
2
26
Mentally
Defective.
26
36
0
62
No inform-
ation.
44
91
16
151
Total.
124
284
32
440
This table comprises the facts and figures revealed by the investigation.
Far more important are the impressions gained by personal visits of the
MENTAL WELFARE 13
investigators to 57 of the cases under review. First and foremost among these
impressions was the exceptional warmth with which the visitors were in every
case received, a warmth which showed beyond doubt that there were difficulties
to be faced, problems to be solved, and that the patient, and more often his
near relatives, were delighted to have a disinterested visitor to whom they
might unburden their troubles and from whom they might get encourage-
ment, moral support and advice. Parents were especially grateful to have
someone with whom they could discuss problems of care, management and
employment, and as the enquiry went on, it became abundantly clear how
much need there was for a little common-sense advice. The simple but ever
present question of what risks the patient should take was answered in the
most diverse ways. Some children were kept always in bed, others continuously
and anxiously watched, and never allowed to leave the house alone even
though their fits were few and far between. Some mothers, on the other hand,
judged that the post of errand boy on a bicycle was quite a desirable one for
an epileptic, and one had allowed her son to become a painter with the result
that he had fallen 20 feet through a window.
Education often presents a difficult problem. As the law stands children
are only sent to residential schools for epileptics if they have fits so frequent
or so severe as to preclude their attendance at ordinary elementary schools.
In practice, this appears to mean, if they have had fits actually in school session.
Some parents however, are unwilling to send their children to residential
schools because they fear that associating with more defective children will be
bad for them. Local Education Authorities do not press the parents, because
the waiting lists are long, and the chances of admission remote. It is only fair
to state that during the last three or four years there has been improvement in
the residential schools. Lower grade defective children have been discharged or
refused admission, and the waiting lists have been reduced. An epileptic child
who can remain in an ordinary school may be better equipped, educationally
and socially, for after-life, but under medical supervision in a residential school,
he will stand a better chance of getting rid of his greatest social handicap, his
epilepsy, a chance that is often enhanced by removal from a home environ-
ment that is emotionally prejudicial to him. In any case, for the more severe
cases, a day school with the necessary coming and going, is out of the question.
To complete their task, the residential schools should provide after-care.
Advice and assistance in obtaining work on leaving school is urgently needed,
but to get suitable work for epileptics of any age is extremely difficult.
The survey suggests that the majority of adult epileptics are unemployed,
and bitterly resentful of the fact. The most pitiable cases visited were those
of men, apparently of normal intelligence, who were unable to get work either
because their doctors had forbidden them to work regularly although they
were told to " occupy themselves," or because their epilepsy was known and
employers were frightened of it. One man said " I am 25, strong enough to
lift 2 cwt. and never done a day's work in my life. It's a pity." Depression
irritability and resentment inevitably follow and in time turn an unemployed
into an unemployable and eventually perhaps into a serious social misfit This
14 MENTAL WELFARE
process of course takes place more readily and quickly in an epileptic than
in a normal person. To obtain, and to retain, work a man must make every
effort to conceal his complaint, and at some hospitals it is a common practice
for relatives to fetch the medicine, because the patients dare not ask for time
off, for fear their complaint became known. The report estimates that out
of the 440 cases there are between 60 and 70 men who need help in the matter
of employment. The lot of the women is not so difficult. Many marry and
have household duties, and anyway they can obtain safe and sedentary occupa-
tions more easily than men. Epileptics receiving out-relief are, like many
others, directly discouraged from earning a few shillings in their homes or by
part-time work. Says the report: ?
'' In connection with the part-time or home employment of epileptics in
receipt of Out-Relief, it is necessary to take into account that every penny
they earn is deducted from their relief. Unless epileptics can earn by a
home trade more than their relief, it will be to their detriment to engage in
one. This is productive of much apathy and discouragement and will
present a very serious obstacle in the way of providing occupation for those
who need and want it, but who dare not accept it. It is a regulation which
all chronic physical defectives suffer under, and it seems out of keeping
with the enlightened policy followed by Public Assistance Committees in
other directions. It does not seem just, that certain persons through no
fault of their own, should be compelled to live all their lives at the bare
subsistence level and be deterred from ' coming off the rates.' "
A truly deplorable state of affairs!
The whole problem of the epileptic in the community may be stated
as a problem in mental health, or rather in mental ill-health. And it may
be divided into two parts, the ill-health of the patient, and the ill-health of
his family. The ill-health of the patient is a long story which can only be
briefly summarized here. Associated with or due to his epilepsy there may
be mental defect of varying grade, a difficult temperament, uncertain memory,
periods of irritability or confusion preceding or following fits, slow or some-
times rapid mental deterioration. These are innate, part and parcel of his
complaint. But superimposed on them are all the mental strain and stresses
resulting from our failure to provide the epileptic with a proper environment.
First among them is want of occupation, and the enforced inaction it brings
with it. The anxiety of relatives with regard to fits and the distress of
relatives when fits occur are others. Greatest of all is the patient's realization
that he is, and is always destined to be, in some way an abnormal member
of his family circle and of society at large, if not a useless burden who would
be better out of the way. These added mental stresses are always in action.
It is a commonplace observation that want of occupation and unhappiness
increase the incidence of fits. More fits leave their inevitable mark on the
patient's mind, and so the vicious circle goes round and round, with destruc-
tion of personality as the end. Important, too, is the mental ill-health of the
family. Fits by themselves, involve no small strain. They are dramatic,
unpredictable and often very distressing to witness. " I never goes out,"
says one woman, " without being frightened I'll find him frizzlin' on the
MENTAL WELFARE 15
stove when I comes ome." But as will already have become evident, fits are
only part of the story. Periods of irritability and depression in the patient,
his anxiety about work and his resentment against society, must leave their
inevitable mark on those who have to live with him. And above all these,
there is often in the parents' mind the haunting fear as to what is going to
happen to the patient when they are no longer there. The family with an
epileptic in it has hard work to be a happy family. These fears, anxieties and
mental stresses in the home are very real things. They impressed themselves
forcibly upon the investigators who prepared this report, and, although I have
little experience of visiting epileptics in their homes, I can confirm the story
a hundred times over from letters and talks with patients of my own who have
gone out into the world.
The problems which arise from the Essex enquiry are all too clear. Less
clear is it how far and in what manner they can be solved. For some of the
cases, institutional treatment would, no doubt, be best. But, apart from the
institutions for the insane and mentally defective, there are less than 4,000 places
in special institutions in England, and at a modest estimate the problem we
are thinking of affects 50,000 people.
In the ideal State, any handicapped citizen capable of some work would
receive the standard weekly wage for the type of work he did, the employer
paying a share of the wage representing the value of his work, and the State
the remainder. In this way the worker would retain the incentive to work,
the status and the self-respect that belongs to a normal member of the com-
munity. This sounds Utopian, but if applied to certain epileptics on out-
relief, or maintained in colonies by Public Assistance Authorities, it would
cost the State no more, and would make the world of difference to the epileptic.
Short of this, there does seem to be a very real need for some sort of
organization, whose business it is to see that epileptics living at home receive
periodic visits from sympathetic and knowledgeable people. That the patients
and patients' friends would welcome the visitors has already been emphasized;
many hospital and other authorities have given the suggestion a most cordial
reception. Even if nothing definite could be done, the visits would probably
be well worth while. Troubles shared are troubles halved; the mere know-
ledge that there was someone in the background, someone disinterested and
sympathetic, in whom one could confide would be a help. But surely there
is much that can and should be done. The chronic epileptic, unemployed for
years, and with a mental horizon progressively narrowing, may be almost a
hopeless case, but the same need not be said of the epileptic children who,
year by year, are leaving our elementary and residential special schools. For
them the world has not yet become an unfriendly place: their minds are not
yet embittered by disappointment or dulled by inaction. Now is the time
for wise and sympathetic after-care. Want of such after-care has deprived
the work of the residential schools of much of its value. Of course employ-
ment will be the great difficulty. But with patience and perseverance, suit-
able or relatively suitable jobs can be found for many patients, by people with
local knowledge. Not everyone need ride a bicycle or tend a machine. I am
16 MENTAL WELFARE
often astonished at the large numbers of epileptics I have known, who keep
their jobs, fits and all, as domestic servants, gardeners, general labourers,
and even shop assistants and clerks. Still, for many, home trades will be
needed, and here it will be the business of the organization, or, better, its local
visitors, to know the kinds of home trade in being in any particular area,
and in time to compile a list of firms which could offer employment. Home
trades cover a considerable range, and probably the work involved in most
of them is unskilled, only requiring a moderate dexterity and of course, speed.
Where a little more skill is needed it should not be impossible to provide
training. In the London area, the Council for the Provision of Occupational
Industries among the Physically Handicapped is able and willing to help.
Elsewhere the requisite short and simple training course could surely be
arranged by the co-operation of voluntary associations for Mental Welfare or
others. In the case of children at residential schools, returning home to areas
wittaknown home trades, it should be possible for appropriate training to be
given towards the end of the school career. Frequent visits would be called
for in the first year or two of the patients after-school life. He would probably
need plenty of encouragement to stick to his home trade, for epileptics are not
very adaptable people, but they do respond to praise.
Aside from the visiting, an organization such as I have suggested, should
press, by itself and in combination with other organizations, for the amend-
ment of the out-relief regulations which, by demanding that any little sums
earned by the epileptic are deducted from his relief, remove all incentive to
work. Furthermore, it should press for convalescent and holiday homes where
epileptics might go. It is the rule, at present, for epileptics to be rigorously
excluded from these homes, but epileptics are taken for short holiday and
convalescent periods at the Chalfont Colony, Bucks. Co-operation with hos-
pitals would help the organization, the hospitals and the patient. The epileptic
needs advice and treatment for his fits, often for some form of mental abnor-
mality or defect, and above all for the social handicap to which his disease
gives rise. Efficient treatment demands that the three lines of approach should
be interdependent, not separate. A note from the hospital might be of the
greatest help in deciding what social advice to give a patient; a note in the
opposite direction giving information as to a patient's peculiarities, the home
circumstances, or the position with regard to work would inevitably enhance
the value of advice given at a hospital. Moreover, the work of neurological
hospitals for chronic cases of idiopathic epilepsy should be lightened. After
the first three or four times, the attendance of many of these cases could be
cut down to, say, one in every six months, if satisfactory arrangements could
be made for the provision of medicine and ordinary medical supervision near
the patient's home. The saving in time and money to patients and hospital
authorities would be considerable.
The Central Association for Mental Welfare have done well in making
this enquiry into the position of epileptics in the community. The report of
their workers, a model of careful observation, reflection and good expression,
discloses in no uncertain terms a large and difficult problem, which concerns
MENTAL WELFARE 17
a number of our fellow citizens. There are men, women and children who
are suffering from a complaint, often lifelong, that brings with it severe social
handicaps, that may affect the happiness and well-being of the patient's imme-
diate family, and ultimately, if severe and prolonged, may have a destructive
effect on the patient's personality. The suggestions made whereby the lot of
some of these patients may be ameliorated are neither definitive nor final.
They are only suggestions, commended to the careful consideration of men
and women of goodwill who have expert knowledge of epilepsy or who are
wise and experienced in dealing with social problems.
