Psychology of Feeling and Emotion
==================================

C. A.
Ruckmick, Ph.D. Pp. xiii, 529. McGraw-
Hill Publishing Co. London, 1936. 25/-.
Books dealing with feeling and emotion are
much needed in the present state of psycho-
logical knowledge, and this volume should find
a place in every college library.
The author has his own view of feeling, its
place in mental life and its relation to emotion.
His is a phylogenetic theory. He regards feel-
ing as primordial and consciousness as beginning
with subjective affective states. This primitive
consciousness is represented at the human level
by the states described as " pleasantness " and
" unpleasantness." Cognitive and effective
development have gone on together. He accepts
Coghill's view of development as " individua-
tion," organisation from within. For Coghill
progress in the motor and nervous system is
from the undifferentiated whole to the part
organised in relation to the whole, so for
Ruckmick there is advance in the affective life
from feeling connected with the whole organism
to feeling connected with the special senses in
their relation to the whole organism. At the
perceptual level of life a further stage of indi-
viduation is possible, emotions arise. In emotion
there is the subjective affective state, but there
is also the objective reference of the expressive
movements and of cognition, there is awareness
of a given situation. As the nervous system
grows in complexity, so the expressive move-
ments become more varied; while on the cogni-
tive side diversity of emotion arises with
diversity of meaning in the perceived situation-
With the development of ideational meanings
there will be an advance to sentiments. There
is continuous development in the wealth of
affective organisation. There is also degenera-
tion with a consequent relapse to more primitive
forms of affective experience. For instance,
Ruckmick regards emotional moods as less
organised than emotions.
The book, however, is far from being only afl
exposition of the author's own constructive con-
tribution to the theory of feeling. This is>
indeed, only set out after justice has been done
to the views of other psychologists. The student
will find an historical outline of the early doc-
trines of feeling, a full discussion of Wundt'5
famous tridimensional theory and of the criti'
cisms levelled at it. A statement of the various
attempts to classify the emotions leads up to a^
excellent account of the James, Lange and Serg1
doctrine of emotion. There is a report of tfte
later presentations of the problems which the
Lange-James view involved. Three chapter5
are devoted to the main directions of present'
day experimental work on the facial and bodi!)'
expression of emotion, including work with the
psycho-galvanic reflex. There is a chapter 011
MENTAL WELFARE 33
the use of the method of impression, and one
on the qualitative description of emotion.
The author checks his own theory by bring-
ing it into relation with the data of pathological
studies and by an examination of the principles
underlying psycho-analysis. An account of the
development of emotion in the child and of the
expression of emotion in animals brings out more
clearly the bearing of the phylo-genetic theory.
The volume concludes with a consideration of
the educational and cultural problems involved
!n any study of affective phenomena.
Appended to each chapter is a summary of
Jts contents, a series of review questions, and
references for further reading. These features
add greatly to the value of the book from a
student's point of view. " The Psychology of
Feeling and Emotion " is more than a text-book,
but it has the merits of a first-class text-book,
clearness of style and emphasis on key-points.
Beatrice Edgell.
