New Course for Workers in Occupation Centres and Institutions
================================================================

A Six Months' Course for those engaged in the training of mentally defective
children in institutions, occupation centres or in their own homes?or for those
intending to take up this work?is being instituted by the C.A.M.W., with the
approval of the Board of Control, to begin on January 10th, 1937.

The Course will be followed by a written and practical examination for a
Diploma which it is hoped will, in time, be accepted as one of the necessary
qualifications for those engaged in the teaching and training of defective children,
other than in schools under the Board of Education.

Success in the written examination, together with a favourable report from
the Director of the Course, will qualify for the Diploma which will not, however,
be awarded until the student has completed Twelve Months' satisfactory practical
work after qualification.

Mrs. Anderson, C.A.M.W. Organiser of Centres and Home Teachers, will
be in charge of the Course under the general direction of Miss Evelyn Fox,
and the syllabus will include lectures, discussions, handwork, musical and physical
work, with three days' practical experience each week in Occupation Centres
or with Home Teachers or in Social Work for defectives. The fee for the full
Course and for the Diploma Examination will be ?15 (non-resident).

Applications?which should be received not later than November 22nd, 1937?
are invited from candidates between the age of 20 and 40 (exceptional cases will
be considered on their individual merits), who can produce evidence of a good
education up to Secondary School standard. Some musical knowledge is essential
and students should also have an aptitude for handicrafts. Experience in Welfare
Centres, Play Centres, Nursery Schools, Institutions or Homes for Defectives,
or in the handling of young children generally, will be regarded as an additional
qualification for acceptance.

Further particulars can be obtained from the C.A.M.W., 24 Buckingham
Palace Road, S.W.I.

Birmingham Course for Teachers of Retarded Children
The C.A.M.W. is glad to record the organising of a Part-Time Training
Course for Teachers of Retarded Children by the Birmingham Education Com-
mittee, under the direction of Miss E. L. S. Ross, Inspector of Residential and
Special Schools.

The Course?which began on October 5th and will end on December 14th?
is being attended by 49 teachers from Birmingham and adjacent areas, the
majority of whom are working in Special Schools. Lectures are taking place
on Monday evenings, Tuesday all day, and on certain Saturday mornings, and in
addition to lectures and practical classes, arrangements are being made for
visits to schools. The lecturers include several of the Board of Education's
Inspectors, with Miss Evelyn Fox, Miss Lucy G. Fildes. Miss Mary MacTaggart
and others from London, in addition to local experts.

The Course is recognised by the Board of Education as being equivalent
to the Elementary Short Course organised by the C.A.M.W. on behalf of the
Board, and attendance at it will qualify teachers for admission to the Advanced
Course. It is of special interest as being the first of the provincial Courses whose
establishment is advocated by the C.A.M.W. for the purpose of meeting the
growing demand for training in the education of retarded children.

International Mental Hygiene Congress
----------------------------------------

The Second International Mental Hygiene Congress held in Paris from
July 19th to 24th, was attended by 300 delegates from 40 countries. The British
Government was represented by Sir Laurence Brock, Sir Hubert Bond, Dr. Kate
Fraser and Prof. D. K. Henderson. Dr. Hugh Crichton-Miller, Dr. Doris Odium
and Dr. J. R. Rees represented the National Council for Mental Hygiene, and
the C.A.M.W. was represented by Miss Evelyn Fox who contributed to the
discussions on " Legislation in relation to the Abnormal Child " and on " The
Social Protection and Assistance of Abnormal Delinquents and Criminals
The Congress was followed by an International Congress on Child Psychiatry.

Joint Register of Foster-Homes and Schools
--------------------------------------------

The Child Guidance Council and the C.A.M.W.?each of whom has for a
number of years been frequently called upon to provide information with regard
to homes for nervous, difficult and retarded children?have recently combined
their resources in this direction, and established a Joint Register.
Two Psychiatric Social Workers, one provided by each organisation, will
act as Registrars, and they are conducting an enquiry with the object of compiling
a comprehensive and reliable Register of foster-parents, private Homes and
Schools, etc., offering accommodation for the type of children concerned. Every
offer is to be personally investigated before being accepted, and the greatest care
will be taken to find the home most suitable for each individual case referred.
Despite the heavy expenses involved in maintaining a reliable service, an
annual subscription of only 10/- will be charged for the use of the Register for the
first experimental year. Private individuals, or others not wishing to become
regular subscribers, will be charged 2/6 for each application. For an additional
fee of 25/- a quarter per case, supervision visits by a psychiatric social worker
will be arranged in order to give advice and help in the child's handling and
management. Reports on these cases will be included in the supervision fee.
Enquiries for further information should be addressed to : The Registrars,
Joint Register of Foster-Homes and Schools for Nervous, Difficult and Retarded
Children, Child Guidance Council, Woburn House, Upper Woburn Place, London,
W.C.I.

It should, perhaps, be pointed out that this new departure will not in any way
lessen the activities of the Case Department of the C.A.M.W. which will continue
to assist Local Authorities and others in the placing of defective children and to
give advice with regard to mentally unstable and subnormal cases of all ages.

Child Guidance Clinic, Sheffield
----------------------------------

A Child Guidance Clinic was opened on 23rd August, 1937, under the
Sheffield Education Committee, to serve the districts of Sheffield, Doncaster,
Barnsley, Rotherham and certain portions of the West Riding. Although the
Clinic is being run by the Education Committees of these districts, the service of
the Clinic is open to all children in the area.

The Clinic is a large surburban house, about half of which has been decorated
and furnished for the purpose and the rest set aside to be used for expansion. It
is in a quiet residential area but is within easy access to the centre of Sheffield
and the rest of the districts which it serves.

The children's playrooms are equipped with a suitable variety of play materials
for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. These include a miniature stage and a
large outside sand platform with buckets and spades, a water trough for boats and
other floating toys.

The Staff consists of the Medical Director (Dr. F. J. S. Esher), a part-time
psychiatrist (Dr. E. F. Skinner), a Psychologist (Miss K. M. Holt) and a Social
Worker (Miss H. H. Riggall).

The opening of the Clinic has aroused an extraordinary amount of interest in
the area, which has given great encouragement to its promoters.

Q. Camp's First Annual Report
------------------------------

The first year's experimental work of the first Q Camp, established " for the
training in character and citizenship of young men who are socially inadequate,
are in danger of breaking the law or in some cases may have actually done so, is
interestingly described by the Camp Chief (Mr. W. David Wells) in the Annual
Report of the Committee.

Since its opening, on May 9th, 1936, the Camp has received 25 men of whom
14 were still there at the time of writing the Report. During the year, five men
were discharged as being unsuitable for treatment, and six left voluntarily.
The Camp staff (consisting of the Chief, a Deputy Chief, and three Student
Helpers) has had to face many vicissitudes and the complete freedom allowed in
the form of self-government decided upon, resulted at first, in abortive experi-
ments being tried, and in crudities and disharmonies, grumbling and resentments,
inevitable in any community until a communal spirit is born. No spectacular
success is claimed by the Committee during this first experimental year, but some
measure of achievement can be recorded not only in the experience gained, but
in the construction of camp buildings and equipment, and in the cultivation of an
acre and a half of land. With regard to work, an interesting development occurred
as the year wore on :?

" The Camp Committee being dissatisfied with the sporadic way in which
some of their fellows worked, asked members to make a definite undertaking to
work so many hours a day and only those so ' contracting in' are to be given
any work to do. Some felt unable to give this undertaking, but they soon
discovered that some form of occupation was preferable to idleness."

The sub-committee responsible for the selection of applicants (consisting
of three medical psychologists, the head master of a school for difficult children,
and the Camp Chief) is kept in close touch with the progress made by each
individual, and where necessary, men are brought to London for psychological
treatment.

The cost per head has been found to work out at 27/6 a week and as the
average weekly payment made by members is not more than 18/-, and much
additional expenditure is due for camp buildings, etc., the Committee state in
their Report that they need ?1,000 a year for the next three years, if the experi-
ment is to be developed.

National Special Schools Union
-------------------------------

The Seventeenth Biennial Conference of the National Special Schools Union
is to be held in London at the County Hall, on November 25th, 26th and 27th.
The programme includes short papers read by eight teachers ' young in Special
School work ', on " What 1 Want to Know " with replies given by various experts.
Other subjects to be discussed are " The Hospital School ", " The Outlook of
the Cripple " and " The Open Air School ".

An exhibition, illustrating the work of the Special Services of the London
County Council will be held during the Conference.
Tickets, price 10/6 each, to include the cost of papers presented, can be
obtained from the Hon. Secretary of the Conference, Mr. L. C. Beber, St. Hubert's
E.B. & J.B. School, Brook Green, London, W.6.

Backwardness in London's Elementary Schools
--------------------------------------------

In May, 1935, the Chief Inspector of the Education Department of the London
County Council set up a Committee of Inspectors to investigate and report
" whether any changes in the organisation of elementary schools should be made
in the interests of backward pupils and the findings of this Committee have
recently been published.*

The Report contains sections on : "General Aspects of the Problem", "Recent
Movements and Measures", "The Small Class and the Teacher" and " The
Organisation of Small Classes in London" with appendices on "Causes of Back-
wardness", "Other Local Education Authorities and the Problem" and " Pre-
liminary Results of Special Medical Inspection".

The Committee, for the purposes of this enquiry, based their interpretation of
"backwardness" on that used by Prof. Burt, and have assumed that the children
concerned have educational ratios of between 70 and 85, whether the cause of
their retardation is to be found in intrinsic or extrinsic factors. Accepting Prof.
Burt's estimate of the incidence of such backwardness as being 10 per cent, of
the school population, they point out that in view of the fact that about 30 per cent,
of children in London schools pass into the secondary and central schools at the
age of 11 plus, it is clear that the 70 per cent, passing into senior schools at this
age will contain, on an average, 10 backward children per 70 or about 14 per cent.?
a considerable increase. Reorganisation at the age of 11 plus has thus "brought
the problem of backwardness to light and compelled its widespread extent to be
recognised".

In dealing with these children, the supreme importance of the personality
and attitude of the teacher is stressed. From the teacher the work demands, in
the Committee's view :

"imagination and initiative, an intimate knowledge of children, a capacity for
intelligent experiment and a readiness to criticise and amend procedure in the
light of experience,"
and some indication of the general ideas underlying the educational treatment
of backwardness is given.

The Committee recommend that as a beginning, special classes should be
formed forthwith in departments where there are enough children to justify the
formation of one or more classes of 30. It discusses in the Report how this can
be done without involving the appointment of an additional teacher, and after
analysing the present distribution of backward children in the Junior Schools,
recommends that special classes?to be known as " Experimental Classes "?should
be formed in 100 schools out of the 1,008 attended by junior children. With
regard to Senior Schools, it is recommended that in 100 out of the 300 that are
separately organised there should be established experimental classes, probably
two or three being necessary in each school.

In Appendix B is given a summary of 90 replies received to a Circular sent
out to Education Authorities asking for information as to their administrative
provision for dull and backward children.

* London County Council Report of a Committee of Inspectors on Backwardness in Elemen-
tary Schools. P. S. King & Son Ltd. 6d.

Birmingham After-Care Committee
--------------------------------

This year the Report of the Birmingham After-Care Committee deals only
with boys and girls who left the Special Schools during the years, 1934, 1935
and 1936 and who, therefore, are all under the age of 19.

Of these 953 children, details are given in a statistical table; 496 are in
employment of some kind, the average wage earned by the boys being 17s. 8d. and
by the girls, 15s. 4d. Of 34 boys over 14 excluded from schools as " ineducable ",
22 were in work, and of 33 girls excluded, 16 were working.

An analysis has been made as to the nature of the employment found in
the case of 248 boys and 210 girls. Of the boys, 40 per cent, were in some type
of engineering work, 16 per cent, in outdoor work and 11 per cent, in unskilled
factory work. Of the girls, 27 per cent, were in engineering work, 21 per cent,
in assembling and warehouse work, 19 per cent, in factory work (non-metal),
13 per cent, in press work, and 10 per cent, in electro-plate and jewellery work.
Fewer than 3 per cent, were employed in any type of domestic service.

Some instances are given of high wages earned, e.g., ?2 4s. Od. by a lad of
17 doing piece-work on a lathe, whose mental level when tested at 14 by Perfor-
mance Tests was about 9| years, but who had made good progress at school in
manual subjects. The second highest wage (<?2) was earned by a boy of nearly
16 employed in a brickworks. At the age of 14, his mental level judged by
Performance Tests, was 8, but by the time he left school at 15? he was described
as a " sensible boy " doing well in practical subjects (book crafts, leatherwork and
woodwork). The highest wage earned by a girl was <?1 10s. Od., working "on a
machine". On approaching 15, her mental level on Performance Tests was 10.
Amongst the 537 boys with which the Report deals there were only eight cases
of delinquency during the year, in three of which the culprits were under
Guardianship after having been in Institutions.

In addition to its After-Care visiting, the Committee is responsible for four
Occupation Centres for ineducable children catering for a total number of 84,
and one Industrial Centre for unemployed youths attended, during the year, by
a maximum number of 15. A scheme of Home Teaching for defectives unable to
attend an Occupation Centre is also carried on with very happy results.

Defectives Run a Circus
-----------------------

From the Rev. Brother Superior of Mount Olivet Certified Institution,
Frensham, Surrey, we have received an account of an entertaining and edu-
cationally valuable enterprise to which we are glad to draw the attention of our
readers.

The thirty high grade defective boys in the Institution, under the direction
of the Brothers, have produced an amateur Circus giving performances of such
merit that they have attracted large audiences, a total of 8,000 people having
attended since the inception of the scheme.

" Large numbers," the Rev. Brother Superior writes " have gone away without
ever knowing that the performers were defectives, while others have expressed
complete amazement upon being informed. Some visitors asked whether they are
public school boys; others enquire whether they are training for the priesthood
at the Monastery, but all resolutely decline to believe that they are defectives !
The performances have even astonished 'hard boiled' professional Circus people
who have been loud in their congratulations."

The idea arose out of the problem of sustaining the older lads' interest in
physical culture, and it was as a physical training display " disguised as a Circus "
that the first performance was given. This proved so successful that it was
decided to develop the scheme still further, and seven ponies were bought and
trained by the boys until they were able to give performances equalling those
produced by professionals. The attention to detail, the regularity and the endless
patience required in this process were found to have a high educational value, as
also the training involved in preparing the juggling and balancing acts, the trapeze
and flying-ring exhibits, and the " turns " of comedy acrobats and clowns. For
the boys not able to aspire to these achievements, there are opportunities to play
their part as ring attendants (in smart uniforms), or as grooms and helpers
behind the scenes.

Most of the properties used are made in the carpenters' shop by the boys
themselves, and they also undertake the publicity work by means of a small coach
drawn by Shetland ponies which, in fancy dress, they escort through the town.
Summing up, the Rev. Brother Superior writes :?

"The Circus provides useful training and interest all the year round. Prepara-
tions naturally have to begin months before a season is contemplated. The boys
are taught to look ahead and they learn responsibility. Apart from their own
individual acts, they have to work together as a team. It gives them confidence
and self reliance, and any sense of inferiority is dealt a death blow by the
knowledge that they have succeeded in producing a show which has received
so much general and unstinted praise. On the other hand, a visit to Bertram
Mills' Olympia Circus effectively kills conceit by showing them how much
further they have to travel along the road of circus fame ! "

The First Year of a Special School
------------------------------------

In April, 1936, the Talbot School, Southall, was opened by the Middlesex
Education Committee, for mentally defective children, and in a Report presented
to the Committee its Psychiatrist, Dr. Mary Ruddy, describes the work that has
been done there and sets out the results so far achieved.

The Report should convince even the most sceptical of the value of a Special
School and of its capacity to bring happiness and fulfilment into the lives of
the children who are taught there. With imagination and understanding, Dr. Ruddy
shows how the heavy cloud of discouragement and failure which surrounds the
defective child struggling to keep up with the impossible pace of his normal
brothers, is dispersed when he is brought into an environment in which his
limitations are understood, his difficulties patiently explained and his achievements
given their true value.

" The change that these conditions have wrought in them " writes Dr. Ruddy,
" have been little short of marvellous. Every child in the school, whatever
increase in actual mental growth it may or may not have achieved, has developed
a personality and is at least happy. Once inside the doors of the school, and there is
an atmosphere of gaiety and fun, exuberance of spirits and an enthusiasm for
work and play which is at least equal to that which exists in an ordinary school.
The pupils are very friendly to the visitor, and are most anxious to share and
enjoy with anyone the new and exciting adventure that learning and making
has become."

One urgent need remains, Dr. Ruddy points out, to complete the good work
that the school is doing, viz., the establishment of a " really hard-working after-
care Committee whose members will undertake to help with the needs of the
child in finding work and getting established in life ".

Scotland's New Act for Defective Children

With the passing of the Education (Scotland) Act, 1936, it has become a duty
of Education Authorities?instead of only a permissive power?to make special
provision " either in schools or otherwise "* for the education of mentally and
physically defective children between the ages of 5 and 16. The legislative
position in Scotland with regard to the responsibility of L.E.A.s for educable
defectives is thus brought into line with that which has existed in this country
since the passing of the Education (Defective and Epileptic Children) Act, in 1914.
A Circular (No. 105) recently issued by the Scottish Education Department,
calls the attention of Education Authorities to their new responsibilities and
discusses ways of meeting them.

The importance of thorough Ascertainment in the case of mentally defective
children is urged, being described as :?

" the essential basis upon which to build " and " a fundamental duty which should
be completely discharged even though actual provision for the special instruction
of the children may not be immediately possible."

In this connection, a reference is made to the importance of a knowledge of mental
testing on the part of every School Medical Officer.

Dealing next with the question of the type of provision which should be
made for children ascertained, two alternatives are pointed out : (1) to send the
child to a residential institution or (2) to provide for him in a special school or
class. Institutional accommodation is still insufficient, and, therefore, it is the
second alternative which is recommended for general use, and the value of
special class education is discussed and explained. With regard to the training
of teachers for this work, it is suggested that advantage should be taken of the
three months' course provided at Jordanhill Training College, Glasgow.
The subject of Notification and the provision of voluntary After-Care for
children whom it is not necessary to notify, are dealt with in conclusion, and
Authorities are reminded of their power, under Section 9 (4) of the Education
(Scotland) Act, 1918, to make financial contributions to After-Care Committees.
The use of this power is, it may be noted, all the more urgent in view of the
fact that there is in Scotland no provision for Statutory Supervision such as
that made under the English Mental Deficiency Acts.

Speech Training and Child Guidance
-----------------------------------

From Miss Marion IVIiyte, Social Worker at the Cheltenham Child Guidance
Clinic, we have received the following account of developments that have resulted
from the Clinic's work:?

An interesting development has taken place in Cheltenham, in large part
due to the activities of the Cheltenham and County (Voluntary) Child Guidance
Clinic. The Clinic opened in May, 1935, and the Social Worker was appointed
in September, 1935. The services of two voluntary Speech Trainers were offered
in January, 1936. The Quarterly report of March, 1936, states that " the Clinic
is demonstrating needs "?using as illustration a case of untreated speech defect
giving rise to serious behaviour problem in later school life, and calling attention
to thirty-three cases of major and minor speech defect culled from one-third of
the Cheltenham Elementary Schools.

* Italics ours. This is an interesting innovation.
---------------------------------------------------

The Clinic, with these two voluntary helpers, dealt with as many of these
children as possible. The service was so popular with the schools that by
December, 1936, forty-three children had been referred specifically for speech
difficulties and there was a reserve list of about thirty as well. This same report
incorporates an expression of opinion from the Speech Trainers, " that the
limited service the Clinic can give in remedial speech work is insufficient to cope
with the incidence of speech defect in Cheltenham and County. Most of the
children would require daily or at least twice weekly treatments. Where there
is concentration in one particular school, it might be more convenient for the
Speech Trainers to go there."

At this point the matter was also taken up by the Head Teachers' Association
who made representations to the Education Committee as well as those made by
the Clinic. The outcome has been that a survey of speech defects in Cheltenham
Elementary schools was made and some one hundred and fifty were listed. Miss
Mary Stuart Phillips, A.S.S.T. (voluntary worker to the Clinic) has been appointed
Speech Therapist, as from September 1st, 1937, under the Education Committee
at a salary of ?200, four days per week for the first (experimental) year, subject
to revision. Thus from voluntary work, a state-aided social service can develop.
In this case it has taken a little under two years to accomplish the appointment of
the Speech Trainer.

Occupation Centre Developments in Cardiff
------------------------------------------

In 1925, the Cardiff Mental Deficiency Committee first established an Occu-
pation Centre which for eleven years has been carried on in premises that were
generally recognised as being by no means ideal for the purpose. In March, 1936,
the Committee?after much searching?discovered a large property in a residential
area which seemed eminently suited for its purpose. Unfortunately, however,
such strong opposition to the proposal was put forward by local residents that
it had to be abandoned.

Faced with this difficulty, the Committee gave up the attempt to acquire
new premises in a central or a residential area, and have recently acquired a
site on the outskirts of the City where the question of opposition by residents will
not arise. The cost of the proposed building (to accommodate 100 defectives)
is estimated at ?4,000 and will comprise a Cookery and Laundry Room, a Manual
Instruction Room, a Hall and Practical Room with cloakrooms, domestic offices,
etc., a Staff Room and a Sitting Room to be used for Housewifery purposes.
A playground and garden are also to be provided. The scheme still awaits approval
by the Board of Control but will be proceeded with as soon as possible.
For the above information we arc indebted to Councillor T. J. Mullins, Chairman of the
Cardiff Mental Deficiency Committee, zvho has been for many years an enthusiastic supporter
of any zvork making for the ivclfarc of defectives.

" Modern Educational Experiments "
------------------------------------

This feature is omitted from the present issue, but it will be resumed in
the January number when we hope to publish an interesting contribution which
has reached us from the Head Master of the Spurley Hey Central School, Rother-
ham, on his " Opportunity Classes " for retarded senior boys.

Mr. H. R. Henry, whose Backward Class in an L.C.C. School was described
in our last issue, asks that a mistake by which the Head of the School was
referred to in the masculine gender may be corrected. The Head in question is
a woman, and to her we tender our apologies.

Special Schools and Certification
----------------------------------

In his Report for 1936, Dr. Henry Herd, School Medical Officer, Man-
chester, refers to the much discussed question of the abolition of certification as
a condition of admission to Special Schools.

" It is a matter of regret", he says, " that in most parts of the country there is
still no adequate educational provision for children who are too sub-normal
mentally to benefit by education in ordinary schools, and yet are not sufficiently
sub-normal to justify their certification as Mentally Defective. It is true that
recent educational developments have made it possible to deal satisfactorily with
the less sub-normal children in ordinary schools, but there is a very substantial
number for whom this is not sufficient, but who are denied the special training
they require. The only method by which this anomaly can be overcome,
apparently, is to abolish the necessity for certification as defective as a condition
of special education and to make the criterion for admission to ' Special Schools'
mainly an educational one, thus extending the benefits of those schools beyond
the class to which they are at present restricted, to other children similarly
but less markedly retarded in their mental and educational development."
This matter is one of the issues still under discussion by the Committee on
the Education and Notification of Defective Children, set up by the C.A.M.W.
at the end of 1935, and so highly controversial has it proved to be that so far
no agreed opinion has been reached.

C.A.M.W. Holiday Homes
----------------------

The four Holiday Homes run under the auspices of the C.A.M.W. have
had a record season. Over 3,000 guests have been received this year, sent for
periods, generally of a fortnight, by thirty-one Local Authorities and Institutions,
and by the Visiting Committees of twelve Mental Hospitals.

The Holiday Homes Committee are gratified to see that parties are returning
year after year, and that their numbers are increasing; and they are especially
glad to know that whilst in 1936 only two parties of Mental Hospital patients
visited the Holiday Homes, in 1937, we had the pleasure of receiving twenty-three
parties from twelve Mental Hospitals.

The Homes at Bognor, Rhyl and Seaford have been full throughout the
season, and the new house at Redcar has also made a most successful beginning.
The many appreciative letters received from Medical Superintendents and from
the patients themselves show how much much the change from ordinary institution
and hospital routine is enjoyed. With only a very few exceptions, the conduct of
the patients sent has been exemplary.

The houses have been improved in a number of ways; the gardens have
been developed and have provided much pleasure; through the kindness of friends,
wireless has been installed at Seaford and at Redcar, and all the homes now
have piano, gramophone and wireless. Equipment for outdoor games such as clock
golf and croquet, is still needed and gifts would be welcomed.

The Committee would welcome small parties of from ten to twelve during
the winter months; individual convalescent patients can also be received at Rhyl
and at Redcar. Application should be made to the Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24
Buckingham Palace Road, S.W., and not to individual homes.

Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency
------------------------------------------------------

In its Third Annual Report recently issued, the Institute for the Scientific
Treatment of Delinquency, record a considerable development of their work,
largely made possible through the proceeds of a Dinner held at Claridge's Hotel
in March, 1936, which raised the substantial sum of ?3,050.

Plans for the development of the psychopathic clinic were thereupon evolved,
the scheme to include the appointment of a paid General Secretary, a combined
Case Secretary and Social Worker, and a paid Medical Registrar. In this
scheme a beginning has been made, but owing to the difficulty of finding the
premises essential to its adequate operation,, progress has not been rapid. A
late note added to the Report contains, however, the good news that in May, 1937,
satisfactory premises were at last secured.

At the Clinic the number of new patients was 132, compared with 116 in
1935 and 71 in 1934. At the end of 1936, there were seven cases on the waiting
list, and it is hoped that when the services of a Medical Registrar are available,
more prompt facilities for treatment may be forthcoming so that the likelihood of
a patient repeating his offence during the waiting period may be lessened. To this
end also, the necessity of an In-Patient Clinic is pointed out, with an Observation
Centre for purposes of research into the prevention of crime. ;

There are two groups of patients presenting special difficulties :
(1) Those who discharge themselves at the end of a period of probation before
treatment is completed.

(2) Those who are obliged to terminate treatment because of the impossibility
of finding suitable employment.

A further difficulty is presented by patients who return to prison before
treatment is completed?although since the Clinic started only eight relapses
of this kind have occurred.

The majority of the patients referred continue to be those who have committed
offences connected with sex or with theft, but this is attributed to the influence
of social rather than medical considerations on the part of those referring cases.
It is hoped in a subsequent Report to publish the results of a research analysis
into methods of treatment used in a small number of selected representative types,
and several other lines of research are also being followed up.

The new address of the Institute is : 8 Portman Street, London, W.l. Tele-
phone : Mayfair, 8311-2
