Research in Dementia Praecox
==============================

By Nolan
D. C. Lewis, M.D. National Committee
for Mental Hygiene, New York. $1.50.
This is a book by an American author,
Professor N. C. D. Lewis, of Columbia
University. It is of a quite unusual kind
and is the result of the author's attempt to
collect the findings of research work done
into the condition during the last fifteen
years. Its publication in America was largely
made possible by the beneficience of the
Scottish Rite Masons. In the prefact it is
suggested that it is written both for those
with and without scientific training. This
seems rather doubtful, for it seems specially
meant for advanced students and research
workers in psychiatry. For the latter, in
fact, such a book would seem to be a most
helpful, if not an almost indispensable, con-
tribution.
One of the many difficulties encountered
by psychiatrists when setting out to do
research along any original lines is the really
serious one of trying to discover all the
work that has been done and published
already. Hitherto the choice has been either
to spend years in collecting such material or
to risk duplication of work already done.
Professor Nolan was particularly impressed
by the amount of duplication of this kind
and by the great lack of proper co-ordina-
tion, when visiting many research centres?
he visited over two hundred such centres?
in the course of his preparation of the book.
Dementia praecox, if not the greatest, is
certainly one of the three main scourges in
our speciality, and every psychiatrist will
heartily endorse the author's plea to get
research into this mental disease placed on
a sound footing. This book sets a splendid
example, for by summarising the work
already done and by making suggestions along
which lines further research can be usefully
continued, it makes a splendid starting off
place for the research worker.
The arrangement of the book follows con-
ventional lines. Including an introduction, it
has seven sections dealing with the clinical
features, etiological aspects, structure
changes, diagnosis, therapeutics, and final
conclusions. Under each heading, the author
briefly summarises the work that has been
done in that particular field, and indicates
where further research is much needed by
asking pertinent questions, which often
strike one as being really fundamental. At
the end of each section is collected a very
full bibliography arranged chronologically
under the years in which reports on work
done appeared in the various journals. The
bibliography, indeed, appears quite exhaus-
tive, roughly filling a third of the pages of
the book. No attempt is made to evaluate
the relative importance of the different con-
tributions and although at first thought it
might appear desirable to do so, it is obvious
that it is a more valuable record as it is,
being now a collection of the work done, and
not just someone's opinion of that work.
In the introduction, which briefly deals
MENTAL WELFARE 129
with modern trends in research, the author
has several statistical tables roughly showing
the source of the material he has collected.
Every country contributes its share, but it
is impossible not to notice how little research
into this condition is apparently going on in
this country, not only as compared with
America, but also with Continental countries.
The fact that our research workers may be
more reluctant to get into print until they
feel they have some really valuable contri-
bution, only partially accounts for this.
Under the other sections one is very much
impressed by the author's facility in making
a coherent, interesting and well-knit book
from so much diverse matter. It is very
apparent that his study of the disease has
been profound, and that his suggestions for
further work are wise and necessary, being
based on a complete master}' of its problems
and difficulties. Perhaps, however, it is the
last section that one finds most arresting.
After giving his ideal plan for procedure
in psychiatric research, which Professor
Nolan himself suggests may be too Utopian
to be put into practice at once, he formulates
a scheme on quite simple and practical lines
which can be followed immediately.
It is a book which should certainly be in
the hands of all those who are devoting
themselves to the study of insanity and to
the care and treatment of mental patients.
It raises the hope that an equally authori-
tative psychiatrist will do the same work for
other forms of mental disorder. By its very
nature, of course, it is the kind of book that
must be brought up to date every few
years, and as this possibility seems to depend
very much on the reception the present
volume receives, it is sincerely hoped that
the book achieves the popularity it deserves.
This would enable it to become a recognised
and frequently revised guide to research in
dementia praecox.
Neil Macleod.
