By Violet Vulliamy
====================
,
Principal, Hampstead School of Physical Education
The place of Physical Education in the general education of mentally
deficient children, has yet to be fully recognised. The normal child, given
average health and opportunity, will develop the necessary ability for the
simple skills without special training; he will have enough spring to jump off
and on a bus, enough balance and co-ordination to climb over a high fence, or
to stand on one leg to tie up his shoe lace?enough postural sense to stand and
move without being conspicuous. The mentally deficient child (limiting the
use of this term to denote the imbecile and low-grade feeble-minded), on the
other hand, requires efficient teaching step by step, if he is to learn to use
his full powers and to take his part in the everyday physical activities of the
ordinary citizen. The basic skills, which are the birthright of every child:
standing, sitting, walking, running, skipping, galloping, swinging by the arms,
balancing, climbing, jumping, etc., frequently lie dormant or only partially
developed in the child who is mentally deficient. Careful training from the
earliest years is necessary if the disabilities and deformities arising from
Neglected movement are to be prevented. This need for physical education in
102 MENTAL WELFARE
the widest sense, thus begins in infancy and continues throughout all the
growing years.
The most ideal scheme of physical education for the mentally defective
child would therefore comprise many forms of training in movement. A large
institution or occupation centre might, for instance, provide for the following
range of physical activities with individual coaching as required. (Class physical
exercise lessons in small selected groups. General activity exercises and
games in larger groups) :?
Dancing.?Ann Driver Music and Movement
Very simple Rhythmic Dancing
Easy Country Dancing, in selected groups.
Remedial Exercises.?Simplified and taught as required.
Games and Sports.?Of a simple kind, e.g., running, high jump, rope skipping,
easy ball games, in selected groups.
Every mentally deficient child presents an individual problem to the
teacher of Physical Education. Unfortunately such specialised care is usually
impossible owing to large numbers. Careful grouping, therefore, becomes a
matter of greatest importance, if more than mere physical exercise is intended.
It is obvious from the outset that the usual age grouping is unsuitable for
mentally deficient children. Indeed, one of the greatest difficulties in dealing
with these children lies in their marked individual variance; they can neither
be grouped entirely according to age, ability, or growth, nor does interest
necessarily keep pace with age. Yet all these four factors, age, ability, growth
and interest, must be taken into consideration in any careful grading. Probably
the most satisfactory solution lies in arranging the main grouping according
to age and growth, with sub-divisions in each main group for finer grading
according to ability and interest. The scheme for a large institution for
mentally deficient children would thus include the following six main groups
with sub-divisions:
I.?Infants?under 7 years, mixed classes.
A group, physical ability age 4- 5 years
B group, physical ability age 2- 3 years
C group, physical ability age 0- 2 years
II.?Pre-Adolescents?Juniors, Boys and Girls, 7-14 years.
A group, physical ability age 5-10 years
B group, physical ability age 2- 4 years
C group, physical ability age under 2 years
III.?Adolescents?Seniors, Boys 12-14 years; Girls 12-18 years.
A group, physical ability age 8-12 years
B group, physical ability age 4- 7years
C group, physical ability age under 4 years
IV.?Young Adults?Boys, 14-25 years; Girls 18-30 years.
A group
B group
MENTAL WELFARE 103
V.?Adults.
VI.?Physically Defective Children.
A group, children with marked postural defects requiring some
individual coaching
B group, children with structural defects or paralysis, requiring
adapted remedial exercises.
Progression, which is the keynote of all work in Physical Education for
mentally deficient children can only be secured if some such grouping is pro-
vided. The mentally deficient child can be trained to use his mind with his
muscles to his fullest ability, if the work is so graded that he is neither dis-
couraged by exercises beyond his capacity, nor bored or deadened by exercises
which appear to him as purposeless and dull.
In the above table the term " physical ability age " has been used to
denote the standard of work possible for the particular group, but it must be
recognised that mentally defective children require specially adapted work,
owing mainly to their limited intelligence and lack of co-ordination. This
is clearly shown when any large class containing a few sub-normal children
is observed. These children are at once noticeable through their peculiarity of
posture or movement?and a more careful survey would probably reveal most
of the usual difficulties of the mentally defective child?notably, bad posture,
lack of spring, uncertain rhythm, difficult co-ordination and balance, slow res-
ponse and feeble muscle sense. The performance of the exercises by the more
normal children would also emphasise many of the special difficulties of the
mentally defective and retarded child, there would be the child who never uses
his ankles, who runs, jumps and walks with a flat-footed gait, the child who
cannot skip, the child without muscle sense who distorts all movements, the
child who cannot maintain a set rhythm, and many others with awkward and
unnatural habits of movement and posture. It is evident, therefore, that the
Physical Education of the mentally deficient child must differ in many respects
from that of the normal child. The organisation of the work must allow for
more individual attention, and the actual class teaching must also vary in many
essential features, particularly as regards pace and choice of exercises. The
pace of the class must be slower, but at the same time interest must be main-
tained by ingenious slight alterations in commands and directions, and by
suitable adaptations of the exercises to the intelligence of the class. The
exercises also must be kept simple, though varied, for it must be admitted
that in the case of defective children it is always a question of suiting the
exercise to the child, rather than fitting the child to the exercise. It is, for
example, deplorable to find mentally deficient children with poor muscle sense
and co-ordination, struggling continually with Indian Club exercises, when
they are still unable to perform such simple activities of child life as running
lightly, landing from a spring without a jerk, or even catching and throwing
104 MENTAL WELFARE
a ball. It is these elementary activities which are required. Every exercise
should, in fact, be used to serve its purpose for the healthy development of
skill and strength.
Much valuable help can be given in this respect by the non-specialist
teacher through the use of general activity lessons. These should follow a
definite scheme, based on the needs of the mentally deficient child, and the
exercises should be selected to give as wide and useful a physical education as
possible. The effect of the exercises on the growth, intelligence, skill and
emotional development of the children should also be observed and considered.
The scheme of such a general activity lesson, and the order of the time-
table might develop along the following lines :?
I. Introductory Exercises
A. Posture Correction from side and front view, e.g., ' John is very
tall to-day' or ' Can you see over the head of the boy in front of you?'
This correction should be very short and should serve as an opportunity for
the teacher's observation of the children's bearing and carriage.
B. Easy activity exercises, based on natural movements?zvalking,
running, galloping, skipping, jumping, etc.
II. Floor Exercises: sitting or lying
Trunk mobility movements, exercising chiefly the abdominal and lateral
trunk muscles.
All trunk movements constitute a real problem for teachers of mentally
deficient children, owing partly to their difficulty in localising movement, and
partly to their dislike of unusual or uncomfortable positions. Floor exercises
are generally most satisfactory in this respect, as they help to localise the
movement and are particularly useful for the practice of exercises which
strengthen the abdominal wall. The non-specialist teacher will usually find
it wiser to avoid giving trunk movements from a standing position with the
exception of exercises in the forward stoop position or very simple side
flexions.
III. Class Practice Exercises
A. Dance movements with music. Rhythmic jumps.
Many mentally deficient children can move gracefully and rhythmically,
and most can imitate a rhythm or keep time to music. It does not, however,
follow that they are " musical " in the true sense of the word?in fact the
majority have little appreciation of the full significance of rhythm.
Some form of training in music and rhythm is, however, essential, but this
can only be given by teachers who are themselves musical, other teachers
MENTAL WELFARE 105
will need to fall back on " rhythmic jumps." These are usually much enjoyed
by mentally defective children, if given in a very simple form. They are
frequently placed at the beginning of the table, but are here moved from their
customary place to serve as a break, after the rather less interesting floor
exercises.
B. Nezv Exerciscs taught or practised, usually arm, or combined arm
and leg movements.
The mentally defective child's movement is generally both limited and
awkward, owing mainly to a lack of incentive, initiative and experience. The
A B C of movement, mastered by a normal child in pre-school days is often
very deficient in defective children. This is amply shown in most of the
reports of the early history of these children, which frequently give " walked
late " as a special feature of the physical and mental condition of the child.
Such a report is indicative of the general lack of experience of movement
usually found in mentally defective children. It is thus imperative that all
physical training should aim at increasing the child's knowledge of movement.
The fundamental movements of everyday life must be mastered and the child's
repertoire enlarged if he is to gain freedom and ease of movement. This can
best be effected by actual careful teaching of new movements requiring con-
centration and skill.
Easy leg and arm movements are included under this heading.
IV. Group Practice Exercises (section work)
Practice in groups, of spring and balance exercises.
This section group work serves two purposes, it gives opportunity for the
free practice of balance and spring exercises, and at the same time it allows
opportunity for individual coaching. In order to keep up the pace of the class,
the spring exercises are used as a break after the new exercises, which require
more mental effort.
V. Athletics and Sports Coaching
Skipping with a rope. Ball exerciscs, simple sport activities, etc.
This rather high sounding name is purposely used to emphasise the neces-
sity of giving to the mentally defective child a share in the ordinary play activi-
ties of the normal school child. Every mentally defective child, for example,
should be able to run lightly, to jump over a low rope easily, to balance walk
a plank or bench, to jump a narrow ditch, and to play sensibly with a ball. Many
Mentally defective children, however, lack the determination and initiative
required to get over the initial difficulties of even these simple activities and
are, therefore, dependent upon help and training in the early stages. It is only
necessary to watch trained, mentally defective children playing with a ball
106 MENTAL WELFARE
or skipping, to realise how much these simple sports contribute to their health
and happiness. It is usually best to begin the work of this exercise group
by teaching or practising these exercises in their simplest form with the class
as a whole, allowing the children to separate afterwards into different groups
according to their ability. This gives opportunity for the enjoyment of
individual gifts by those children who have special abilities and interests which
may never find outlet in the ordinary class work?the microcephalic child, for
example, who has exceptional spring, or the older girl who is capable of enjoy-
ing neat and quite advanced footwork.
VI. Game
The game spirit is present in practically all mentally defective children,
though the sense of competition which is sometimes considered as the essence
of enjoyment in games is frequently absent in all but the higher grade mentally
defective children.
There is, however, no need to emphasise competition where the com-
petitive spirit is absent. The children can play all these simple games in their
own way, and will in any case benefit from the mental and physical stimulus.
So long as the child is enjoying the game, and learning to be more alert and
active, the purpose is served.
VII. Quiet Ending
A. Posture correction.
Posture is one of the most important factors in the physical education of
the mentally defective child, and definite postural training is required in almost
every case. It cannot even be assumed that good posture will be achieved
entirely as a by-product of general activity, except, naturally, in those few
instances where environment and circumstance are exceptionally favourable.
Special care and help are needed from the earliest years, if the mentally
deficient child, and incidentally, also his family, are not to suffer all the discom-
fort arising from his continued bad posture and movement. It is, in fact, this
very ungainliness of movement which makes the mentally deficient child so
conspicuous?the heavy, round-shouldered girl with the shambling gait, the
mongol child with flat-footed walk, the stiff, high-shouldered boy with the
poking head?these can all be helped and even in some cases cured, by wisely
adapted physical education. It is, in fact, probable that many of the deformities
and disabilities of posture and movement now so prevalent amongst the
mentally deficient might altogether disappear in course of time, if a planned
scheme of physical education from the earliest years were more generally
adopted.
MENTAL WELFARE 107
B. Test breathing.
It is usually recognised that deep breathing is best encouraged by general
activity exercises which will improve chest mobility and encourage complete
respiration. At the present time, however, owing frequently to lack of early
attention, mouth breathing and other respiratory difficulties, are very common
amongst mentally deficient children.
The synchronisation of breathing with movement is nevertheless so
delicate that taught respiratory exercises in physical education classes are
usually unsuccessful, resulting only in forced, unnatural and stiff movements.
It is, however, advisable that the teacher should notice and help individual
children with faulty breathing habits, always bearing in mind the main
features of good breathing, and in particular the great importance of chest
mobility.
We hope to publish a second instalment of this article dealing with the physical
education of dull, backward and unstable children in our next issue.?Editor.
/
