Mind, Medicine and Metaphysics
=================================

The Philosophy of a Physician, by
William Brown, D.M. (Oxon), D.Sc.
(Lond.), F.R.C.P. London, Oxford
University Press, 1936. Price 7/6d.
A series of fourteen essays and lec-
tures upon medical, psychological and
metaphysical topics is chosen by the
author as the medium for conveying to
the general reader (a) a philosophy
of life and (b) the philosophy of a
physician (the author). Each essay is
complete in itself and several have
already appeared as contributions in
journals serving special groups of
readers, such as The British Medical
Journal and The Churchman, The
main value of the compilation is that
it presents in a popular form the views
of an experienced physician and
psychologist upon various aspects of
psychological medicine, religion and
international affairs.
Chapter III, for example, upon
" Psycho-analysis and Psycho-therapy"
is a lecture delivered to general prac-
titioners under the auspices of the
Rritish Medical Association. The main
tenets of Freud's system and their
applications in medical work are out-
lined ; and Dr. Brown indicates certain
differences between his own views and
those of Freud. This is valid criticism
of the theory and practice of psycho-
analysis. But it is not clear how such
a dissertation contributes towards the
formulation of a philosophy of life or
enlightens us upon the philosophy of
the author.
The author touches upon philosophi-
cal matters in many places, but not
always in a manner acceptable to
philosophers. When he alludes to
sublimation' he declares that the re-
directed instinctive energy should
ultimately be " directed towards the
entire universe, which is, of course,
the same as what we mean by God."
" God is met with in the physical world
?the physical universe is God as He
manifests Himself outwardly?and
inwardly in prompting and tendencies
of all kinds; and therefore we know?
we need not bemuse ourselves with
sophisticated arguments?we knozv
that idealism is the true theory of the
universe." Of course Dr. Brown knows
this, but it may not be self-evident to
his readers.
The psychological accompaniments
of international relations are discussed
in broad terms. While giving due
weight to primitive aggressive im-
pulses, the author, very rightly, draws
attention to the equally fundamental
desire for love and fellowship.
Aggressivity in individuals is often
secondary to the denial of parental
love. The same holds good between
nations?there is more wish to be an
ally than to be an enemy. He goes on
to make a plea (as he has done so
well elsewhere) for moral disarmament
which must precede material disarma-
ment.
Dr. Brown believes that religion is
the most important branch of all
human activity and experience. But he
points out that to bring in "the religious
factor" into analysis may be dangerous
and may emphasise rather than dimin-
ish repressions. The "so-called Oxford
Group Movement" is "psychologically
considered" in a sympathetic and
eminently sane manner; and its inade-
quacies are indicated.
Mental analysis is stated to have
an ethical value. " Everyone," we
read, "is the better for being analysed."
Dr. Brown has himself been analysed
for ninety-two hours?"as a scientific
experiment." He mentions, twice, that
Freud was never analysed. This state-
ment is often made, but it is inaccurate.
Freud may not have been fully ana-
lysed, but he did submit himself to
92 MENTAL WELFARE
analysis at the hands of one of his
colleagues round about the year 1909.
The book ends with an appendix
upon Psychology at Oxford; and a
further appendix embodying the
author's views, as contributed to The
Times, upon War and Peace.
E. A. Bennet.
