The Mentally 111 in America
===========================

MENTAL WELFARE 127

A History
of their Care and Treatment from
Colonial Times. By Albert Deutsch. With
an Introduction by William A. White,
M.D., Sc.D. 530 pp. Doubleday, Doran &
Co., Inc., N.Y., 1937.
It is characteristic of the American
approach to social problems that it should
be thought worth while for the American
Foundation for Mental Hygiene to finance
a survey of the treatment of the mentally ill.
It is perhaps not so characteristic that the
subject should be approached by a social
historian from the standpoint of the gradual
development of social attitudes and of the
institutions through which these attitudes
became shaped.
If proof were needed that the true under-
standing of social institutions, as of
individuals, depends upon an appreciation of
the influences which have combined to create
them, it may be found in this interesting
and intelligent study. As the author reveals
the conflict of attitudes, the struggle between
individual and social rights and duties, from
ancient civilizations, through the barbarities
of the Middle Ages, up to the theoretical and
practical controversies of a society more
self-conscious, if not more rational, the
reader becomes aware of the presence of all
these influences in his own and in other
people's lives. " It is a fact that every stage
in the long and painful history of the care of
the insane from 1537 .... could be actually
witnessed in some American community this
afternoonsaid Thomas Salmon twenty-
five years ago, and the author adds, "With
some modification that sentiment might well
be expressed to-day
Albert Deutsch has done for the United
States what D. H. Tuke did for this country
in 1882, in his History of the Insane in the
British Isles. Whereas Tuke wrote with the
intimate knowledge of the physician, draw-
ing upon the remarkable annals of his own
illustrious family, Deutsch claims no expert
knowledge of mental disorder, and, as a
social historian, is more interested in the
influences which stimulated scientific dis-
covery and which released the social effort
necessary for its constructive use. This
approach is amply justified since, as he
Points out, " Throughout the greater part of
human history the role of the medical man
in the care and treatment of the mentally ill
has been a minor one ".
So many aspects of social life go towards
the growth of care for the mentally dis-
ordered that the organisation of material is
a difficult task. The author has shewn great
thoroughness in his search for facts, and
has, on the whole, succeeded in maintaining
a proportion which makes for easy reading,
while his ample references are unusually
satisfying to the more scrupulous scholar.
Starting with a chapter on "Prophets,
Demons, and Witches", he describes the
early influence of magic and the ambivalence
of attitude to which ideas of " possession "
gave rise. Touching upon the stages
of remarkable enlightenment in Babylonia,
Greece and Rome, and among the Moslems
of the 5th century, where a form of " after-
care " was already practised, he passes on to
the crude witch-hunting phase of Colonial
America, a stage which, under the influence
of Puritanism, was even more prolonged
than it was in the old world. It is interesting
to find a parallel between the dramatic
effects of the French and American revolu-
tions, and also in the lead that was given
by the Quakers in the reform of institutional
care in England and in the United States.
The 19th century produced in America as
it did in this country, outstanding men and
women who devoted their lives to the im-
provement of the care of the insane. Such
leaders as Benjamin Rush and Dorothea
Lynde Dix established in the United States
some of the principles of justice with which
the names of John Howard, Samuel Tuke,
Lord Shaftesbury and Henry Maudsley will
always be associated. It is interesting to
trace the exchange of ideas between the two
continents : the effect in America of the
great experiment in Tuke's "Retreat", in
spite of the claim that " non-restraint might
do for Englishmen, but it would never
be tolerated by the red-blooded Americans" ;
the stirring of popular imagination by
Dickens and Charles Reade; the achieve-
ments in Scotland as well as on the continent
of that remarkable middle-aged school-
teacher, Dorothea Lynde Dix. The author
sees these pioneers as symbols of their age,
harnessing the forces of social change which
they would themselves have been powerless
to create.
128 MENTAL WELFARE
In America, as in England, the rationalism
prevailing at the end of the 19th century
was at the safne time destructive and
creative of true justice. The very principles
which found effect in elaborate proce-
dures for protecting the individual from
improper detention militated there as here
against preventive and remedial treatment.
Long after the concept of responsibility had
been re-interpreted by psychology mental
patients were given the right to meet the
charge of insanity made against them, and
the privilege of being tried by their peers.
It is an astonishing fact that in some States
a jury trial of the insane is still mandatory,
and that in many others patients awaiting
admission to hospitals are still cared for
in jails and police-stations.
The development of the Mental Hygiene
movement associated with the indomitable
Clifford Beers, receiving its impetus from
post-war psychiatry, child psychology and
modern social case work, and finding its
embodiment in the Child Guidance move-
ment and in the treatment of voluntary
mental patients, is vividly told, and the book
includes a useful account of the care of
mental defectives, of insanity and criminal
law, and of modern theory and practice in
medical and institutional treatment of mental
patients.
This book is invaluable not only for the
special subject which has been dealt with
more comprehensively than in any other
single work, but also as an illustration of the
nature of social development. Students and
practitioners concerned with mental health
services will find it an essential addition to
their libraries, and will be particularly grate-
ful for the well chosen bibliography.
S. Clement Brown.
