Mental Deficiency (Amentia)
============================

:Author: A. F. Tredgold, M.D., F.R.C.P.,
F.R.S.E. 6th Edition. Bailliere,
Tindall and Cox. 25/-.

To all who are interested in the
welfare of the mentally defective, the
appearance of a new edition of Dr.
Tredgold's 'Amentia' is something of
an event. Indispensable alike to the
student and to the specialist, for almost
thirty years this work has served as an
authoritative guide to the study of
mental deficiency, and being founded
on the author's own unrivalled ex-
perience, it conveys a vivid impression
of a personal study written with a
grace of phraseology and a precision of
thought seldom encountered in medical
literature.

As indicated in the preface, the new
edition, which is larger than its pre-
decessors by twenty-two pages, has
been extensively revised; the chapters
on Aetiology, Psychology, Pathology,
Secondary Amentia and Sociology
have been almost entirely re-written;
those devoted to the Nature of Mental
Defect, Clinical Examination, Mental
Tests, Diagnosis and Legal Procedure
have undergone considerable amplifica-
tion, and a section has been added on
the Chronological Development of the
Normal Mind.

In his discussion of Aetiology, the
author recognises four groups: (i)
Amentia due to inheritance, (ii) Amen-
tia due to environment, (iii) Amen-
tia due to both these causes, and
(iv) Amentia without discoverable
cause. For the first group, Dr. Tred-
gold claims a preponderating influeuce,
in his opinion, no less than eighty per
cent, of all defect being attributable to
inheritance?some germinal tendency
or peculiarity. Since importance is
attached to the influence of a " neuro-
pathic diathesis " in the germinal basis
of mental defect, it is of some interest
to note in this connection that a recent
investigation conducted by a special
committee of the Royal Medico-
Psychological Association revealed the
presence of a similar vitiation in the
antecedents of more than fifty per cent,
of apparently normal persons; a find-
ing of this sort suggests that in eluci-
dating the causes of mental defect it
is perhaps possible to attach too much
importance to a family history of
" neuropathic diathesis
Cases of amentia due entirely to
environment are considered to com-
prise about twenty per cent, of defec-
tives of all ages, though Dr. Tredgold
recognises that since a large number die
in the early years or months of life,
the proportion of secondary cases is
probably higher than this.

The number of cases of amentia
without discoverable cause is put at
not more than one or two per cent, of
all aments, a percentage which by many
will be regarded as an unduly optimis-
tic index of the present state of our
knowledge of the causes of amentia.

Though Dr. Tredgold places Mon-
golism in the category of primary
amentia, and assesses its incidence at
about five per cent, of the total number
of aments of all ages, he is forced to
admit that its causation is still largely
a matter of conjecture. Would it not
be more prudent, then, to place this
distinctive type in the category
"amentia without discoverable cause" ?
In the chapter devoted to pathology
the view is retained that mental
deficiency has, as its material basis, an
inadequate development or persistent
imperfection of function of the
neurones of the mantle of the brain,
but a note of caution is now introduced
in as much as the author makes it clear
that the histological changes described
are those of low grade amentia. Since
the neuropathology of high grade
amentia is still an uncharted field, it is
well that this point should receive
recognition.

It may be questioned whether the
advantage of simplicity which is
possessed by Dr. Tredgold's method of
recording cranial measurements, is not
outweighed by its failure to yield data
which can be compared with those
obtained by the more orthodox methods
of the anthropologist. As the breadth-
length ratio or cephalic index of the
skull affords a very useful and concise
way of recording certain anomalies of
the cranial vault, and requires for its
determination only a simple form of
head calliper, it is to be regretted that
the author does not recommend its use
in clinical work.

In the description of secondary
amentia, the clinical varieties are now
grouped under the headings, traumatic,
infective, degenerative and deprivative.
This is a new and admirable form of
classification which should prove
extremely useful.

One curious omission must be noted.
Though the book has been brought up
to date by the inclusion of certain rare
forms of amentia which have only
recently been described, of which
Gargoylism and the amentia associated
with Phenylketonuria are examples,
no reference is made to the Laurence-
Moon-Biedl syndrome, which has as its
cardinal features, mental retardation,
obesity, hypogenitalism, Polydactyly
and retinal pigmentation. This is
somewhat surprising as the condition
has been known for more than sixty
years, and with one or two exceptions,
all its victims have shown varying
degrees of mental defect.

The maze of complexities which
underlie the behaviour problems of the
moral defective are discussed very
fully in a chapter of sixty pages, and
this must be reckoned as one of the
most valuable sections of the book.
It is safe to depict that the s;xth
edition of " Mental Deficiency " will
maintain its place as an outstanding
and comprehensive contribution to the
study of amentia.
R.M.S.
