New Light on Delinquency
=========================

:Author: Wm. Healy
and Augusta F. Bronner. Published for
the Institute of Human Relations by the
Yale University Press, 1936, $2. Oxford
University Press, 9/-.

When such a well-known authority as
Dr Wm. Healy and the scarcely less famous
Dr Augusta Bronner collaborate in the
?writing of a book on delinquency, it must be
regarded as an event of some consequence
in the psychological world, and when it is
realised that this is by far the most important work which the Judge Baker
Guidance Centre has produced, it will be
read, as it deserves to be, by psychiatrists,
psychologists, social workers, probation
officers, magistrates and all others who take
a serious interest in problems of juvenile
crime. It should also be mentioned that this
is a book " eminently suitable to the intelligent lay public "; in short, it is attractively
written with a minimum of pretentious
professional jargon. Thus the first duty of
the reviewer (to indicate whether a book
should be read or not) can be quickly
answered in the affirmative.

The " Nerv Light on Delinquency and its
Treatment" is the "result of a research
conducted for the Institute of Human
Relations of Yale University ", and for the
most part describes a three years' study of
105 delinquent children who are compared
with a similar number of non-delinquents,
belonging to the same families, who thus
act as controls. There is also a very frank
account of the results of the treatment
employed which gives an indication of the
success to be expected in the treatment of
delinquency by Child Guidance methods,
even though the " extent and intensity of the
services rendered were much greater than
could be expected from an ordinary clinic".
From reading these careful studies we can
say without hesitation that they are of
immense help, not only to those engaged in
the treatment of delinquency, but also as a
basis for future work of this kind. We can
but regret indeed that there exists so few
foundations willing to finance research work
and so few Healy and Bronners to carry it
out. With so much valuable material passing
through our juvenile courts, child guidance
clinics, remand homes and approved schools,
it seems prodigal to make so little use of it.
One cannot but feel that this neglect of
opportunity arises from the tendency, all too
prevalent in this country, to view delinquency " merely as an exhibition of vicious,
naughty or irrational behaviour "?a viewpoint, in our opinion, which can be utterly
contradicted by any study such as Healy
and Bronner have made.

It was only when we came to read the
final chapter in which the authors question
what new light they had discovered on delinquency that we experienced a slight sense of
disappointment, for frankly there seemed
little which was entirely novel in the
answers. Perhaps, however, it would be
more just to say that the practical implications of these studies were those which one
would have expected from one's clinical
experience. One must remind oneself, too,
that subjective judgments are of little value
compared with the conclusions drawn from
studies made with as great scientific
accuracy as can be expected in the field of
human behaviour. None the less, one closes
the book with the feeling that a less ambitious and ponderous title would have been
more appropriate.

In conclusion we would like to endorse the
statement made in the penultimate pages of
this book that there is " no royal road to
success" in the treatment of delinquency.
We agree also that: "for the sake of relief
from our extraordinary national burden of
delinquency and crime, much greater interest
must be manifested not only in expert zvork
with individual offenders, but also in mass
attacks upon this ivhole problemStatements such as these could be made admirable
texts . . . but a reviewer has no right to
preach a sermon, however great the temptation. Deprived of that privilege, we can but
commend this book to all who study, treat
or sit in judgment upon delinquents.
D. R. McC.
