News and Notes
===============

Advisory Committee on Scientific and Ancillary Mental Health Services
The Board of Control, with the approval of the Minister of Health, have
appointed the following to be a Committee to advise upon questions arising in
connection with scientific and ancillary mental health services :?
The Rt. Hon. The Earl of Radnor (Chairman), Sir Laurence Brock, C.B.,
Sir Hubert Bond, K.B.E., D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P., Alderman J. W. Black,
J.P., Alderman W. E. Lovsey, J.P., A. A. W. Petrie, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.,
F.R.C.S.E., D.P.M., Miss Adeline Roberts, O.B.E., J.P., M.B., B.S.,
Alderman J. C. Grime, O.B.E., J.P., C. J. Thomas, Esq., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.,
I).P.M., George Somerville, Esq., M.D., Cli.B., D.P.M., H. J. Clarke
(Secretary).

A Committee was appointed in 1931, but owing to the financial crisis which
occurred in that year, its work remained in abeyance.

The Mental Treatment Act, 1930, empowered local authorities to provide
for out-patient treatment and for the after-care of mental patients, and, subject
to the approval of the Board of Control, to undertake, or contribute towards
the expenses of, research in relation to mental illness.

The primary function of the Advisory Committee will be to advise the
Board of Control regarding organisation and encouragement of research, and other
ancillary services will be within its purview. On technical questions relating to
research, the Committee will have the expert assistance of members of the Committee on Mental Disorders of the Medical Research Council.

Royal Eastern Counties Institution
-----------------------------------
Dr F. Douglas Turner informs us that important developments are taking
place in the Royal Eastern Counties' Institution Research Department, under
the direction of Dr Penrose, to which we are glad to call attention.

The Rockefeller Foundation has agreed to give a grant of ?700 towards the
equipment of the new Laboratory, and an additional ?600 a year for five years
towards the cost of the Research Department, in order that additional assistance
may be employed. Increased grants are also being received from the Medical
Research Council.

In future, the total annual expenditure on Research in connection with the
Institution will be at the rate of nearly ?3,600 a year, made up by grants from
the Medical Research Council, the Rockefeller Foundation, the Darwin Trustees,
a Beit Memorial Fellowship, and a Pinsent-Darwin Studentship, added to which
the Directors of the Institution pay about ?700 a year.

The Staff, under Dr Penrose, will in future consist of at least seven
members, including Dr Munro, Dr Nevin (part time), Mr. Raven and Miss
Newlyn.

New Laboratories and Offices are at present being built, at a cost of over
?4,000, towards which the Hon. Alexandrina Peckover has given ?2,200.

Mental Health Administration in Scotland
-----------------------------------------
The General Board of Control for Scotland, in its 1936 Report, calls
attention to the need for increased provision (other than that made in Observation
Wards in such progressive areas as Glasgow, Dundee and the Burgh of Paisley)
for the early treatment of mental illness and to the desirability of legislation
enabling Local Authorities to provide Clinics with in-patient and out-patient
departments. The Board agrees with those critics of the Scottish Lunacy Laws
who urge their amendment and would particularly welcome the abolition of the
use of the terms " lunatic," " lunatic asylum" and "pauper lunatic."

In a section of the Report dealing with the medical staffing of Asylums in
Scotland, the need for reform is also indicated. The Board states that, generally
speaking, the Asylums are medically understaffed ? the number of patients
admitted per Assistant Medical Officer varies from 28 to 129?with the result
that it is impossible for the necessary investigation into new cases to be undertaken and for full case records to be kept. The medical staff of the Asylums
are too often overburdened with routine duties and the service offers little
inducement to first-class recruits, however keen may be their interest in psychiatry.
Moreover, it is pointed out, an additional burden is thrown on Medical Superintendents of Asylums where officials such as Clerks of Works, Stewards, Farm
Managers and Dispensers?to whom responsibilities can be delegated?are not
appointed. The need of trained psychiatric social workers is also indicated.
Staffing adequate enough not only to allow proper individual treatment of
patients?particularly of those newly admitted?but also to meet the needs of
early cases of mental disorder coming for advice to Clinics, and Observation
Wards in the vicinity of the Mental Hospitals, is regarded by the Board as the
ideal to be attained if the Mental Health Services in Scotland are to take their
rightful position in Public Health.

Every mental patient and mental defective in Scotland, whose maintenance
is contributed to from public sources, is under the direct supervision of the
central authority, and the section of this Report on "Patients in Private Dwellings"
is particularly interesting.

There were in private dwellings on January 1st, 1937, in the care of guardians
related or unrelated (separate statistics for the two categories are unfortunately
not given), 1,141 "pauper lunatics" and 1,470 mental defectives. The following
extracts are taken from the reports of the Deputy Commissioners on their visiting
of these cases :?

" Good use is made of the farms and crofts of Arran for boarding out male
patients. It is interesting to learn how little objection is taken to this by summer
visitors who are often very good to the patients, and in some cases give great
pleasure by remembering them at Christmas with cards or presents."

" The patience shown by unrelated guardians towards old patients who have been
with them for years is striking. Guardians are often unwilling to part with them
even when they could have younger and more useful patients instead. One
guardian of 78, referring to her patient, who is now over 80 and very frail
and who has been with her for 30 years, said, ' I don't know what I'd do
without her. She's my companion and friend.'"

" A feature of the boarding-out system which rehabilitation engenders, is the
renewal of hope, especially in the minds of those patients who have spent a
considerable time in Mental Hospitals or in Institutions for mental defectives.
Above all, they take their share in the normal routine of workaday family and
social life, their horizon is widened and brightened, and there is an awakening
and cultivation of the social attributes of life, an appreciation of its pleasures and
privileges, and a realisation of its responsibilities."

In addition to the 1,470 registered defectives in private dwellings, there
were on January 1st, 1937, 3,077 in Certified Institutions, and 17 in the State
Institution. This represents an increase of 120 in Institutions and of 30 in
private dwellings.*

Child Guidance Council
---------------------
In its Report for 1936, the Child Guidance Council refers to the paramount
importance of securing that Clinics are staffed only by trained workers and that
their number does not grow so quickly that it overtakes the number of such
workers available. The Council is therefore curbing its general publicity propaganda and concentrating chiefly on specialised activities.

The Foreword to the Annual Report for 1936, emphasises the value of the
close linking-up of Clinics with the existing educational and medical services,
foreshadowing a time "when a routine of psychological study is recognised to
* Twenty-Third Animal Report of the General Board of Control for Scotland for the
Year 1936. H.M. Stationery Office, lj. 3d.

be as necessary a part of every community and educational system as medical
inspection." It notes the increasing efficiency of the existing Clinics?as experience
is gradually acquired?in accuracy of diagnosis and methods of treatment, but at
the same time points out two dangers that must be avoided if the movement
is to develop along sound iines. First there is the temptation, in appealing
lor public support, to make exaggerated claims for Child Guidance as a panacea;
second, there is the risk of keeping it in a water-tight compartment and failing
to see it "in its proper perspective as a small part of a wider movement for
the amelioration of human problems."

Useful work has been achieved by the Council during the year under review,
particularly in the realm of Lecture Courses in Teachers' Training Colleges and
to workers in Children's Homes, and by means of three Residential Courses. A
special training course was also arranged for the workers appointed to be in charge
of two houses for nervous and difficult children newly opened by the National
Children's Homes organisation. The course lasted three months and examination
papers were set at the end of it.

The Inter-Clinic Committee, consisting of representatives of the various
Clinics proposed at the 1935 Inter-Clinic Conference, met regularly throughout the
year, and carried on much useful work, in which the Scottish Child Guidance
Council has co-operated. This Committee is responsible for a pamphlet " Some
Suggestions for a Clinic Play Room " published at 2d. A List of the Clinics
represented on the Council is a useful feature of the Report giving, as it does,
the address of Clinics in 21 areas of England and Wales and in seven Scottish
areas.

For copies of the Report apply to the Secretary of the Child Guidance
Council, Upper Woburn House, Upper Woburn Place, W.C.I.
A very interesting report of the Proceedings of the Third P>iennial Child
Guidance Conference held in London on 29th January, 1937, can also be obtained
from the Council, price 5/-.

Runwell Mental Hospital
------------------------
On June 14th the Minister of Health, Sir Kingsley Wood, officially opened
this new Mental Hospital in Essex, which has been provided jointly by the County
Boroughs of East Ham and Southend-on-Sea.

The Hospital?under the direction of Dr Rolf Strom-Olsen, whose paper
on the value of physical education in mental illness read at the Public Health
Congress last year we published in our January issue?is planned on the most
modern lines, allowing for a complete system of classification. It includes a
separate admission hospital, four research laboratories, a general library and a
recreation hall with gymnastic apparatus. A new feature is a detached " closed
unit" for 60 male and 100 female patients for whom seclusion is necessary,
and?at the other end of the scale?two detached villas for voluntary patients
suffering from the milder forms of mental disease, and three parole units for
patients capable of enjoying a larger measure of freedom. Ample provision
is made for occupational therapy of all types.

units.
The Hospital will accommodate 1,010 patients, divided into 25 to 30 separate
International Congresses in Paris
During July, three International Congresses of interest to Mental Welfare
Workers are taking place in Paris.

The Second International Congress on Mental Hygiene will be held from
July 19th to July 24th, when papers are to be given on every aspect of the
Mental Hygiene Movement by experts gathered together from all parts of the
world.

Immediately following on this Congress comes one on Child Psychiatry?
the first of its kind to be held?which will last from July 24th to August 1st.
During this period also, the International Eugenics Congress meets?on July
24th and 25th?and is to discuss, amongst other subjects, the heredity of cancer
and epilepsy.

C.A.M.W. Training Courses
-------------------------
July is also a month of great activity in the C.A.M.W's. Educational Department, which at this time of year is responsible for four Courses proceeding
simultaneously.

The Long (Nine Weeks) Course for Teachers of Retarded Children?this
year attended by the maximum number yet reached, viz., 63?comes to an end
on July 23rd, while the Board of Education Short Course (Advanced) attended
by 60 teachers covers the period July 5th to 24th.

In addition, a Three Weeks' Course, divided into two sections for Occupation
Centre Supervisors and members of Institution Staffs, and for Mental Deficiency
Officers of Local Authorities, began on July 5th and ends on July 24th?accounting for another 39 students.

At the end of these Courses there is a short interval until on August 26th
begins the Board of Education's Elementary Short Course for Teachers to be
held this year in Leeds. Another record is being broken in this connection,
in that the number of students accepted for the Course is 120, whilst a further
142 have had to be rejected for lack of room.

Recent Home Teaching Schemes Stafford.
--------------------------------------
In the Seventeenth Annual Report of the Staffordshire Mental Welfare
Association, recently published, there is an interesting account of a Home Teaching
Scheme begun last June in the Cheadle area.

The Home Teacher has 33 names on her list and pays an average of 5
visits a day.

As is always the case in this held of work, the efforts made have amply
justified themselves. We read in the Report of the happiness and increased
fullness of life which " Home Teaching" has brought into the households to
which it has been taken :

" In a few instances where the children did not want to be taught when first visited,
now on the appointed day they are afraid to go from home or out to play in case
the teacher should arrive and they not be there to welcome her. One also
notes the interest of other members of the family."

and in summing up the experience gained during the first few months of the
scheme, the Executive Committee states :

" We feel that this system of training is going to be far reaching in its results;
apart from the actual teaching, the teacher is able to adjust the attitude of other
members of the family to the defective, to advise the parents in ways of
personal health and general routine and secure for the defective that thought
and consideration so often denied him through lack of understanding and which,
because of the very nature of his mental condition, should be his birthright."
Devon.

A further proof of the value of Home Teaching comes from Devon, where
an additional grant has just been made to the Voluntary Association by the
County Council, for the purpose of appointing a second teacher.
IV arwickshire.

The Warwickshire Mental Deficiency Committee have recently instituted an
experimental Home Teaching scheme for six months, in the Warwick and
Leamington areas. A generous offer of voluntary work in this direction for three
days a week has been accepted by the Committee, and at the end of the experimental period the whole position is to be reviewed.

Oldham Council for Mental Health
-------------------------------
From Miss Elizabeth Martland, Hon. Secretary of this Council, ice have received
the following account of its progress:

There are hopeful signs of increasing interest in the welfare of the mentally
sick. Reports come in from all sides concerning the need for adequate accommodation for cases of nervous breakdown, mental defect, mental disease and those
borderline patients for whom there seems to be no suitable provision. It is painfully
evident that few citizens understand where and how advice may be sought, and
it would seem that some sort of centre or clearing-house for their assistance
should be available in every town. Members of the Oldham Council for Mental
Health are doing their utmost to direct to the proper quarter all cases appealing
for help, but the lack of sufficient accommodation for cases of various types is
a great obstacle, and every effort is being made meanwhile to bring about a
better state of affairs.

Educational work proceeds apace. With the help of the National Council
for Mental Hygiene, a course of four Lectures was arranged during the spring.
Dr Murdo Mackenzie read a witty and stimulating paper on " Mental Life and
the Community"; Dr Larkin, of West Ham Mental Hospital, followed with an
extremely instructive and illuminating address on " Mental Disease and Mental
Defect"; the third Lecture on "Child Guidance," delivered by Dr MacCalman,
was one of the most delightful and practical imaginable, giving special pleasure
to the many teachers present; and the fourth, on " Functional Nervous Disorder"
by Dr J. Burnett Rae was most deeply appreciated on account of its philosophic
tone and the many and profound problems touched upon.

During the summer, expeditions to places of interest in mental welfare work,
such as special schools and colonies for mental defectives, have been arranged.
Further information about the Council, which is affiliated to the National
Council for Mental Hygiene, may be obtained from Miss Martland, Lyndhurst,
Queens Road, Oldham.

Psychotherapy in Prison
-----------------------
In the Report of the Commissioners of Prisons and the Directors of Convict
Prisons for 1935,* Dr Norwood East, Medical Commissioner, devotes considerable attention to the subject of the psychological treatment of prisoners. With
the publication of this Report, three out of the four years' programme for
such a scheme of treatment were completed and although the time has not yet
come for a full report a few facts which have already emerged from it are here
recorded.

Dr East deplores the still too frequent practice of Justices in asking for
a report on the mental condition of a prisoner after conviction and not before,
despite the Home Office Circular of 20th April, 1934, urging that this factor
shall be taken into account when passing sentence. Moreover, in few prisons,
is the medical officer supplied with reports of the life histories of prisoners
committed on remand, and thus it may be that in some cases "the key to the
whole problem is withheld from the knowledge of the Medical Officer." These
factors in the present situation delay the advance which otherwise might be
made in a more scientific approach to criminal problems.

The cases found to be most suitable for psychological investigation and
treatment are youths and men under 40 who are likely to co-operate and who
are sentenced preferably to not less than 6 months' imprisonment "for various
sex and other offences which from their nature and circumstances, suggest some
mental abnormality as a causal factor." To these are added certain cases of
adolescent delinquents of good intelligence.

The practice by which certain Courts postpone sentence until a report on
the prisoner's suitability for psychological treatment is forthcoming inevitably
results, Dr East reports, in hostility to such treatment, for sentence of imprisonment appears to be the direct result of medical evidence. Equally undesirable,
he points out, is the substitution of medical treatment for imprisonment in
cases that are often quite unsuitable where if the consequences of misconduct
are evaded, no useful purpose can be served by treatment given in their place.
It has been found, further, that some prisoners who appear at first to be
suitable subjects for treatment, fail to respond to it because their "anti-social
behaviour is found to be fundamentally a demonstration of personality traits
which are inherent or so firmly established as to be immovable." The most hopeful
cases so far have been "those in whom environmental circumstances have influenced
a personality already predisposed to react to accidental effects."

In many cases of criminal behaviour, however, Dr East notes that the
chief factor concerned is membership of a group and in some cases, change of
environment may be more useful than prolonged psychological treatment.
He concludes his observations by a note of warning. It is, he contends, a
mistake to regard all criminals as neurotics and he deprecates the modern tendency
to identify self-control and self-restraint with "repression," an attitude which
tends to encourage anti-social conduct by admonitions to "self-expression" in
sex and other matters. Psychological investigation, he writes, may explain criminal
conduct but are not intended to excuse it.

The importance of adequate training in those who practice psychotherapy is
emphasised and the complexity of the task confronting Medical Officers of prisons
is illustrated by a table giving a " Mental Classification of Criminals."
* H. M. Stationery Officet 2s.

Some Sfatistics.
During 1935, 39 prisoners were certified as Mentally Defective (compared
with 26 in 1934), of whom 37 were removed to Certified Institutions under
Section 9 of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913. Under Section 8, 214 defectives
coming before the Courts were dealt with (1934 : 222). In the Borstal Institutions,
6 youths and 3 girls were certified under the Acts.

2,703 men and women were remanded to prison for observation and reports
to the Court on their mental condition, and 97 were certified as insane. In
addition, 251 remand prisoners were found by Medical Officers to be insane and
were dealt with by the Courts, 20 were found by juries to be insane on arraignment,
and 23 were found guilty but insane.

Delinquency and Dullness
The Governor of Feltham Borstal Institution, reporting to the Prison Commissioners on the work in 1935, states that in most of the cases allocated to him,
"the root cause of delinquency is poor mental capacity or inferiority personality."
This has been borne out by the results of tests administered on reception to
259 lads, their average score (Columbian Test) being 47 per cent. The average
Mental Age of a group of 116 lads (with an average chronological age of
nearly 18) tested by the Terman method was found to be 10 and 7/12 years.

Despite this unpromising material, however the Governor is able to report
that in all except a very few cases, Borstal training is able to effect in the lads
undergoing it "a clear improvement in character, alertness and energy."
"If we have taught him humility without depressing him and if life outside is
fairly kind to him, he may and usually does continue to lead an honest and
fairly useful life after discharge.".." .. It says a good deal both for after-care and
modern social legislation that so many of our dullards succeed in remaining
honest."*

The problem of illiteracy?ever present at Feltham?was seriously tackled
during the year under review. Additional classes in reading, writing and arithmetic were organised and special attention was given to certain obdurate cases
which were made to do a morning's work in reading and writing in addition
to attendance at the ordinary classes in these subjects; as a result before their
discharge they succeeded in gaining some elementary ability in them. The
Governor, in referring to the usually accepted belief that dull children must not
be expected to concentrate for long at a time, refers to this experience which
has led him to feel that "the weaker the powers of concentration, the less the
risk of overstrain and that backward lads must learn by saturation rather than
by repeated injections."

A disquieting fact revealed by the Governor in this Report is that during
1935, nearly 16 per cent, of the lads admitted to Feltham had previously received
one or more sentences of imprisonment; the figure had previously never exceeded
10 per cent.

* Statistical returns made by the Borstal Association show that of the numbers discharged
from all the six Borstal Institutions for boys between 1932 and 1934, 57.9 per cent, had
not, up to the end of 1936, been re-convicted, and 22.6 per cent, had been re-convicted
only once in periods varying from two to five years after discharge.

Information Service for Research Workers in Human Genetics
We are asked by the Bureau of Human- Heredity, 115 Gower Street, London,
W.C.I, to publish the following information:

One activity contemplated in setting up the Clearing-House for Human
Heredity is the organization of information service for research workers in the
subject. The value of such a plan has been demonstrated in the information service
already established for workers on Drosophila, etc. It should be noted that
apart from convenience of ascertaining easily centres at which comparable work
is going on, the circulation of notice by those engaged in a particular enquiry
of their work is a safeguard in dating priority?a point to which it is natural
to attach some importance.

Workers are requested to address to the Bureau a short paragraph describing
the work on which they are engaged. These notices will be multiplied and circulated
to all those co-operating. In the first instance this bulletin will be issued every
twelve months. Later supplementary bulletins will be issued more frequently.
Those using this service are asked to subscribe 5s., a sum equalling approximately one quarter of a pound sterling equivalent in the currency of their country.

The accepted languages are : French, German, English.
The Tavistock Clinic, 1936
In his Report of the work of the Institute of Medical Psychology for 1936,
the Chairman (Sir Henry Brackenbury) records the reversion to its old name,
made necessary by the growing use of the newer name by other bodies and the
confusion arising therefrom.

Unfortunately it has not been found possible to proceed with the erection
of the new In-Patient Hospital on the site acquired, owing to lack of the
necessary financial support, and unless this is forthcoming, the drastic curtailment
of the existing work?despite its urgent need?is foreshadowed. The need is
made strikingly apparent in the Report of the Medical Director (Dr J. R. Rees),
when he says (italics are ours.) :

" There has been a decrease of 114 in the number of new patients seen during
the year. This is due primarily to the fact that the waiting list has been closed
for the greater part of the time under review." 

Particularly is there pointed out the urgency of adequately providing for the
treatment of adult patients suffering from the psychoneuroses to which it is now
generally recognised by doctors that at least one third of all sickness belongs.
The value of the special facilities offered by the Clinic in training medical practitioners in psychiatry is also stressed, and an account of its work in this direction
is given by the Director of Studies (Dr J. A. Hadfield).

The Report contains interesting sections on the various branches of the
Clinic's work?the In-Patient Department at 12 Endsleigh Street to which 37
patients were admitted during the year; the Childrens' Department with its
4,574 attendances; the Educational Psychologist's Department in which 424 intelligence tests were administered; the Social Service Department with its many and
sometimes insoluble problems, particularly those connected with employment and
living conditions during treatment.

Copies of the Report can be obtained from the Tavistock Clinic, Malet Place,
London, W.C.I.
* Total number of nciv patients treated in 1936: Adults, 741; Children, 351.

North-Eastern Council for Mental Welfare*
----------------------------------------
In March, 1935, the Committee of this Council was constituted, under
the chairmanship of Alderman W. Locke, Lord Mayor of Newcastle, to institute
?with the co-operation and financial help of the C.A.M.W.?a scheme
of Guardianship work for defectives and of social work for Mental Hospitals
in the area. The Committee was a representative one, consisting of members
of the Local Authorities of Darlington, Durham County, Middlesborough,
Newcastle-on-Tyne, Sunderland, and Gateshead?all of whom agreed to participate
in the scheme for an experimental year and to contribute to its expenses on
a basis apportioned according to rateable value.
This First Annual Report is an interesting record of the work achieved
by Miss Crosse and Miss Williams, the two C.A.M.W. officers responsible for
it, and by Miss Cullen, the C.A.M.W. organiser who helped in its initiation.
During the year, 43 cases of mentally defective patients have been referred
by Local Authorities for placing under guardianship, 24 of whom were placed,
whilst arrangements for others were in process of completion at the time of
writing the Report. In addition psychiatric social work was carried out for two
of the Mental Hospitals in the area?(Newcastle and Gateshead). To the value
of this work a generous tribute was paid at the first Annual Meeting held recently,
by Dr Bamford, Medical Superintendent of the Gateshead Mental Hospital.
At the end of this experimental year, the C.A.M.W. has agreed to continue
a financial contribution for a second year, and two further Local Authorities
(Tynemouth and West Hartlepool) have come into the scheme, which is henceforth to be known under the title of the North Eastern Council for Mental
Welfare.

Dame Ellen Pinsent
------------------
Many readers of Mental Welfare will remember Mrs. Pinsent when she was
a Commissioner of the Board of Control and will wish to join in congratulating
her on the occasion of her being made a Dame Commander of the British Empire.
Dame Ellen has devoted a large part of her life to work for defectives, and
was a member of the Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feebleminded which sat from 1904 to 1909. She was an Honorary Commissioner
of the Board of Control from 1913 to 1920, a Commissioner from 1921 to 1930,
and Senior Commissioner from January, 1931, till her retirement in July, 1932,
and on the Joint Committee on Mental Deficiency she represented the Board
from 1924 to 1929. Although she has retired from official duties, her Report on
the Mental Health Services in Oxford, Oxfordshire and Berkshire, a review
of which is to be found on page is an indication that she is by no means
at an end of her active life.

An outstanding service was rendered by Dame Ellen to Research when in
1924, she joined with Sir Horace and Lady Darwin in offering a sum of ?5,000
to the University of Cambridge for the purpose of promoting research " by
studentship or otherwise, into any problem having a bearing on mental defect,
disease or disorder."

* Address: 22 Ellison Place, Neu*castle-upon-Tyiie, 1.
