New Zealand News
=================

New Zealand News
(<Communicated)

The P.M.W. (National, Physical and Mental Welfare) Board of New
Zealand comprises some hundreds of social workers, writers, speakers, Members
of Parliament and medical men. Its objectives are the reduction of the " time-gap "
in the application of science and scientific methods to :?(1) the Prevention, (2) the
Amelioration, and (3) the Cure of the physical, mental and moral disabilities of
the race.

The proposals of the P.M.W. Board at present before the Government
comprise :?

(a) The merging of the Mental Hospitals Department into an augmented Health
Department, whose province shall be particularly the prevention of ill-health.
(b) The administration of the Health Department to be per medium of a Governing
Board representative of the various sciences concerned in the maintenance of racial
health, i.e., Applied Biology, Chemistry, Dentistry, Economics, Education, Endocrin-
ology, Ethics, Eugenics, Hygiene and Sex Hygiene, Medicine (including the establish-
ment of a Chair of Pediatrics), Nutritional Physiology, Pharmaceutical Chemistry,
Politics, Psychiatry, Psychology, Physical Education, Physics, Physiology, Religion,
Sociology, and other sciences.

(c) In regard to the Amelioration of the condition of mental patients, the Boarding-
Out system to be temporarily and immediately adopted, in order to relieve congestion
at the Mental Hospitals, with a view later of the Colony system reinforcing the
present institutional system.

(d) The civic rights of ex-patients of mental Hospitals to be safeguarded by legislation.
(e) Legislation to be enacted to prevent the incarceration in asylums of patients
registering high-temperature during illness.

(f) The provision of a permanent clinic at each school in the Dominion, under the
control of a qualified person whose duties shall be the frequent examination of
the children?physical, mental and moral?together with the supervision of their
physical education, and short talks out of school hours on elementary hygiene,
nutritional physiology, biology, etc.

The Director-General of Mental Hospitals, in his 1936 Report to the
House of Representatives, states:

" For many years most of our hospitals have been overcrowded, in some cases
seriously so, and attention has frequently been drawn to the shortage of accom-
modation, but no effective long-range building programme has ever been evolved to
meet the inevitable increase in population."

The propaganda of the P.M.W. Board of new Zealand is released weekly
in twenty New Zealand newspapers, by personally written editorials and reviews
in various journals, and by addresses to the women's organisations and social
service societies. Facilities by radio are now being sought.

The Board's Officers are :?President, Dr. D. G. McMillan, M.P., Dunedin;
Vice-President, Dr. Guy Chapman; Hon. Solicitor, E. J. V. Dyson, LL.B.,
Auckland; Treasurer, Robert J. Peter, Auckland; Supervisor, Mother
Machree, Onehunga.
