Music and Movement
===================


:Author: Ann Driver. With
illustrations by Molly MacArthur and a
Preface by Dr. L. P. Jacks. Oxford
University Press. Humphrey Milford.
5/-.

Miss Ann Driver, whose broadcasted
lessons have made her known to a wide
public, has now put her ideas on rhythmic
work into book form. In " Music and Movement " she gives a detailed and practical
account of her system.

Her prime concern is to make music itself
a lived experience, by a bodily response to
its many sides. Like that great pioneer and
musical genius, Dalcroze, she has " discovered " that the way to teach music and
all it meanj to the child, is to let him enact
it with his own body. So too, like Dalcroze,
she has found that lived music has a
psychological value?". . . that children " (to
quote Dr. Jacks) "whose habit of movement
is thus established in the rhythm and
harmony for which their bodies are designed
by nature, at once begin to develop mental
and character qualities to correspond, such
as poise, balance, self-control, evenness of
temper, and power of concentration."

The book begins with many free exercises
in rhythmic movement, and emphasis is laid
on the importance of allowing the child to
express his own rhythm " with or without
music" undominated by the Teacher's
rhythm, " till his own rhythm has been
released and expressed." In this connection,
the child is encouraged to express
imaginatively his kinship with all created
things?rhythms of Nature, the Elements,
domestic life, machinery, work-rhythms, etc.

Miss Driver urges the need for Tension to
be balanced by Relaxation; the law of
rhythmic health is ebb and flow, systole and
diastole, the right balance of the opposites;
children must learn to lie in a completely
relaxed condition; their frequent inability
to do so, is an indication of the wrong
nervous tensity many children exhibit.

The book is written, as Miss Driver
herself says, " with special reference to
music". It deals with musical interpretations
through bodily movement which are too
advanced for sub-normal children. Considerable musicianship is also demanded
from the Teacher.

The drawings by Miss Molly MacArthur
are vital and explanatory and the preface by
Dr. L. P. Jacks is instructive.
L.F.C.
