Obituary Notice
================

104 MENTAL WELFARE.
In the death of Sir Bryan Donkin, which occurred at his house in
Hyde Park Street in the eighty-third year of his age, the Central Association
for Mental Welfare and all it represents has lost a firm friend.
He was a man of encyclopaedic knowledge and withal the kindliest and
most unassuming of men.
Donkin was educated at Blackheath Proprietary School and thence went to
Queen's College, Oxford, as an open scholar, graduating in the first class of the
Classical Tripos. He graduated as M.B., Oxon, in 1873, and became a
F.R.C.P. Lon. in 1880, and during his active professional life held many
important appointments and was Harveian Orator in 1910. He was physician
and lecturer on Medicine at Westminster Hospital and Physician to the East
London Hospital for Children, and Examiner in Medicine at the Royal College
of Physicians. He was the author of many papers dealing with mental deficiency
and criminality.
Donkin was appointed a Prison Commissioner in 1898 and threw himself
with ardour into the duties of that office. He was an active member of the
Royal Commission on the care and control of the feeble-minded (1908) the
outcome of which was the Mental Deficiency Act (1913).
He retired from his post as Commissioner of Prisons in 1910 on attaining
the age of 65, and his valuable services were recognised by the knighthood
conferred on him in the following year. His activities on the Prison Commission
were continued after retirement, as medical adviser to the Prisons Board and as
Director of Convict Prisons. In addition he was made a member of the Board
of Visitors for the State Inebriate Reformatory at Aylesbury, a member of the
Visiting Committee of the Borstal Institution at Aylesbury, and a member of
the Advisory Committee at Camp Hill in the Isle of Wight, which is a prison
for men undergoing sentences of preventive detention. He continued his valuable
services in this last appointment until a few months before his death.
Sir Bryan was a loyal friend, a firm but kindly administrator and one who
was always ready to place his wide general knowledge of medicine and his special
knowledge of nervous and mental diseases at the service of his colleagues.
G. B. Cx.
