Education of Children of Combined Defect
===========================================

[Thanks to the courtesy of the Association of Education Committees we are able to print
Mr. W. Popplestone's Memorandum on the Education of Children of Combined Defect, which
was forwarded by the Association to the Board of Education. In our January issue we pub-
lished a letter on this subject from Mr. Popplestone, who is the Director of Education for
Shipley, Yorkshire, and readers may recollect the article in the October number, 1926, by
Dr. Carleton Williams (Divisional Medical Officer for the L.C.C.).]
Memorandum on the Education of Children
of Combined Defect.

1. In offering suggestions for the effective provision of education for
children who are suffering from Combined Defects, consideration must first be
given to?
(a) the types of cases to be dealt with; and
(b) the numbers of children who, after medical examination and skilled
testing, are certified as educable.
2. The Return which I submitted to the Association early last year from
particulars furnished by 195 Local Education Authorities revealed the following
types :?

(a) Children who are not Mentally Defective :? Boys. Girls. Total.
1. Blind and deaf ... ... ... ... ... 3 5 8
2. Blind or partially blind and physically defective 11 11 22
3. Deaf or dumb and physically defective ... ... 4 2 6
4. Deaf or partially deaf and dumb or semi-mute 5 3 8
5. Blind and epileptic ... ... ... ... ... 4 2 6
6. Deaf and epileptic ... ... ... ... ... 1 0 1
7. Physically defective and epileptic ... ... 8 3 11
Total number of cases in the areas of 195
Authorities ... ... ... ... ... 36 26 62

(b) Children who are Mentally Defective :?
1. Blind or partially blind and mentally defective 93 71 164
2. Deaf or partially deaf and mentally defective 109 82 191
3. Dumb or semi-mute and mentally defective ... 12 8 20
4. Epileptic and mentally defective ... ... 357 296 653
5. Physically defective and mentally defective ... 258 198 456
Total number of cases in the areas of 195
Authorities ... ... ??? ??? 829 655 1484

As these figures cover less than two-thirds of the country, it may be
assumed that there are about 100 cases of the types (a) 1 to 7, and more than
2,200 of the types (b) 1 to 5 in England and Wales.

CHILDREN WHO ARE NOT MENTALLY DEFECTIVE:
-------------------------------------------

3. All the cases of the types included in paragraphs 2 (a) 1 to 7 are
described as of normal mentality, and are therefore educable.
4. Notwithstanding the variety of their defects, these children can all be
accommodated in one institution, the small number of epileptics being separated
from the non-epileptics.

5. As all the children of these classes in the country would thereby be
collected in one school, the institution could conveniently be established in one
of the Midland Counties.

CHILDREN WHO ARE MENTALLY DEFECTIVE :
--------------------------------------

G. The children who are mentally defective and are also suffering from
one or more other defects demand more detailed consideration. They are much
more numerous than the cases in which mentality is normal, and the extent of
their defects is more difficult to diagnose, as requiring more careful and pro-
longed testing. It is possible that very many of the children will need permanent
care and supervision, and will fall to be dealt with by the Board of Control
on or shortly after reaching the age of 1G. On the other hand, there are
probably a fair number of the children who are not properly described as
mentally defective?because of the difficulty of diagnosis?and whose mentality
is but little retarded.

7. Of Mentally Defective Epileptics it is estimated that there are nearly
1,000 cases of children of school age in England and Wales. The Medical
Officer of a County Borough Authority has expressed the view that epilepsy
is almost invariably associated, in the mentally defective, with progressive mental
deterioration, and that fits associated with sclerotic amentia are especially hope-
less. This Medical Officer also suggests the desirability of making special
provision for cases of post-encephalitic moral degeneration. Some of these are
certainly amenable to skilled moral treatment in an institution, and the matter
is engaging the attention of the Board of Education. In view, however, of the
special difficulties which these cases present, and of the vary large number which
would need to be dealt with, I do not propose to include them in the present
suggestions.

8. Neither do I desire to suggest at present any provision for the education
of mentally defective children who are also suffering from physical defects.
It is estimated that there are nearly 700 of these crippled mentally defectives
in the country. They are in a class apart, and constitute a problem quite different
from that of the types described above, and much more complicated. In due
course, the needs of these unfortunate children should be considered and pro-
vided for as far as possible, but provision for the simpler types should first be
undertaken.

9. The types of cases to which particular attention should be directed are
those included in paragraph 2 (b) 1, 2 and 3 above, viz. : Blind or partially blind
mentally defectives, deaf or partially deaf mentally defectives, and dumb or
mental welfare. 101
semi-mute mentally defectives. Of these types there are probably 560 cases in
the whole country, and judging- from the remarkable success of the late Mrs.
J. Meiklejon at St. Leonards and of the London County Council at their Institu-
tion at Penn, it is fair to assume that 300 of these children are educable.
10. It has been suggested that most children who are mentally defective
and blind, or mentally defective and deaf, probably owe their condition to
congenital syphilis, and that such cases will tend to degenerate still further as
they grow older. Therefore, by the kindness of the Directors and Medical
Officers of ten Authorities in whose areas a large number of these defectives
have been found, I have arranged for a careful investigation to be made of
the cases, and the result of the inquiry has proved that there is no foundation
for the suggestion. Of 143 cases?58 blind mentally defectives and 85 deaf
mentally defectives?only ten children have been found whose condition is
attributable to congenital syphilis.

11. The educable cases of these types are therefore sufficiently numerous
to require the establishment of two institutions?one for blind or partially blind
mentally defectives?about 130 children?and the other for deaf or partially deaf
mentally defectives and dumb or semi-mute mentally defectives?about 90 cases.
The first of these schools should be located in the North of England, and the
other in one of the Midland Counties. The London County Council's School
at Penn, intended primarily for deaf mentally defectives, has accommodation for
about 80 children.

INSTITUTIONS MOST URGENTLY NEEDED.
-----------------------------------

12. I have ventured to suggest the establishment of three institutions,
namely :?
1. A school for 100 children who are suffering from more than one defect
but are of normal intelligence, to be established in one of the Midland
Counties.
2. A school for 130 blind or partially blind mentally defectives, to be
located in one of the Northern Counties; and
3. A school for 90 deaf or partially deaf mentally defectives and dumb
or semi-mute mentally defectives, to be established in the Midlands.

HOW THE INSTITUTIONS MAY BE ESTABLISHED :
------------------------------------------

13. Children suffering from combined defects are found in small numbers
in the area of almost every Local Education Authority in the country, and are
not sufficiently numerous in any one area, with the exception of London, to
warrant the Authority in incurring the expenditure necessary for the establish-
ment of suitable schools. To this circumstance is due the fact that the education
of these children has been wholly neglected by provincial Authorities.
14. The following are alternative methods of dealing with the problem.
The necessary provision might be made
(a) by some voluntary body;
(b) by the Local Education Authority of a large area or by a combination
of Authorities, for the benefit of children in the Authorities' own
districts, and in the areas of other Authorities who would contribute
towards the cost of maintenance of the institutions;
(c) by the Board of Education, on the analogy of the institutions for
specially difficult types of mentally defectives, which have been
established and are maintained by the Board of Control.

15. The first of these methods has been tried with much enthusiasm, but
it has not hitherto been possible for voluntary workers to benefit more than
a very small number of the children who need provision. The pioneer school for
Blind Mentally Defective Children, a voluntary institution established by the
late Mrs. J. Meiklejon at St. Leonards-on-Sea in 1903, did magnificent work
for 22 years. It was closed in December, 1925, owing to financial strain and
the failing health of the founder, who was also responsible for two other
institutions for mentally defective children. The school was certified by the
Board of Education, and affiliated to the National Association for the Feeble-
minded, but Education Authorities and other bodies interested in blind mentally
defective children were either unaware of its existence or did not consider that
a voluntary establishment was the most suitable for such children, as the
Institution was never full. When it was closed, Mrs. Meiklejon experienced
the utmost difficulty in placing the children, as they were unsuitable for any
existing institution for the training of children of one defect. She considered
that there was the direst need for special provision for the education of these
unfortunate cases.

16. Mrs. A. E. Priestley, at the Kindergarten Preparatory Boarding School,
The Mount, Whitby, receives a very small number of dumb or semi-mute
children of retarded mentality; and a small institution?The Ellen Terry National
Home for Blind Mentally Defective Children?with accommodation for 18
children, has been established at Reigate.

17. The Essex Voluntary Association, a Welfare Organization which is
doing a useful work in the administrative County of Essex and the County
Borough of East Ham in the training of adults and children who are either blind
or mentally defective, also undertakes the training and supervision of children
of combined defect in workhouses or in their own homes or boarded out with
foster parents.

18. The second alternative?the provision by one Local Education Authority
or a combination of Authorities of each of the three institutions now urgently
required is a practical proposition. Three schools so established, for the types
of children specified, would meet the present need so far as strictly educable
children of these types are concerned, at a small cost. The Board of Education
consider that provision would appear to be best made by one or more Authorities
as suggested, and have expressed their willingness to consider any proposals
that may be put forward by Authorities for the provision of suitable schools.
Other Authorities from whose areas children were sent to the institutions would
contribute towards the cost of maintenance of the schools.
19. In view of this expression of opinion by the Board, the third alterna-
tive?the provision of institutions by the Board of Education?is not practicable
at the present time.

20. Of these three methods I suggest the second for the special considera-
tion of the Executive of the Association of Education Committees and of
Authorities by whom the provision can most easily be made?the provision of
each of the three institutions required, by the Local Education Authority for one
large area or by a combination of Authorities.

21. The largest number of Children of Normal Intelligence who are
suffering from Combined Defects are found in Birmingham, Gloucestershire,
the West Riding, Hull, Bristol, Bury, Kent and Manchester.
Blind Mentally Defective Children are most numerous in Salford, Oldham,
the West Riding, Bristol, the Isle of Ely and Manchester.

Deaf Mentally Defectives are found in largest numbers in London, Derby-
shire, Birmingham, Staffordshire, the West Riding, Salford and iNorthumberland.
22. If I might venture to ask the special attention of individual Authorities
to the question of providing the necessary schools, I would request the con-
sideration of the Birmingham Committee to the needs of the children of Normal
Intelligence; the Manchester, Salford and Oldham Committees to the require-
ments of the Blind Mentally Defectives, and the Derbyshire, Birmingham and
Staffordshire Committees to the cases of Mentally Defectives who are Deaf
or Dumb. In making provision for the education of these unfortunate children
the Authorities would be doing a humane as well as an educational work, and
their proposals would, I believe, receive the sympathetic consideration of the
Board of Education.

23. It may be that other situations than those I have suggested may be
found more convenient as the places in which the Institutions should be
established, and that individual Authorities rather than Joint Committees of
Authorities may best undertake the work. I merely offer the suggestions I have
submitted as a basis for consideration.
W. POPPLESTONE.
