Dulness in Rural Children
==========================

18 MENTAL WELFARE.
By G. A. Gordon Johnstone, M.A., M.D. Cantab., D.P.H.,
Assistant County Medical Officer, Lanes, (late of Wilts.)
The early diagnosis and certification of Mentally Defective cases is becoming
increasingly important, but we are still a considerable distance from the posi-
tion where we can make full use of the Mental Deficiency Act.
Generally speaking, it would be true to say that practically all mental
defectives should be diagnosed whilst they are of school age. The great majority
of them are in attendance, at some time, at our public elementary schools. There
is no difficulty in recognising the Idiot, Imbecile and the low-grade Feeble-
minded groups, but it is not easy always to distinguish the high-grade Feeble-
minded children. In the first place, the possibility of mental deficiency has not
occurred to the teacher and, in the second, it is not always possible for a case
of this type to be recognised by its behaviour during the ordinary routine medical
inspection held at our public elementary schools.
When we remember that the present definition of Feeble-minded Persons is
" persons in whose case there exists from birth or from an early age, mental defec-
tiveness  so pronounced that they require care, supervision,
and control for their own protection or for the protection of others," etc., it will
be appreciated in dealing with a feeble-minded adult brought to notice for
anti-social( behaviour, that it is important to be able to refer to some earlier
part of the person's life for information which, if satisfactorily obtained, may
enable the case to be dealt with by the more humane machinery of the 1913 Act
than by the ordinary penal code.
During recent years, School Medical Inspectors have been using, to an
increasing extent, some form of standardised scale of test questions, which
makes the work of diagnosis more easy and more accurate, but these scales
must, of course, be reg'arded only as one of several methods of diagnosis, much
in the same way as a stethoscope is of value in the diagnosis of a case of
pneumonia.
Nobody would diagnose a borderland case of mental deficiency by a standard
scale alone, but the more we know about the use of a scale the fewer the mis-
takes we shall be likely to make, and the more clearly we shall realise the limi-
tations of its use.
Work with the aid of a scale has hitherto been chiefly done1 in urban areas.
The following figures are, however, derived from observations on elementary
school children in one of the most sparsely populated counties in England, and
apply only to Dull and Backward children?cases which are just above the level
of certification, unless they have exhibited any marked features such as mental
instability or anti-social behaviour, etc.
In this series of cases, by means of the Stanford Revision of the Binet Simon
Scale, the mental breakage points have been ascertained, that is to say, in each
individual case those years have been taken in which the child has begun to fail
in his answers. For instance, let us suppose that we are dealing with a dull child
of twelve years of age, whose mental age is found to be nine-and-a-half years?
with an intelligent quotient of approximately 80. In the scale tests, the child
will probably be found to miss one or two questions of the eight-year-old group,
.Mental welfare.
* ? Lonc ia nnCftWpr onlv one or two in the ten yesr
more in the nine year sToup. perhaps o ? The record of these tilree
group, and to fail completely f ? asinJfailure, has been noted, and the
years in which there was a gr, y ? convenience, the group has been
results have been combined and analysed For ^en.en^^ g? ^ ^
limited to children whose intelligence qu ncrPc virv from six to four-
the figures 69 and 80, and ?-
struct^^bhTwhich'demonstrat^ "he gradual breakdown as the dull children
further and further behind in their failures with the question .
STAMFORD REVISION.
Age Group
No. of questions put ...
No. answered correctly
Percentage answered correctly
20
17
85
62
42
157
110
67 70
288
188
62
390
249
63
480
255
53
470
277
59
10
403
202
50
12
155
51
33
17
17
J
It will, however, be more instructive to consider the various age groups in
more detail, and to notice the individual breakage points and their nature.
During the first year age group, owing to the small number of observations
and the relatively slight deviation from normal of the children^ no very definite
features are shown. It is, perhaps, just worth noticing that in the four year
group only three out of ten children could repeat four digits (one out o tiiree
trials). The successful performance of this test depends large y upon aiten ion
<*nd concentration. Again, in Group 5, the two earliest breaking points are
tests in which sustained attention and memory are involved . (a) Arrangement o
two triangles to make a quadrilateral like one shown; and (b) the performance
?f three simple errands.
In Group 6, we meet with another feature. Less than half the children could
name three out of four common English coins. This test is of doubtful value,
especially in essentially rural children. Less than half the children could repeat
a sentence (one of three trials) of 16-17 syllables. This test again depends on
memory and sustained concentration.
In Group 7, we again find that the two weakest groups of answers are in
those subjects where sustained concentration is required : ^a) Ability to repeat
five numbers forward, and (b) three numbers backwards. 1 he failures were not
due to the inability of the children to understand the nature of the tesL, but to
lack of power to fix their minds on it. Next to these answers is the comparative^
poor response when asked to name the days of the week-only twenty out of
thirty-five children being able to do this.
In Group 8, it is rather surprising to find that the worst answered questions
(fifteen out of sixty-eie-ht) of the whole group in the Ball and Field test, which,
^ a certain extent, depends upon practical planning. We might expect better
results in rural children, but in practice they have great difficulty in grasping
the nature of the problem and even then their efforts are poor. Next in order of
Poorness is the vocabulary test. Only one out of three could give satisfactory
definitions to twenty simple words. 'I his failure is also noticeable in later age
groups. Only thirty-nine out of seventy-five were able to give similarities between
coal and wood, etc. The answers to these questions were often interesting. It
20 MENTAL WELFARE,
was often remarkable how a child, after once grasping- the idea of similarity in
the first part of the question, and giving a satisfactory answer, returned almost
persistently to give replies of contrast. This is, again, in some degree a con-
centration test.
The nine year group of questions, generally speaking, is of a rather more
practical nature than the other age groups, and it has been noticed that the
percentage of correct replies shows a slight increase. The poorest response is
found in the inability of naming the months of the year (eleven out of twenty-six
children), and only half the children could do a simple addition sum, using postage
stamps. The other two poor responses in this group are again found in prob-
lems which require attention and sustained mental effort: (a) repetition of four
numbers backwards, and (b) finding three rhymes to a given word. Failure in
the latter appears to be due more to lack of attention and ability to concentrate
than to poverty of vocabulary.
By the time we come to the ten year group, there is a marked increase in
the breakage points of dull children. Once again the problem demanding con-
centration heads the list of failures. Only eleven out of thirty-six repeated six
digits correctly in order. The next worst failure is in the vocabulary test, where
only one child in three was successful. Following this is a comparative failure
(eleven out of twenty-nine) in a test which depends upon several factors, but
chiefly upon concentration. The child is asked, with appropriate demonstration,
to say as many words as possible in three minutes. The problem is easily under-
stood, and failure seems to be chiefly due to the child being unable to keep the
problem continually in his mind.
The figures in the twelve year group are small. Most of the dull children
brought forward by teachers had broken down completely before reaching this
mental age. We may just note that only one child in five passed the vocabulary
test. It seems as if this fest is perhaps hardly fair for rural children. The next
most evident failure is in the Dissected Sentences test, which requires ability in
the use of words, as well as initiative and concentration.
For practical purposes, the 14 year group is beyond the dull children of
elementary school age.
From the above, we see that the two weakest factors are : (1) Sustained
Mental Effort; (2) Vocabulary and Word Usage.
It may also be noted that the breakdown occurs last in : (1) Association
tests, relating to common objects and their functions, and (2) Tests of spontaneous
interest in environment. Comprehension in these children is slow, but not unduly
poor.
In using the Stanford Revision Scale, these factors should be borne in mind,
in so far as rural children are concerned.
