Mental Genetic Studies of Genius
==================================

MENTAL WELFARE. 53
Book Reviews *32 Abstracts.
Vnl 1. . * 'd Gifted
and Physical Traits of a rhouS ... 648
Children. By ^^
Three Hundred Geniuses. By Catherine
Morris Cox. xxm. + 8^ PP' ?j et each
Harrap & Co., Ltd. 1926. 2". ne
No attempt is made in these ^?^Sd'?t^guish
the essential nature of genius, o volume
between genius and talent. In the: hr?
Professor Terman gives a dfrtedaccou ^
three hundred children in the .? ts were
of America whose intelligence qu rnnlete for
140 or over. The researeh .s mcomplete ^
these thousand cases are to be discovering
at least ten years, with a view to
how far the future performance o ^e
will agree with their present Pr? -n what
purpose of this first report is to ,.ff from
way a group of " gifted " children^
a group of normal non-selected c facts
The book is a crowded storehouse of acts
and statistics from which many infere"ce^ no
drawn by the author, and still m?rc m
doubt, be drawn by the reader None of them
are startling : most of them confirm strated
of previous investigators. Galton wjt^
that genius ran in families in accoi search
the laws of heredity. The Pr^" children
abundantly confirms this view. Br b m:i;es
do not always belong to distinguis le
but the probability of this doing; j n<
enormously greater than for mediocre .
Nearly a quarter of the members of the ?
tan Hall of Fame are known to be relal
?ne or more of the thousand subjects ex :?te(j
Another important inference is ia g
ehildren are as a rule stronger, hea 1 > <T,jie
better-behaved than normal children.
notion that bright children are neurotic,
healthy, and difficult to manage is pro\e
have no foundation in fact.
A few of the most interesting finding >
briefly be recorded. The average age o
father of a gifted child is 34 ; of the motier'
The gifted child is very frequently the fir
born of a family; his parents are long- >
and very rarely is his heredity tainte
physical or mental disease. He is a ,
heavier, better developed, and has a.
breathing capacity, than the ordinary chi ?
is a significant fact that only 8 per cent, o
total number of bright children were bottle-fed
during the entire period, while 48 per cent,
were wholly breast-fed, and 44 per cent, were
partly breast-fed?a proportion of breast-
feeding which is much higher than for the
general population.
The one salient exception to the clean medical
record of the bright children is that more than
half of them have undergone tonsillectomy, as
compared with a quarter of the control group.
This does not necessarily point to a greater
frequency of enlarged tonsils : it may mean
greater parental care and vigilance, and more
thorough medical supervision.
Gifted children sleep more than their
comrades.
The gifted child as a rule loves school, learns
to read without formal instruction, does two
hours' homework a week, and is rarely as far
advanced in his lessons as his intelligence would
warrant. Terman attributes this to the general
tendency of teachers to keep back precocious
children. Finally, the bright child shows his
superiority most in general information, and
least in history and civics. It must be borne
in mind that these conclusions are drawn from
the group of cases studied, and must not be
regarded as necessarily true of any one par-
ticular child.
Gifted children exhibit as much variety in
individual traits as do ordinary children.
The reading records show that the average
gifted child of seven reads more books in a
given time than the ordinary child of fifteen,
and his range of reading is much wider.
Vol. II is of greater interest than Vol. I to
the general reader, though not, perhaps, to the
teacher and social worker. Dr. Cox, acting
under the guidance of Professor Terman (who,
by the way, edits the series), selected 300
eminent men and women who lived between the
vears 1450 and 1850 a.d. The field was
restricted to those who were deservedly emin-
ent, and again to those of whose childhood
there were sufficient records to enable the
author and her helpers to arrive at an estimate
of their intelligence quotients. It was found
convenient to make two estimates, one based
on achievements up to the age of seventeen,
and the other on achievements from between
the ages of seventeen and twenty-six. The
assessors applied to this material the norms
and standards at which they had arrived by
testing the intelligence and scholastic attain-
ments of present-day American children. The
36 MENTAL WELFARE.
author has collected and has presented in this
book the largest store of information with re-
gard to the childhood of men of genius that
has ever been placed before the public. That
in itself, quite apart from the attempt to apply
modern standards to ancient performances,
invests this book with an interest and a value
which are unique.
The reader would probably be glad to learn
the actual quotients assigned to some of the
best-known of the 300 celebrities. Here they
are (the intelligence quotient estimated from the
achievements of childhood is placed first, and
the quotient estimated from the achievements of
late adolescence is placed second) :
John Bunyan, 105, 120; Cervantes, 105, 110;
Sir Francis Drake, 105, 110; Michael Faraday,
105, 150; Oliver Cromwell, 110, 115; Raphael,
110, 150; Rembrandt, 110, 135; Oliver Gold-
smith, 115, 115; Martin Luther, 115, 145; Ben
Jonson, 120, 145; Van Dyck, 120, 135; Joseph
Addison, 125, 140; John Bright, 125, 130;
Abraham Lincoln, 125, 140; John Locke, 125,
135; Nelson, 125, 145; Sir Joshua Reynolds,
125, 125; Swift, 125, 130; Velasquez, 125,
140; Balzac, 130, 145; Robert Burns, 130, 130;
Sir Isaac Newton, 130, 170; Rousseau, 130,
125; Sheridan, 130, 145; Beethoven, 135, 140;
Edmund Burke, 135, 150; Darwin, 135, 140;
Kant, 135, 145; Sir Thomas More, 135, 135;
Bonaparte, 135, 140; Thackeray, 135, 140;
Leonardo da Vinci, 135, 150; Wagner, 135,
150; John Wesley, 135, 140 ; Lord Lytton, 140,
145; Carlyle, 140, 155; Rubens, 140, 140;
Francis Bacon, 145, 155; Charles Dickens, 145,
155; Disraeli, 145, 150; Emerson, 145, 145;
Gibbon, 145, 155; Handel, 145, 155; John
Milton, 145, 170; Byron, 150, 170; Descartes,
150, 160; Victor Hugo, 150, 170; Longfellow,
150, 160; Mozart, 150, 155; Scott, 150, 155;
Wordsworth, 150, 155; Hume, 155, 160;
Johnson, 155, 155; Tennyson, 155, 160;
William Pitt, 160, 180; Pope, 160, 170;
Wolsey, 165, 165; Voltaire, 170, 180; Cole-
ridge, 175, 165 ; Bentham, 180, 170; Macaulay,
180, 165; Pascal, 180, 180; Goethe, 185, 210;
Liebnitz, 185, 190; John Stuart Mill, 190, 170.
P. B. Ballard.
Mind and Personality. By William Brown,
M.D., D.Sc., Wilde Reader in Mental
Philosophy in the University of Oxford.
Pp. x., 344. (London. University of
London Press. 1927, 12/6.)
This book is an attempt to deal with the
problem of personality along special lines, to
work out some sort of harmony by adjusting
the points of view of psychology, psycho-
pathology, philosophy, biology, logic, ethics,
metaphysics and religious experience. Person-
ality is left undefined, but the concept of
mental unity is offered as a guiding line.
In his introduction, Dr. Brown ascribes great
advances in recent years to Freud's analytic
method of approach, which teaches us how the
experiences that have special bearing upon
development are conative and emotional in their
nature and related to the most fundamental
instincts and impulses. The old problem ot
mind and body of course has to be faced and
the author dismisses in turn the purely
mechanistic view, held by those who consider
the only solid knowledge we have is that of
the structure and functioning of the human
body, and the theories of automatism, inter-
actionism and parallelism. When regretting
the division of physicians into those who ex-
clude the mental and those who ignore the
physical, Dr. Brown could have made a plea
for the student, who is generally given a bias
towards the belief that mechanistic explana-
tions cover the whole of medicine, with no hint
of its philosophical difficulties and practical
disadvantages. The nature of the mind 5s
gradually changing from the cradle to the
grave; this may be paralleled by a difference
of anatomical structure, but we shall, he says>
have to wait a long time before physiology can
give us much helpful insight into the structure
of personality.
The structure of the mind is described in
accordance with McDougall's theories ?*
instincts, and a nice distinction is drawn be-
tween complexes and sentiments in regard to
the effect upon them of analysis. The com-
plexes, dependent upon repression, can be got
rid of by analysis; do sentiments, regarded by
Dr. Brown as normal and healthy, run any
risk of being interfered with? Perhaps the
question arises from a tendency of the author
towards an arbitrary dichotomy between
normal and abnormal, the normal being what
is approved by him. Sentiments, if there ?s
anything in psycho-analysis, are unconsciously
motivated, although consciously recognised,
and they may be as anti-social and as harmfu'
to the individual as a complex.
Dr. Brown rightly defends modern psycho-
logy against the charge that it tends to weaken
the sense of moral responsibility, its task being
mental welfare?. 57
the modest one of attempting to ra .
cedent factors of wrongdoing" in the cr
heredity, mental constitution and envir. .v t
It certainly does not countenance the vi
all criminals suffer from mental 1 ne ,
that mental illness is an invariab y su
excuse for crime. # ,
The chapter on mental development in c 1
hood is rather commonplace, and the p
advice of sex instruction prompts ?ne lt:ps
what the fuss is about. Surely tie 1 . .
of sex instruction arise from adult sen >
involving secrecy and emotional e^P asl ' t:
if we could only strip ourselves of these
ments?or complexes?the child would exp ^
ence no more trouble in this su jec
any other. Dr. Brown discusses the ns
" shock " in giving sex instruction, a
not seem to think the existence of such
calls for explanation. What is t er^
mind of the child that should make_th p
ticular knowledge cause shock. cv,nrk
possible answer is that the foundation ?
has already been laid by adult mis-handling.
The chapters on psycho-pathology begin with
an account of physical factors, with tie \
ing, however, that these are in little danger
being underestimated ; medical men are more
danger of neglecting the psychologica ave
?f approach. Suggestion and hypnosis, ps)
analysis, and mental dissociation are adequa y
handled, but occasionally there crop up P?
?f view which seem based upon persona
positions of the author. Thus Freud s e
tion of conscience from the CEdipus comp ? >
against which several arguments can.
adduced, is met by the generalisation that tnese
repressive tendencies belong to the pat 10 ogic
and not to the normal, and so far as they are
conscience are not true conscience. Psyc o ?t>y'
says Dr. Brown, can explain excess or
deficiency of conscientiousness but not, appar
ently, a " normal " conscience, since that is
a -matter of ethics. The distinction between
normal and pathological is a graded one an
not enough to justify thrusting the one ou^
side the domain of psychology. Dr- Brown s
exposition and criticism of psycho-ana y ica
principles are straightforward and helpful; he
stops short of complete agreement, but leaves
no doubt as to his belief in the soundness an
practical value of the methods. Since is
approach to the subject has been cautious and
guided always by personal experience, preceded
by adequate knowledge of general psychology
and philosophy, his opinions and criticisms
carry weight. Psycho-analysis has suffered as
much from the absence of effective criticism as
it has from ignorant abuse.
Our author's interests are plainly drawn most
of all to the philosophical point of view. He
asks what is the significance and importance
of the emotions in the formulation of the moral
ideal, and from this point departs more and
more from psychology in the direction of
philosophy and metaphysics. Aristotelian
ethics are, as he says, based almost exclusively
upon psychological data, and yet he claims
Aristotle as a supporter of intuitionism result-
ing from the purification, by experience, of a
moral insight which had always been present
as an essential potentiality of the human soul.
In considering ethics and the study of values,
Dr. Brown regards certain philosophical and
religious mental states as the normal; here he
might bear in mind a principle laid down by
Jung that people of any one psychological type
inevitably regard their own attitude to the
universe as the normal, and can rarely admit
the equal validity of the attitude of people of
other types. Neither Dr. Brown nor his readers
can escape from the working of this principle.
The scope of Dr. Brown's task is so immense
that one questions whether any specific science
is in a position to have its teachings integrated
with that of the others for his purpose. If we
look at psychology alone, the knowledge gained
during the last two decades through the work
of Freud has not yet been assimilated to the
general body of psychological knowledge, still
less to remoter sciences. Wide reading and
much thought are shown in this attempt to
gather together a number of divergent lines;
it is well done, but we are left with the feeling
that the chasm separating us from a knowledge
of personality is greater than we thought.
Millais Culpin.
An Introduction to Forensic Psychiatry
in the Criminal Courts. By W. Norwood
East, M.D. (J. & A. Churchill. 1927.
16/-)
Dr. Norwood East has produced a volume
of remarkable interest and value, not only
to the medical practitioner, but to everyone
concerned with the care of defectives and
the administration of the criminal law. His
early chapters on " Ascertainment " and
58 MENTAL WELFARE.
" Criminal Responsibility " could not be
bettered in respect of expert knowledge and
practical advice on methods of examination,
on the proper functions of a medical witness
and on the considerations which should enter
into the advice he gives the Court. He
emphasises a point which would reassure the
public greatly if it were better known, i.e.,
that a prison doctor, although a state official,
regards the prisoner primarily as a patient,
and is absolutely impartial in his examina-
tion, which is, moreover, conducted with
every safeguard against entrapping a pri-
soner into making a statement to his
detriment.
In a lucid series of chapters, Dr. East
describes the main forms of psychosis and the
common varieties of crime to which they may
give rise. Like the late Dr. Sullivan of
Broadmoor, he lays great stress on the
dangerous potentialities of dementia praecox
and the comparative unimportance of
epilepsy. His exposition of the complex
subject of epileptic " forgetting " is par-
ticularly clear and helpful, and he is equally
illuminating on the difficult problem of dis-
tinguishing the malinger and the hysteric
from the truly insane.
On the subject of defectives, Dr. East is a
sure guide on disputed points. He confirms
other recent findings on the small number of
defectives found within prison walls. His
own figures from Brixton show 1.3 per cent,
certifiable under the Mental Deficiency Act,
1.3 per cent, subnormal but not certifiable,
and 1.5 per cent, insane. The Boys' Prison
at Wandsworth, naturally, gives a rather
higher proportion, but even here only 10
per cent, belong to these three groups. He
insists that it is essential in dealing with
crime to distinguish between mental
deficiency and inefficiency. " The Mental
Deficiency and Lunacy Acts provide for
the rational treatment of the defective and
the insane criminal, but a large group of
mental inefficients consisting of subnormals,
cases of undeveloped psychosis and psycho-
neuroses remain outside the scope of the
Acts. It is important to bear them con-
stantly in mind and not attempt to stretch
the definition of mental deficiency to include
any of them; otherwise the true defective
may suffer from the consequent administra-
tive and judicial difficulties and complexities
that will arise."
The author gives some interesting- case
histories of " moral imbeciles," and he up-
holds the view that the moral imbecile need
not be defective in intelligence and could not
always be defined as "feeble-minded." "In
short, they appear to be uncontrolled by wis-
dom, by moral perception and moral senti-
ment, whether the instinctive factors are at
fault or not." The psychological basis of
moral imbecility remains obscure, and Dr.
East suggests that we may be dealing with
" a symptom-complex founded on different
psychological bases." A warning is added
as to the great need for care in diagnosis of
this group. Persistent disturbances of con-
duct due to bad environment and training,
immaturity or compulsion neuroses should be
carefully excluded. It is reassuring that
Dr. East approves the attitude of the Central
Association for Mental Welfare in regard to
sterilization, and by inference in many other
important points bearing on the welfare of
defectives.
L. Fairfield.
The Child's Path to Freedom. By Norman
MacMunn, with a foreword by T. Percy Nunn,
M.A., D.Sc. (J. Curwen & Sons, Ltd. 1926.
5/-.)
This is a book with an ideal. Mr?
MacMunn had a vision, a vision for which
the educational world at the time was totally
unprepared, and for which as a general rule
it is almost equally unready to-day. If in
1927 his basic ideals are regarded by some
with enthusiasm, by more with toleration,
but by the great majority with scepticism if
not antagonism, in 1914 they were treated
as a violation of a grimly-rooted and com-
pletely satisfactory system, and entirely
revolutionary.
Broadly speaking, however, we have much
to learn from Mr. MacMunn, his attitude to
the child, and his experience as to results.
It is, however, scarcely necessary to add
that his method as it stands is not practi-
cable in the average elementary school of
to-day; at the same time, we must allow,
and even urge, that there is much suggested
within the pages of " The Child's Path to
Freedom " that should find place in every
class-room. The spirit of Mr. MacMunn
does indeed exist in the present day educa-
MENTAL WELFARE. 59
lonal system under the forms of industrial
with beginners, Dalton plans with older
c ildren, and many excellent modifications
? where they are effectually, sanely
j. systematically carried out. All this is
?lng' much to enlarge the outlook of
e11 dren and to ensure that each is put in the
vay of being able to develop his own per-
sonality, so that specialisation during later
?C ??1 life is possible, and ensuring that all
re no^ now turned out, as it were, " to
Pa tern." Much, however, yet remains to
uone, and we agree that in very truth
oes the outlook of the existing educational
owers^ need itself an education. At the
tin*1'6 tlme' &rowth in these matters is con-
to^ ' .as we see experimentalists tolerated
? ay? if not with enthusiasm at least with
us and greater things are yet before
we but continue in the spirit of what
reG ,are taught here. It is a book well worth
si a'n8" we may not agree, but at least we
bea i learn? we may not adopt, but we shall
lop- f to aPPiy J Mr. MacMunn's psycho-
g} may not convince us in dealing with
bett ?W? ^ 0-m or ?etty' but we shall ke the
stanr^ ^-tS study and our children will
rj ht to &ain. The child is not necessarily
Oy every time, but he is right sometimes.
exPerience counts for a good deal, but
bo0j^re infallible, and if the study of this
as tL-Wl^ help us towards realisation such
of v 'f' an5* the reconstruction of our sense
Vajn a ues it will not have been written in
S. J. Hardcastle.
Foundations of Social Hygiene. (J^11
Social Hygiene Council, Inc.
" Now that we see that progressive e _
tion has occurred in the past, and may^
tinued into the future, by that very vlS1 j
are. become responsible for its continuan
proper guidance in our own race. iiat
sentence, Professor Julian Huxley soun s .
is the keynote of the whole volume. e
as a biologist, on the biological approac
social hygiene : Dr. Cyril Burt on the co" r
tion of psychology : Dr. Malinowski on that
anthropology : while Professor Winifred Cum*
discusses the influence of the home, and r
fessor Percy Nunn that of education and trao-
tion. Sir Arthur Newsholme writes or
Community and Social Hygiene " : and Pro-
fessor Arthur Thomson opens the series with
some general considerations on health and its
attainment of which " the generalised moral is
this, that social organisation is not necessarily
a good thing in itself. It requires to be scru-
tinised not only in terms of wealth and
health . . . but in terms of higher values?the
good, the beautiful and the true, with their out-
come in the evolution of man's personality."
" We must look to it that we do not shut our-
selves off from the ultra-violet rays of the
spirit."
Thus from different points of view all the
writers who contribute to this volume see the
possibilities of a society which is not merely
allowed to grow, Topsy-wise, but is built with
a conscious sense of responsibility for the ob-
servance of truths which science makes clearer
every year.
Professor Huxley says that " eugenics is the
stepchild of politics. It deals only in long views
and fares badly in consequence, just as
afforestation has fared badly for the same
reason. So far as social hygiene is concerned,
politics deal only with improvement in the con-
ditions of living, with housing, wages, educa-
tion, sanitation, hours of labour, and the like.
It deals only with each generation as it comes
along. Any serious attempt to understand the
reaction of one generation to the next is still
beyond it." And yet it is shown " that
venereal diseases could be stamped out in a
generation if only a right public opinion in the
matter could be developed."
It is hoped that this collection of papers will
be widely read. It should certainly help to
form public opinion rightly, for on a number of
questions on which public opinion wobbles
lamentably there is a striking measure of agree-
ment between these writers. Not the least
striking is the summary of evidence prepared
by Physiologists and Psychologists and the
statement of the British Social Hygiene Coun-
cil which is based upon it.
Lionel Ellis.
Mental Hygiene with special reference to
the migration of people. (U.S.A. Public
Health Bulletin, No. 148.)
We have received this publication from the
Treasury Department, Public Health Service
at Washington, and find in it a forcible re-
minder of the complicated questions confronting
60 MENTAL WELFARE.
a nation with so vast an immigration problem.
The first part of the report reviews the facilities
in the States for the care of the feeble-minded
and insane, and discusses the principles under-
lying- the methods of treatment and training-.
The chapters dealing- with "Ten decades of
immigration" are of much interest, and the
practical carrying out of the law of 1917 which
requires mental and physical examination of
aliens before admission is described with much
sympathy for the special difficulties of the
examining medical officer. Altogether, the
report is an interesting summary of the
attempt to preserve the U.S.A. from race-
deterioration.
A Study of Masturbation and its Reputed
Sequels. By John F. W. Meagher, M.D.
(Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, 1924. 6/-).
The time is ripe for a clear and sane pro-
nouncement upon the true significance of
masturbation, and so this little book will be
welcomed both by members of the medical pro-
fession and by lay people. After a discussion
of the habit in children and in adults, the author
proceeds to review its symptoms and sequelae,
prevalence and treatment, and in chapter V,
gives a helpful comparison between masturba-
tion and coitus.
We are glad to find points of special import-
ance being clearly emphasized, among these
being the necessity for regarding the habit as
physiological in childhood, as being indeed a
stage of sex-development; the importance and
value of dealing with the accompanying
remorse; the grouping together of masturba-
tory reveries and masturbation as one and the
same thing; the futility, if not the immorality
of suggesting illicit intercourse or marriage as
a cure for masturbation.
Such criticism as we venture to offer is
directed towards contradictory phraseology,
and does not imply any divergence of views.
For instance, although in one part of the book
the term sex-sublimation is used, and advice is
given along these lines, yet, on page 54, under
the heading of " religion as an aid," the author
recommends that everyone should strive to do
his or her best to suppress or repress the sex
impulses. Again, although in Chapter I it is
stated of masturbation that " It is an infantile
way of seeking sex-gratification," later on,
under "effects on character," p. 35, the effects
pf the habit are discussed, instead of
associating* the traits mentioned with an infari*
tile type of personality who masturbates
because his outlook on life is infantile.
would also, in our opinion, have been helpful if
less had been said about the negative course
of struggling against and conquering the habit,
and the attention had been more pointedly
concentrated upon the positive course of slow,
steady growth away from the infantile and
towards the full stature of manhood and
womanhood, since the latter course yields more
stable results. The book is, nevertheless,
warmly recommended to all who wish to gain
an insight into the subject and to glean advice
upon the treatment of individual cases.
A. M. Hutchison.
Report of the Departmental Committee on
the Treatment of Young Offenders.
(H.M. Stationery Office, 1927. 2/6.)
This report has been eagerly awaited since
the appointment of the Committee in January*
1925. The Committee have reviewed the whole
question of the treatment of offenders under the
age of 21, and they divide these into two
groups, those under 17, whether neglected or
delinquent, and those between 17 and 21, who
are offenders. We have no doubt that the re-
port will be studied closely by all who are
dealing with young offenders, and we only pro-
pose to refer to one or two of the most
important points.
The Juvenile Court system is upheld by the
Committee as the best method in this country
for dealing with juvenile cases, and the Com-
mittee advise that the present system be
rapidly extended and immediate appointments
on all benches be made of magistrates especi-
ally suited for the work ; that some means be
devised of sharing experiences among magis-
trates, so that there may be a certain
uniformity of treatment, and that the general
procedure be simplified.
Perhaps the recommendation of major im*
portance in regard to Juvenile Courts is that
their jurisdiction should extend to the age of lj*
The Committee evidently had some difficulty *n
deciding up to what age the Juvenile Courts
should have jurisdiction, and we think they
were on the whole wise to reject the suggestion
of 21. They lecommend, on the other hand,
that 18 should be the age below which sentence
of death cannot be passed. Other recommenda-
tions for the extension of Probation, the
MENTAL WELFARE. 61
Borstal System, After-Care, and ^ y0ung
the guardianship of a neglected c ?olloW 0n
person to an Education Authority,
the lines of advanced opinion. mterest-
For readers of this paper, the most ntere
ing part of the report deals with the faam
for the examination and observa 1
offenders. The Report says
. a the views ex-
" We have been much impresse y rP~ter facilities
pressed to us as to the need of much g < of[en_
for the examination and observation important
ders. To the Court is entrusted applied
function of deciding the right treatm js ad-
to each particular case. Once t ie _p ^ much
mitted that the duty of the Court is lhe offender
to punish for the offence as to rea j ^gnosis of
to the community, the need for acc <? . auenced the
the circumstances and motives _ w i nQt p0S.
offence becomes apparent. ^or ins an , re\ease on
sible for the Court to determine w treatment is
probation or some form of instituti?'''^_ ^ ^ the
called for without the fullest enqu ? der> These
antecedents and surroundings ot t e there is a
enquiries can often best be pursu \s the
remand in custody. But more impo including
need for estimating the Pers,onau. ' There is always
especially mental and physical healt . discovery of
t^ possibility of mental deficiency, the discovery ^
which would lead to special treatment. enceph-
m.. fecent years of that distressing P careful
ahtis lethargica has emphasised th _ who are
examination. It is well known that P^ are i;able
suffering from the sequelae of this dis appear
to lose their mental or moral balance
before the Courts as offenders. ? ? * , .* ?i j{now-
" There is also the help which psyc mental
ledge and training can give in estim:Lrged with
equipment of young people who. are c0'mparatively
offences. Though psychology is stil heinfi given
new science a great deal of attention apply its
to _ it and many medical men cons a > ^ known
Principles in their private practice. rtood posi-
that boys and girls whose parents are 1 < * Qr ca-
tion and who become delinquent a j other
where are frequently taken to neurolog Those
specialists, and proper treatment is aPP' er;ng from
who appear before the Court are oft mental
the same causes, and it is not right ? their
aspect should be ignored in the treatment haS
case. The real value of _Psych?lo?lc^ by sharp
been somewhat obscured in recently fortu-
controversies about particular theories. know-
nately not our function?even if we have ^
ledge?to take any part in such controversy. the
wish to make it clear that in our opini . to
resources of approved medical science in under
the functions of the mind should be availab' >?
any system of observation such as we
(P. 43.)
And the Committee go on to recommend * at
in order to provide places where co"dl??"
could exist for scientific observation, the
should establish three observation Centres, 1
London, in the Midlands and in the North. _
Report states :?
" We have studied the methods adopted in other
countries in meeting this problem, especially in Bel-
gium. We have received a good deal of information
about the Observation Centre for lads at Moll and
the similar Centre for girls at Namur, and several
members of the Committee paid a special visit to
Belgium to study the methods on the spot. The
Central Observation School at Moll, which was
opened in 1915, owed its origin to the passing of an
Act a few years earlier which gave the Juvenile
Courts power to commit children to the care of the
State. To enable the State to fulfil its obligations a
systematic method of observation was felt to be essen-
tial. To this school young people are sent from the
Courts as a preliminary step and their subsequent
treatment depends on the results of the observation
there. The school is organised on the basis of
separate Houses according to age, and there the lads
live for several months under a carefully organised
system of work and recreation, though there is con-
siderable freedom of choice left to the individual. An
ingenious system of 'tests is applied to ascertain as
far as possible the particular boy's tastes, abilities,
and proclivities. As a result of the treatment some
of the lads are returned to their homes after a stay
of a few months (about 10 per cent.), some are
boarded out (about 10 per cent.), some are sent to
voluntary Homes (about 4 per cent.), some are sent
to a State school (about 52 per cent.), and some to
a special institution (about 21 per cent.). Moll is
under a Director of exceptional qualifications and
enthusiasm for the work, and it is apparent that in
this as in other instances the success of an institu-
tion largely depends on the personality of its head.
" The Moll system would not fit in with English
methods in every respect, but its main principle seems
to us to supply an example of the sort of examina-
tion which is required in this country. In order to
justify the employment of the best possible staff we
think it would be right to adopt a scheme which
would provide for the examination and observation,
when necessary, of all persons under 21 and be avail-
able for the Juvenile Courts as well as the Adult
Courts. There would be no objection in principle,
and administratively it would be a great advantage
if Observation Centres could provide for all offenders
under 21, because it would be possible to employ the
same expert staff." (p 44.)
It is scarcely possible to exaggerate the value
of such Observation Centres and we believe
that though this recommendation of the Com-
mittee involves immediate and considerable
expense, it is of such importance and likely to
lead to results of such consequence that even
in the present economic stringency, it should
at once be carried out, at least in London.
Report of the Commissioners of Prisons
and the Directors of Convict Prisons
for the Year 1925-26. (H.M. Stationery
Office, 1927. 1/6.)
The harmful effect of the short sentence, the
prevalence of recidivism and the unsuitability
62 MENTAL WELFARE.
of prison conditions for persons of low or
abnormal mentality are subjects which recur in
almost every one of the Governors' and Medical
Officers' reports which are contained in this
volume.
" During the year under review the general prison
population continued, as before, to show a tendency
to a slow decline.
" Probation, allowance of time in which to pay fines,
and the operation of the Mental Deficiency Act, were,
as for some years past, the chief factors in this decline ;
while the increased efficiency of the agencies for .the
assistance of all classes of prisoners on their discharge,
combined with the training given to as many as possible
during their imprisonment, also contributed in a per-
ceptible degree." (p. 6.)
And later in the report (p. 33) the Medical
Commissioner states :
"As I reported last year, the intelligent application
of the Mental Deficiency Act ,(1913) by Prison Medical
Officers has resulted in the permanent diminution of
the prison population by a large but unknown number?
possibly 200 daily.
" A logical extension of a similar measure to those
persons who are to some degree feeble-minded, though
not so much so as to be certifiable under the Lunacy
or Mental Deficiency Acts, either by some form of in-
determinate sentence or permanent segregation in some
form of special institution or farm colony would un-
doubtedly, in my opinion, lead to the elimination from
the unsuitable environment of a prison of a further
large contingent of weak-minded habitual petty
offenders.
" With the practical elimination of such, a prison
would then be what it ought to be, a place for hard
work, discipline and education, with a view to rehabili-
tation on completion of the sentence."
It is interesting to read the protest made
against the practice of some Justices of con-
victing prisoners about whose mentality they
have doubts, instead of remanding them and
asking- for a medical report before dealing" with
them. The Report states (p. 32) :?
" This practice of conviction first and mental ex-
amination afterwards is not very common, and would
probably disappear altogether if the Justices had the
matter brought to their notice."
The point is, we think, of real importance,
and we hope that steps will be taken to press
for a more constant recourse to mental ex-
amination in doubtful cases. The Medical
Officer of Birmingham Prison has some in-
teresting remarks to make on the intelligence
of prisoners. He says (p. 37) :
" Much attention has been given during recent years
to the estimation of the intelligence of offenders. It
has beep shown that the estimates formerly given as
to the percentage of offenders who are of defective
intelligence were far too high ; on the use, that is to
say, of any reasonable standard of measurement, for
a scheme could be devised which would bring the
majority of persons, whether offenders or otherwise,
within the category of intelligence defectives. This
most necessary work must, of course, continue; for
the elimination of possible defect of intelligence must be
one of the first steps taken when dealing with any
case ; but defect of intelligence is not the only nor the
most frequent nor the most important mental abnor-
mality acting as a causative factor in the production
of delinquency. It is becoming clear that defect of
intelligence is not to be compared in importance to
emotional abnormality. It is to the estimation of these
emotional abnormalities that our work must now be
directed. All persons suffer, to some extent, from
emotional abnormality. Our task is to determine the
nature of, and, if possible, to correct the mental abnor-
malities of our offenders ; we have to consider the con-
nection of the emotional abnormality with the offence
committed. The task is far more difficult than that of
the measurement of intelligence; but it should not be
insuperable.
" The facts necessary for the solution of the problem
are becoming clearer, but the problem can only be
solved by the careful and intensive investigation of
individual cases, and this implies the provision of the
necessary investigators."
Brixton Prison Medical Officer also pleads for
special institutions for the borderline case :
" Both in his own and in the public interest, the
borderline case of persistent delinquent tendencies should
be secluded until there is a reasonable prospect that he
will not resume his anti-social habits. I am quite
confident that, if .the necessary change in the law were
effected, most Courts would welcome the opportunity
to send such cases to a suitable institution. I believe
alsoi that public opinion is ready for the change. After
all, the proposal involves no new principle. At present
the lunatic and the mental deficient receive indeterminate
sentences by quite summary procedures. It is felt
that this is best for the patients, as it is obviously best
for society. Why should the all-but insane and the
all-but deficient be treated so very differently? "
(p. 39.)
The same need is voiced by the Holloway
Prison Medical Officer (p. 42) :
" During the year there has been a fall again in the
prison population, but I regret to say that there has not
been a corresponding fall in the numbers of abnormal
mental cases. As I have pointed out in previous reports,
the need for fresh legislation in reference to subnormal
mental cases is long overdue, and if other provision was
made for those cases we now term ' uncertifiable cases
of mental defect,' a very large part of Holloway might
be closed.''
This Report is further of value in that it
contains the Resolutions of the International
Penitentiary Congress (Prison Congress,
August, 1925) with comments on .the British
practice and point of view.
