State Institutions for Violent and Dangerous Defectives
==========================================================

By Ruth Darwin.
There is a class of defectives, fortunately a small one, described as
" defectives of violent and dangerous propensities," for whose care special
provision is made under the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913. Instead of being-
dealt with locally bv the Authority responsible in each area for the care of the
mentally defective, they are maintained by the State in Institutions under the
direct management of the Board of Control.
On January 1st, 1927, there were on the books of the State Institutions at
Rampton and Warwick the names of 325 men and 257 women distributed as
follows :?
Men. Women. Total.
Rampton ... ... 324 ... 207 ... 531
Warwick ... ... ?
On Licence ... ... 1
41 ... 41
9 ... 10
325 257 582
Five hundred and eighty-two is therefore the number of defectives of
violent or dangerous propensities for whom the State is at present responsible,
forming 2.09 per cent, of the total number of defectives in Institutions for
the mentally defective in England and Wales, and 0.97 per cent of all cases
reported to Local Authorities under the Mental Deficiency Act up to the
beginning of this year.
90 MENTAL WELFARE.
The method by which these defectives are admitted to the State Institu-
tions will show the sources from which they are drawn and how closely the
question is connected with delinquency.
Figures taken over nine years (1916 to 1925) show that out of 590
admissions during that period :?
-11 per cent, were transfers from Reformatories, Borstal Institutions,
Prisons and Criminal Lunatic Asylums. (Sec. 9, M.D. Act.)
10 per cent, were sent direct by, or at instance of a Criminal Court.
(Sec. 8, M.D. Act.)
38 per cent, were transfers from Certified Institutions for the mentally
defective or from Workhouses where they had become unmanageable.
11 per cent, were admitted at the instance of the Local Authority
from their own homes.
It will be seen, therefore, that during these years 51 per cent, are known
to have come through the courts, and, on investigation of the past histories
of the 38 per cent, who have been transferred from other Institutions, a number
of these also are found to have had frequent convictions and short sentences
before their mental defect was recognised.
A marked change in the method of admission is shown in the figures
quoted by Dr. Rees Thomas, the Medical Superintendent of the State Institution
at Rampton, in his report for 1926-27. Amongst 111 new admissions during
that year, 29 per cent, were admitted from Certified Institutions and 38 per
cent, from Poor Law Institutions approved under Sec. 37 of the Mental
Deficiency Act. The remaining 33 per cent, were drawn, with very few
exceptions, directly or indirectly from the Courts. These more recent figures
are of interest as showing, firstly, the large proportion of cases admitted from
Poor Law Institutions where the initial difficulty of managing this type of
patient is often greatly increased by lack of trained staff or of proper facilities
for employment, recreation and classification, and, secondly, the decrease in the
proportion of admissions known to have come through the Courts. This
decrease cannot at present be assigned to definite causes. It may be hoped, on
the one hand, that the use of the powers given to Local Education Authorities
under the Education Acts and the gradual operation of the Mental Deficiency Act
may be preventing a certain amount of delinquency amongst mentally defective
children and adults; on the other hand, there is reason to believe that through
lack of knowledge or through a narrow interpretation of the terms " feeble
minded " and '' moral imbecile," a number of mentally defective persons
coming before the Courts may still be treated as delinquents and denied the
permanent care, protection and training that they need as defectives.
Crime and delinquency, as well as pauperism, illegitimacy and disease,
may be the direct outcome of mental defect, and where this is the case the
recognition of the defect is of fundamental importance. It is useless to attempt
to cure such symptoms without attacking the root of the disease. The criminal
defective will not be cured of his defect by repeated periods in Reformatories
and Prisons. Although his anti-social tendencies may fall into abeyance as long
as he is away from temptation and in surroundings adapted to his needs, on
release his powers will again be taxed beyond his strength, and the cycle of
misery and active harm to the community will start again. The only humane
and safe form of treatment for such cases is to make suitable provision for
their care and control as defectives, not only whilst their anti-social tendencies
persist, but as long as they show themselves unfit to manage themselves or
their affairs in the world.
MENTAL WELFARE. 91
Having- said so much on the general question, I can only give a very brief
account of the difficulties experienced and the aims and methods employed in
the treatment of violent and dangerous defectives in England. From the facts
already given it will be seen that State Institutions are the dumping-ground
for the dregs of humanity and for the rejects of other Institutions. From
Prisons and Borstal Institutions we receive defectives convicted for various
offences, such as theft, murder, inebriety, arson and sexual offences, who are
transferred, sometimes after prolonged trial, having proved themselves
unamenable to discipline and reform. From other Certified Institutions cases are
admitted whose violence and degraded habits make them unmanageable and
unfit to associate with the ordinary well-behaved defective. Violence to
Nurses or to other patients, attempted suicide, repeated " smashing up,"
uncontrolled or perverted sexual impulses, may all be put forward as a claim
to admission to the State Institution.
The difficulty of dealing with over 500 defectives of these propensities in
one Institution is obvious, but this difficulty is enormously increased by the fact
that symptoms of violence occur in defectives of widely varying intelligence.
1 he patients at Rampton range from the imbecile, unable to read, write or do
any but the simplest manual work, whose violence is purposeless and uncon-
trolled, to the high grade feeble-minded, who is unstable, restless, hysterical,
emotional, morbid, romancing, often actively mischievous, but, intellectually,
sometimes not far below the average. Added to these are the cases where
some form of psychosis is super-imposed on a defective mentality, resulting
often in ideas of persecution and grievances, aggression and recurrent periods
of mania and depression. Some of these latter are transferred to Mental
Hospitals, but although the symptom of violence may be cured, the fundamental
defect and lack of control remains and demands some form of permanent care.
Aims and methods of treatment have, therefore, to be devised suitable for
the widely varying grades of mental defect.
As far as possible, the State Institution at Rampton is looked upon as a
Hospital; attacks of violence and excitement are treated as symptoms requiring
preventive treatment and not punishment. This atmosphere is difficult to
introduce amongst the patients owing to the fact that detention is compulsory,
that locked doors are to a certain extent necessary and that they themselves are
generally incapable of recognising the nature and origin of their^ disordered
behaviour. The staff required is much larger than that required in ordinary
Institutions for defectives, and the accommodation required is also different.
Single rooms, instead of dormitories, are found to be indispensable for about
00 per cent, of the patients. Violence is catching and will spread like wildfire
from one excited patient in a dormitory to the rest. Seclusion is constantly
necessary, especially amongst the women, and the need for solitude and quiet
is shown by the fact that "they themselves frequently ask permission to go to
their own rooms when they feel irritable or unable to control a mood of passion
or excitement.
The most definite form of treatment, however, lies in the daily handling
of the patients by the Medical Officers and the Nurses and in the arrangement
of the daily routine. Varied and interesting occupation, healthy exercise, and
plenty of recreation are the only means by which it can be hoped to alter their
attitude of mind and to form a more hopeful outlook and better habits.
On the male side the favourite employment is work on the garden and
farm ; there are also flourishing shops for bootmaking, tailoring, brush-making,
upholstering and weaving, where excellent work is done in spite of the erratic
92 MENTAL WELFARE.
moods of the workers and of the fact that those most capable of skilled work
are often those who cannot be trusted with tools. The girls also do some
gardening, and chicken farming promises to be a wholesome and popular
employment; the majority work in the laundry and kitchen or at sewing,
weaving, raffia and leather work, lace-making and rug-making.
Lectures have been organised for the higher grade patients; there is a
troop of Scouts on the male side; physical drill, outdoor games, a weekly
cinema show during the winter, and a weekly dance, where men and women
meet in the Recreation Hall, take place regularly, and a considerable number
of selected patients are given parole in the Institution grounds. Escapes
occur every year and must be looked upon as inevitable unless the place is to
be turned into a prison. In commenting on this question in last year's Annual
Report, the Medical Superintendent says : " I think the impulse to break away
is becoming less marked, which is perhaps a sign of increasing contentment and
attachment to the Institution. A former patient, a man with 15 convictions for
housebreaking and burglary, escaped from another Institution to which he had
been transferred, and crossing on foot from the West of England, presented
himself for re-admission with the proud boast that he had not broken into a
single house?although he had been sorely tempted by the carelessness of
householders."
Amongst the different grades of patients described above, little can be
done for the older imbecile class beyond protecting them against themselves
and providing them with a comfortable life. The following is a typical case,
described by Dr. Rees Thomas, of this low grade of patient :?
" A " is a woman aged 44, said by her sister to have been weak-minded from birth
and for many years to have suffered from attacks of violent temper, in which she smashed
the windows of her own home and those of neighbouring premises. She was always
inclined to wander and sleep out in the streets. She first became known to the Police and
was recognised as feeble-minded in 1906. Between 1906 and 1916 she was convicted on 17
occasions for burglary, wandering, drunkenness, begging, etc., and was well known as a
drunkard and a prostitute.
In 1916 she was sent to the State Institution.
She is a low grade feeble-minded woman (mental age about eight years), very vain
and boastful, responsive to flattery, and regards herself as rather attractive. She is slow
and slovenly in her work and, as a rule, obedient, but any criticism upsets her, with the
result that she becomes noisy, turbulent and foul-mouthed, and would often smash or
threaten to smash windows. Every two months or so she suffered from attacks of excite-
ment, during which she would retire to her room and crouch in a corner or roll herself up
on the bed with her head covered, remaining thus for several hours unless disturbed, when
she would become violently abusive and threatening. On the rare occasions on which she
offered physical violence, she apologised after it was over with a smile of joy at the
recollection of her misbehaviour.
In 1917 she ceased to break windows and her behaviour has slowly improved. She
now regards her ability to refrain from breaking glass as the sole criterion of her suitability
for discharge. A few years ago she begged the Medical Officer to go to her room, and
there she showed him a pane of glass accidentally cracked, which caused her great sorrow.
When, at her urgent request, the pane was replaced, she became her old self again and
declared that nobody would "bring her down " now that " her piece of glass " had been
replaced.
She will now work in the rug room, sorting or cutting wool, or will do rough washing
or scrubbing. She is still easily upset and has frequent attacks of bad temper and
sulkiness, but she is at least comparatively happy and no longer suffers from outbreaks of
such uncontrolled excitement and violence.
In dealing with the higher grade, however, many of whom are capable of
a partial appreciation of their position, we are faced with a harder problem.
What hope can be put before them as an incentive to better behaviour? No
one can strive perpetually without some goal in view, and yet experience shows
that absolute freedom, the only goal that will satisfy this particular type, is
MENTAL WELFARE. 93
certain in all but a very small percentage of cases to lead them again into
depths of degradation and misery. Is it fair to put before them a goal, which,
with very few exceptions, they are inherently incapable of attaining?
A solution of this problem amongst the women has been attempted at
Warwick. Fifty of the better behaved and higher grade younger women have
been transferred from the main Institution at Rampton with a view to ascer-
taining whether, after more specialised training, some may not prove fit to
live happier and more useful lives in less restricted surroundings. The scheme
is a progressive one. Selected cases from Rampton are promoted to Warwick,
from which they can proceed through a Hostel to daily work outside, and, if
they should prove fit, to licence with a responsible person away from the
Institution.
The only building available for this experiment was the Infirmary and the
Chaplain's house of the disused prison at Warwick. The disadvantages of
such accommodation from the point of view of the girls, at a moment when
one wants them to feel that they are getting away from bolts and bars, are
obvious; the advantages are that each has her own cubicle bedroom and that
the Chaplain's house was available and has been adapted as a Hostel for
eleven of the most trustworthy girls who are employed on daily work outside
the Institution. This Hostel has been made homelike and comfortable and
is run as far as possible on the lines of a Hostel for normal women. Girls
who show sufficient improvement in the Institution, both in their conduct and
in their work, are promoted to the Hostel, and after a period of further
domestic training in the Superintendent's house, they are placed out in daily
service. They are allowed to go out for walks and to the cinema in batches
of two or three, and there are no locked doors, but their leisure time and
recreations are carefully supervised by the Superintendent.
One of the difficulties of the scheme lies in finding mistresses who are
both able and willing to take these girls and to put up with their moods and
vagaries, but these difficulties are as nothing in comparison with those that
arise from the unstable, uncontrolled and potentially violent temperaments of
the girls themselves. Disappointments are frequent; a girl who knows that
her future promotion depends on her behaviour for the next months and who
is placed with a kind mistress to whom she is, in words at least, grateful,
will suddenly commit senseless thefts. Another will, after some mild reproof,
smash up or will return to the Institution and refuse absolutely to return to
her post. The following are typical examples of some, of the girls who have
been tried at Warwick.
" B" is a very pretty, childish girl of 28. She writes poetry, is over-emotional and
morbid and prone to violent friendships and as violent dislikes. Her mother died when she
was a baby and she was sent to an Industrial School at the age of 13. Three years later
she was sent out to service, lost four situations in one year, stayed out at night and returned
to the Industrial School till she was 18, when she was discharged and again went into
service and was convicted of theft. At the age of 19 she was again convicted and sentenced
to three years' detention at Borstal. At the Borstal Institution she attempted suicide, was
said to be emotional, unintelligent and wanting in moral control, and at the age of 21 she
was certified as a moral imbecile and transferred to the State Institution. After five years
she showed some improvement and was transferred to Warwick. She went through the
Hostel and had i daily post, where she proved undependable, but, as a very good situation
was offered her in the house of people who knew her failings and were prepared to protect
her, she was sent out on licence. She was very happy and did well for six months, and
then a telegram arrived asking for her immediate removal. She had become depressed
and had attempted suicide by swallowing a bottle of some house-cleaning mixture. She
returned to Rampton, where she soon regained such mental balance as she can ever be said
to possess, and she is now out again in the same situation on licence.
94 MENTAL WELFARE.
" C " was an illegitimate child and was brought up by Sisters in a Home where she
always gave trouble on account of temper and dishonesty. At the age of 16 she went out
to service, but could not keep her places, got into trouble by staying out at night, and at
the age of 18 was certified as a moral imbecile and sent to a Certified Poor Law Institution.
Here she gave endless trouble, was sullen, abusive, irresponsive, insubordinate, romancing
on sexual subjects and showing no sense of shame. After a few monchs she was transferred
to another small Certified Institution, where everything was done to help and influence her,
but she proved utterly shameless, passionate and a subversive influence, and she was
transferred to Rampton at the age of 18. She was a pale, discontented looking girl, with
a constant grievance and very poor intelligence. At the age of 23 she was transferred to
Warwick, where she was found to be lazy, bad-tempered and quite unfit to earn her own
living. Her mental age was said to be that of a child of ten years. After a period of good
behaviour she was transferred to an Institution nearer to her friends, where she had always
asked to go. Before she had been there three months we were asked to remove her as she
had been striking Nurses and threatening to kill them and inciting insubordination amongst
the other patients. In writing to me after her return to Rampton, she makes a remark
which I must quote, as it seems to me to throw light on the mentality of many State Insti-
tution patients. After telling me in her letter how the trouble arose, she adds: "So,
natural enough, I got pondering with my thoughts and smash a window and was very
obstreperous. I no it is of no credit to me, but still." This is a typical attitude of mind ;
the natural and immediate result of pondering with your thoughts is to smash a window,
and although, theoretically, you know it is no credit to you, and each time it happens you
repeat and believe that you have learnt your lesson and all will be different in the future,
no amount of rational teaching and no amount of suffering will prevent its recurrence or
supply the higher mental qualities of judgment, foresight and reasoning which are inher-
ently lacking.
Disappointments and failures are inevitable, but there has been also some
measure of success. During- the year twenty girls have been in situations, and
at the beginning of the year there were six living in their situations on licence
and two in their own homes. Two have also been discharged, who, after
having passed through the graduated scheme, had proved able for a year to
maintain and to behave themselves in situations.
It may be said that the successes are small in proportion to the failures,
but the opening of the Institution and of the Hostel has made a radical change
in the outlook of the girls. An atmosphere of greater contentment, arising
from the return of hope, self-respect and less distrust of those in authority is
marked and is perhaps the greatest measure of success that can be hoped for
amongst this type of patient, the vast majority of whom will always require
institutional care.
Mental defect, as far as our present knowledge goes, is incurable, but I
am convinced that much may be done to prevent the mentally defective person
from joining the ranks of the " violent and dangerous." Only by early
recognition of defect, both in the schoolchild and in the juvenile offender,
and by fuller operation of the Mental Deficiency Act, will it be possible to
provide for the unstable and feeble-minded person the training, care and
protection he requires from childhood upwards, and only by the provision of
this early care can we hope to decrease the number of violent and dangerous
adults in State Institutions.
