Combined Defect
================

Correspondence.
To the Editor of " Mental Welfare."
Dear Sir,
Dr. A. Carleton Williams' valuable article on " Combined Defect " in your
last issue of " Mental Welfare " deals with a subject the importance of which is
too little realised. The difficulty of deciding- the actual extent of the handicap
under which children of combined defect are suffering-, and the consequent diffi-
culty of providing- suitable and adequate instruction and training for such of the
children as are believed to be educable, has led to the problem being almost wholly
neglected by local authorities charged with the education of children. The problem
affects many hundreds of children in this country, and because of its complexities,
MENTAL WELFARE. 25
workers to whom the solution is possible, who are enthusiastic and successful in
other branches of the work of national education, appear to have concluded that
children of combined defect cannot be educated, or are not worth the effort and
expenditure which the training would involve. They sympathise with the defec-
tives, and would be glad to help if the way were clear, but the task is uncertain
and its results obscure.
The fact that success has actually been achieved in the education of many
children of various combined defects does not appear to have affected this conclu-
sion, and with the exception of the London County Council and a few sympathetic
voluntary workers greatly handicapped by lack of funds no educationists or ocal
education authorities have taken practical steps in the educational interests of the
children.
Large numbers of children have been medically certified as suffering from
double or triple defects, and many have been admitted to institutions for the
training of the Blind Deaf or Mentally Defective, only to be returned later to their
homes as unsuitable'cases for such institutions. The unfortunate defectives con-
tinue, therefore without any suitable instruction. Practically none is able to earn
his own livelihood, and very many are a continuous burden on their relatives.
Many local education authorities would be willing to make provision for the
education of the children in their respective areas if the number of cases of the
chief types of defect were sufficient to warrant the authorities in incurring on
their own account expenditure necessary for the establishment of suitable institu-
tions. A combination of large authorities as a joint committee for the work would
overcome this difficulty, and the Board of Education have expressed their willing-
ness to consider any proposals that might be put forward either by voluntary
societies or by local education authorities for the provision of suitable schools.
^ is an encouraging and satisfactory result of the work done at the London County
Council's School at Penn that 57 per cent, of the children who have left that
institution during the last five years are either in employment or are undergoing
further training for special employment, and the majority of the remainder have
greatly benefited in health, usefulness and self-reliance by the training they have
received at the school.
The very valuable work of diagnosing the co-existence of two or more types
?f defect in a child, with which Dr. Williams' article is principally concerned, is
the necessary preliminary to the consideration of the educability of the child and
the kind of training suitable to his case to enable him to make the most of his
life. May I venture to suggest that Dr. Williams and his colleagues engaged in
the work add to the value of their certification an expression of their views as to
the educability of thr. cases, and communicate this to the local education authority
for the area in which the children are found; adding to such public service, in any
Way which seems to them most fitting, such representations to the local authorities
concerned and to the Board of Education, as may lead to a practical issue in the
mterests of the children and the community? It is essential that the need for the
education of these children be more widely realised before the establishment of
suitable institutions can be secured.
Yours faithfully,
WALTER POPPLESTONE.
Education Office,
Saltaire Road,
Shipley.
29th December, 1926.
