Epilepsy. A Functional Mental Illness
======================================

:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts.
:Author: R. G. Rows and W. E. Bond. H. K. Lewis
& Co., Ltd. 1926. 8s.

Epilepsy is a disease about which much is
known, but little understood. Without some
knowledge as to its causation, a rational
therapy seems out of our grasp. The search
for a cause has elicited few facts, but many
theories. A study of the voluminous literature
shows two principal groups of theorists. On
the one hand stand those with generous imagin-
ations, who have built up a philosophy of the
disease on bold lines, physiological or, more
often, psychological. On the other are those
who see epilepsy as the outcome of some
chemical change or structural abnormality, the
presence of which they have been at great pain
to demonstrate. Pre-eminently, epilepsy
affords an admirable battle-ground for the
physiogenic and the psychogenic schools. The
battle-ground is, indeed, common to most
mental and not a few physical disorders. The
psychogenic school would, generally speaking,
have us believe that the disorder represents the
reaction to life of an individual hampered by a
peculiar mental make up, and that the convul-
sive and other attacks, are but incidents in that
reaction. The physiogenic school, for the most
part regarding the fits as the most important
feature of the complaint, direct our attention
to structural changes in the cornu ammonis, or
the motor cortex, to endocrine imbalance, to
vaso-motor instability, to metabolic disorders,
to chemical alterations in the blood or cerebro-
spinal fluid, or even to the large intestine,
where those who are anxious to economize in
thought or labour can find the cause for any
disease under the sun.

There is one general criticism that can be
levelled at most of, if not all, the theories that
have been advanced. They claim too much.
There is no theory that fits in with all the facts.
Nor is it likely that such an one will be found.
The very definition of epilepsy is a matter for
debate. The causation is probably complex in
each individual case ; still more complex in that
great group of patients who are labelled as
epileptic.

This general criticism applies to the admir-
able essay entitled " Epilepsy, A Functional
Mental Illness," by Drs. Rows and Bond,
which has recently been published in book form.
These authors have a novel and definite
to put forward as to the cause of epilepsy* a .
its relation to the other psychoses. The the
may be briefly outlined as follows. Me ^
exploration will show in every case that^
cause of the first fit was an emotional one. i5
sequent fits are the result of the revival ot
original emotion, whether by exoge1^
stimuli, memory associations, or the like.
value of the aura, which is constant in a
given case, and of pre- and post-epileptic m
tal states, or of those mental conditions kn?
as epileptic equivalents, is determined by
emotional state and its associations. ^
activities of the lower cerebral centres and ^
the autonomic nervous system, form an integ j
part of what is known as consciousness, a
in modifying consciousness, emotion has a p
found eft'ect upon the whole of the nenf?jje
system. The actual convulsion may well j
due to vasomotor stimuli reaching the cereD ^
vessels, and profound and repeated stimuli
give rise to those anatomical changes in .
central nervous system which may be found
old standing cases of epilepsy. By autonofl'
stimulation also, emotion may give rise ^
endocrine imbalance. The hypothesis o*
special mental makeup prior to the commen .
ment of the fits is unnecessary. All the men ^
pictures found in the disease can be traced
the original emotion and its ramifications ^
association in the mental life of the patient, ^
to the prejudicial effect of the social handic^P
which he finds that he must submit to. j
It is well-known that the mental states fou .
in epilepsy may conform to those found
almost any of the psychoses. Besides drea /
states, fugues, automatism, there may be sta
of mania, melancholia, confusion, stupor, etc'^
which are in no way distinguishable from th?.^
found in the true psychoses. lEpilepsy lS?
fact, the great prototype of all the psychos^
Similar symptoms and mental states must
the result of similar mechanisms, and in P
pounding this theory of the origin of epilep
the authors are, in fact, applying it to the P^.
choses in general. From an serological P01 ^
of view, moreover, this means that epilepsy a
hysteria are indistinguishable. ?

Such, in very brief outline, is the thesis a
vanced, and a good deal of evidence, s ^
clinical, some rather speculative, is brou?
forward to support it. It is, however, we sU&j
gest, untrue to say that similar symptoms ^
mental states must be the result of sim1*
mechanisms. In dementi:a P ? distinguish"
clinical picture may include mental states
able from those of epilepsy, o n'a> all of
such as confusion, stupor, o ernotion,
which are demonstrably due,_ n g -n the
but to the activities of sPir jn about 50
brain. Again, epileptic fits oc grades of
per cent, of all cases of the ffross defect
primary aments, where there shortage ot
brain development and ac ' n -m those
cells, and are also relatively c whether
whose brains are damaged in i ^ actual
by inflammation, hemorr ag , n emotional
trauma. Is it likely that thereif these
cause in such cases?, or, alt eptic, are all
patients are not to be called P -^ren who
the backward and feeble-nun e? oUt? The
suffer from fits, to be similar Y. . ernotion is
revival by association of the orl? o? ^ts, and in
said to be the determining caus the aura
this connection stress is lai an emotional
which in every case is said to ^ recent ex-
and not a physical basis. u v the closest
amination of 300 cases of ?p P_nu';ective aura
questioning could only elicit a
in 40 per cent, of the patients.^ ^ bloc, to
To attempt to apply this tie are sure,
the great mass of epileptics w > ^ t^at in
be a mistake; but it is Prob^l!^ortant factor
many cases emotion is an i P *a^y is this
which has been overlooked. J^ice men, and
so in the epilepsies of the eX~s(~, material on
it is significant that most o roun(j among
which this book is based wa sant erno-
these patients. If, however, u p authors
tions really played so large a par bave been
Would have us believe, there s epileptics
an enormous number of PoS ' ent that the
whereas there is general fgr<\ embling true
number of cases, clinically directly ?ut ?
epilepsv, whose disease arose Qne cannot
War service, is not very large. ^ sGil that
resist the conclusion that it is book,
counts most of all. On pp- " , history of
we find an account of the emo 1 m and the
an epileptic, set out in some 'lajnt was
conclusion is reached that hi Averse influ-
obviously the result of various ,-er years,
ences and circumstances in ns innate
and it is unnecessary to assum circum-
tendencies. But the influences ^ been
stances detailed do not appear than must
any more extraordinary or a?ye seemS much
occur to thousands of us, and i ten^ency to
more reasonable to assume tna
the epileptic type of reaction is present in
varying degree among the population, and that
the reaction will be readily evoked in some
by minimal stimuli, be they emotional, toxic,
or metabolic.

We unhesitatingly commend this book to all
who are interested in epilepsy. It is not a com-
prehensive account of the disease, but an essay
on its causation. Though rather loosely put
together, it is interesting to read, and contains
much that is fresh and thought provoking. If
the authors claim too much for their theory,
they are not the first who have regarded one
of the many factors in the causation of this
baffling disease as its primary and universal
cause.

J. Tylor Fox.
The Psychology of the Thinker. By I. B.
Saxbv, D.Sc. Lecturer in Education,
University College, Cardiff. University of
London Press : 1926 : 7/6.

The aim of this book is to give an account
of the psychology of thinking, in the light of
our present-day knowledge of the nature and
functions of the unconscious. To Dr. Saxby,
thought is a tool developed in the service of
man's desires; working along certain lines, it
develops and uses the concept as a means to
satisfaction; working along other lines, it
shows itself in phantasy-thinking, which at
first leading away from reality, may finally
return to it in the form of art and literature.
In order to pacify the mind of the reader from
unacknowledged, and often unwarranted
associations, aroused by the words conscious
and unconscious, Dr. Saxby makes use of
Semon's terms, engram for the trace left on
the organism by an experience, and ecphory
for the active functioning of the engrams. The
free use of these unfamiliar terms will cer-
tainly, as the writer conjectures, to some
extent repel the beginner, yet, once the initial
difficulty has been overcome, it will conduce
to a clearer appreciation of the author's
meaning".

The first five chapters of the book are
devoted to a consideration of the function of
thought, the next four to a discussion of the
thought-process, the last seven to an account
of the acquisition of knowledge. The whole
exposition is commendably ciear and is ac-
companied by a wealth of illustration drawn
from a wide range of reading- and experience.
It has been said that the mentally defective
child resembles a machine in which the wheels
move so slowly that it is possible to analyse
the parts and to distinguish their connections
and inter-lockings. But even in such circum-
stances, he sees most who has most knowledge
of the general nature of the working of
machines; he who has a plan ready in his
mind knows for what to look, and on which
parts first to concentrate attention. In the
same way he will understand best the slow
working of the defective mind, who knows best
the intricacies of the thought process, as it
normally occurs; he will best be able to help
such a mind to accumulate and systematise
knowledge, who has realised exactly the
methods by means of which such accumulation
and systematisation are brought about in the
mind of ordinary intelligence. Hence an
analysis such as that presented by Dr. Saxby
as her central thesis must be of great value to
those who are seeking to teach and guide the
feeble-minded.

From this point of view it is, perhaps, not
wholly a disadvantage that the engram theory
adopted by Dr. Saxby, compels her to take up
a distinctly deterministic view of the course of
mental life. Intelligence, she considers, " con-
sists in a tendency to inhibit acts of proved
uselessness, combined with the power of find-
ing new paths for the energy which has been
set free." Both these factors Dr. Saxby
accepts as inborn, which is, indeed, the
orthodox attitude in present day psychology.
The teacher can help the pupil by providing the
needed stimuli so that numerous and useful
engrams may be formed ; she can also teach
method, by breaking up problems into simpler
units, but she cannot add to the intelligence
with which the child has been endowed at
birth. For many people, I admit that this view
probably still requires to be emphasised; but
it should not be regarded as a proved and
ultimate truth. We need not yet on the basis
of results accumulated through intelligence
tests, give up the view that spirit may call to
spirit, and that the success of many a teacher
depends not on perfection of method, but on
that giving of herself, which is spiritual con-
tact, spiritual inspiration.

Margaret Drummond.
London County Council's Annual Repor*'
Vols. II., III., & IV. P. S. King & Sons.
Ltd. 1/0, 2/6, 1/0: 1926.

These three volumes, which include the Re
ports for the year 1925 of the School MedlC^
Officer, the Education Officer and the
? ? ? /)!
Hospitals' Committee, all contain matters
interest to mental welfare workers.
The Mental Hospitals' Committee Report ^
a general survey of the development in
L.C.C. Mental Hospitals and Institution?'
Following- up their experiment at Horton Me
tal Hospital and the Maudsley Hospital, t
Council have agreed to the employment ox
part-time woman occupation officer at all tn
Mental Hospitals.

The Report shows that the Council is P1"^
pared to continue its support of Occupat' ^
Centres and make a more extensive use
Guardianship.

In the School Medical Officer's Repor^
figures are given (p. 147, Vol. III.) shoW'n?
the number of mentally-defective child1"
(other than imbeciles) suffering from a secon
defect :? ^
Boys. Girls- ^
Mentally defective and epileptic 53 30 ^
>> ff ,, blind ... 3 ^ rll
,, deaf ... 26 28
? ,, ,, physically ?
defective 85 63 *

Interesting details are given of Dr. Shru
sail's special enquiry concerning Mongols IP'
147). The Report states : " Mongolism
occur in families of any social class, thoug
in data collected from the public elements-
schools the proportion met with in the mio"
classes is likely to be underestimated. Ait
taking out the percentage of distribution of t ^
social class and occupation of the parents
272 Mongols, and comparing it with a sim1'^
percentage as revealed by the data of t
Registrar-General, it will be noted that the
are relatively more examples whose Pare? "r
belong to the middle or distributing class,
mixed occupations, which include service in t
Army, Navy or Mercantile Marine, Police,
the like, and fewer belonging to the artisan ^
unskilled labour classes, and poverty is
dently not a factor in the causation." (p. 1* j
Dr. Nairn Dobbie has been associated ^vl
an investigation into vocational guiaarl
carried out by the National Institute of Inou
has1 Ps^hol?g"y- Dr. Elizabeth M. McVail
conrTf*3111^6^ Prev'ous history and physical
clas 1 10n ^ children (girls) in backward
?frep6^ ^er conclusions show that illness and
back attendance are mainly responsible for
0ver<5^air<^ness" P^eac^s f?r special medical
f0r ^ and care for backward children, and
drenSm- v classes. " The proportion of chil-
am0n 1 Physical defects is much higher than
Comb^St normal children. In the two classes
lg Dlne^' ^ Per cent, had defective vision,
cent Cen.t- defective hearing, and 4.3 per
and ?r?:anic heart disease, while lung-trouble
avera^0nera^ c^ebility were also much above the
that fu incic3ence. It is of interest to note
lono- effects of illness and disease persist
?f inafter .^le disease has been cured. Habits
special tent'on acquired owing to defect of the
theme i Senses remain when the defects are
selves corrected." (p. 160, Vol. III.)
the TGre are 13>?00 children in attendance at
?ne_L?"c'0n Special Schools, of whom about
ti?n ft are mentahy defective. The Educa-
difficult-P?r- points out that the administrative
accom lGS *n.^erent in providing special school
ably moc*ation for children who are inevit-
'ation Ca/tere(^ among the general school popu-
Londo h* ^6en *ncreasec* by the fall in the
Va^ *^-rate. A summary is given of
ti?n jsri^Us activities of the schools, and atten-
educat* rawn to the development of physical
rTlentali?nj ^ames and swimming in schools for
ment fe^ct^ve children. " The develop-
triarked SwImming ir> these schools is very
childre ' -ant^ more than one quarter of the
W?rthvn T tbe sch??'s can now swim. It is
sions record that on three recent occa-
VaHantmentally"defective children have made
Were c atternPts at life-saving, two of which
successfC(]eSS^u'" third attempt, while un-
divino- fiU 1 ^as exceptionally creditable, a lad
to regc times into deep water in his efforts
n?t hav! u b?y whom h was found later could
the ol ^ ^Cen saved as he was entangled in
ia,n of a barge." (p. 18, Vol. IV.)
a

Profn NoRmality and Deficiency. By
Luelbn'r,Sidne-v L- Pressey, Ph.D., and
Allen JL'PTressey, Ph.D. pp. xii, 356. George
This Unwin, Ltd. : 1926 : 10/6.
esPecial]eXue^ent .text book will be welcomed,
}vorl<ers^ social workers, mental after-care
'nS" the ^ose who are employed in help-
c octors at Nervous and Mental Out-
patient Clinics. Tt will, however, appeal also
to a much wider public: teachers, heads of
departments, and, in fact, all those who find it
an advantage to understand the every-day
practical psychology of their employees and
pupils will find much to interest and instruct
them in this very readable and stimulating-
piece of work.

Here is a book that can be safely recom-
mended to those who ask for a good all-round
introduction to the study of mental ill-health
and deficiency; there is a great need at the
present time for such a book. It is non-
controversial and is generally in accordance
with the work of the best teachers of the day.
The most valuable point about it, however, is
that it leads the student on to listen and to
observe for himself and to reflect the facts
obtained sanely and intelligently; it does not
so much set out to teach as to show how the
worker must learn for himself. The one fault
is that there is a good deal of repetition, which
seems rather unnecessary even in an elemen-
tary book such as this; the reason is quite
obviously that the writers are anxious to drive
certain big principles home, but in another
edition it would be well to do some judicious
pruning.

Part I. deals with the methods of cise-
study, and is the most valuable part of the
work. The student is gradually led by stages
to the recording of a case, and there is excel-
lent advice as to the accurate recording of it,
so that it shall not only be useful at the time
of taking but for all time. There are most
frank and practical pieces of advice as to the
manner, of interviewing the patient and his
immediate family, and of obtaining from them
the family history and other particulars with-
out offending or hurting them in any way.
This matter is approached from a fresh and
sympathetic angle and, so far, I have not seen
anything in that way better done.

Part II. deals with the various types of
Mental Disease and Disability, and very rightly
starts with the picture of the normal or aver-
age individual and his family. The writers are
careful to point out how this standard differs
in the different walks of life, a fact that is
often lost sight of, even by experienced social
workers. Next follows what the writers call
the " Borderland Cases," using the word in a
different, and one may say, in an infinitely
more correct sense than we in England gene-
rally use it to-day. Under this heading- are
grouped the " emotionally mal-adjusted," the
" emotionally unstable," and the " peculiar
people." Test cases are given which illustrate
these types beautifully and which do more to
instruct than many chapters and many hours
of lectures. The remainder of this part is taken
up with the description of the functional and
organic psychoses and feeble-minded condi-
tions. When the writers get on to purely
medical ground they do not appear to be quite
so sure of themselves, but, since this is not
really the principal part of the book, it is not,
perhaps, a very serious fault.

Part III. deals with many big problems,
such as that of the adolescent, the delinquent,
the non-educable, the adjustments of school
life and many other subjects. There is a good
chapter on mental hygiene in which there are
some very suggestive remarks about the cause
and the prevention of mental abnormality.

Each chapter is in turn summarised, and
mental exercises are given upon the subject of
the text. A list of books and pamphlets directly
bearing upon each chapter is also listed, so that
those who wish to amplify the subject may
know exactly where to go for their informa-
tion, instead of laboriously wading through
enormous tomes and never finding what they
want. The literature advised is practically all
English and American and the selection is
particularly good.

Finally there is an annotated bibliography
and a good index.

ISABEL EMSLIE HUTTON.
----------------------

Pubt.ic Social Services. Published by The
National Council of Social Service. 4th ed.
1926. 2/-.

This useful little handbook has been in con-
siderable demand in its earlier editions, and
we welcome a fourth edition (revised and en-
larged). It is a handy summary of all the
various public social services, the chapters
dealing with Public Health, Education, the
Poor Law, Industry and Employment, and the
Administration of Justice, being especially
useful to the general reader.

The Health of the School Child. Ann"
Report of the Chief Medical Officer of t
Board of Education for the Year 1925. H-^ ?
Stationery Office. 1926. 1/6.

There are many parts of this Report deali?f>
with the general health of school children \vhlC
one would like to quote. Especially interestifl&
is the chapter on " The health of the yoUJ/j
child on admission to school." (pp. 23-3 ?/
There still remains in Sir George Newman
opinion great cause for anxiety about the pre
school years. Sir George Newman refers
the valuable Report (for the Medical Reseat
Council), of Professor Noel Paton and ProfeS
sor Leonard Findlay on " Poverty, nutritt?()
and growth ; Studies of child life in Scotland-
And his comments are as follows : " Their c?0^
elusion is that ' heredity and the inherit^
growth impulse play no small part in determ"1
ing the growth of the child, and that in spite 0
environmental factors, which may appea
prejudicial, the slum child tends to develop ?j
the lines of its parents ... Of the environments
characters studied, maternal efficiency seerT,
more closely associated with variations in tn
condition of the child than our measures 0
poverty, underfeeding or overcrowding . . . ^
studies suggest that maternal efficiency is n.?
directly and immediately associated with s'zC
of family, cubic capacity of the house Per
person (i.e., with overcrowding), and ^vlt'
maternal health.' It will be seen that this n^v
and elaborate investigation tends to supp0
neither the extreme Economist nor the extrefl16
Eugenist. It brings us back to the mother"""
her health, her capacity to nurture, the siz^
of her family and house, her Intelligence an
devotion to the care of her children. I thin
both biology and human experience will supp?r,
that conclusion. It is not this or that dietaO
or clothing, or environment, which is the pfe.
dominant influence. The predominant influen<^
are more likely to be the nature of the ch'
as the offspring of its parents and the nurtur
provided for it by an intelligent and an efficien
mother." (p. 31.)

Every worker among subnormal people 1,1
their own homes will heartily endorse this c?n
elusion, and it is a truth that should be borjj
in mind in all discussions regarding 1
marriage of defectives, and the care of defec
ives within the community.

Sir George Newman's report on the mental
subnormal child, shows that ^iel^ nts for
some improvement in the arrang e(jucat-lon.
ascertainment, supervision ana Educa-
Ihere are now, according" to t e children
tion Authorities' returns, these
certified as mentally defeetrve- aooroxi-
" 32,975 mentally defective c i ^ speCial
lately one-half are accommo these
schools. The total in day
schools at present is for 15,1^3 schools;
and for 1,880 children in rf schools,
1^,470 are attending public elerne . ? s and
860 are in other 4 educational ins tion In
3,872 are not in any school or m control
1925 there were notified to eh:iJren 1,509
authorities 842 feeble-minded chd '
imbeciles, and 218 idiots." (P-
- WPre 30,821

The figures for last Yea soecial school
mentally defective children, with sp
accommodation for 16,569 chi re ^
The Local Authorities' aSC^rtafnI^iie school
represents 6.7 per thousand o . . /^y
Population, while the Board s e
many considered too low), con in
Sir George Newman summarises Qrjc Q?
conclusions so far reached throug wrote
the school medical service. Last.year^he wr ^
at some length in defence of th financial
mentally defective children, despi e . ayS :
outlay.5 In this year-s report he^aptly.say ^
The mentally defective ar J?nrp costly
educate and care for ; but they ar5 ^ need
to neglect." He again
e^rly training and care. . early
is proving the large part ta . of the
training, conduct, habit, and P ? uman mind,
child in the development of th body
and fuller regard must now be pai , ^e
capacity, nurture and_ ' behavio nt t^e
mfant and young child if we wou P motor
subsequent formation of faulty se= ' baCk-
and mental actions, leading to d re
wardness and mental defect. Moral .ssues
also concerned." (p. 81.)

His reasoned discussion on th^Pj,^?^ tjie
special school is enlightening. special
country as a whole," he says, %SrPm0re
school can never, at best, be a so u i
"han a part of the problem (p- for
indicates that room should be found pntally
the dull and backward, but for | e juni0r
deficient child who is not asocial in u^ j
Elementary Schools, if the modern tendency
for a more individualistic education and smaller
classes is encouraged and developed.
Supervision and After-care (Circular 1341)
are considered at some length, and special
reference is made to the valuable work done by
the Kent, Cambridgeshire and Somerset
Associations for Mental Welfare, (p. 88.) The
after-history of boys (unselected as far as
practicable) who were in attendance at Special
Schools in different areas has been examined.
" A summary of these records of after-care
shows that out of 211 boys, approximately 134
are capable of engaging in regular work, often
of a skilled character, 47 are in reasonably
regular work, while 30 are not employable
under ordinary conditions, and require care and
control, whether at home or at an institution.
The general impression left on one's mind
after perusing these records is, first, the large
number of boys who, on leaving the Day
Special School, obtain reasonably regular
work; secondly, the small proportion of them
who cause special trouble or get into the hands
of the police; thirdly, the fact that those in
irregular odd jobs will become a charge on the
community, unless they belong to good homes
. . . But, whatever may be their subsequent
employment, their educational backwardness
and instability of character, demonstrate the
need for a good home, or, failing this, the
kind of sympathetic supervision so admirably
provided by such voluntary societies as the
Central Association for Mental Welfare, and
many of the 4 After-Care ' Committees
throughout the country." (p. 90-91.)
The Sheffield Outbreak of Encephalitis
Lethargic a. 1924. Medical Research
Council. H.M. Stationery Office. 1926. 1/9.
This Report is welcome, as the outcome of
a close study of this baffling disease, the cause
and cure of which is still unknown. All over
the country, there are now neurologists devoted
to its investigation, but, as it was first des-
cribed by Von Economo, in Vienna, as recently
as 1917, it is still early to expect an adequate
understanding of it.

This Report consists of an Epidemiological
Report, by Professor F. E. Wynne, M.B., a
Pathological Report, by Professor J. S. C.
Douglas, D.M., a Clinical Report, by Professor
A. J. Hall, M.D., F.R.C.P., and A. Gurney\
Yates, M.D., M.R.C.P., and an Appendix.
Etiology : Summary of Recent Researches, by
J. R. Perdrau, M.B., B.S.
The researches here set forth show negative
rather than positive results, and no startling
new theories are advanced. Professor Wynne
investigated the question of infectivity. He
says (p. 12), " While several cases are on
record where the disease assailed simultane-
ously a number of persons living in institutions,
the evidence of infectivity among members of
a normal community is generally very slight.
Thus, in the Glasgow epidemic, Dr. Chalmers
found only two instances in which more than
one case occurred in the same household.

" In the Sheffield outbreak, I have been able
to find evidence of contact, more or less inti-
mate, in six instances, involving 13 patients, or
just over 4 per cent, of the total number of
cases ascertained.'' After setting forth the de-
tails of these cases, he adds (p. 15), " It will be
seen that any attempt to deduce the possible
limits of an incubation period from these cases,
is little better than guesswork, owing to the
difficulty of obtaining exact dates of contact
and the uncertainty that obtains in most cases
as to the date of onset ... If the disease were
' infectious ' in any but a negligible degree, one
would expect, with confidence, to find evidence
of its spread in the elementary schools. In the
Sheffield outbreak, however, while 82 children
of school age were affected, there were only 45
instances of more than one case occurring in
the same school. These were distributed among
20 schools, out of the 136 in the city area. In
only one case were there as many as 4 cases
in one school. In 3 schools there were 3
cases in each, and in the other 16 there were
2 cases in each. In 3 schools only were there
instances of 2 cases occurring in the same class.
As it is certain that many of these children
must have continued to attend school after
symptoms had developed, it would seem that it
is only with difficulty, if at all, that the disease
is communicated from one individual to
another."

A very interesting investigation was made
into the social conditions of those suffering
from the disease, from which it was deduced
that encephalitis is not a disease associated
with poverty and its accompanying conditions.
The evidence of the Sheffield figures confirm
previous investigations, showing the greater
susceptibility to infection in males (the most
susceptible age for males being 15-30 years),
and greater liability to death in females.
This Report, together with Dr. Tredgold s
Paper at the C.A.M.W. Conference, and Df'
Borthwick's Report on the Encephalitis Unit)
Metropolitan Asylums Board Norther0
Hospital, Winchmore Hill, give in convenient
form some of the most recent pronouncement5
on Encephalitis lethargica.

Report of the Committee on Education anp
Industry (England & Wales). First part-
H.M. Stationery Office. 1926. 1/6.
Second Report of Progress. Vocational
Guidance Experiment. National Institute
of Industrial Psychology.

The terms of reference to the Committee otl
Education and Industry, the first part of \vhoSe
report is just published, were :?
" To inquire into and advise upon the
public system of education in England an
Wales in relation to the requirements 0
trade and industry, with particular refer'
ence to the adequacy of the arrangement5
for enabling young persons to enter int0
and retain suitable employment."

This first Report deals with the second part o*
the reference, and gives a useful historic^1
summary of the development of organise*3
arrangements for placing persons in empl0^'
ment since the Labour Exchanges were fifS.
set up, in 1909, and the Education (Choice 0
Employment) Act was passed in 1910. I*1
Unemployment Insurance Act, 1923, created a
new position. By this Act a Local Educati011
Authority was not permitted to exercise Choice
of Employment powers unless it also undertoo
duties in connection with unemployment bene11
for persons between 16 and 18. The positi^
at present as regards juveniles is that *
County Councils (and 26 Boroughs and *
Urban districts who are immediately resp0l\
sible, but exercise the powers of the Count;
Council), and 56 County Boroughs have unde1"
taken the duties as Education Authorities.
The Committee approve in general ^
present system. Two of their major recon*
mendations are :

(1) That the Ministry of Labour shoul
assume entire responsibility centrally in regar
to Juvenile Employment, whether the work-
done locally by the Education Authority or jv
the Ministry of Labour by means of JuveO1
Advisory Committees.

(2) That Working Certificates should be
required in all cases of employment belo ^
age of entry into Employment ? '

as to bridge the gap between 14 and >?
. A passage in the Report, which J^j^don
interest, refers to the work ? Mentally
Association for the Care of tllie f-
Defective and the After Care Associ ^
Blind, Deaf, and Crippled Children, in S
to Juvenile Employment. Ihe Lon o T7moi0y-
Council decided to leave Choice o P
rnent to the Ministry of Labour, ,
Ministry continued the arrangemen s
these Associations exercised powers o
of the Council. The Report describes the work
on behalf of defectives between 14 and ,
adds:?(p. 32.) , , ,

" We would, therefore, recomment a^
in all areas where no definite P .
taken in the matter, the Local Education
Authority or the Ministry ?f La tjon
consider whether, probably by co- p .
with Voluntary Associations, so? .. . ,
factory system might not be es a m
The precise form that any sue i >
might take would depend partly o
circumstances and on the exis en
suitable local Associations for detect
children and juveniles."
This is a very important ^commendation,
and it is a tribute to the efficiency o 1 '
niethods of investigation and fo ow?
which have been adopted by the
Associations.

Ihe grant from the Ministry of if
the London Association amounts to ? ?
all those areas where there are Loca ?
t-ions for Mental Welfare were to organi
definite system of After-care for p.reat
defective children, there would be a S
improvement in the statistics of employm
for such children.

The figures given above indicate that t
Ministry of Labour is responsible for a
section of the country, and we look or\\
a speedy development of the system o s,
ln aid of Juvenile employment, suci a
proved so successful in London.

Ihe Report welcomes in a tentative
psychological tests as aids to determ ?
suitable employment, and refers to tie wo
the National Institute of Industrial Vs^/)(f"
and the occupations ol: the pupils aitei eav &
The Institute has just issued its second
Report of Progress on the work it is carrying-
out through a grant from the Carnegie United
Kingdom Trust. The Report is careful to
emphasise that the work is still in an experi-
mental stage, but to be able to point even to
the present results is encouraging.

The technique of vocational guidance by
psychological tests is beings worked out with
scientific accuracy, and the follow-up of the
children who were examined and advised are
here shown :?

" Number of children who have
been followed up successfully 161
Number of children in work of
the same or similar kind as
that recommended ... ... 103 (64%)
Number of children in work of
a different kind ... ... 58 (36%)
Of the former group the majority are in their
first post, only four have had more than two
posts, and there are no cases in which dissatis-
faction with the work has been definitely
expressed (though this does not imply that
none exists).

On the other hand, among those doing work
of a different kind, 18 children (31 per cent.)
have definitely expressed dissatisfaction either
with the work or the prospects, and there are
10 children who have changed their work from
three to eight times in less than a year. These
results are generally in agreement with those
obtained in a former enquiry, and may be con-
sidered to be distinctly promising. They
conccrn, however, only the children examined
by the Institute. The corresponding rate of
change among children who were not examined
has yet to be inquired into."

Report of the Consultative Committee of
the Board of Education on the Educa-
tion of the Adolescent. H.M. Stationery
Office. .1926. 2/- paper, 3/- cloth covers.
This Report is the outcome of deliberations
by the Committee since May, 1924. They were
asked by the Board to report upon the
organization, objective and curriculum of
courses of study suitable for children who still
remain in full-time attendance at schools
other than Secondary Schools, up to the a?"e of
15, and further, to consider the relationship
of such curriculum to a good general education
school. In regard to the latter part of this
reference, the reference to the Committee on
Choice of Employment and Industry (reviewed
in this issue of the Magazine) would seem to
cover some of the same ground and the Second
Part of that Committee's Report (when it
appears) should be compared with the present
findings. The Report deals exclusively with
the problem of children aged 11?the age at
which the Committee unanimously agree that
all types of Education should be divided into
primary and post-primary. The whole question
of the adequate education of the child over 11
to the end of its school career (at whatever
age that may be) is of burning interest, but as
the Report avowedly deals with normal
children, it does not specially concern mental
welfare workers. There is, however, the
recommendation, with some dissentients, that
legislation should at once be introduced to
raise the minimum school leaving age to 15
from the year 1932. Lord Eustace Percy's
immediate pronouncement, at the same time as
the issue of the Report, that the Government
does not propose to introduce legislation, but
will leave the matter to the permissive powers
granted to Local Authorities by the 1918
Education Act, removes this question from
practical politics, unless further opinion should
be greatly roused in its favour.

Such raising of the age would improve to a
considerable extent the position of the feeble-
minded child in the Elementary School, who
at present leaves at 14.

Though no specific recommendation is made,
it is evident that the Committee intend that all
children over 11 unable to profit by the varied
types of education proposed for the later years
of school life, should remain in the junior school
or be otherwise provided for.

If those recommendations of the Committee,
which stress the need for an adequate number
of teachers with the " craftsman's outlook
and the craftsman's interest " (p. 232), and the
development of practical work were carried out,
there would be a valuable and direct effect on
the training of all teachers, including those
dealing with dull and backward and mentally
defective children.

The Committee devote a chapter to the
administrative difficulties caused by the division
of powers among Educational Authorities.
Their recommendation is as follows :?
" Finally, we recommend that con-
sideration should be given to the question
whether it may not be a desirable objective
of educational development that provincial
authorities for education should be insti-
tuted, in which the authorities for
Elementary Education only and the
Authorities for Higher Education shall
both be ultimatelv merged. Chapter X,
p. 192.) "

Little Mothers and Big Sisters. By Hilda
Halliday, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., D.P.H., Assis-
tant Medical Officer, Maternity and Child
Welfare Centres, Greenwich. Oxford
University Press. 1926. 1/3.

The Publishers have sent us this little book,
which is written as an Elementary Health
Reader for the senior girls in schools. It is
attractively printed and illustrated, and should
provide a helpful stimulus to the readers for
whom it is intended. Professor Kenwood, in
his preface, says that, " the author has set
herself the task of suitably dealing with import-
ant matters which bear upon the formation of
the healthy mind as well as the healthy body."
