The Education and Care of the Mentally Defective Child in Renfrewshire
=======================================================================

:Author: Mrs. Fern,
Convener of Health and Special Schools Committee,
Renfrewshire Education Authority.

The primary duties laid upon Education Authorities by the Education of
Defective Children (Scotland) Act, 1906, and the Mental Deficiency and Lunacy
(Scotland) Act of 1913, are ascertainment of mental defect in the school population
of their area, the provision of educational facilities for such cases as are considered
educable in Special Schools, and the notification of those considered uneducable to
the appropriate authority, i.e., Parish Councils and the General Board of Control
for Scotland.

It will thus be seen that, apart from purely educational provision, the res-
ponsibility laid upon Education Authorities under the Acts is most important, as
their primary investigations form the foundation on which the whole structure of
the problem of the care of the defective child is built.

The Education Authority is essentially a clearing house for all manner of
cases of mental defect. Their obligation, however, with regard to severe mental
deficiency is extremely limited.

The matter of ascertainment is all important, and, in Renfrewshire, for the
past few yea'rs, we have been concentrating upon scientific, and, as far as possible,
complete ascertainment of mental defect in the area.

Unfortunately, the work was somewhat hampered in the early years by the
prejudice existing on the part of the general public against provision of special
school accommodation for mental defectives. Some objected on the ground'of
expense, others on grounds of stigmatisation, and questions such as " What is
the use?", or " Does the result justify the expense?", were often asked.

Undoubtedly there was some ground for such questions at that time, as many of
the children admitted were cases for whom institutional treatment was the only
solution. It is satisfactory to note, however, that now, generally speaking, only
the high grade type is dealt with in the Special Schools, and, consequently,
considerable educational progress is made.

The crux of the whole matter lies in the selection of proper cases. If proper
cases are selected, then those schools not only justify themselves, but become an
absolute necessity.

During the past two years in Renfrewshire, the Education Authority has made
provision for the establishment of backward classes in every large school in the
area. Extra teachers have been appointed for this purpose; one is a psychologist,
who has made a special study of the backward child. She devotes one hour each
day in selected schools to the ascertainment of suitable cases for the backward
classes. The rest of her time is taken up in preparing reports on special cases,
e.g., temperamental, vocational, delinquent, mentally defective, etc., for the
information of the medical staff and teachers.

With the organised establishment of backward classes, the great majority of
admissions to special schools should now be from Infant and Junior Divisions only.
Of course, it is inevitable and incidental to a moving- population such as ours, that
an occasional ease of mental defect escapes observation, and icmains in an ordinary
school till twelve or thirteen years of age.

Under the Authority's Scheme, when a teacher expresses the opinion that a
case is unable to profit from education in the ordinary school, special repoits are
made by the Head Teacher and the psychologist as to the child's intelligence and
scholastic attainments. If these indicate subnormal intelligence, they are
considered together with other evidence of subnormality by the Medical Officer,
before certification.

The report of the psychologist is of exceptional value, and we hope that, in the
near future, it will be found that the Medical Officer's field of investigation into
mental defect will be more or less limited to the backward class.
We have two large Special Schools in Renfrewshire?one in Paisley for the
upper area of the Countv, with a roll of 21G, and one in Greenock, for the lower
area, with a roll of 80 Owing to the lack of sufficient Special School accommoda^
tion in the latter area," there are about 150 additional cases of mental defect being
taught in ordinary schools. The Authority also provide for the education of about 30
children resident in the Epileptic Colony of the Orphan Homes of Scotland,
Bridge-of-Weir.

These schools are equipped on up-to-date lines and staffed by highly
Qualified, specially trained teachers. The work is carried out in ideal school
buildings, which are amply provided with rooms for special treatment ^ ort iopa? ic,
dental, etc. Use is made of the latest educational methods in teaching the three
Rs, and a teacher is engaged each forenoon in dealing with speech detects, in
addition to the ordinary general training provided, the girls receive a thorough
grounding in domestic science, and the boys are taught handwork, cobb ing, an
gardening. Every effort is made to ascertain the special aptitude of each child in
order that special training may be given with a view to helping the pupil to become
wholly or partially self-supporting in later life. The Aurist, Oculist, and Dentist,
visit these schools regularly, and the general health of the children is supervised
by the Authority's Medical Officers, who visit once or twice weekly.

The schools tap practically the whole Renfrewshire Area. _ A travelling
teacher, with special school training, was employed experimentally tor
a few months last year in giving instruction to mental defectives who, through
transport and other difficulties, were not attending special schools. The experience
gained was valuable. The result of the experiment is that these children are now
classified and the position in the outlying districts is known. The children showed
their adaptability to special school methods, and the superiority of these methods
was fully demonstrated. Arrangements are now being made for the conveyance
?f these children to a special school centre.

Cases are transported from outlying areas to special schools by motor
ambulance and specially chartered tram cars. The Authority has four motor
ambulance vans and three trams are engaged morning and afternoon.
Arrangements are being made for a few cases to travel by train. For each
ambulance and tram car there is a special guide, whose duty is to take the children
to and from school and to attend to the comfort and wants of the children in
school, including serving of meals. Children get cocoa or milk at 10.30 a.m. and
a hot dinner at 12.30. Extras are supplied when necessary. Except in cases of
necessity, an inclusive weekly charge of 1/3 is made for meals.

Transport problems are not acute in Renfrewshire. The area is a compact one,
and it is possible, without much loss of time, to reach any part by train, tramcar,
or motor. There is, therefore, no difficult rural problem.
The total number of ascertained cases in Renfrewshire on 7th April, 1926, was
518, made up as follows :?

In Special Schools ... ... ... ... 262
On lists, awaiting admission   33
In ordinary schools ... ... ... ... 151
Uneducables   ... ... 72
518

In cases of doubt as to whether or not children are of too low grade for a
special school, it has been the practice to send all such children, for a brief period,
at least, to the Special School in the Area. Here they are kept under observation,
their confidence gained, and a Local Care Visitor introduced to pupil and parent.
Besides making doubly sure that the diagnosis of uneducability is correct, this
procedure has the effect of ensuring that no case escapes the knowledge of the
Local Care Committees, and that no child so certified misses the safeguarding
which is his right under the Act.

We are fortunate in Renfrewshire in having our Physical Defectives and our
Mental Defectives taught under the same roof, and in having a working agreement
between the teachers, under which cases are sent from one to the other for
observation.

Thus, in a doubtful case of mental defect, where definite diagnosis is further
obscured by periods of absenteeism, due to physical disability, and where remedial
measures are advisable before definite opinion is given, the child is at once sent
to the Physical Division, where his defects are attended to, his general health
improved, his education carried on in pleasant open-air surroundings, and the
relation of his backwardness to physical fitness assessed.

These safeguards all make for scientific ascertainment, and the proximity of
the two schools also makes decertification a practical proposition. If a case
progresses well, decertification is invited by trying that case in a physical class
for observation. In this manner also the Special School can be utilised as a
Psychiatric Clinic for observation in difficult and problem cases of delinquency.
Although gradually disappearing, difficulties are still met with, e.g., securing
the notification of cases by teachers to Medical Officers, and obtaining the consent
of parents to their children being sent to Special Schools. So far, no case has
arisen where extreme measures have had to be taken. A friendly talk by the
Doctor or Headmistress with the parents, usually had the desired effect. This is
fortunate, as probably forceful measures by our Authority at this juncture would
undo much of the progress already made and destroy the confidence existing.
A visit to the Special School has often the desired effect of overcoming
parents' scruples and prejudices.

Children in our special schools are under continual medical supervision, and
notes are kept on special case sheets, of physical condition, mental condition,
conduct, progress, and attainments, until finally reported on under the Act, at
15J years, prior to being passed out to the Local Care Committees at 16 years.
In Renfrewshire, it is the practice to recommend in all cases " Supervision
by Local Care Committee," except those for Institutions and Guardianship.

LOCAL CARE COMMITTEES.
----------------------

There are two Local Care Committees for Mental Welfare in Renfrewshire,
these Committees have been in existence for five and six years respectively. The
total number on the rolls of the Committees is 362. Practically all were
Pupils in the mental side of the Special Schools. A considerable number completed
e course provided; the remainder, on account of their low standard of attainment,
Were found to be uneducable. There are 99 Visitors for the two Committees, and
each person on the rolls is visited periodically and reported on. Every
effort is made to enable Visitors to become acquainted with the pupils while
they are attending- the Special Schools. This saves much explanation when an
ex-pupil is visited. The Cards used by the Visitors are prepared by the Scottish
Association for Mental Welfare. The Committees assist, as far as possible, all
the cases reported. The assistance may take one or other of the following- forms :?
(1) Arranging, when desired by parents or guardians, for the admission of
low-grade and difficult cases into suitable institutions.
(2) Securing suitable situations for former pupils who are fit for work.
(3) Providing garden plots for boys, and arranging for assistance and super-
vision when the boys are working on the plots. Potatoes, cabbages,
and turnips are grown, and sold to the Special School. Last year twelve
boys were provided with plots.
(4) Providing Employment Centre for Former and Unemployed Pupils.
One Centre is in operation, and is at present attended by ten
boys and five girls, for two days per week, from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m.
In addition, two girls get work sent to their homes, as they are unable
to attend. The ages of the pupils range from 16 to 32 years. They
are taught rug-making, toy-making, paper-flower making, wood-carving,
leather-work, sewing, knitting, dressmaking, and embroidery. The work
is taken home and in every case the worker is paid on the completion
of the article. The goods are sold at the Special Schools throughout the
year, or at an Annual Sale. A Visitor pays for the dinners supplied to
the pupils at the Centre. The boys invariably return immediately to
the Centre when unemployed.
(5) Setting up Occupation Centres.
These Centres are for boys and girls who are unfit or unsuited for Special
Schools. Two are at present in existence. The total number of boys and
girls on the rolls is 46. Their ages are from seven to fourteen. The pupils
meet two hours per day on five days per week. They are taught personal
hygiene, discipline, sociability, and generally made less " difficult." An
attempt is also made to teach them to write their own names and to
understand numbers, but most attention is given to handwork. The
youngest and very low-grade, are instructed in bead-threading, card-
lacing, woollen ball making, and working with plasticine. The older
and slightly less low-grade, are taught to knit and sew, to make rugs, and
paper-flowers, and to do simple house-work. In addition, dancing,
singing, games, and drill, form part of the instruction given. During the
forenoon, milk or cocoa and biscuits are supplied, for which a small
charge is made. The Education Authority have generously given the
use of their motor vans for conveying a number of the children to and
from the Centres. Some of the pupils travel by tram car a distance of
between three and four miles. Usually a friend or neighbour escorts the
pupil to the car, here he is met by a guide and conveyed to the Centre.
These Centres afford a great relief to the harassed, overworked mothers,
and there has been a marked improvement, at least physically, in the
pupils.

In addition to the assistance above referred to, the Committees have been able
to render valuable help when mental cases have been unfortunate enough to get
into trouble and brought before Police Courts. Particulars have been submitted
regarding the mental condition of those charged, and the information given has
been the means of the accused being sent to suitable mental institutions instead
of to prison.

The Committees are somewhat handicapped in their work through lack of
funds. The main part of the expenditure is the salaries of the Instructresses. The
income is derived principally from grants from the Scottish Association for Mental
Welfare, Education Authority, Parish Council, and Board of Control; also from
donations, Sales of Work, and Whist Drives, organised by the teachers of Special
Schools and members of the Committees. A larger income would enable the
Committee to extend the scope of their work so as to provide more suitable premises
and further training in handicraft and domestic subjects for the pupils.

Another feature which has recently been introduced by the Committees is the
reading of suitable Papers, delivered at Mental Welfare Conferences, to the
local members of Committees. This has been the means of giving much important
information to the members, and has raised many useful and valuable discussions.

It is interesting to note the steps taken by the Paisley Parish Council for
dealing with mental defectives. Two years ago the Council purchased an estate
of about 56 acres, with a modern mansion house attached. This place is at
present used as a Colony for mental defective boys and youths, mainly of the
moral defective type. At present the accommodation is for 25, but when alterations
are completed, it is hoped to provide for 40 inmates. They are instructed in
gardening, and general farm work, including poultry keeping. Lessons are also
given in rug-making and boot repairing. All have, from the physical standpoint,
improved markedly, and there has been a decided change for the better in their
conduct. Some of the younger boys are being taught in the evening by a specially
trained teacher, who is also an experienced psychologist. A qualified nurse acts as
Matron of the Colony.

In Renfrewshire, every effort is being made to get in touch with all mental
defectives in the area, and the result is (1), close and effective supervision;
(2), cordial co-operation between public bodies and Local Care Committees; (3), an
awakening of public interest in the welfare of the mentally defective; (4), sym-
pathetic consideration in Courts; and (5), complete records of all cases which have
passed through the Special Schools.
