The Abilities of Man: Their Nature and Measurement
====================================================

Menial Deficiency Bill.

As we go to press, there seems to be a reasonable prospect that the Mental
Deficiency Bill, presented by Mr. Crompton Wood, will become law this Session.
It has been considered by Standing' Committee A, and has been ordered to be
reported to the House. It must not be forgotten that the Government Bill last
autumn reached this stage, but had then to be withdrawn owing to opposition.
The new Bill, however, has met some of the criticisms raised against the previous
Bill, and there has been time to dispel certain suspicions that appeared ill-founded,
so that there seems ground for hope that the Bill, as amended, will be acceptable
to the House.

We hope, in our October issue, to be able to give a summary of the important
changes which will be effected by the Bill as finally accepted.

Annual Report of the Board of Control.
-------------------------------------
The Section of the Annual Report of the Board of Control dealing with
Mental Deficiency for the year 1925 has been the subject of an interesting
Memorandum adopted by the Society of the County Medical Officers of Health,
which has received considerable attention in the medical press. The Memorandum
has been published in the June issue of " Public Health," has been commented
on in the " Lancet " (June 18th), and critically reviewed in the " British Medical
Journal " (June 4th), and has been the subject of correspondence by Dr Tredgold
and Dr Ralph Picken (" Lancet," June 18th and 25th).

The Memorandum unfortunately is so hostile in tone to the Board of Control,
and strikes one as so singularly biassed and violent in tone that it tends to
prejudice the reader against the case it puts forward. The Board in their Report
emphasised the desirability of trained and experienced medical men for the
administration of the Mental Deficiency Act. Everyone must be in agreement
with this. The Board suggests that the best method to secure such men is by
the appointment of special officers for the Mental Deficiency Act. This may be
dangerous as leading to a disassociation of Mental Deficiency from the rest of
Public Health work. The Memorandum and the article in the " British Medical
Journal " are both strongly opposed to this, and, if we may say so, the case
for including the duties of the Mental Deficiency Medical Officer in the unification
of medical services under the Medical Officer of Health are put far more cogently,
reasonably, and convincingly in the latter article than in the Memorandum, with
its distinctly " peevish " tone. Mental and physical health are accepted as part
of one and the same problem of Public Health in the case of children by the
establishment and development of a unified School Medical Service; then surely
the work for adult mental defectives must not run the danger of being " isolated "
and placed in a water-tight compartment, which may be the case unless the
responsible officers personally agree to co-operate. The general supervision of the
work by the Medical Officer of Health need not necessarily prevent the appointment
on his staff of someone specially trained and experienced in this branch of work,
nor need it prevent the consultation with an outside specialist for difficult cases.
The quotations given in the " British Medical Journal " from many ol the leading
authorities on Public Health are an indication of the realisation by more enlightened
public opinion of the close inter-relations of mental and physical factors in health
and disease, and anything which would tend to check the practical interpretation
of this recognition may seriously delay the development of preventive medicine in
the sphere of mental hygiene.

The tone of the Memorandum is also very bitter as to the work of Voluntary
Associations, but the only comments we would make are the following.
The majority of the paid posts in Voluntary Associations are filled by persons
of very considerable training and experience in general social work, with additional
training in work for the care of defectives. The Central Association for Mental
Welfare is constantly urging the need of further training in psychological social
work for all social workers, and more especially for those engaged in such special
branches as mental deficiency, delinquency, mental after-care, psychological
clinics, etc.

With regard to Health Visitors' assisting in ascertainment and supervision
of defectives, this is obviously a satisfactory way for a Local Authority to carry
out its duties, provided such Health Visitors are given any training in the work.
One Local Authority has realised very fully the necessity for this, and the senior
members of the staff have attended special courses of training, and in addition
special instruction is being given to any of the Health Visitors who are actually
engaged in visiting defectives. We would, however, emphasise the fact that
the training of a Health Visitor does not in itself fit a person to give that help
and advice to parents on the special care to be taken of the defectives or the special
methods which should be employed at home for their training and occupation.

In conclusion, it is to be feared that the tone of the whole Memorandum
will be prejudicial to the fair-minded discussion of what are important principles
of administration, on which those with a real desire to secure the best administration of the Mental Deficiency Act may well hold divergent views. An excellent
opportunity for an unbiassed discussion of the problem has been lost by the most
unfortunate method of approach displayed in the Memorandum.

Mental Deficiency in Oxford.
----------------------------
We have received from the Oxford Voluntary Association for Mental Welfare
the following interesting- notes :??

An enquiry has lately been made into the mental condition of the children
of persons resident, or lately resident, in Oxford, who had been medically
examined and found to be feeble-minded. Thirty-six children of seventeen parents
were traced Of these :?

Too young for any opinion to be given ... ... ... ... 3
Apparently normal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Below normal, possibly deficient (in the opinion of teachers or
guardians), but not medically examined and found to be
deficient ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Medically examined and found to be deficient ... ... ... 12
Maintained and educated at public expense or by charity ... ... 25
In one case both parents had been medically examined and passed as feebleminded, but never certified : these people are still having children, but all except
one are dead.

In the other cases, 1 father and 17 mothers were passed as feeble-minded : all
were certified except two of the mothers, who are both living at home and still
having children : both have large families already.

The ages of the children (not including the three who are too young for any
judgment to be given) varies from 2| to 22.
Three children are in Special Schools (residential), two are awaiting vacancies;
two are certified under the Mental Deficiency Act and are under guardianship;
five are in charitable homes; 13 are in Poor Law Institutions or boarded out
under the Poor Law.

Two fathers (of five children altogether) are dead, but 19 of the children are
illegitimate (children of 13 mothers) and their fathers are not known.
SUMMARY.

Fathers.?1 certified; 1 medically examined and found feeble-minded; 13 not
known; 2 not examined but obviously sub-normal.
Mothers.?15 certified; 3 examined but not certified; 1 normal.
Children.?19 illegitimate; 5 in Mental Deficiency Schools or awaiting vacancies;
2 certified under Mental Deficiency Act; 13 in Poor Law Institutions;
5 in Charitable Homes.

Appointment of Women Inspectors under the Board of Control.
Miss M. M. McFarlane, B.A., Ph.D., late Assistant Inspector of Special
Schools under the London County Council, and Miss Hilda Redfern, late Superintendent of Monyhull Residential School, have been appointed Women Inspectors
under the Board of Control.

C.A.M.W. Courses.
----------------
The C.A.M.W. Courses have been attended with success, and the last of
this year's series will he held as a Refresher Course at the beginning of August.

Arrangements are being made for a Course for the Secretaries of Voluntary
Associations. It is hoped that this Course will take place in London from
December 4th to 9th, by which date Miss Fox will have returned from America.
