The Essential Unity of the Mental Problem
==========================================

:Author: W. F. Menzies, M.D., B.Sc., F.R.C.P.

I must thank most cordially the Committee of the Staffordshire Association
for Mental Welfare for their kindness in inviting me to fulfil this year the pleasing duty of delivering the Annual Address, and I hope what I have to say will be
neither too boring nor too far divorced from problems connected with the daily
work of the Association. I have chosen as my subject " The Essential Unity of
the Mental Problem " because the treatment of the mentally affected is considerably handicapped by well-meant, but, as I think, misdirected efforts to confine the
problems of mental illness within water-tight compartments that is, on the one
hand Mental Defect, on the other hand Mental Disorder.

The Brain.
I am not going to waste your time over a long discourse on brain
physiology, but in order to begin at the beginning, or as near that point as justifiable, I must ask you to bear with me for a few minutes while I give a very sketchy
demonstration of the growth of mind by means of a few diagrams. Here we have
a rough outline drawing of the brain of a shark, a crocodile, a kangaroo, and a
human being. I have chosen these vertebrate animals as being roughly of equal
body weight. This is the brain stem or medulla, which governs the three vital
functions of respiration, circulation and digestion. You see that the brain stem is
much the same size in each. The brain masses below are called the basal ganglia
and cerebellum, which organise the reflex movements and postures. These lower
mechanisms, which have nothing to do with reason, are coloured grey. Above, in
the fish, is a thin layer of brain cortex containing a few nerve cells, connected
practically with one sense, that of smell. In the reptile the cortical layer is
thicker, but still nearly all reasoning is done by the sense of smell. Even in the
kangaroo this is largely so, but great advances have been made. Here you see
an area of brain cortex devoted to sight, another to hearing, another to body
sensation, a fourth to movement. Each of these functions is connected with the
basal ganglia. But in man, what a difference? Round each of the four special
* The Annual Address to the Staffordshire Association for Mental Welfare, delivered at Stafford
on 30th April, 1927, illustrated by wall diagrams.

sense areas there is a supplemental area, called an association area, where the
special functions are elaborated. These association areas are connected, not only
with the basal ganglia and with the organs of sense and the voluntary body
muscles, but also with one another, each to every other one. How is this done?
In the lower mammals, guinea pigs, rabbits, etc., there are layers of brain cells,
neurons, as they are called, whose long fibres run out from brain to body. These
may be three or four or 20 deep according to the activity of the various senses.

But in man, and to some extent in the higher mammals?dog, cat, elephant?the
telephone exchange system, as it might be called, is infinitely more complicated.

Above the first layer is another, composed of small cells, granular cells they are
called, which are the jack plugs in the switch board, and above them an association layer, called the supragranular layer, 20, 40, 60 cells deep, sending fibres
to every other part of the cortex. The infragranular layers are linked up through
the basal ganglia to nerves running to and from the internal organs, the sympathetic nerves. It is the nerve currents in these sympathetic nerves, constantly
reaching the brain second by second, sleeping and waking, from conception to
dissolution, ever stimulated or controlled by the great system of endocrine glands,
which are the basis of what we call emotion, that wonderful mainspring of energy,
interest and endeavour, of joy and sorrow, of hope and despair.

But this is not all. As we rise in the scale of intelligence the brain cells
themselves become more complicated. Here is a human brain cell; note the bushy
network of fine fibrils, stretching out to embrace similar fibrils of a neighbouring
cell, like the rootlets of a plant. Here is a less bushy cell, with fewer rootlets;
this might serve for a sheep, a congenital imbecile, or a demented person; under
the microscope you might not be able to tell which it was. I want to make it
quite clear that the complications in the human cortex are to those of the fish as
many millions to one, and that all the attributes of human mentality can be
accounted for on a strictly mathematical basis of anatomical structure, namely,
the power of storing up associated memories, hereditary and instinctive on the
one hand, acquired by education and observation on the other. Most of us
presume other and more metaphysical characters, collectively called the " mind,"
but we need not do so unless we like, for the permutations and combinations of
nerve paths in the brain are mathematically sufficient. If you travel from Lichfield
to Stoke by rail you may go by Colwich, or Stafford, or Birmingham, or Crewe,
or Uttoxeter and Leek. But if you chose to walk and utilised every footpath, a
few yards on one, a few yards on another, you could pursue many millions of
paths, and could not use them up in 10 generations. Such is the difference between
the brain of the lowest and highest vertebrate animal. When we raise the arm
the supragranular cortex does not concern itself with the details of the movement.

These are all arranged by the infragranular layers, basal ganglia, spinal cord, and
elsewhere, according to patterns worked out through millions of years of trial and
error, and now become automatic, instinctive, even unconscious. What the supragranular layer cares for is the purpose of the movement, and here again patterns
have been worked out by thousands of years of habits, beliefs, manners, and ways
of thought acquired throughout each successive culture phase in human history.

This is why the higher mammals alone have the power of learning by experience,
and of varying almost infinitely the thousands of millions of alternative pattern
paths of nerve force. The conflicting emotional stimuli involved in the choice of
these paths are a well recognised basis of worry, or even of mental breakdown.

Just one other law of evolution :?The oldest acquired structure or function is the
most stable, the newest is the most vulnerable to disease or accident. The brain
stem is the oldest part of the brain ; it has varied very little since backbones were
first evolved in the fishes of the Silurian geological series countless ages ago.

The supragranular layers of the brain cortex are the newest developments ; they
perish easily under embryonic or environmental stress, more especially in the
prefrontal, or extreme front portion of the brain, the part where ideas and problems
of highly complicated movements, which we call thought, are worked out, that
part of the brain possessed by the human race only. When this goes man might
as well have no forehead; his behaviour is on the level of that of a monkey.

Next a few words about how heredity affects things. As soon as a fertilised
vegetable or animal germ begins to develop it divides into two portions, the bodyplasm and the germ-plasm. The body-plasm grows on to form the individual,
the germ-plasm, which constitutes the sex glands, remains embryonic, but in possession of all the family qualities, until it is called upon to form the basis of a
new generation. So environmental stresses may affect both body-plasm and germplasm; injury to the former comes to light in the individual, injury to the latter
not until some succeeding generation. I believe, although many do not, that
instability of the brain cells, as explained above, is a Mendelian recessive quality,
and appears only when an undue stress affects a brain whose cells in a former
generation (where, of course, they were only germ-plasm, not body-plasm), were
similarly subjected to undue environmental stress. If this be true it follows that
sterilisation of the unfit can remove from a population at the most 25 per cent, of
mental deficiency. But as in practice mental deficients are not responsible for
anything like their proportionate percentage of births, probably a nation would
be lucky who succeeded in removing even 10 per cent, of mental deficiency by such
means; for it must be remembered that in the present culture phase of civilised
society sterility necessarily accompanies the graver forms of mental defect. Nor
does sterilisation save the cost of segregation, most defectives being asocial.

We have now arrived at the position that, as regards heredity in mental
weakness, what is inherited is not a tendency to mania, or melancholia, or mental
deficiency, or epilepsy, or neurasthenia, but is an inherited weakness of constitution of the brain cells, more especially the newest acquired cells of the
supragranular layers of the prefrontal cortex. Some of the hereditary causes of
neuronic failure are plain and self-evident, such as alcohol, lead poisoning, or
syphilis, or other physical disease in the parent, but many are at present
beyond our knowledge and belong to the accumulation of adverse environments
of former generations; these we class under the general term " neuropathic
diathesis." If the injury to the body-plasm and germ-plasm be severe, the
individual may perish at a very early embryonic stage, but in proportion as
it is less urgent or less continuous, development goes on longer and longer until
the individual may be born apparently normal. At birth the brain cortex has
attained about three-fifths of its adult depth, but the supragranular layers are
much behind-hand. Most defective brains have gone on growing until the
seventh or eighth month, or else their owners would not have been born alive
at all. If the supragranular layers of the cortex are partly formed, the child
is educable in greater or less degree, but we find that if a child cannot be taught
to talk, there is some defect even in the infragranular layers._ A great deal of
discussion is at present centred round the disease encephalitis lethargica, or
sleepy sickness. At what age does a person whose brain is permanently injured
by this disease cease to become a case of mental deficiency and become one
of acquired mental disorder? Whatever view is taken, it is clear that the
decision is not on physiological so much as on social grounds. Certain acquired
mental disorders begin early in life, at the stress periods, puberty or adolescence,
when not only are sexual functions beginning to exercise an enormous influence
on the character of the child, but the increasing brain power is creating all sorts
of new social difficulties which call for adjustment. If the brain cells fail under
the strain, we get precocious dementia, dementia praecox, a most unfavourable
type of mental illness, and one all too common under the increasing worries of
competition. But who can say that this is wholly an evil? To the individual
68 Mental welfare.

it is a calamity, but to the race a blessing-, for these cases rarely marry, and
so the neurosis cures itself. Nature is ever careless of the individual, but ever
careful of the race. The brains of many idiots are grossly malformed, and those
of many advanced dements much changed by chronic inflammatory conditions,
but there is a large class of cases in which it is almost impossible to tell
after death whether the brain was that of an imbecile or a dementia piEecox or a
manic-depressive. And so during life; often the history alone will give us a
clue as to the age at which the brain became affected; by no direct medical
examination can we tell whether the illness was congenital or acquired. This is
especially true of young acute maniacs and epileptics. There are always the two
classes of causes at work?there is the predisposing cause, an inherited want of
vitality in the brain cells, and there is the exciting cause, generally a tissue poison
generated within the body of the individual as the result of inharmonious environment. These two great classes of determinants are like the rope and the weight
it has to carry. The strong-er the rope the longer it will carry a given weight,
the heavier the weight the sooner will it wear out a given rope. But whether
mental failure is pre-natal, or infantile, or adult, or senile, becomes merely an
equation of accumulated severity of causes versus the resistance of the individual.

Ascertainment.?Having dealt with continuity of causation, I now come
to the question of ascertainment. There are a good many social services already
in existence which are or might be utilised for the early detection of mental
illness. It is highly desirable to adapt existing means to present needs rather
than create entirely new agencies. We have the ante-natal clinics, the infant
welfare centres, health visiting, the school medical service, the industrial welfare
movement, venereal and tuberculosis clinics, the Central Association for Mental
Welfare and its affiliated branches, the National After-Care Association,
Ex-Service Men's Associations, the Industrial Approved Benefit Societies, various
religious and temperance Social Welfare Associations, and an unclassified list
of local groups of voluntary workers making praiseworthy efforts in various
directions to ameliorate society in general and further their own pet schemes in
particular. But there is an almost total lack of co-ordination, there is no attempt
at continuity, and there are important gaps in the age periods. In a large
percentage of our mental patients careful records have been kept of their early
days, at Infant Welfare Centres or by school medical officers, if only these were
not pigeon-holed in locked compartments by the various authorities responsible.
After leaving school they are lost sight of, for it is precisely persons with
congenital or acquired mental weakness who tend to gravitate into the unemployed
and unemployable classes, being unable to compete with the more able members of
society. Most of the organisations, voluntary or rate-supported, are at present
concerned with bodily illness and its prevention, but with very slight extension
they could gather data which would be of great value should their patients later
on require mental attention; for the origins of bodily and mental illnesses are
common and indivisible, and one never knows what information as to bodily
conditions may not in the future indicate the special direction to be followed in
mental treatment. Let us consider the work of some of these agencies.

Probably the most useful of all is the ante-natal clinic, not only because
it holds the earliest inquiry in the child's existence, but also because at it the
parent is examined, and the large field of disease which in later life displays a
mental side is adequately explored and dealt with. Thus a careful history of
insanity, neuroses, epilepsy, alcohol and temperamental peculiarities in father
and mother is taken, and the mother is especially examined for signs of syphilis,
heart disease, tuberculosis and Bright's disease, the first of which notoriously
affects the grovvth of the infant's brain almost more than its body, accounting
for one-fifth to one-fourth of mental cases, congenital or acquired. If a history
of still-births or miscarriages is elicited, or signs of active disease noted in
the mother or her elder children, absolutely specific and sure treatment can be given
and the unborn child saved from all taint. Things are not quite so hopeful
in Bright's disease, but if convulsive seizures in the mother can be prevented,
the child's brain is generally preserved from injury. Next in order of importance
comes pelvic defects in the mother, which, if severe, may necessitate Caesarian
section or premature induction of labour, thus saving the child's skull from undue
pressure or fracture, both of which may at times result, the former in primary
dementia, the latter in birth paralysis and mental defect. Lastly, the nutrition
of the mother is attended to, especially cases of semi-starvation or dietary defects,
which, would, if neglected, inevitably lead to rickets, deformities, or mental defect
in the infant.

From the age of a fortnight up to 2 years or older, children are brought
to Infant Welfare Centres. Sometimes, if attached to hospitals or instituted
by the local authority, these centres carry on the work progressively from the
ante-natal clinics, but often they are independent, and the medical men and nurses
have not then the advantage of the record cards, and so have to begin de novo.
A doctor will examine the baby at the first visit and note whether the child
notices things, looks round and smiles, or is abnormally placid, or whether it
seems unhappy and cross. A great attraction is the tea and social gathering of
mothers, and when a tactful and enterprising lady visitor is in charge of this
part of the job the centres become very popular, and much useful knowledge of
maternity and child management is spread by the discussions. If necessary,
histories of the family are taken. Weight charts are kept, dietary arranged,
and the proper management of the bowels inculcated. Deformities, stigmata of
degeneration and signs of the usual infantile ailments are looked for, and the
growth of the teeth noted according to the age. If older, what progress is being
made with weaning and training in cleanliness, and whether the child is progressing normally with walking and talking. The medical officer looks for early
signs of rickets, eczema, cretinism, mongolism, hydrocephalus, dysthyroidism,
flaccid or spastic paralysis, tetany, chorea, etc. All these and many others are
important as regards subsequent mental defect or illness. Cod liver oil and ultraviolet ray treatment are often provided.

From 3 years onwards the child begins to come under the Education
Authorities, and thenceforwards up to 14 he is under a most carefully devised
and skilfully organised scheme of progressive training. The play schools for
infants of 3 to 5 are a most useful preliminary to education in the crowded slum
districts of the great towns, and the nurses have an unique opportunity for
observing physical and mental defects, and drawing the medical officer's attention
to the necessity for treatment. Incidentally these play classes are ideal disseminators of children's diseases, but there is something to be said for the
argument that, if the child gets these infectious fevers over early, his education
is less interfered with later on. In rural districts the child is far better playing
near his home until he begins school at 5, but it certainly leaves a gap of 2 years
in observation, unless the district nurse is an observant person not overwhelmed
with specific duties. Like all high-grade machines, the school system has its
defects, and from the medical point of view the greatest is the result of rushed
work and the inevitable fall into a groove. I do not know about the conditions in
Staffordshire, but in many places the school medical officers are far too few
to give adequate consideration to individual cases, or to conduct a full examination
sufficiently often. I understand they aim at three examinations in the nine years
of school life?clearly not enough. But the teachers are wonderful in spotting
mental and character anomalies in the pupils; and if the school nurses spend
enough time over the teeth and adenoids, the worst shortcomings are avoided.

The shy and reticent child, often inclined to be delicate, the one, as we say, with
an "inferiority complex," is too apt to be left severely alone in a large class
until repeated failures to reach the required standard compel attention. These
are the children often slightly defective congenitally, made worse by the deafness
of adenoids and mouth-breathing, who recruit the ranks of the mental defectives,
or later on enter the hopeless alley of dementia praecox. And the terrible results
of encephalitis lethargica make it most important for teachers to be on the
look out for those slight and undiagnosed cases which result in quite as formidable
sequelae as those whose original illness assumed the more acute and unmistakable
type. In fact, my experience seems to show that many of the worst of the moral
or " Apache " type passed unnoticed at first, and only a year or two or three
years later the teacher can recall when questioned that the child seemed dull
or out of sorts for a day or two, but that this was put down to a dietary indiscretion at home. This problem of the encephalitic is going to tax the ingenuity of
the country in a few years, when these children grow up. I have had some
under observation for over 3 years, who, although the disease has not progressed, have become more and more unmanageable as they grow bigger and
stronger. Previously quiet, diligent and well-behaved children now lie, steal
and assault others; reproofs, arguments, punishments and rewards are alike
useless, the answer is always the same, " I'm sorry, I know I was wrong, but
I couldn't help it; I won't do it again." Five minutes later another small outrage
is committed. Now imagine these no longer little children, but powerful adults.
What will become, say, in a murder case, of the McNaughten dictum as to knowledge of the nature and quality of the wrongful act? I have several of both
sexes who have passed puberty, and they are now adding sexual misbehaviour
to their childish peccadilloes; and with it all these patients preserve their devilish
monkey ingenuity and cleverness, never at a loss for an explanation or an excuse.
What modern system of detention will control these people in the future, certainly
not a criminal lunatic asylum as at present constituted ? Luckily, this type seems
rarely to occur when the original infection appears in an adult, but only in those
whose brains are yet far off full development.

The Industrial Welfare Clinics deserve a few words. The working of the
Industrial Research Board on the physical and psychical sides of employment
will lead to the diagnosis of the mental waverers. Transference to more suitable
employment, together with advice as to more hygienic living and the treatment
of dental and rheumatic affections, should ultimately diminish the cost of institutional treatment and remove part of the heavy burden of unemployment through
chronic invalidism. The hospitals of the country are filled with those who have
through ignorance and unhealthy surroundings been pushed to the wall or fallen
by the way. One hopes that when the cost of industrial clinics is shared fairly
between sick benefit societies, or still better, the trade unions, on the one hand,
and the employers, on the other, a reasonable Government grant in aid will come
to far less than the present cost of poor relief, unemployment, mental deficiency
and insanity. The casuals and unemployables will still need to be provided for,
but it is not beyond the wit of man, although it may seem beyond the pecuniary
capacity of successive governments, to devise remedies for roping them in before
their cases have become hopeless.

Administration.?I have tried to show that the same sets of causes, hereditary
and environmental, are at work in producing mental defect and mental illness,
and that, beyond certain fairly-defined limits, it seems to our present knowledge
almost fortuitous which, if either, will emerge in a given individual. And we
see constantly in our hospitals mental defectives who have regular relapses into
active insanity, in no way distinguished from other persons who between their
attacks are normal members of society. The rest of my address will be devoted
to administrative recommendations for unifying treatment.

There are two societies devoted to the amelioration of the mental problem.
The older is the Mental After-Care Association, founded in 1886 for the purpose
of supervising- discharges from asylums. There are many local branches, but
none in this district. By its assistance many men and women, all of them poor,
some friendless, yet capable with a modicum of assistance of earning- their own
living, have been sent temporarily to homes, convalescent or otherwise, for a
change of air and scene, or have been found employment, or received small
monetary grants towards fresh clothing or tools, or have been cheered by
the occasional visits of voluntary workers. Like other charitable organisations,
this association is chronically hampered by lack of funds. I he other is the
Central Association for Mental Welfare. It would greatly lighten the mental
problem if these two Associations amalgamated. Nor are we free from trouble
in Staffordshire. After a good many years of striving we have obtained the
Staffordshire Mental Hospitals Board, and one would have thought that the
obvious step of extending its aegis to cover mental deficiency would have commended itself to every authority in the geographical area. Yet we know that
some stand out. To anyone like myself, whose official life is drawing to an end,
it seems inexplicable that the public should be willing to see their money wasted
in overlapping, and still worse, see the education and control of the mental
defective suffer; and those who know anything worth while about the subject
realise that this is exactly what will happen if each local authority sets out to
manage its own defectives. People who deny this assertion are not those who
have given their working lives to the solution of the problem, so that all I can
do is to plead for the wide view. The Board of Control suggested that the willing
authorities form a voluntary board for mental deficiency, but what good would
this be? They could not raise money by precept, and every trifling expenditure,
structural alteration, and so on, would have to be submitted seriatim to each
authority. If one dissented, that expenditure could not be incurred, and at best
the negotiations and correspondence would be interminable. I do not suggest
that local mental deficiency committees should lose their identity, but that each
authority should appoint one or more members of the board from their own mental
deficiency committee, if indeed they have not already one common committee
for mental work. But this alone would not satisfy those of us who are idealists.

We say that there should be no divorce between education and mental treatment,
or between mental treatment and public health. Accordingly, we should like it
made possible to have members of these committees of each authority upon what
would then, we hope, bear the name of the Staffordshire Board of Mental Health.

Following the precedent of the Education Acts, we should like other special
interests co-opted, although of persons not responsible to the ratepayers; I can
instance voluntary societies, the Police Court Mission, the Staffordshire Nursing
Association, the Health Visiting Committee, Infant Welfare Committees, Local
War Pensions Committees and Orthopaedic Associations. One member of each
of these, and there may be others, would act as liaison officers without having
sufficient voting power to interfere with the ratepayers' wishes. Next we would
like to see more team work among the medical officers. Too often at present
the specialist medical service is overwhelmed by routine. It arrangements could
be made so that these officers and medical officers of social service committees
and institutions should confidentially refer all mental cases in their early and
unconfirmed stages to the Board of Mental Health, much as cases of infectious
disorders are reported, no publicity would be entailed, and in many cases preventive measures, physical or psychological, could be taken without loss of time.

But it must be acknowledged that such suggestions are Utopian, and could only
be brought about gradually after an Early Mental Treatment Act and amendments
to the Mental Deficiency Acts had paved the way for the education of the public
in these matters. There would then be in the offices of the Board of Mental
Health a complete card index record of the salient features from the ante-natal
clinics onwards through life of all who might presumably require medical advice
on their mental health. The Board of Mental Health would have one senior medical
official, the Medical Officer of Mental Health, who would be responsible to the
Board for the classification of all cases reported to them, and who, after a personal
visit and examination in whatever part of the geographical area, would advise as
to disposal, whether for home treatment, or guardianship, or at a local clinic,
or in a mental defective colony, or a mental hospital. The Board's executive
officers would be people analogous to the present relieving officers, possibly, when
the Board had taken over from Boards of Guardians the responsibility for all
mental cases, the same individuals, or some of them. Officials of other bodies
co-ordinating would act for the Board on a part-time basis. The Medical Officer
of Mental Health should be an official of long experience, co-ordinate to, but
independent of, the Medical Officer of Health. I am aware that the British

Medical Association and many of the higher Ministry of Health officials would
have him as an Assistant Medical Officer of Health, but both the Board of Control
and the Royal Medico-Psychological Association are opposed to this on many
grounds; one of these is sufficient, viz., that he would have to consult with the
M.O. H. of many local authorities, and should not, therefore, be under any one
of them, but only under the combined Board of Mental Health. Another reason
is that, unless the post were independent and of senior standing, no man of
life-long experience of mental cases could be found to fill it. He would have
nothing whatever to do with the internal administration of the Board's institutions,
but he would be consultant to the local psychological clinics in the various smaller
towns, which he would have to visit regularly. He would also be expected to
give advice on mental cases if asked for by the school or other medical officer of
any of the local authorities constituting the Board of Mental Health. The local
clinics would be held on one day a fortnight or month, conveniently in the
same room used on other days for health clinics, children's welfare centres, and so
on. The medical officer of mental health would probably refer cases requiring
prolonged psychotherapy to the psychological and psychiatric clinics attached
to the general hospitals in one of the larger county boroughs; for under our model
scheme there would be reciprocity between general and mental hospitals, and
one or more medical officers of the latter would be appointed honorary psychiatrist
to the neighbouring general hospital. With these out-patient or in-patient clinics,
set up by the local authority in alliance with the hospital managers, the medical
officer of mental health would be connected in a consultant capacity alone.

Voluntary and uncertified early cases, as suggested under the Early Mental
Treatment Bill, would in a few years comprise quite half the admissions to the
mental hospitals. It is so in Scotland, where voluntary boarders are more
numerous and where early cases may be received for 6 months without a justice's
order. The Scots are reputed to be as fond of liberty as the English, yet there
is no case on record of an action for illegal detention. The reason is that there
the medical officer of a mental institution has power to discharge, and does
discharge, a recovered patient or one whose friends accept responsibility for his
welfare. Patients get out of Scottish asylums so easily that they are less anxious
to leave, which is perhaps human nature. Scotland is half a century ahead of
England in questions of mental health. A common fallacy is that this somewhat
elaborate scheme for covering the whole geographical area would result in
roping into institutions large numbers of mental cases who need never go there.
We aim at quite the opposite goal, the idea is to keep as many out as possible,
but to have these under such supervision that the best could be got out of them.

For instance, we receive into mental hospitals many middle-aged defectives with
the history that they worked as unskilled labourers under father, brother or
friend for many years, and got along all right, earning a small wage, until
the relative died or gave up work; then they were helpless. A case like this
would no longer require to spend the rest of his life in a hospital or colony; a
suitable place of work, perhaps on the land or away from the former city factory,
would be found for him, and if necessary the guardian would be allowed a small
weekly grant if the patient's wage-earning capacity were very low. But at
present city is separated from country, and there is no list of suitable country
guardians available in the town.

Before concluding I should say a few words about mental defective colonies.
I estimate that there may be 1,500 deficients in the Staffordshire geographical
area who would benefit by institution treatment, at least in their earlier years.

1 fear it is too late to hope for one institution for the county, the next best
hope is one for the north of, say, 750 beds. This is too small to get the best
value out of the money spent, but makes the best of a bad job. Many of the
trade outfits would be unduly costly per head in a small colony where expensive
machinery had to be installed, such as power joinery, fitting and metal welding,
bookbinding and printing. On the other hand, in a small institution too many
people would be trained for jobs in which they could never make a living, such
as tin smith, basket making, weaving, and luxury trades much taught to the
blind. Even tailoring and shoemaking do not offer much inducement at present,
and yet the resources of each shop would have to be fully utilised to pay for its
upkeep. The bulk of deficients should learn a staple trade in a colony, farming,
a building operation, or in this district potting. It must ever be borne in mind
that 9 out of 10 have not brain to compete in the open market, and must at
best need supervision for life, so there is little use in troubling them with a
literary education further than trying to teach them to read simple stories as a
means of relaxation and to keep them out of mischief in the evenings. Further,
they can learn only one process in any trade, and can then perform it mechanically.

The larger the institution the more grading can be done. Large classes are a
serious handicap in a normal school; in a defective colony they are anathema.
There must be individual attention if successful results are to be attained, and
the children must be caught young. I suppose at Cheddleton we have the lowest
grade school in the country. The paralysed idiots, utterly helpless, with less
sense than a fish, first have orthopaedic treatment to reduce their deformities.

Then they have to be taught cleanliness, grasping and walking. Needless to
say, little can be expected if we get them at 11 or 12?we must have them at
2 or 3. The greatest difficulty is talking; for often the speech centres in the
brain are undeveloped. But if these children can be taught to use fairly intelligible signs and sounds, they can get along. That the lowest and grossest idiots
can be so greatly benefited, idiots so extreme that no ordinary colony will have
them, holds out quite a bright hope that many belonging to the higher grades
may ultimately become useful members of their own limited social sphere, and
save the money spent on their keep, while a few may even earn a moderate
competence in the world outside. A small colony cannot grade its cases
sufficiently. With 90 children at Cheddleton we require 5 grades, and if we had
double the number of cases we would have 9. Extend this detailed classification
through all the range of mental deficiency, and you would require at least
40 grades. I once heard an officer at Darenth, with over 2,000 patients, complain
that they could not sub-divide their people as they would like. Catch the children
young, grade them minutely, educate them individually, and when they grow up
find guardians for them, and you will in the end get 15 to 20 per cent, of them
removed from being a burden on the rates. But catch them late, immure them in
small homes or colonies, treat them more or less in bulk, and there they will
remain for the rest of their lives.
