News and Notes
===============

26 Mental welfare.

C.A.M.W. Conference.
Readers are reminded that a Report of the Conference proceedings is being"
published by the C.A.M.W.?price 3/6 per copy.
New Local Associations.
During- the year three new Associations have been affiliated to the C.A.M.W.
?Cumberland and Westmorland, Isle of Ely, and Lines (Parts of Lindsey) (where
the Child Welfare Association has undertaken Mental Welfare work by aid of a
grant from the County). Further developments are in progress in other counties.
Mental Deficiency Bill.
We had hoped that this Bill would have become law before the close of the
session. It came from the House of Lords, and passed the second reading and
the Committee stage with but little amendment, and it was confidently expected
that it would easily pass the third reading. There were, however, so many
amendments handed in by the Labour Party, that the Government felt obliged to
withdraw it.
We are of opinion that there was a great deal of misapprehension about the
Bill. There was, we believe, no ground for supposing that it would have brought
within the Mental Deficiency Act persons who were not intended to be included in
the original Act. Several clauses of the Bill embodied administrative changes
which would have been exceedingly helpful to the proper carrying out of the aims
of the 1913 Act, and we cannot but hope that the Government will before long see
its way to introduce a new Bill.
C.A.M.W. Gourses.
The first Course to be held this year will be the Course for Magistrates, from
Tuesday, February 8th, to Thursday, February 10th, of which fuller particulars
are given on page 39.
Two Short Courses for Teachers, organised by the C.A.M.W. for the Board
of Education, will be held, at Nottingham, from April 20th, to May 11th, and at
Birmingham, from July 6th, to July 27th.
A Ten Weeks' Course for Teachers will be held from May 2nd to July 9th, in
London, mainly intended to give an opportunity of more complete training for
those who desire to teach mentally deficient and dull and backward children, but
who have not had experience.
A Refresher Course, limited to those Teachers who have attended not less
than one course previously, will be held from August 8th, to August 13th, at
Bangor, N. Wales.
The Course for Medical Practitioners, arranged in conjunction with the London
University Extension Board, will be held from May 23rd, to May 28th, at the
Imperial Institute.
MENTAL WELFARE. 27
A Special Course, from March 25th to April 14th, is to be held in London, for
Officers of Local Authorities engaged in the ascertainment and supervision of
Defectives, and for Occupation Centre Supervisors and Nurses and Attendants in
Institutions and Mental Hospitals. ? . , ,
This Course is especially designed to meet the difficulties usually met with by
such workers, and the practical work will be varied accordingly. Fuller particulars
are given on page 39.
Board of Control.
On the recommendation of the Minister of Health, the King has been pleased
to appoint Dr. Robert Cunyngham Brown, C.B.E., to be a Commissioner of the
Board of Control, to fill the vacancy caused by the retirement of Dr. Robert Welsh
Branthwaite, C.B.
Portsmouth Voluntary Association for Mental Welfare.
An interesting new development has recently taken place in Portsmouth. Dr.
Beaton, who has succeeded Dr. Devine as Medical Superintendent of the City
Mental Hospital, has arranged to hold a clinic for Nervous and Mental Diseases
m the Out-Patient Department of the Royal Portsmouth Hospital, which has been
'ent to him for the purpose by the Hospital Committee. The Clinic is the outcome
?f negotiations between Dr. Beaton and the Association for Mental \\ elfare, which
is already fortunate in having all cases of mentakdefect referred by the Association
examined at the Mental Hospital. . . (
The new departure is intended to encourage patients sulfering from nervous
conditions and mild psychotic disturbances, to seek early treatment, and it is clear
that the use of the Out-Patient Department of the General Hospital will facilitate
this. The Secretary of the Association is to be in attendance at the Clinic, to assist
in the investigation of the cases, and to do the following-up.
Encephalitis Lethargica.
Weekly notifications (reproduced from the Lancet).
Week ending Week ending Week ending
Oct. 2 44 Nov. 6 49 Dec. 4 38
,, 9 33 >> 13 35 " If
? 16 33 ? 20 46 ? 18 41
? 23 37 ,> 27 61 ,, 2j 29
,, 30 33
"180 191 150
Total 521
