The Psychology of Childhood: Normal and Abnormal
=================================================

110 MENTAL WELFARE.
Book Reviews & Abstracts.
. By Mary Scharlieb, D.B.E.,
M.D., M.S.Lond., J.P. Constable & Co.,
Ltd. : 1927. 190 pages. Price Gs. net.
This book, which gives a practicable, plain
and sensible introduction to the study of the
child, will be both interesting and most useful
for parents, nurses and young- teachers, who are
daily coming across the difficulties and problems
which exist even in the training of the most
normal child. While the indications of the fre-
quently unrecognised beginnings of abnormality
will be a real boon to those who fear the
development of these.
The chapter on the Moral Imbecile is well
planned and sustained, and is specially com-
mended to the notice of magistrates and of
those who are required to pass judgment on
so-called delinquents. The new term, Psuedo-
moral Imbeciles undoubtedly covers a class
much more common than is generally sup-
posed ; the writer does not appear to attribute
this at all to hyper-sensitivity, which is usually
cloaked by cruelty, truculence, or the desire to
be infamous if it cannot be famous.
The " Mongolian Child " seems somewhat
of an interloper, for a chapter is devoted to this
individual type in a rather general treatise.
But, no one should miss reading the author's
delightfully sane and refreshing outlook on the
questions of suggestion, discipline and punish-
ment. She says : " The action of conscience
and influence of suggestion are probably the
two most potent elements in the direction of
our conduct and in the formation of character."
Dr. Scharlieb brings to the task that calm
common sense and mellow experience which we
are accustomed to expect from this pioneer
woman, together with the charm of humour
which relieves even the most prosaic page.
The book is thoroughly clear and well-
planned throughout, and is illuminated by
stories which, besides being apt and well-
chosen, have the ring- of truth about them,
while there is hardly a page, particularly in
the second half of the book, where one would
not have been glad to have had considerable
amplification of the writer's views.
M. F. B.
Annual Report of the Chief Medical
Officer of the Ministry of Health for
the Year 1926. H.M. Stationery Office :
1927. 3s.
Out of the very interesting- contents of the
Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer
" On the State of Public Health " the section
on Maternity and Child Welfare will probably
be of most interest to our readers. This
section includes a note on the Pre-school Child,
and on the subject of the Mental Health of the
Child the Chief Medical Officer says : " In my
last report I called attention to the danger of
neglecting the mental development of the child
as a result of focussing interest and attention
upon the physical welfare. Interest in mental
health is still mainly the concern of the rela-
tively few psychologists who have given special
study to this somewhat difficult subject, but
there are welcome signs that interest is spread-
ing and that many of those concerned with the
upbringing of children are beginning to realise
that wisdom in mental and moral training is
just as necessary as foresight and watchfulness
in the hygiene of the physical side of life."
Reference is made to the Poor Law Authori-
ties who have given assistance, from time to
time, by affording special units to which
patients from other areas can be admitted. An
arrangement is under discussion in the Mid-
lands by which one of the Poor Law Authorities
" will set aside beds for the treatment of the
after effects of Encephalitis Lethargica."
Metropolitan Asylums Board Report, 1926-
27. General Section, 5s. Mental Dis-
eases Section (only), 2s. Offices of the
Board, Victoria Embankment, E.C.
It is interesting to read in the Metropolitan
Asylums Board Report for this year of the
many institutions that have been training an
increasing number of defectives in domestic or
industrial occupations, and have added equip-
ment or provided further facilities towards this
end. At Leavesden Mental Hospital, five new
workshops have been established for male
patients. At Caterham, the number at occu-
pation training centres shows an increase and
the children's centre has now 160 in attendance,
the maximum number that it can accommodate.
At Darenth there has been a substantial in-
crease in the out-put of many sections of the
MENTAL WELFARE. Ill
industrial department. The importance of
developing- this side of the mental hospitals is
borne out by Dr. E. L. Sherlock. In sum-
marising- his contribution " On Prognosis in
Mental Deficiency," he writes : " It is sound
public policy, as being the cheapest in the end,
to help the mentally-defective person to pro-
duce all he is capable of producing economic-
ally. . . . It is clear that when consider-
ing the mentally-defective some other standard
than ' recovery ' must be taken in forming an
opinion as to prognosis. . . . Prognosis
will thus depend on the adaptation of the en-
vironment to the individual rather than on the
converse proceeding."
Miss Rose Munday (Head Mistress of
Darenth Training Colony) has contributed a
detailed account of the Decroly method of
teaching.
Dr. Borthwick (Medical Superintendent of
the Northern Hospital) has given a very in-
teresting account of the post-encephalitis
lethargica cases under his charge at the
Northern Hospital. His account is illustrated
and readers are shown some of the different
results occurring in various cases. As Dr.
Borthwick says : " Encephalitis lethargica
brings in its train, therefore, a wealth of clini-
cal material that is almost overwhelming and of
which the problems of classification alone are
considerable." We hope that some detailed
account of the training that has been found
most suitable will be given in next year's Re-
port. While the medical aspects of the disease
are of extraordinary interest, it will be par-
ticularly helpful to institutions which receive
a few isolated cases, to have some information
on methods of training.
Following upon Dr. Stewart's investigations,
published last year in the Metropolitan Asylums
Board Report regarding the incidence of con-
genital syphilis in mental deficiency, Dr. Leslie
Gordon, of the Caterham Mental Hospital,
publishes a further paper. He writes : "Of
the 575 cases tested at Caterham, 485 gave a
negative result and 90 a positive, giving a per-
centage of 15.65 positive. It is interesting to
note that the percentage is no higher than the
one obtained by Dr. Stewart in older patients,
and does not seem to bear out the statement
that age or the reaching of puberty is of such
importance in modifying the Wassermann
reaction." The patients at Caterham are
between the ages of 6 and 16.
Board of Control, England and Wales.
Thirteenth Annual Report. H.M.
Stationery Office: 1927. Part I., 2s.;
Part II., 9s.
A welcome innovation in the format of their
Thirteenth Annual Report, just published, has
been made by the Board of Control. In recent
years the Report has been issued in a rather
bulky blue book at the somewhat prohibitive
charge of 12s. 6d., and the Mental Deficiency
Section has only been available for a limited
public. Members of the Central Association
and Local Associations, the Staffs of Certified
Institutions, Justices of the Peace, and many
others, have long wished for a convenient and
inexpensive issue of this Section. The Board
have given them what they wanted and have
further included in that Section nearly all the
information essential to the general public re-
garding mental hospitals and the care of the
insane. We urge our readers to obtain it
without delay.
The Report is of particular interest in its
account of improved ascertainment and of
further developments in the training of defec-
tives and in its expression of opinion re
sterilization and the marriage of defectives.
To take matters of interest in the Report in
the order in which they are set down, we would
like first to refer to the Board's reiteration of
the need for action following upon the Report
of the Royal Commission on Lunacy and Mental
Disorder. They recapitulate some of the
evidence which they gave before the Commis-
sion, suggesting, that in regard to the pro-
cedure for the reception of persons suffering
from mental disorder, patients should be classi-
fied as voluntary, non-volitional and unwilling.
They refer to the Mental Treatment Bill, and
state with truth, " That Bill was based on the
widespread demand that had been made by the
Board of Control, the Royal Medico-Psycho-
logical Association and others, for some years,
that much extended facilities were needed for
treating early cases of insanity without certifi-
cation " (p. 2). We cannot but agree also
with their view regarding the Poor Law.
They say, " We are in entire agreement with
the Commission in advising that the treatment
of insanity in all its stages should be divorced
from the Poor Law." ..." The present
arrangements under which so many patients are
first dealt with in the Poor-Law institutions?
112 MENTAL WELFARE.
sometimes for long- periods?before reaching
the mental hospital are open to grave objection.
Moreover, it seems to us indefensible to
pauperise individuals merely because they be-
come mentally ill and are treated at the public
expense " (p. 5). Apropos of this, however,
it is necessary to point out that there is some
reason to think that the serious risk of legal
proceedings to which medical men are
exposed in signing certificates under the
Lunacy Acts is causing many of them to
decline to perform this duty, with the result
that there is an increasing tendency for certi-
fiable patients to be sent " for observation "
to Poor Law Institutions rather than direct-
to the Mental Hospital.
The Board make further reference to the
scheme for the Regional Grouping of mental
hospitals which they put forward in their last
Report. It can scarcely be questioned that
if the Statutory Committees were able to
adopt some plan of providing facilities
whereby " the medical work of mental
hospitals could find a link with the Medical
Schools of Universities " great stimulus
would be given to medical research in those
hospitals (footnote p. 12).
That Section of Part I of the Report, which
deals with Mental Deficiency, begins with the
usual plaint that " the lack of accommodation
for defectives becomes every year more
urgent." It is discouraging to read (p. 36)
that "No additions have been made to the
number of Institutions provided by Local
Authorities," though certain Authorities have
increased their existing accommodation. The
total number of beds provided by Local
Authorities is now 5,301 as against 5,075 at the
time of last year's report. The Board again
reiterate that " It is difficult to convince mem-
bers of councils that the expense of maintain-
ing the feeble-minded who cannot maintain
themselves must eventually be borne by the
community, and that it is a choice between
maintenance under improper conditions in Poor
Law institutions, prisons, by out-door relief or
unemployment benefit, or maintenance in insti-
tutions where they are under continuous train-
ing and care " (p. 36). Certain schemes are,
however, in course of development and there
may, during the next few years, be some relief
in certain localities. The Board further em-
phasise the need for a Colony system where
proper grading and individual care can be
ensured. Later on in the Report (p. 76) the
Board discuss at some length the use of Poor
Law Institutions under Section 37 of the Act.
While giving- due appreciation to the public-
spirited way in which the Boards of Guardians
have come to the assistance of the Local
Authorities in the present acute shortage of
accommodation, the Board rightly point out
that many of the Poor-Law Institutions " can-
not be said to come within the meaning of
section 37, for they show no ' special fitness
for the detention, care and training ' of the
Mentally Defective. We think it is time
that the community realised that Local Authori-
ties ought not to be content with this provision
and that to have secured places in Poor-Law
Institutions for some of the defectives for
whom they are responsible, does not mean that
they have fulfilled their statutory obligations
under Section 30 (c) ' to provide suitable and
sufficient accommodation.' The importance of
this consideration will be evident when it is
remembered that so far only 5,301 beds have
been provided by Local Authorities, whereas
they have sent nearly 3,390 cases to Poor Law
Institutions."
In order to satisfy themselves as to the actual
conditions in Poor-Law Institutions certified
under Section 37 the Board have carefully re-
viewed the position. They have considered
J 08 reports of Commissioners and Inspectors
of such Institutions and they arrive at the fol-
lowing conclusions, comparing the standard
of such Institutions with that prevailing in
large certified Institutions :?
" The Training given in 23 Poor Law Institutions is satisfactory.
? ? ? .. 16 ? ? ? ? fair.
? ? ? 69 ? ? ? ? unsatisfactory.
The Recreation,, ? 33 ? ? ? ? satisfactory.
., 48 ? ? ? .. fair.
? 24 ? ? ? ? unsatisfactory.
? 3 (We have no information).
The Classification in 9 Poor Law Institutions is satisfactory.
? ? ? 17 ? ? ,. fair.
? ? 82 ? ? ., ? unsatisfactory."
We hope that the Section of the Report
which deals with Marriage of Defectives and
Sterilization will be read by all members of
Boards of Guardians and County Councils,
many of whom have recently been considering
these questions. On the question of the
Marriage of Defectives the Board say : "It
has been suggested that it should be made a
punishable offence to marry or connive at the
marriage of any person known to be certified
as a mental defective under the Mental De-
MENTAL WELFARE. H3
ficiency Act, but if the law were so altered it
is very doubtful if public opinion is sufficiently
informed to enforce it. We have instances
where a Local Authority and Visitor have
suggested the discharge of feeble-minded
women in order that they might be married ;
and, if a girl has become pregnant, public
opinion would generally approve of her
marriage and disapprove of her recall to an
institution."
" One Local Authority tells us that they
have knowledge of six defectives where peti-
tions have been dismissed by the Judicial
Authority in order to allow the defectives to
get married, and also of two others where
the petitions were dismissed in order to allow
two pregnant girls to get married. These
instances seem to show that public opinion
has not yet realised that the upbringing of
children by defectives should be prevented as
far as possible."
" The publication of the facts discovered by
Local Authorities as to the extent to which the
marriage of defectives takes place might go
far to prepare the way for legislation, and to
justify an alteration of the law." (p. 42.)
In view of these examples, which seem to
us deplorable and to show a strange lack of
understanding on the part of some Justices of
the Peace, we wonder if the Board is right in
thinking that public opinion is not ripe for a
measure limited to the prevention of marriage
of a duly certified mental defective. It is at
least significant that, as reported in the press,
the London Mental Hospitals Committee re-
cently passed a resolution recommending to
the County Council that legislation should be
promoted by the Government to make illegal
the marriage of a person who was, for the
time being, subject to an order of detention
under the Mental Deficiency Act.
On the question of sterilization the Board'b
position is clear. They have arrived at no
definite conclusions, but they express the
opinion (p. 46) that undue weight is given to
the economic aspect of the question " for steri-
lization would not obviate the need for super-
vision and industrial training', and the number
for whom it would render institutional provision
unnecessary is greatly exaggerated." After
quoting at some length the views of certain
Medical Officers of Health who definitely advo-
cate sterilization and go so far as to state that
" At least half the cases sent to institutions
are sent there solely to prevent procreation,"
they give a Report by Dr. Turner, who was
asked to consider the question in relation to
the whole of the patients, who number
over 1,000, under his care. We make no
apology for reproducing in full this exceedingly
interesting statement (pp. 44, 45, 46).
I have been considering the answer I should give
to your question as to the percentage number of defec-
tives now being retained in institutions solely to prevent
them having children, and who could therefore be
discharged if they were sterilized.
I can only speak for this institution, and so far
as we are concerned the number is almost negligible.
" To take the patients class by class.
" Idiots.?It is admitted generally, I believe, that
cases of idiots having children are almost unknown,
and the question of sterilization does not arise in
reference to this class. Those we have are here because
they need looking after and are too great a burden
in their own homes.
" Imbeciles.?With the lower half of this grade the
position is the same as with the idiots. They are
custodial cases who need too much looking after to
be in a private house.
" The female upper half of the imbecile grade are,
in my opinion, just the class best suited to be boarded
out with foster-mothers. They are quiet, well-
behaved, and harmless, and if the foster-mother treats
them just as children, which is the only way to treat
them, I think sterilization is unnecessary. They should
be safe without this. It is the class we are trying
most to board out.
" The male upper half of the imbecile class are
not so easy to board out, or return to their homes.
No one, in my experience, wants them outside an
institution, and there is therefore no object in steriliz-
ing them.
" If, therefore, any defectives are to be sterilized,
it can only be the feeble-minded, and these are the
only class in which there is any possible chance of
its being any saving.
" First of these one naturally thinks of those mar-
ried before admission. We have two men and six
women.
" Of the men, one lives chiefly by thieving when
outside; the other committed an indecent assault on
his step-daughter aged 12. Sterilization would not
permit of their being discharged.
" Of the women, two were admitted at the instance
of the N.S.P.C.C. because they could not look after
the children they already had.
" The other four were all sent for gross promiscuous
immorality. Sterilization would not make the first
two able to look after their children any better than
they did before admission, and would not prevent the
immorality of the latter four. Sterilization would not
permit of any one of these being discharged.
" Now take the unmarried.
" Of the higher grade ones who would perhaps be
able to get a living outside with some propping up,
most of the male cases are here for some offence,
petty theft, indecent conduct, assault, etc. Steriliza-
tion would not prevent any of this, and they must,
therefore, still be detained. I think criminal assaults
114 MENTAL WELFARE.
seldom produce children, but you could not risk the
real damage, mental and moral, to the woman, and
allow these men out, just because there would be no
risk of children if committed by a sterilized defective
at large.
" With the female higher grade patients, by the
time you have eliminated the unstable psychopathic
women, the promiscuously immoral, the persistent
thieves, and the epileptic, there are not many left
who are quiet, well-behaved, and harmless, and who
would go out, but for the fact that some of them may
have had an illegitimate child already, and in others
you fear they may if they go out.
" The demand for beds is so insistent and the shortage
so great, that nowadays a well-behaved high grade de-
fective stands little chance of getting into an institution
at all.
" It seems to me that it can only be the quiet, well-
behaved defectives able to earn a living, and yet like
most defectives liable to have an illegitimate child be-
cause they can be overpersuaded to anything, for whom
there can be any question as to whether or not sterili-
zation would enable you to send them outside the in-
stitution, and these would be chiefly females.
" If a male defective is well-behaved and so high
grade that he can earn his living outside, and is
presentable enough and persuasive enough to get a
normal girl into trouble, there is to my mind a reason-
able doubt if he should be certified at all. He, there-
fore, would not be sterilizable.
" Taking all these things into consideration I per-
sonally feel that the number of defectives now detained
in institutions who could be discharged merely by
reason of sterilization, cannot be put higher than three
to five per cent., and probably the smaller figure is
the more correct of the two.
" P.S.?If it be said that my opinion is probably
distorted because I have considered only cases already
in an institution, I think the answer is :?
" Firstly: This institution is not like most institu-
tions taking urgent cases from all over England. We
take cases only from the Eastern Counties, a limited
specific area, and already have in the institution .63
cases per 1,000 of the population we are to cater for.
We thus have a much fairer sample, but I still know
of many cases in our area that ought to come in if
we had the beds. I mean cases that still ought to
come even if they were sterilized.
" Secondly : Even if all defectives now outside were
sterilized, it would not affect the fact that our area has
needed accommodation in institutions for .63 per1 1,000
of the population, and that this number would only
in my opinion have been reduced by 3 per cent., if
they had been sterilized, and that we still need many
more beds to take really urgent cases, urgent whether
sterilized or not."
For the other points of Interest in the Re-
port, such as Ascertainment, Guardianship, the
work of the Central and Local Associations, we
must refer our readers to the Report. We
hope that they will not omit to read Dr. Rees
Thomas' very careful argument, which surely
supports the contention that the majority of
Mental Defectives in Institutions are happier
than they would be at large in the community.
Of the institutional life of the criminal defec-
tives at Rampton whom he has in his charge,
he says, " But two things are missing. The
freedom we all so much desire and the best of
all social influences, the home life. If freedom
implies being free to enter and rob other
people's houses or attack the freedom of
others, then they seek privileges that are not
granted to the best of citizens. With regard
to home life, one must agree that ideal
home conditions with tender care, help and
guidance of parents, has no counterpart in
institution life. Unfortunately, this ideal does
not obtain in the majority of cases no matter
from what class of society the defectives are
drawn." (p. 69.)
The Board make an authoritative statement
regarding persons suffering from the effects of
Encephalitis Lethargica : " In our opinion
mental defect within the meaning of the Act
may exist in persons of considerable intelli-
gence. The criterion is whether the individual
is so mentally defective that he requires care,
supervision and control for his own protection
or the protection of others. In the present
state of our knowledge, institutions for defec-
tives offer the most appropriate places, so far
provided, for the care and training of certain
post-encephalitic cases, and, if the condition
has existed at the adolescent period, they may
properly be certified under the Mental Defi-
ciency Act." (p. 82.)
Board of Control, Scotland. Thirteenth
Annual Report. H.M. Stationery Office:
1927. 2s.
The Thirteenth Annual Report of the General
Board of Control for Scotland largely covers
the same ground as the Report of last year.
Emphasis is laid on the distinction between
lunatics and mental defectives, and the need for
differing care and treatment. The Board say :
" The mentally defective being ill-endowed
with powers of resistance to the stress and
strain of social conditions and physical dis-
eases are specially liable to temporary attacks
of mental disorders. As a rule they can be
dealt with in Institutions for Defectives, but
when insanity supervenes, and the patient is
troublesome, it has hitherto been the practice
to send such cases to Asylums. Such trans-
ference in our view should, at most, be tem-
porary and when the scheme of treatment of
MENTAL WELFARE. 115
the mentally defective of all ages has become
more completely evolved there should be no
necessity for even the temporary transference
of defectives to Asylums."
It is of particular interest to note that in
regard to post-encephalitic cases they express
views differing- from those which we have
quoted in the Report of the Board of Control
for England and Wales. The Report states :?
" The Board have been watching the present
condition of those mentally affected through
Encephalitis Lethargica, whether young or old,
and by arrangement with the Board of Health
a large number of such cases from all parts of
Scotland are accommodated in the General
Hospital at Stobhill, where ideal Observation
Wards exist for the care and treatment of in-
cipient and temporary forms of mental dis-
order.
" Where juveniles under 16 years of age
exhibit mental symptoms associated with En-
cephalitis Lethargica, the Board have been re-
luctant to advise certification, the affection
being regarded by many as of microbic origin
and if this surmise, is confirmed by the re-
searches which are now being actively carried
on remedial measures may reasonably be hoped
for.
" Some juvenile and adult patients affected
with Encephalitis Lethargica have been placed
in Defective Institutions and- Asylums, they
having been certified as suffering from mental
defect of a post-encephalitic nature. In the
present state of our knowledge of the affection
it is, however, doubtful if the term ' post-
encephalitic ' can be properly applied to any
of these cases, for it may be that they are
suffering from the actual disease in a chronic
and lingering form and have the prospect of
regaining complete mental health."
Possibly Scotland may find some new admin-
istrative method of dealing with these cases,
but in England, provided special accommoda-
tion can be obtained, certification under the
Mental Deficiency Act appears to afford a ready
means of treatment and care, and should re-
covery ensue, decertification is always possible.
As was pointed out recently in the House, the
claims on the existing accommodation are so
many, and the interest in post-encephalitic
cases so great, that it is unlikely that any
case would be unnecessarily detained.
Dr. Kate Fraser, Deputy Commissioner, has
an interesting statement, which is of general
applicability, regarding the boarding-out of
defectives. She says :?
" Recently the ' boarding-out ' of certified
defectives has been subjected to some adverse
criticism, such criticism being based on one or
two outstanding failures in this method of deal-
ing with the mentally defective. Owing to the
lack of sufficient institutional accommodation
for cases requiring care and treatment in insti-
tutions it has been necessary in many instances
to ' board-out ' doubtful cases rather than leave
them in unsuitable home conditions. And con-
sidering the number of such cases at present
under guardianship, it says much for the care
and supervision exercised that so few failures
do occur. To be properly carried out the
boarding-out of defectives should form a neces-
sary part of a national system for their care, a
system which includes special schools, institu-
tional treatment, home care and care under
guardianship, and both patients and guardians
must be carefully selected.
" On the whole 1 have been satisfied with the
care and supervision exercised, although in
many instances more might be done to interest
and occupy the patient during leisure. In this
connection 1 should like to emphasise the im-
portance of education and training in early life
of all defectives. A defective so trained may
have many interests which help to occupy
his leisure and make his life under guardian-
ship more like the home life of the normal
members of the household, as well as making
him a more efiicient and useful member of
society."
Psychopathology. By Bernard Hart, M.D.,
F.R.C.P. Pp. 15G. Cambridge : The
University Press. 1927. 7/6.
This volume contains a reprint of the
Goulstonian Lectures delivered before the
Royal College of Physicians of London in
192G, together with two additional sections
previously published in the Proceedings of
the Royal Society of Medicine. These latter
deal respectively with the psychology of
rumour and the methods of psychotherapy.
The collection of such a series of papers in
one volume necessarily means a certain
amount of overlapping, but the repetition in
this instance only serves to drive home
several lessons of fundamental importance.
Moreover, no one should be misled by the
116 MENTAL WELFARE.
apparently heterogeneous character of the
subjects dealt with, for in spite of their
diversity they are more closely integrated
than appears at hrst sight.
The (Joulstonian Lectures, three in num-
ber (with a very necessary appendix on the
different conceptions of the unconscious),
have as their theme the development of
psychopathology and its place in modern
medicine. For once, the whole subject has
been placed in its proper perspective, first
by a rapid but none the less accurate his-
torical review of its origins, and second by
insisting that it is by the ordinary criteria of
scientific method and not by prejudice or
personal predilection that the claims of
psychopathology to a place in the hierarchy
of the sciences must be judged. The his-
torical section shows very clearly how far
psychopathology is indebted to its various
predecessors. The debt, as Dr. Hart clearly
proves, is much less than is commonly
supposed. Its distinguishing feature is that
it is a therapeutic measure, psychological in
character, and deliberately employed to
alleviate distress, whereas its forerunners
were for the most part merely " psycho-
logical procedures " empirically devised and
used without any real notion of their
rationale. So long as this is kept in view,
none need cavil at the contention that psycho-
pathology is a science of very recent growth.
Magnetism, hypnotism, suggestion, " per-
suasionism "?these have all contributed
something to its origin, but the real founda-
tion was not laid till the middle of the nine-
teenth century. This section of Dr. Hart's
work contains a fine appreciation, all the
more attractive as it is so essentially just,
of the achievements, judged by scientific
standards, of the various schools, and
especially those of Paris and Nancy.
At once the most interesting and important
feature of the book is the attempt to apply
to the Freudian system the criteria of
ordinary scientific method. These methods,
or rather stages, are three in number : (1)
the observation of those phenomena which
come within the scope of the subject, of
whatever order the phenomena may be; (2)
the classification of these observed facts; and
(3) the formulation of general laws which
cover all the known facts and enable us to
predict the issue when these are predicated.
Dr. Hart's analysis of Freud's work in rela-
tion to these three requirements is eminently
fair, and his severely judicial attitude lends
additional weight to his words. The
phenomena which underlie Freud's inductions
are not really " facts of observation " as
that term is usually understood, but " facts "
which emerge as the result of using a par-
ticular technique. This technique, although
it pretends to be strictly impersonal, is
always coloured by an affective relationship
of one sort or another between the analyst
and the patient. Criticism along these lines
is specially applicable to the later develop-
ments of psychoanalytical theory, though
many of the earlier conceptions are firmly
established on the basis of direct observation.
As it happens, it is these elementary con-
ceptions and not the more metaphysical
aftergrowths that have re-oriented modern
psychology, and they have achieved this just
because they are founded on observation and
inference is subjected to the severest
restraints.
It is a peculiarity, however, of the subject
matter of psychology that it does not lend
itself to observation in the same sense as the
physical sciences. After all, introspection is
the only direct route to the discovery of
psychic processes; all else is inference. In
the case of the physical sciences, " objective
verification " is used at every milestone to
rule out possible deviations, but psychology
from its very nature cannot be corrected in
this way. It is here that the critical problem
arises?how to eliminate the distortion which
creeps in from a dozen sources between
observed facts and a legitimate inference
therefrom. So far as Freud's work is con-
cerned, Dr. Hart concludes that the method
of psychoanalysis is liable to many possible
errors and the inductions based on its use,
therefore, do not always rest on a firm
foundation. Moreover, " in the elaborate
later theories the actual facts of observation
become more and more remote, and the
degree of inference swells by progressive
accretions until a satisfactory objective
verification is no longer possible."
Freud's work does not conform to the
standards of scientific progress, but it must
always be kept in view that the limits of the
sciences are quite arbitrary and that at best
any science presents but a single facet of
MENTAL WELFARE. 117
the whole truth. As a corollary, one might
say that criticism along- such lines as Dr.
Hart follows is beside the point. But in
the present state of our knowledge caution
is very necessary, and to lose sight altogether
of scientific method would certainly result not
in progress, but chaos. In the history of
psychology there has been more than enough
unbridled speculation, and up to this point
we have by no means exhausted the uses of
the ordinary weapons of research.
Dr. Hart approaches his task from an
interesting point of view and the result is
a volume well worth reading and pondering.
It is free from unnecessary technicalities,
and those who have grown weary of the
reckless extravagances of later psycho-
analytical theory will find it a relief to get
back to this delightful exposition of its
fundamental claims.
W. McAlister.
