Portland, Oregon, to entertain the N. E. A
===========================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.

For the first time in its history the National Education Convention is this
year to be held in the Northwest. The association will meet at Portland, Oregon,
July 7 to 14th. The United States Weather Bureau says that Portland has the
best summer climate in the United States. It is rare that the thermometer in
that city climbs above 75 degrees in summer, and always the people of the state
of Oregon sleep under blankets. Summer days are bright and warm. Oregon
gets its rain in winter.
Portland makes a fine base for a summer of sight-seeing in the Northwest.
It is close to the seashore, while within a few hours travel are Mt. Adams, Mt.
St. Helens and famous Mt. Hood. To the north are Ranier National Park,
easily reached in a day by automobile, the Georgian Circuit around Puget Sound,
Snoqualmie Falls, Victoria, and Vancouver. Portland's saw mills and ship
building yards are to be open to visitors. During the convention the committee
will hold the annual Rose Carnival for the benefit of visiting teachers. Good
hotel rates are guaranteed by the Portland General Committee, of which Superintendent L. R. Alderman is chairman. Room reservations should be made to
the Portland General Committee, Mark Woodruff, Secretary, or through the
Chamber of Commerce of that city.
Portland, Oregon, is already organized with a view to making the 1917
session of the National Education Association the most successful in its history.
It is the ambition of Superintendent Alderman to identify the interests of the
thousands from East, South, and Middle West with those of the people of the
Northwest. Mr. Alderman is planning committees on joint excursions over the
Columbia Highway, through Oregon's big timber and along the crest of mountains overlooking the beautiful lake region. Excursions also will be made to
the various state educational institutions that are rapidly coming to the front
rank.
The University of Oregon has announced that its summer school will run
three weeks before, and three weeks following the N. E. A. Oregon Agricultural
College, the Oregon Normal School, the University of Washington, the University of Idaho, the three Washington Normal Schools and two Idaho Normal
Schools, all with summer sessions, surround Portland on the various railway
lines entering the city. Some of the historic endowed colleges, such as Whitman, and Willamette, and the new but famous Reed College, will join the state
institutions in vying for the opportunity to welcome the visitors, and to profit
by the coming of the nation's educators to Oregon. The N. E. A. will come in
272 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
July in time to assist in the celebration of the completion of one of the greatest
bridges in the world, the interstate span connecting Oregon and Washington at
Vancouver, and forming a link in the Pacific Highway, connecting Seattle, Portland and San Francisco.
Leading Educators Organize for Physical Training in Public Schools.
Adopting as its slogan President Wilson's recent statement that "physical
training is needed but can be had without compulsory military service," a committee of leading educators has been formed to urge the adoption, in the various
states, of a model state bill, drafted by Dr Dudley A. Sargent of Harvard, providing for the introduction of physical training, without military features, in the
public schools. The new committee, which bears the title of "The Committee
for Promoting Physical Education in the Public Schools of the United States,"
has opened headquarters in the Munsey building in Washington, D. C., with
Mrs. Harriet P. Thomas as secretary in charge.
In its announcement the committee says, in part: "We believe that the time
has come when the public schools can, and should, enter deliberately and purposefully upon a definite plan for the preparation of our youth physically for the
exigencies of life and for all the demands of citizenship. We need to spend more
money and more time upon physical training intended to develop the body so
that both boys and girls may be prepared equally for the pursuits of peace or the
vicissitudes of war."
The bill is officially entitled "a bill to upbuild national vitality through the
establishment of physical education and training in the public schools of the
state." It is described as a tentative draft which may be easily modified to meet
the varying financial and educational conditions in the different states. Its
proponents are careful to assert that they are not intending to impose an
"elaborate and expensive machinery" upon any state,?merely to indicate the
way to begin in the belief that public opinion has now been educated to the
point where it will support physical training in the schools when that training
is shorn of military features.
The bill, with suitable modifications, has been introduced in the Massachusetts General Assembly (by special consent) and in the legislatures of California and Indiana. Its introduction in other states is expected to follow shortly.
A Correction.
On page 233 of the January number of The Psychological Clinic occurs
a statement concerning the treatment of feebleminded women in New York
State. This statement is included in a clinical lecture given by me and reported
by the Recorder of the Psychological Clinic. A graduate student, a member of
the class to which I was lecturing, made this statement, or something like it,
and the Recorder, through a misunderstanding, reported it as part of my
lecture. I have the best of reasons for believing the facts not to be true, as
Dr Ethan A. Nevin, of the State Custodial Asylum at Newark, N. Y., writes
me that they are very far from representing the true situation. I regret to say
that I did not notice the statement until my attention was called to it by Dr.
Nevin.
Lightner Witmer.
