A Chemical Sign of Life
=========================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
By Shiro Tashiro. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press,
1917. Pp. x + 142.
Life cannot be defined as the sum of the attributes of living things. Never-
theless we may conceive that one attribute may be sufficiently constant to serve
as the diagnostic sign of life. This is what Mr. Tashiro has demonstrated.
"That mechanism," he says, "which enables living matter to respond to the
external world . . . may be called the most characteristic thing in life. The
chemical accompaniment, or basis, of this mechanism, discovered by the author
in nerve fibers, he has hoped to show exists in all forms of living matter, both
of plants and animals. It gives a chemical method of distinguishing living
from dead tissue, and of measuring the quantity of life."
"A hundred years ago," Mr. Tashiro reminds us, "the electrical sign of life
was discovered by Galvani, when he found that animal tissues are a source of
electricity. ... It is now certain that whenever the response to a stimulus takes
place in animals or plants?the response which is the sign of life?an electrical
change accompanies it. . . . There is always and everywhere," he continues,
"an accompanying chemical change of a particular kind which is as sure a sign
of life and as invariable an accompaniment of the vital reaction as the electrical
change. This chemical sign is the sudden outbrust of carbon dioxide which
all living things show?plants as well as animals, dry seeds as well as the nerve
tissues of the highest mammals?when they are stimulated in any way."
Mr. Tashiro has devised a piece of apparatus called the biometer, which
will detect infinitessimal amounts of carbon dioxide. The construction of the
apparatus and the method of using it are fully described in the appendix. While
we may imagine the high commercial value of being able to discriminate living
from dead grain, to a psychologist perhaps the most interesting application of
the biometer will be in the study of nerve action. "Whatever may be the nature
of that activity going on in our minds," concludes Mr. Tashiro, "we have at
least discovered something about its simplest chemical accompaniment. Perhaps
the nerve impulse is something in the nature of a propagated explosive wave in
a continuous substance. Whether that wave is in the nature of a hydrolysis or
an oxidation we cannot say, but at any rate it results in the liberation, in some
manner, of carbon dioxide. This substance tells us whether the nerve impulse
has passed this way or not. The change which liberates it may be the impulse
itself. Three kinds of changes occur, then, in our brains when the nerve impulses
are passing?an electrical change, a chemical change, and a psychical change
Which is the fundamental change?"
