Testing Juvenile Mentality
===========================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
:Author:  Norbert J. Melville. Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott Co., 1917. Pp. xi+142.

The broad, general title of this book is misleading. It is a manual of directions for giving the Binet tests according to the 1911 revision. In his introduction to the book Dr William Healy says, "For final diagnosis of the mentality
of the individual, the Binet test score is simply one out of several main facts to
be taken into consideration. Not even all mental abilities are represented in
this system, to say nothing of their not being thoroughly tested at each age
level, and many items of the physical background inevitably form part of the
problem," The author recognizes this fact when he refers to the use of the scale
as a "first aid." But other parts of the work are not consistent with this view.
For instance: "Those who have been doing most work with such apparatus, as
for example Drs. Healy, Witmer and others, are using it in supplementing the
Binet-Simon scale (1911) as valid for subjects "up to ten years or so of age."
These workers would hardly agree that their work is the development of supplementary scales.
The first part of the book contains abridged quotations from the published
reports of Binet and Simon on "The Problem of Clinical Interpretation." One
striking statement is this: "The lack of attention, of character, of will, do not
appear or scarcely so, in our tests of intelligence. In fact, in our examinations
we have not found an inattentive child except among those of three or four
years." Again: "We have endeavored to perfect the procedure in the direct
examination of the mental functions. For that purpose we make use of the
new method, that of taking the level." But: "The results of our examination
have no value if deprived of all comment; they need to be interpreted."
The whole problem of the place of the Binet scale in clinical diagnosis is
opened up by these quotations. What is it that is to be interpreted? The
final score? If not it must be the results of the individual tests. How can one
interpret these unless he has seen the performance? If attention and the other
capabilities that go to make up "mentality" are not shown, what is there to
interpret? "The voice is Jacob's voice but the hands are the hands of Esau."
If another manual for giving the 1911 series of tests is needed, this one should
fill the place. It is intended for workers in the Philadelphia schools and will
probably find its chief use there. The 1911 revision is not the one most widely
used by Binet workers, and that fact limits the field for a manual. It is another
"uniform" and "standard" method.

The method is excellent. The directions are simple and clear. A new
feature is the arrangement of the tests in series. "Tests which the majority of
investigations thus far reported," he says, "have shown to be most highly
disgnostic in differentiating the mentally deficient from the normal, constitute
the first or a series; those next in diagnostic value constitute the b series, etc.
? ? . Those tests which involve the use of similar materials or methods are
arranged in the same series so that they will be given in sequence." In the directions in regard to test order, Mr. Melville has his examiners begin with the
Pictures, then give the a tests of the year just above that indicated by the results
?f the picture test, then proceed with the a tests in succession. This method ia
of great value in saving time and orienting the examiner with regard to the
limitations of his subject. After the a tests are completed, the b tests are taken
UP in the same way, then the c, d, and e series in order.

One of the merits claimed for the Binet scale is that it can be applied in a
very short time. Unless some definite procedure like Mr. Melville's is followed,
examiners usually find that it takes too long. If the sitting is not to occupy
more than half an hour, some such time-saving device is necessary. The arrangement of tests in part II is very cleverly planned for the convenience of the
examiner and the best presentation to the subject. The directions are printed
on one page; the pictures or drawings are printed on the page opposite, so that
the former can be turned in position for the examiner to read, while the subject
is looking at the latter.

The score sheet may be kept out of the subject's sight behind the book,
eliminating the possible disturbance of the marking of the paper. The directions
for scoring are very explicit. The attempt to reduce to a uniform standard
the method of giving and scoring the tests, is highly commendable. It is doubtful
if the personal equation can be eliminated and examiners be found who will
score uniformly. Anyone who has had experience in training people to give and
score the Binet tests, will realize that this is well nigh impossible. The practical
outcome for clinical method, of a general, uniform procedure, is the securing of
results that are comparable, and if Mr. Melville's book accomplishes this, it is a
very useful and valuable contribution. H. J. H.
