Wasted Effort
================

By A. Travis,
Recorder of the Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania.
Standing on the scales at the Psychological Clinic a few months
ago, straight and lithe, with her serene gaze on the autumn sky
beyond the window, she might have been one of Botticelli's darker
angels. The master would have freed her from the dingy white
cotton dress, too short for her thirteen years, and draped her in a
flowered blue robe to conceal her sturdy legs. With a golden trumpet
in her upraised hand he would have painted her above an altar, to
praise God everlastingly. She seemed without blemish until she
smiled. Then one saw that her teeth were oddly malformed by a
congenital disease which had left her beauty otherwise unspoiled.
She bore the name of Italy's queen dowager, Margarita1, yet
when the examiner asked her to write it for him, she shocked his
sense of the appropriate by writing Maggie in a sprawling hand.
Maggie Fresco she is called at school. When the children want to
tease her, they call her "cock-eye,",because at moments one of her
lovely eyes turns inward ever so little. She has been given glasses
to relieve the strain on her eye muscles, but false pride, or mere
indifference, keeps her from wearing them. She is as large as the
average girl of fourteen, by far the largest child in her class, where
she seems discouraged by her failure to keep up with girls of her size.
She is fond of little children, and finds charming motherly ways of
helping them, but they do not like her because they cannot trust her.
She is a telltale, and runs to the teacher with every little story.
Although she has improved marvelously in looks, Margarita's
mental development has been slight during the four years and a half
since she first appeared at the Psychological Clinic in 1912, Then
she was shy and apathetic. On the way to the University she hung
back and had hardly a word to say to the agent of the Society for
Organizing Charity, who was escorting her. In the warmth of the
examiner's genial smile she thawed out a little and became more
communicative. Eight years and two months old, she tested at a
little over five years on the Binet-Simon scale. A month later,
when somewhat better acquainted with the Clinic staff, she passed
all thr six year and one or two of the seven year tests. Her vocabulary in Italian as well as in English was very limited. She had been
attending regularly a special class for foreign children, and had not
1 The names are all fictitious, but chosen to give as nearly as possible the same impression as the originals.
(112)
WASTED EFFORT. 113
learned to read and write. She could add 2 and 2, 3 and 3, and 3
and 2, but there her arithmetic stopped short; 4 and 4 she said
made 7. She knew she had five fingers on one hand and five on the
other, but said that on both together she had eight. She
matched colors but could not name them, even in Italian. When
the examiner took up two blocks in his hand, showed them to her
for a moment, and closed his hand over them, she could tell there
had been two. When he showed her three in the same way, she
could not tell how many he had.
At this time it was observed that her appearance was good,
considering her physical handicaps. She was a little large for her
age, and stood leaning slightly to the left, her left shoulder drooping.
Her hair was abundant, long and silky, though far from clean.
Then as now her eyes were large, dark, and well set; her nostrils
were small and delicately formed; so were her ears and mouth.
Even then her clear olive skin and red cheeks were worth noticing,
and her nutrition and circulation were good. Among her drawbacks
were the malformed teeth and a box-shaped cranium, whose outline
Was disguised by her hair. Her throat was in bad condition.
The examining psychologist deferred his diagnosis with the
expectation that her mental status would improve greatly when some
of her physical handicaps were removed. He recommended a nose
and throat examination, an eye examination, and a Wassermann
test, physical treatment to be followed by six weeks of training in
the special class conducted by the Department of Psychology during
the summer session.
Through the social service department of the Clinic the cooperation of the public school was secured, and there were interviews
with several other social workers and physicians who had exerted
themselves in behalf of Margarita's family. With one exception,
they all pronounced Signora Fresco lazy, shiftless, and incompetent
to look after her children. That one exception was a rather inexperienced young person who thought her an exemplary mother and
housewife. The family were living in a wretched tenement, huddled
m two small rooms that were dirty and dishevelled. The mother
was complaining constantly of her children, and appealing for aid
to one charitable agency after another. At one hospital Margarita
had been given treatment for chorea and sent to recuperate at a seashore home, where she gained ten pounds. The physicians who
treated her there apparently did not suspect that she had congenital
syphilis.
With the cooperation of the S.O.C., money was raised to pay
Margarita's board in West Philadelphia during the six weeks of the
114 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
summer session, and the teachers in her public school presented
her with an outfit of underclothes. Toward the end of May she
was brought again to the Clinic, where a physician in attendance
diagnosed adenoids and enlarged tonsils, and took.a specimen of
blood for a Wassermann test. A week later the Wassermann reaction
was reported positive, and she entered the Woman's Hospital for
mercurial treatment and removal of tonsils and adenoids. Her
eyes were also refracted at this time.
On the first of July, 1912, a much improved Margarita came to
live in West Philadelphia. She was still a good deal of a savage,
not easy to break in to the ways of a civilized household. Her
caretaker reported that she was disobedient and sly, and sometimes
made trouble among the other children. After three weeks an eruption was noticed on her body. The physician at the skin dispensary
of the University Hospital said that while the breaking out in one
or two places might be due to her disease, the real trouble was
pediculosis. He prescribed a lotion for her hair, and advised that
her clothing be separately boiled before being thrown in with the
family wash.
At the end of the summer session Dr Lightner Witmer held a
consultation over Margarita, with the two teachers who had had
her in charge for six weeks. Her behavior, the}'" said, was typical
of the little guttersnipe that she was. Without being really afraid
of anything, she was very self-conscious and shy, but she paid no
particular attention to the boys in the class. Of all the children,
she was the most troublesome. She could not carry out simple
commands, and was always wanting to do something else than the
thing she had in hand at the moment. Her analytic concentration
and distributive attention were very poor, so was her persistent
attention for school work. In teasing she was persistent enough.
When she wished to attract the notice of a teacher or classmate, she
struck her first and spoke afterward. If the person thus addressed
did not turn at once, she thumped her again. Her memory was
slightly trainable, but not retentive. Her idea complexes were very
deficient. She was careless and unreliable in doing her share of the
dish-washing and cleaning up. Music was the only thing she loved.
She could not read; could count to ten, but made frequent mistakes
in counting objects.
Dr Witmer's diagnosis, based upon the teachers' reports and
upon his own daily observation of the little girl was,?low grade imbecile, an institutional case. Margarita was returned to her family,
and an application made out for her admission to a training school
for feebleminded children. Her mother would not consent to let
WASTED EFFORT. 115
her go, so that plan had to be postponed, and in the fall she re-entered
the special class in the public school. The teacher's report on her
work a year and a half later was that she was lazy and phlegmatic,
not at all nervous. She worked only when scolded, and when
praised she rested on her laurels and did nothing. All of her school
work was of poor quality and meagre quantity.
Another year later a social worker who went to visit the family,
found the tenement house where they had lived, but they had moved
away and no one knew anything about them. Margarita was traced
through the school, and finally in October of 1916, as we have seen,
she was brought back to the Clinic with her mother by an agent of
the S.O.C. She was now under somewhat irregular and intermittent
treatment for rheumatism at a hospital in her home neighborhood.
Whenever she felt ill, she went to the dispensary and they gave her
some medicine. Just then she seemed to be in good health. Her
manners were vastly improved, and she gave promise of becoming a
very attractive (though feebleminded and dependent) young woman.
In all the concrete tests Margarita did very well. She did the
Witmer formboard in 35 sec.; the Witmer cylinders on the first
trial in 225 sec., and on the second trial in 79 sec. with only two false
moves. She copied four-block patterns with the design blocks very
well indeed, but it must be remembered that she had had practice
with these in school. Nevertheless, her performance was equally
good with Healy construction puzzles A and B, which she had certainly not seen before. The smaller puzzle she did in 82 sec., and
the larger one in 52 sec. In the latter problem her method of solution was particularly good.
Her progress in school subjects in the past six years has been
small. She can write her name and the date, and can. recognize
a few words on a printed page. She does not read in the sense of
reading as a means of getting information. Numbers mean little
to her. She has not learned how to carry in multiplying, and she
cannot even add; 24 -f 13 she put down as = 107; 27 -f 18 = 18.
She can spell a few short words, like tree, baby, hope, and three, but
nest she spells n-i-s-s-t; school is s-h-o-o-1, and she cannot spell
teacher at all. Her auditory memory span is easily five digits, and
she succeeded twice out of five trials in repeating a series of six
digits. On the basis of this examination Dr Francis N. Maxfield
confirmed the previous diagnosis, with the observation that she
might possibly be classed now as a middle grade imbecile.
Margarita is the eldest child of Signora Fresco by her second
marriage. The mother is a character who has interested everybody
concerned with the history of Margarita. Born near Naples, the
116 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
daughter of a musician, Angela Fresco holds herself a little above
the laboring people among whom fate has thrown her. Of her first
husband she has nothing to say, beyond the jbare mention of his
name. When tuberculosis took him and left her a widow with a
baby son, she promptly married Feliziano Fresco, a longshoreman,
who like herself came from Naples and was alone in the new world
with a little boy to look after. This little boy has turned out badly,
and been sent to a reformatory. Her own son has developed the
disease which killed his father, and is too sickly to hold a steady
job or make a good living.
By her second husband Signora Fresco has had five children, all
born in America. Margarita, the eldest, we already know. Angelina,
the youngest, died of pneumonia. Between them came two boys
who are going to school and seem to be getting on well enough,
and another child who died of kidney disease. Signora Fresco
complains of her delicate health, but one suspects her health is
better than she imagines. When she came with Margarita to the
Clinic last fall, she had a good color and appeared well nourished
and tastefully dressed. Her youthful brightness is amazing to those
who remember that she is forty-two, and who know how early these
Italian women begin to fade. How has she done it? Not by spending her strength in the care of her home and her babies. She has
neglected them as much as she dared, and has leaned heavily on
them as they grew big enough to be helpful. Margarita now does
all the rough housework under direction, and her usefulness to her
lazy mother is making it very difficult to get the parents to consent
to place her in an institution, where she could have the training and
protection she needs.
Margarita will never be capable of looking after herself, or having a heme of her own. It is not certain that all her children would
be born feebleminded, if she happened to marry a man of sound
stock, but they would be so badly disciplined and so poorly nourished
that they would not have half a chance in the world. At thirteen she
is in the third grade with children of eight and nine. Among 1375
girls whom Dr H. H. Young tested with the Witmer formboard,
he found 78 who did it as slowly as Margarita?in 35 sec. or more?
but they were all younger, the mode for this time being about six
years. At Margarita's age girls do the formboard in from 9 to 29 sec.
Her performance in doing the Witmer cylinders in 79 sec. with only
two false moves was remarkably good. During the last four years
before entering her present grade, she was in a special class and had
the devoted attention of one of the best teachers in the city. The
effort whioh has been made to educate her has confirmed the opinion
given by Dr Witmer in 1912, that she is trainable in many sorts of
WASTED EFFORT. 117
handwork, but is not educable beyond definite limits which have
already been reached.
When she came for her first examination in April, 1912, she had
been under the eye of the Society for Organizing Charity for about
two years. She was referred to them by a magistrate before whom
she appeared as plaintiff when only six years old. The defendant,
who was convicted of attacking the child, was said to be a boarder
with the family. He was sent to prison for a term of years, and
Margarita was placed in the Philadelphia Hospital for treatment.
Several physicians who saw her about that time ascribed her dulness
and apathy to the effect of shock. It would appear now that from
babyhood she had been so dull that she was incapable of being
severely shocked, and that this experience had no appreciable effect
upon her.
A social worker from the Psychological Clinic visited Margarita's
school last November and had a talk with her teacher. She is the
largest child in the room, and her desk is entirely too small for her.
She sits quietly dreaming most of the time, with her head on her
hand. She does best in the simple operations of arithmetic and in
geography, where she can commit to memory by many repetitions
the brief facts which are sufficient to get her through. It is in spelling
and reading that Margarita is weakest?not as one might think,
because Italian is her native tongue, but because she makes nonsensical mistakes and cannot see why she is wrong. On the day the
social worker visited the class, ten words were dictated as a spelling
lesson. They were supposed to have been studied at home. The
four most difficult words of the ten, Margarita spelled correctly;
five easier words were spelled wrong, and one very easy word was
left out completely. The dictated sentence, "We must study our
notes," was written by her, "We must hame are noter."
Her young teacher is to be ranked with the few who have been
favorably impressed by Margarita's plausible mother. She said
Signora Fresco was a fine woman, and did as well as could be expected
with the means at her disposal.
In January of this year the same social worker visited Margarita's new home, and found that the girl was in a hospital undergoing treatment for rheumatism. While in the hospital she has good
food and care, but when she returns home she quickly falls ill again,
because her mother cannot provide the right kind of food and is
incompetent to give her the care she requires. The father was
temporarily out of work, as there was no ship to be unloaded that
week, and the only wage earner for the time being was the consumptive son, aged seventeen, who was working in a tailor shop. He
118 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
made five dollars a week, spent $1.20, a week for carfare and lunch,
and gave the rest to his mother. He eats very little, she explained,
coughs a great deal and neglects to take his medicine, because, as
he says, he doesn't care whether he dies soon or a little later. Though
he pretends to have no fear of death, he has so much fear of losing
his job that he will not take the doctor's advice to give up his indoor
work and try to get something to do out of doors.
The father and the two younger boys were all having bronchitis
but were not in bed. Feliziano was out, and the little boys were
playing in the kitchen. Signora Fresco herself was under dispensary
treatment for various chronic minor ailments. She looked well and
strong, but complained of bad headaches, and while talking to the
social worker had to pause for breath every few minutes. Her
little four-room house is in excellent repair, very clean, and sufficiently furnished. It is above the ordinary for an Italian family of
their means and antecedents. The cooking range is exceptionally
good, but it would seem that Signora Fresco does not make competent use of her resources for nourishing her family. The chief
thing lacking, beside money of course, is a degree of energetic good
management on the part of the housewife. The clothing of the family
is substantial and of good quality. It is in the vital matter of food
that they are poorly cared for.
A few years ago it was somewhat the fashion among social
welfare workers to think that if all of a child's physical defects ?
of eyes, ears, teeth, posture, breathing, and digestion?could be
remedied, that child was bound to get on all right in school ever
after. Some even went so far as to imagine that a feebleminded
child could be transformed into a normal citizen by removing his
physical handicaps. Now we know that with an occasional exception so rare that the rule is all the stronger, once feebleminded means
always feebleminded. Dr Witmer defines the feebleminded as those
individuals who cannot maintain themselves in society without
supervision, who cannot earn a living, marry, and take care of their
families. Margarita could probably become almost self-supporting
in an institution, where she could scrub, fold linen, or help the cook
prepare vegetables and wash dishes. Surely she would be happier
in an institution with companions of her own age and mental calibre,
than in a schoolroom where she is conscious of being a misfit, or in
a home where she is constantly falling back into a state of ill-health
requiring hospital treatment. What is more she needs watching,
and her mother has proved incompetent for the task.
Margarita is an impressive type of wasted human material and
wasted educational effort as well. There are no less than three
WASTED EFFORT. 119
potent factors operating to spoil her life. Any one of the three in
itself is almost incurable. Working together they form a vicious
circle from which society is helpless to rescue her. First there is
the congenital syphilis. Whether or not this is the sole cause of
her feeblemindedness, no one can say. Certainly there are many
feebleminded persons who are not syphilitic, and some congenital
syphilitics who are not feebleminded. We can only say that both
grave misfortunes have fallen upon this girl.
In the third place there is her miserable environment, and in
that we have to include the depressing influence of the members
of her family, as well as the economic stringency, the cramped
quarters, bad air, and inadequate food. Even a well-born child
might go under in such a setting.
Society may well ask itself, is there no way of saving a child
like Margarita, pleasing to look upon, and capable of hard work
willingly performed? One can only answer that all the ways have
not yet been tried, all the experiments have not yet been made.
There is evidence going to show that the history of a child in the
first year or two, its nurture and discipline, may determine whether
the individual is to be socially competent or incompetent in adult life.
In Margarita's case it is too late to experiment further. Experimenting costs much money, and no philanthropist has yet arisen
to give a sum of money large enough to make a fair trial over a term
years of the measures which have been proposed. If society
really wants to conserve its human resources before they become
liabilities, and is not ready to attack the whole problem of poverty,
it may begin by taking handsome babies like Margarita out of their
unfavorable environment at a very early age, and giving them a
hygienic life, with prompt medical treatment, discipline, and wholesome food. Then perhaps we shall not have to maintain so many
custodial institutions for wrecks who are past saving.
