Advance in the Study of Mental Hygiene
=======================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.

The Ninth Annual Meeting of The National Committee for Mental Hygiene,
Inc., was held February 7th in New York City.

Mr. Otto T. Bannard, Treasurer, announced that gifts amounting to more
than $30,000 for general expenses had been contributed during the past year by
four donors, one of whom had pledged $100,000 toward an endowment fund
that is being raised. The Rockefeller Foundation contributed $34,000 for special
purposes, such as surveys of conditions among the insane and feebleminded.
Short addresses were given by Dr Walter E. Fernald on "Supervision of
the Feebleminded in the Community"; Dr William A. White, "Influence of
Mental Hygiene upon Methods of Dealing with Crime and Criminals"; Dr.
William L. Russell, "Some of the Indirect Results Which May Be Expected to
Follow our Surveys of the Care and Treatment of Mental Diseases"; Professor
William H. Burnham, "The Role of Mental Hygiene in Education"; Dr E. E.
Southard, "The Community as a Unit for Mental Hygiene Work"; Dr Henry
R. Stedman, "The Teaching of Mental Hygiene in Medical Schools."

During the past year surveys have been completed in the states of California, Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Louisiana, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, and Wisconsin, and are now in progress in the cities of Chicago
and New York. State societies for mental hygiene are now organized in sixteen
states.

During the coming year emphasis will be laid upon the educational work
of the committee. A feature of this work will be the publication of a quarterly
journal, "Mental Hygiene," the first number of which was issued during January.
It is a substantial magazine of 156 pages, containing articles on Unemployment
and Personality," by Prof. Herman M. Adler; "Provision for the Feebleminded
in the United States," by Dr Walter E. Fernald, with a table showing the existing institutions state by state; and "Mental Adaptation," by Dr Frederick
Lyman Wells, as well as six other papers of uncommon merit. The Journal is
published at 50 Union Square, New York City.

W ith Regard to Psycho-Motor Norms.

To the Editor of the Psychological Clinic:
On the basis of a diagram of the formboard in which the dimensions of the
blocks had not been drawn in entirely correct proportions by the makers, A. 1.,
in reviewing our Psycho-Motor Norms in the Psychological Clinic, February,
1917, p. 270, draws certain erroneous inferences which require correction, in order
that no one consulting the monograph may have any doubt as to the formboard
used.

The formboard reproduced on page 1 of the monograph was printed from a
cut which we assumed had been properly drawn because it was secured from C. H.
Stoelting Co., who had used it to illustrate their formboard No. 78002 on page 1
of a circular entitled "Tests Used in the Training School at Vineland, New Jersey,
by Dr Henry H. Goddard." In this formboard which we used the square does
not go into the circle, rectangle or hexagon, and the diamond will not go into the
hexagon. In the preliminary exposition of our results we referred to the test as
the modified Seguinian formboard," and specified that it was "Number 18002
in Stoelting's catalogue,"1 while in the reference given on p. 11 of the PsychoMotor Norms" which we made to our earlier use of the formboard (Experimental
Studies of Mental Defectives) we stated that the "Vineland pattern was used.
On the strength of a statement made by Goddard we named the board after
Seguin, in recognition of his early work on formboards we had, moreover,
Previously seen a formboard in an institution which was said to have been devised
by Seguin and which we inferred was the original model of the board we used
and also made due acknowledgments to Norsworthy and Goddard. Ihe
Formboard is one of the many good things we have inherited from Seguin.
Norsworthy . . . embodied it among her tests. . . . Our present
board is a slight modification of the one used by her."2 Since this statement was
made in 1912 while Norsworthy wrote six years earlier our statement evidently
could only have referred to Goddard's adaptation of the board. Norsworthy
does not tell us anything about the derivation of her board.3
Sylvester employed a formboard in which he used Goddard s arrangement
and size of forms, but reversed their order, made the recesses shallower, used
1 Age Norms of Psycho-Motor Capacity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1916, p. 19.
2The Formboard as a Measure of Intellectual Development in Children, The Training School, June, 1912.
8 The Psychology of Mentally Deficient Children, 1906, pp. 25 and 26.
hard wood, contrasted the colors of board, blocks and recesses and gave the
whole a more attractive appearance.1 The essential difference between this
board and the one we used is simply the reversal of the order of the blocks: the
forms are absolutely the same.

Sylvester's experimental data did not show in what respect or to what an
extent the arrangement which he used represented an "improved type of board,"
nor do they show that the results secured from this board are so different that
they cannot be compared with the results obtained by the older arrangement.
On the contrary, Sylvester found that even blocks of different sizes (but the same
shapes) gave "practically the same" results (p. 6), while he considered that the
study of the "re-arranging the forms" "would probably contribute little to the
efficacy of the device" (p. 7). "Without a long and elaborate series of experiments (probably not worth while), one could not improve on the size, arrangement and choice of forms as they appear on the standard formboard" (p. 12).
Both Goddard and Sylvester regard this as the "standard formboard," and in
this judgment we concur, after having used the board with many thousands of
cases.

J. E. W. Wallin.

Summer Courses in Psychology at University of Pennsylvania.
The illustrated announcement of Courses in Psychology at the Summer
Session of the University of Pennsylvania is now ready and may be had for the
asking. Address a postal card to Professor Edwin B. Twitmyer, College Hall,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa.
'The Formboard Test, 1913, p. 3.
