Clinic Report.
===============

IV.
Abel has very superior intelligence according to the Terman Revision of
the Binet Scale, his I. Q. being 12G, but his record upon certain of the so-called
performance tests was rather poor.
The boy, who is about two months over five years of age, was brought to
the Clinic by his mother, accompanying an older half-brother, who was to be
examined. Certain tests were given him, and the performance soon became so
interesting that Dr Twitmyer declared he would be a very good case for the
summer school. Hence his record was put into case form.
Almost no history is available about Abel, except what was obtained in
the case of his half-brother. The mother's first husband was syphilitic, and
the older boy who was brought to the Clinic is now on anti-syphilitic treatment.
At the Clinic he was diagnosed as feebleminded and institutional care was
advised.
The second husband, the father of Abel, lived with the mother but a short
time and then deserted.
Nothing in Abel's conduct has suggested any variation from the normal.
From the remarks of social workers it was concluded that the mother is having
some trouble in controlling him, and they expect him to get beyond her power
before very many years have passed. The mother did not give the impression
of being of strong mentality. Abel has not attended kindergarten, but expects
to start school next fall.
His formboard record was satisfactory, in so far as the shortest trial was
concerned, but the first trial was not well done. The cylinder test gave poor
results, except that it showed his ability to learn from experience, for it was
necessary to give him very minute instructions and much urging before he was
finally successful. His work on the design blocks was perhaps his poorest
performance, none of the trials being completed without some suggestions from
the examiner. The Healy Completion Test was likewise a failure. But in the
Binet tests he passed all of the five year tests, four of the six year, three of the
seven year, and two of the eight year tests. Some of the results were rather
surprising in view of the fact that he has had no formal training, and it is
doubtful whether the home training has been up to the normal amount.
He may be said to be of the intellectual type, but memory and training
seemed to be depended upon but little. His remarks while working on the
Witmer Cylinders indicate this somewhat,?"This fatty goes in a big hole,"
and "That one sticks up; it don't go there." In naming the days of the week
he seemed to be thinking out which one came next. At no time did he depend
upon trial and error, except during periods when his attention wandered. This
was his one main trouble. He did not have the persistence that is normal for
his age, and it was difficult to hold his attention. Time after time the examiner
thought the test would be a failure because the boy paid so little attention to
instructions, yet after much rolling of the eyes and gazing about, he would do
what was asked of him. He seemed to be giving no attention to the three
commissions, yet he performed them quickly.
The diagnosis was superior mentality, with the recommendation that he
be admitted to the summer school.
(264)
CLINIC REPORTS. 265
V.
Amos was thirteen years of age when he was brought to the Clinic by a
social worker, who desired to know the mental status in order to determine
his treatment. Dishonesty, truancy and running away from home had brought
him under the care of an organization. On numerous occasions Amos had
run away from home, staying away for a day and at least once for longer, and
on one of these occasions he committed acts which he believes would get him
into trouble were they known. His stealing from the school has been stopped
by the principal.
He is a pale, expressionless boy, just above the minimum height for his
age; a mouth breather. His head was injured at birth, which was instrumental.
He was very delicate and had almost all the diseases that could fall to a child.
Finally he was sent to a tuberculosis sanitarium, from which he was discharged
fifteen months ago. His tonsils and adenoids were removed six years ago.
Up to last spring he wore glasses.
There were ten children in the family, born within fourteen years. Five
are living and all are said to be abnormal, the oldest, a girl, being particularly
dishonest and retarded. The mother is thought to be of low intelligence and
is said to be untruthful.
The home life has been unsatisfactory, due to poverty and to a lack of
knowledge on the part of the parents as to the best methods of raising children.
As a result, the boy has no real love for his parents. His physical condition
and lack of home assistance have made him a misfit among children of his age.
Except for the two years he was under treatment for tuberculosis, he has
kept up with his school work, being fair in everything but arithmetic. He
does not like school.
The Binet tests (Stanford Revision) showed him to be about a year retarded,
and other tests gave normal results. He fatigued quickly and frequently needed
encouragement.
Amos is therefore of normal mentality, his physical condition entitling
him to be a little behind his age. His thieving has been of the sort commonly
found among boys of his age, and he has a complete recognition of the wrongness
of his acts. His lack of love for his parents may quite easily be accounted for
by their failure to bring it out. The running away has been accounted for as
a result of fear of punishment. The lack of a normal outlet for his energies
has further contributed to the direction of his conduct.
In view of the fact that his acts are not without reason, and there is no
other evidence of deficient responsibility, the diagnosis was normal mentality
with bad conduct, due to environmental factors. Eye, nose and throat examinations'were recommended. It was considered advisable that he be placed
upon a farm for six months to a year, the social worker having in mind such a
farm where he can be under the guidance of a man who understands these
problems. Franklyn C. Paschal, A.M.,
Harrison Fellow in Psychology.
266 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
VI.
Last October Ezra was brought to the Psychological Clinic by his mother
and a friend. Their physician had referred the boy for mental examination
because of backwardness in school.
Ezra was fourteen years and four months old. His height, weight and head
girth were normal. Physically he was a well developed boy, but his mother
reported that he had never been well. Owing to her own ill health she had
given him very little care during his first four years, and pleaded ignorance of
many facts in his early life. Most mothers, whether or not they personally care
for a child, know the state of his health, and his progress. Such a situation as
this points to a lack of interest rather unusual in mothers. The information
which she gave was that Ezra was not a healthy baby; he always had a blue
look and was very slow in developing. He did not walk until four years, and
did not even sit up alone until three and one-half years old. He began to talk
at two years.. When eeven or eight months old he suffered from marasmus.
Shortly after this he had enlarged glands in the neck, and between the ages of
two and five had running ears.
At the time of his examination Ezra complained of both his eyes and ears,
but his mother thought the matter of no importance. The boy tried to describe a
"roaring sensation" which annoyed him, but could not make himself clear.
Three years before this examination he had had several convulsions. His mother
could throw no light on their character.
There was nothing significant about Ezra's birth. From the mother's
report it was entirely normal, although she had been extremely nervous during
her pregnancy. The boy had always been nervous, and had not commenced
school until nearly nine years of age. Necessarily this gave him a severe pedagogical retardation, and he did not progress at the normal rate. He had never
been graded in school. For a while he attended a parochial school, but at the
time of his examination was not attending any school.
Socially Ezra was incompetent. Boys of his own age would not tolerate
him. They poked fun at him and said he had a queer look. This was because
he looked from the corners of his eyes; instead of fixating an object squarely in
front of him, he would turn his head until he looked sidewise at the object. He
allowed even younger boys to impose on him, and they tormented him because
it was necessary for him to urinate frequently. Another factor against him was
his inability to dress himself properly. Certainly no difficulty should be experienced in this direction by a fourteen year old boy.
Ezra did not come of healthy ancestry. His maternal grandmother died
at seventy-six from an affection of the lungs following grippe. Two of her
daughters died early in life from tuberculosis. Ezra's paternal grandfather died
at the age of forty-two, and had been paralyzed for three years before that time.
Ezra was an only child.
The qualitative and quantitative results of the examination showed clearly
that in many respects Ezra was mentally inferior to boys of his age. His performance with the Witmer formboard was very poor. Four year old children
have accomplished this test in less time than his shortest record of three trials.
He made a complete failure with the Witmer cylinders. Another striking feature
was his memory span of only four digits. A boy of fourteen should repeat at
least six digits. In school subjects he could not do first grade work.
During the entire examination Ezra displayed very little initiative and
alertness, although he was always willing to work. His persistence was good.
CLINIC REPORTS. 267
His rate of movement was slow, but his control of movement, complexity and
coordination were normal. His cardinal defect was in imagination, and his
imageability was far below normal. His analytic and distributive attention
were exceedingly poor. It was difficult to make him understand what was
required of him. His observation, planfulness and understanding were very
poor. He displayed practically no intelligence?that is, no ability to solve a
new problem.
The showing which Ezra made at the examination, combined with his poor
school record and his inability to get along with boys of his own age, indicated
a diagnosis of feeblemindedness. The grade was given as low grade imbecile
(Barr classification).
Natalie A. Bassett, A.M.
Graduate Student.
