Tom the Enigma? A Clinic Teacher's Report
==========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1017, by Llghtnor Witmer, Editor.
Vol. X, No. 8
January 15, 1917

By Sarah Warfield Parker, B.A., .
Bath, N. Y.
Nothing would afford Tom keener satisfaction than to know-
that he baffles diagnosis. He is a droll enigma. In the fifteen years
of his life he has consciously exerted himself to play that role effec-
tively and he has succeeded. In all probability Tom is a high grade
imbecile. He thoroughly enjoys appearing at times much less than
that, at times much more than that. If he is an imbecile, he is an
extraordinarily intelligent one; if he is normal he directs his intelli-
gence in extraordinarily eccentric directions.
At his best, when his face is bronzed, his cheeks flushed with
healthy color, when his brown eyes are keen, and his hair neatly
smoothed, when he holds himself erect, proud of his well-cut suit
and of his smart white tie, he looks like a handsome normal boy.
But there was no greater difference between Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
than there is between this Tom and the Tom we see all too frequently.
It is not only that his hair is rumpled, his skin pallid, his eyes luster-
less and drowsy, but the human intelligence seems to die out of his
face, leaving behind the gross animal. He yawns, lolls wearily,
swinging his loose body. His arms become flexed at the elbow, the
hands dangle weakly from the wrists; his knees knock together, and
his feet cross one over the other so that in walking his legs inter-
twine, throwing him to the ground. The first boy looks like a
normal youth of intelligence and refinement; the last, like an idio-
imbecile. Which is Tom? Like many other good people, Tom
finds that to be subject to fits adds distinctly to one's personality.
Moreover the situation itself appeals to him. If one has a keen
sense of humor it is indeed not altogether uninteresting to see how
other people will behave in such an emergency. His mother par-
ticularly has for years played up admirably, with marked excitement
and interest in these attacks. An attack of the "wiggles," as the
mother calls it, overtook Tom on the road one day. He required
(209)
210 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
the support of two able-bodied adults to assist him home, but with
his arm on the shoulder of each, walked down the hall quite normally
with an expression of frank satisfaction.
One of his supporters remarked, "He's perfectly contented as
long as he can victimize some one." Tom accepted it as a compli-
ment, "Yes," he retorted, "you just ought to see how I victimize
my family."
Just as the coxcomb in Tom yielded to his pleasure in victimiz-
ing his adult associates by simulated fits, so his very real pride in his
wit and drollery and in his fund of information yielded to a perverse
enjoyment in shamming stupidity. It pandered to his private sense
of superiority to see an adult making a fool of herself by teaching
him something he already knew; to see his mother patiently show-
ing him how to suck lemonade through a straw while he pretended
to be unable to do anything but blow bubbles into the glass?surely
there was fun in that. In attempting, therefore, to draw from him
reactions which would indicate his mental status, one had to beware
of sham stupidity. Such a mental analysis is in this case peculiarly
necessary to determine whether his serious retardation in school
subjects is due to a defect of mind or to a defect of character.
In the three elementary processes of mind?attention, imag-
ination, and memory?there appears to be no serious defect. Tom's
keen observation gives evidence that his analytic concentration of
attention is excellent?that he sees not a confused whole, but minute
/ 7
parts. Provided that he is interested, that the end justifies the
means, there is no limit to his perseverance at a task. He will spend
hours over a large jig-saw puzzle or a drawing. His persistent con-
centration is excellent when he is constructing anything useful to
himself?a sling shot or a wooden sword. To be sure, this per-
severance is nil where he is bored and uninterested, but such active
refusal of attention is indicative of something quite other than a
defect of the attention process itself. The distribution of attention,
too, is quite as satisfactory as its concentration. Imagination
depends primarily on acuity of perception and secondarily upon
these qualities of attention. Tom has no defect of hearing, no
serious defect of vision other than color blindness of the red-green
type. He confuses violet with blue, orange with yellow, and red,
green, brown, and gray with each other. He is hugely proud of this
defect?a defect which of course makes his visual images abnormal
in respect to color but which can have no effect upon imagination as
a function of mental activity. In fact, the intensity of his visual
images of form and position is high. He reproduces from memory
images, complicated designs with the design blocks. In writing the
TOM THE ENIGMA. 211
longer words in his spelling lesson it interests him to put a dot just
where he thinks the word will end. It is surprising to see how
accurate this mental measurement of space is. Tom likes to draw;
he draws railroad trains from memory, reproducing the shape of the
engine cab, the cylinders under the cars, the windows, and the ven-
tilators above?all somewhat out of proportion, but nevertheless
indicating an accurate visual image of the object drawn. Tom's
auditory imagery, though not so intense, is adequate for ordinary
use. He recognizes tunes but does not reproduce them very well.
He responds quickly to auditory verbal stimuli, though not as
quickly as to the same stimuli in visual presentation. That is to
say, he remembers more of a story that he has read than of one he
has heard, and learns more quickly a jingle which he sees in print
than one that some one else repeats. Motor imagery proves ade-
quate for his daily performances. Acuity of the sense organs, atten-
tion to stimuli and sensitivity of cerebral cells he has, therefore, in a
degree sufficient to determine normal intensity of images.
No greater defect can be found in the associability of these
images. The association of images in sequence?that is, memory
span, is if anything, something above normal. Binet accepts seven
digits as a normal span for a fifteen year old child. Tom's span is
eight digits with an occasional success in repeating nine. More
complex association does not seem to trouble him. He has the
capacity to link images by logical relation as well as by sequence in
time. The Woodworth and Wells Logical Relation Association
Tests1 found Tom accurate and fairly ready in his responses. In
the series of Twenty Easiest Opposites nineteen reactions were
given correctly; in the series of forty opposites thirty-six were correct.
Tom is quick to see a joke, to appreciate a pun. His capacity for
manipulating the images formed shows every evidence of being
normal. The elasticity of his mind is an important asset.
Tom should learn readily, for his memory, too, is good. He
is sensitive to impressions; so that his threshold of sensibility is low.
He can repeat the main facts in his history lesson after a single
reading. He can learn a vocabulary of twelve Latin words in ten
minutes. Whatever he learns he retains well. The Latin words,
once learned, are not forgotten. The facts which he has picked up
here and there, though incomplete and badly organized, form a
permanent fund of information. He has read a great deal, and
remembers the titles, authors, characters, scenes, and incidents over
a fairly long period. He enjoys the role of narrator and keeps by
him a store of fairy tales to entertain the children, of anecdotes to
1 Woodworth, R. S., and Wells, F. L. Association Tests. Pschol. Rev. Monog. Sup. No. 57,1911.
212 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
amuse his older companions. This memory is not wholly verbal
or mechanical. To be sure, Tom's most accurate memory is for
words but those words are to him rich in connotation, full of meaning
that he has gathered, not from definition, but from reading and experi-
ence. A number of his own definitions of words, chosen from a
single week's work, will show how meaningful is his vocabulary.
Canyon?"A gash in the rocks like the Grand Canyon of the
Colorado out west."
Avalanche?"When things get to going so fast down the side
of a hill that you can't stop it and things are buried."
Tyrant?"A bad king."
Advantage?"When you get a chance to do something to a man
you don't like."
Eccentric?"Queer. Why don't you pronounce it essentric?"
Ambassador?"A man at a king's court."
Dense?"Do you mean dense darkness or dense in your studies?"
Climate?"If somebody from up here goes south and it's too
hot, he says, ' I guess I'll go back home. This climate isn't
good.'"
Imitation?"When you copy another gink's writing."
Muscle?"Do you mean the shell or the thing in your arm?"
Divide?He illustrated the concept by drawing his two hands
together down the middle of the desk, then separating them
to right and left.
Swindler?"A man who swindles gets things that don't belong
to him, without permission."
Journal?"A paper you read."
Tenement?"A dirty house in New York."
One day, when I gave him the word "vote," Tom flashed back
the question, "Are you a suffragette?"
"I believe in suffrage," I answered.
His retort was instant, "Then you can't teach me."
There is, I think, no question that words stand for ideas and
images in Tom's mind?that they are symbols of a somewhat rich
mental content. Although in repeating stories he retains much of
the vocabulary of the original, the relation of incident to incident,
frequent variation of phrasing, and understanding comment bespeak
his comprehension of the story. The only serious incapacity in the
comprehension of meaning seems to be Tom's extraordinary inability
to appreciate time and space. A trip of two hours he declares to
have been shorter than a trip of half an hour; his voyage across the
Atlantic to have taken no longer than a journey by train from New
York to Philadelphia. He estimated a house standing on a hill a
TOM THE ENIGMA- 213
quarter of a mile or more across the valley to be "about a foot
away." How much of this apparent ignorance is willful perversity
one cannot tell. It was sufficiently convincing, at least, to impel
his father and mother to take him to Europe to teach him distance.
Even this spectacular pedagogic method failed.
It may be well to review the points of mental analysis made
thus far. Tom appears to be mentally sound in the three elementary
processes of acquiring, relating, and retaining impressions?atten-
tion, imagination, and memory. The mental content thus estab-
lished is, with the grave exception of time and distance, normally
meaningful and elastic. The faculty of reasoning may well be only
a constructive use of this mental content, and these mental capacities.
Since Tom has the volitional qualities of initiative and control, we
should expect to find him capable of a purposeful manipulation of
these capacities. Observation does not indicate that he falls below
par even here. He has distinctly a constructive faculty, an apprecia-
tion of the relation of part to whole. He shows this concretely in
the effective way he puts together large and difficult jig-saw puzzles.
He failed on none of the questions involving reason in the Binet test.
In a lesson in mathematical geography his teacher asked him how
many small circles could be drawn on the earth's surface, equally
distant from the equator. After a few minutes thought Tom
answered, "Two, one north and one south."
His constructive imagination is distinctly active?at least in his
drawing. He drew, one morning, a brown horse with a curiously
thick body, short thin legs, a minute tail, a flying mane, and a red
saddle. He told me that the horse was running away, that the man
had been thrown from the saddle, and that the mane blew out
because the horse was going so fast. His critical faculty is equally
active. He was distinctly dissatisfied with the same horse because
of the undue bulk of body and the absence of motion in the hind
legs. This purposive use of the ability which we call reason, to
attend discriminatingly and to associate constructively percepts
and retained images, completes the catalog of mental faculties
involved in the learning process. In running through this catalog
we find nothing to convince us that Tom is mentally defective. We
have still to examine those qualities which come under the general
terms?energy and volition.
In Tom's activity, at least, these qualities stand in close inter-
relation. His activities certainly show, more often than not, a very
low degree of force. Part of this is due to physical weakness; to
the feeble muscles of his hands, and the body so quickly subject to
muscular fatigue. Part of it is due to indifference. Where the end
214 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
does not to him reasonably justify the means, he does not choose to
exert whatever physical and mental force he has. The same situa-
tion holds when we turn to rate of movement. Tom is a fairly fast
runner. He can win out against all but one of the children in the
school. His reaction to the signal for the race is prompt. A speed
test, however, is a distinct bore, and therefore there is no particular
reason for his wishing to do it well. In the card sorting test his
initial time equalled that of a boy abnormally slow as the effect of
hemiplegia. His lack of interest and effort was so marked that no
attempt was made to obtain a practice curve. In Woodworth and
Wells' Number Checking Test his time was 157 seconds?that of the
hemiplegia patient 185 seconds, of a moron of the same age 85 seconds ;
the range of a small number of graduate students tested by Wood-
worth and Wells, 50 to 100 seconds. In the Courtis Test Tom copied
only ten figures in one minute. In the Binet Test, requiring the
utterance of at least sixty words in three minutes, he drawled out
lazily only forty-seven. Yet his mind does not seem to work with
abnormal deliberateness. In the Woodworth and Wells Form
Naming Test his record is good.
Range for twelve graduate students tested by Woodworth and
Wells 31-60 seconds
Tom... 50 "
Moron (15 years) 60 "
Hemiplegic patient (17 years) 80
In repartee Tom's mind is particularly alert. His brother
exclaimed at breakfast, " I have an idea."
"Keep it. You don't often get one," Tom retorted.
When he first came into the school we made a consistent effort
I
to bring Tom down from his complacent superiority. He com-
mented on it as he sat at his desk, "It's funny, at home my mother
thinks I'm the smartest gink there is."
"She can't know you very well, then," I remarked.
"She's known me for fourteen years," he parried quickly.
In energy we have found a marked decline in daily performances,
a deficiency in force, due in part to physical inability, in part to lack
of effort; a slow rate of movement, combined as it is with swift
mental reactions, seems to be determined partially at least by lack
of interest and failure to erect the volitional element in action. It is
curious to find this same quality of volition as a potential factor,
particularly strong in Tom. He is not lacking in initiative. The
children are, of course, not allowed to leave the school grounds.
The second day Tom disappeared at recess. Presently he appeared
TOM THE ENIGMA. 215
coming through the bushes at the foot of the hill with Sen, the collie,
close at his heels. "The other ginks told me Sen could swim," he
commented, in his droll deliberate voice, " I don't see any signs of
it. I took him down to the pond and threw some sticks in, but he
wouldn't go in."
One infers from this persistent curiosity and keen observation,
a mind that is spontaneously active. At the end of the first day I
spent with Tom I made a list of the questions I remembered from the
day's conversation. The list filled three large sheets of paper. I
select a few of them as suggestive of his exploring, active mind:
Where does the hall go that's by my room?
Where is John going with that shovel?
Why do you call the dog Sen when his name is Senator?
What are you writing down?
Why does Sen jump up on me and wind his leg around mine and
try to trip me up?
Where were you born?
What does P. B. & W. R. R. stand for?
Which track do west bound trains go on?
Then why does that sign say to east bound trains when it points
west?
Is this station a house too?
Which room is the dining room?
May I climb the fence and make an inspection?
How long would it take a man to clean this car?
How long would it take two men?
Do Angora cats come from Angora?
How does the smoke get through the smoke stack?
Why does the smoke come down to the track when we go through
a tunnel?
How much bigger is this car than a box car?
How early do children go to bed in sleeping trains?
Don't you think there's too much smoke in this station for
comfort?
Why don't they keep the car tracks clean in Philadelphia?
How far south would you have to go to get out of the United
States?
Provided Tom is interested, he never has to be prodded to
either mental or physical activity. He acts, too, upon his own
idea, not upon someone else's suggestion. He is. therefore, a leader,
admired and obeyed by the younger children.
Tom's control is as strong as his initiative. He is able to direct
his action so as to give a desired impression, to fool if he wishes his
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
teachers, his parents, or his companions. He is a boy of his
word.
From observation and analysis of Tom I should conclude, that
in the most precise significance of the term, he is intelligent. The
day that he ruined his garter to make a good sling shot is not the
only time he has shown his resourcefulness, his invention. The
resources, that is, the mental capacities within which the invention
is operative do not appear, from our survey, to be particularly below
those of a normal boy. With this evidence of his intelligence and
his active will, the low level of Tom's performances, this extreme
inefficiency in the operations of daily life, is surprising. His per-
formance level is so low that up to the age of fourteen he has been
kept successively in private institutions for the training of quite
low grade feebleminded children. In these institutions, Tom has
received excellent physiological training. There he has learned to
handle the Seguin and Montessori material for sense training, to
write a tremulous script. He reads as well as any fifteen year old
boy, but pronounces his sentences in a monotone, without expression
or respect for punctuation. Occasionally, when his pride is touched,
Tom can quite effectively correct this defect in elocution. He has
learned to spell as well as an average boy. It is only necessary for
him to see a word several times in reading for it to become fixed in
his mind. He has learned to count, and to perceive number.
Beyond that he can do nothing in arithmetic. He has either had
no training in fundamental processes or has failed to profit by such
training. He knows no grammar. Whatever history and geography
he knows he has gathered from his reading and from the conversa-
tion of his younger brothers. How wide that information is, how
interspersed with gaps and misconceptions, how unorganized, one
sees in swift examination of Tom:
Q. What is an island?
A. A body of land entirely surrounded by water.
Q. What is a peninsula?
A. A body of land that juts out into the water.
Q. What is a continent?
A. A big piece of land.
Q. What continents do you know?
A. America and Asia.
Q. What is an ocean?
A. A large body of water on the earth's surface,
Q. Where is the North Pole?
A. At the top of the map.
Q. The South Pole?
TOM THE ENIGMA. 217
A. At the bottom of the map.
Q. What ocean is at the South Pole?
A. Antarctic.
Q. What ocean is at the North Pole?
A. Arctic.
Q. Between Europe and America?
A. Atlantic.
Q. Between Asia and America?
A. Pacific.
Q. South of Asia?
A. Oh, there's a lot of seas and things there?the Indian Ocean
and the Adriatic Sea.
Q. What is the equator?
A. The boundary between the United States and Mexico?
Q. WTiere is the Adriatic Sea?
A. Don't know.
Q. Where is London?
A. England.
Q. Where is Paris?
A. France.
Q. Where is Berlin?
A. Germany.
Q. Where is Rome?
A. Greece.
Q. Where is Athens?
A. Greece.
Q. Tell me a city in Spain.
A. Don't know any.
Q. What mountains are in Switzerland?
A. Alps.
Q. What mountains are in Italy?
A. Don't know any. I've never been there. There are some
other mountains in Switzerland, the Adirondacks.
Q. Where are the Adirondacks?
A. New York State.
Q. Where's Mont Blanc?
A. In the Alps.
Q. Yes, but in what part?
A. In the foot hills.
Q. Where is Niagara Falls?
A. In the Grand Canyon of the Colorado.
Q. In what state is it?
A. Nigara State.
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Q. In what state do you live?
A. New York.
Q. In what country do you live?
A. United States.
Q. On what continent do you live?
A. North America.
Q. Do you live in Canada?
A. No.
Q. Is Canada in America?
A. Yes.
Q. In North or South America?
A. South America.
Whatever history he has learned he knows as he knows fiction,
as he knows classic myths and fairy tales. The boy has an excellent
imaginative background for history but no consecutive knowledge.
The Binet Test professes to test mental age and not training.
Tom does not seem to be very much below the normal fifteen year
old boy in mentality yet the six year group in the Binet Tests is the
first group in which he can pass all the tests. In the seven year old
group he can not count the cost of three two-cent and three one-cent
stamps. In the eight-year tests he was a bit uncertain as to the date.
In the nine-year tests, he made two errors in reciting the months
and failed to make change. In the ten-year test he could not com-
pare weights or combine the three words given into a satisfactory
sentence. In the twelve-year group he drawled out only forty-seven
words in fifteen minutes. In the fifteen-year tests he failed to
repeat the twenty-six syllable sentence and the pictures shown did
not interest him enough to draw out the interpretation of which he
is capable. This, in exact quantitative measure gives Tom a mental
age of nine and a half years. The reason for this low rating seems
to be his contant failure in questions of number, and his frequent
lack of effort in performing the tests.
If indifference and lack of systematic training are the factors in
determining this low level of performance, it seems, superficially at
least, that these obstacles can be overcome. It appears on the face
of it, that under proper instruction Tom is ready to make rapid
progress toward a normal education. But such a judgment fails to
reckon with the boy himself. Tom is a unique individual. His
intelligence and will are confined to resisting systematic education.
He asks only one thing of life?to be permitted to do solely the
things that interest him. The boy is keen enough to see that the
more things he knows how to do the more work he is "let in for."
The intelligent person will avoid as much responsibility as possible.
TOM THE ENIGMA. 219
For fourteen years Tom has been relieved of responsibility and he
finds it a very satisfactory mode of life. "I don't need to learn to
make change," he remarked. " My mother will always be there to
do it for me." Tom's position is wholly tenable from a logical point
of view. On the basis of avoiding the uninteresting routine of
school work and the acquirement of a dangerous efficiency, he sets
himself obstinately against systematic training.
Tom is perfectly satisfied with his present acquirements. He
already feels superior to every individual whom he has met. The
fifth day he was in the school he summed up the mental status of the
other children.
"Does Jack know much?" he asked.
"Yes, don't you think so?" I asked in return.
"I haven't seen much that he knows," Tom remarked. I
started a cross examination of my own.
"Who do you think knows most in the school?"
"I," Tom answered with calm brevity.
"But of the others, I mean?" I continued.
"William."
"And after William?"
"Jack."
"What do you think about Margaret?"
"She doesn't spell very well."
"Don't you think she knows other things?"
"I haven't seen what she knows yet."
Tom is quite as confident, though a bit less frank in judging his
teachers and examiners. He is satisfied with his superiority and
wishes to be left at leisure to play Indian, read, put jig-saw puzzles
together, to do what he desires.
Tom started his experiment the very day that he came into the
school. He tried out those who had him in charge, to see how far
he could escape obedience, how much work he could avoid. He
made his first stand against the afternoon rest hour. The matron
told him to take off his shoes and lie down. Ten minutes later she
found him downstairs in a heavier pair of shoes. She sent him up
again, only to find him a little later, wandering restlessly about the
room. The third time she discovered him on the floor, leaning his
head against the bed, kicking his heels in the air. When she com-
manded him to lie down, his eyes narrowed to tiny slits and he
mumbled defiantly, "You bull, bull, bull." I found him again in
the same position on the floor, sullen, muttering, "I'm not tired.
I won't rest." After a brief parley I got him to his feet. He grabbed
a box cover,?
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"Now I've got something to hammer you over the head with.0
In my indifference I did not seem worth hammering so he
dropped the cover. He was finally persuaded as far as the bed.
Once there he drew his knees up to his chin and growled, "I won't
lie on my back. I'll curl up as much as I can." After further
threats to throw the blanket up to the ceiling and to jump out of
the window, Tom gave in and lay for a few minutes quietly resting.
After three successive days in which he lost out, he gave up his point,
and on the fourth, responded with a cheerful, "Sure." He still
avoids the boredom of a real rest by playing sailor or talking to
himself.
Another crucial contest was fought on the point of immediate
obedience to the call to school. One morning after recess the uncon-
genial summons interrupted Tom in an interesting project to make a
waterfall by dumping tubs of water over the hill. Tom reverted to
his "Bull, bull, bull," and refused to come.
"Very well," I said, "You come now or not at all."
"Then I shan't come at all," he mumbled.
"Certainly," I agreed, "and you go to bed for the afternoon."
Three minutes later he appeared sheepishly in the door of the
school room, " I guess I won't go to bed this afternoon."
To his surprise he found it was too late. He was refused admis-
sion and spent the afternoon in bed. Several days in bed on a cereal
diet similarly cured him of going to the lake without permission.
Because of his nervous attacks his mother had never taken
him on city streets, into stores, or to the theater. He was taken
frequently after coming to the school, to accustom him to more
normal life. At first he had no regard for appearances. He
slouched and thumped his feet because he liked to hear the noise
they made. Although he could walk a mile in the country without
fatigue, he felt that it was beneath his dignity to walk a single
block in the city. He would begin immediately to stumble, to
mutter that he thought he was going to have a fit, that we ought
to take a taxi. This ridiculous behavior was particularly anomalous
after you had watched the alert intelligence of Tom's face as he
listened to Bernard Shaw's "Pygmalion." The willful element
was definitely demonstrated. The next time he went to town his
teacher told him that if he walked well and did not mention being-
tired she would take him to the moving pictures. He walked steadily
erect through an hour's shopping and made no complaint.
Within a month's time all active resistance was overcome.
Tom is the first person to see when the game is not worth the struggle.
He now yields prompt and cheerful obedience. Yet he has by no
TOM THE ENIGMA. 221
means surrendered in the fight against learning anything through
study. Most pedagogic methods seem foolish to him. Oral compo-
sition is particularly ridiculous. In the days when his resistance
was still active I recorded a typical incident. When he was asked
to reproduce a fairy tale he had read, he answered, logically, "I've
read it to you, you know it. I told you one story yesterday, that's
enough."
"I don't want to do it, and I won't" he persisted. "I said no
and I mean it." He gave in when he found that the struggle only
postponed indefinitely his recess hour, but the incident is typical of
his attitude toward the recitation of any lesson. His position is
one of extreme impatience, "I know it and you know it. What's
the use of all this fuss?" Though he has yielded all active resistance,
his passive refusal to co-operate is quite as effective. One teacher
wrote on January 5th, "His general attitude is bored. His voice
in reading is bored. There is no energy in anything he does except
in his curiosity and criticism. When tired he grunts, lolls, scratches
his head, makes random responses. He becomes glum when you
ask him anything he does not know."
Another teacher wrote on February 3d, "I had no control over
him. He complained every ten minutes of being tired, rubbed his
eyes and hair, yawned and sighed. His face and legs were twitch-
ing, and he acted as if he were going to have a fit any minute. He
had to have recess every twenty minutes and during his twenty
minutes of supposed work made no effort of any kind and appeared
bored to death. All information he deemed unnecessary because
his mother and father could always look after him anyway. For
two weeks I tried unsuccessfully to teach him the geographical
relation of the continents to the oceans. He could do no arithmetic?
not even between one and six."
A third teacher records: "Tom writes a copy each day. He
doesn't exert himself very much or try to write any better. His
writing in ink is very shaky. He tried today and it is slowly show-
ing slight improvement. He is very much bored by work of this
kind. He reads fluently but without expression."
April 6th: "He has never studied alone. His idea of studying
is to read his history lesson over once and remember what he can
of it. He is very much bored by explanations. He likes to read
along without paying attention to details."
April 7th: "Tom worked some examples in addition; work
pretty inaccurate. He is very much bored by an oral lesson in
arithmetic. He was very fidgety, kept moving his feet, scratching
222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
his head, and his eyes looked as if he were only half awake. I asked
him whether he felt tired, and he said, "Tired of this arithmetic."
April 9th: "About the only thing Tom likes to do is to play
Indian or read."
Tom is superior to any mass of information that you may pre-
sent to him. He knows enough of the stories of history to think
that the study is superfluous. Arithmetic is absurd and wholly
unnecessary. Latin piqued his interest for a few days but he quite
naturally considers declensions and conjugations useless and trans-
lates with a dignified disregard of verb and noun forms. His writing
is legible; his reading intelligible. Why should he trouble himself
to make them any better? With his droll originality and talent in
oral narration he should be able to write interesting compositions.
Writing is, however, too slow a means of expression. Tom will
write nothing but a succinct summary of facts. Geography and a
few of the elementary facts of astronomy are the two subjects to
which he has responded most warmly. In all probability his
response to these latter subjects was due to the way in which they
were presented. The only favorable report of Tom comes from a
teacher who took him in hand for drill in geography:
"Tom is now a changed boy. He has in the last ten days
learned the geography of Sweden, Norway, Russia, Ireland, and
Scotland. Besides this, he has learned ten mountain ranges in other
countries, eight straits and some of the history of Sweden and Nor-
way. He also now does sums of three numbers, making about five
mistakes out of fourteen examples. This improvement is due to
competition with William?to wanting to show William, whom he
adores, how smart he is and also to wanting to make Jack by com-
parison a laughing stock. He has to be taught in a special way that
amuses him so that the whole thing appears as an entertaining game.
It is no use to keep at one thing too long. He learns best if you
jump quickly from one thing to another. This method seems to
him worthy of his intelligence. I have succeeded in impressing
him to the point that he even grants my superior cleverness. We
have also to season our work with rough play in order to get the best
results. William has to be in the game and all three of us often try
contests in quickly naming places in geography."
Frankly I do not know whether or not we should call Tom
feebleminded. If the term implies a physiological deficiency,
cerebral or otherwise, I hesitate; for except for an organism which is
generally weakened by malnutrition I do not believe that Tom has
any such deficiency. If the term is purely of patho-social signifi-
cance and describes an individual altogether inefficient in the per-
TOM THE ENIGMA. 223
formances of society, Tom is certainly feebleminded. He presents
a puzzling enigma because he has been so far an agent in perpetuating
his own insufficiency of which the initial cause was physical.
Psychological training is not the urgent remedy for this case.
Tom requires first a restoration of his physical energies, then contact
with a strong personality. He needs a teacher clever enough to
command his respect, vigorous enough to overcome his resistance,
resourceful enough to make useful study coincide with his interests,?
an individual endowed with a dynamic energy that will create in the
boy the incentive to work. He is too cold, too undemonstrative, too
egoistic to be stirred by personal loyalty to any one but himself.
Egoism and uncomprising justice are the two fundamental qualities of
his character. Between Tom and the personality which is strong
enough to master him, the contest must be one of wit and will.
