The Pennsylvania Subsidy System
================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
The State LegUlatnre of Pennsylvania at its current ?*aon wUl^bly
appropriate something over S6,000,0W-about one-tenth djhetotad^eof
the Commonwealth for the next two years-to msritutions o privateehanty
The wisdom and justice of these appropriations, especiaUy of the method by
36 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
which they are made, are now being more vigorously discussed than at any
time in recent years.
The Public Charities Association concurs with the State Board of Public
Charities in disapproval of the suggestion to create a new commission to make
binding recommendations to the Legislature with reference to appropriations
to private charities. When, however, the Board defends the present method of
making appropriations, it appears to the Association that a very different ques-
tion is raised, requiring a critical examination of the statement of the Board,
which appeared in newspapers of December 20, 1916.
It is said, for example, in this statement: "Hearings are held . . . and all
institutions are given the chance to present their claims for state aid." In fact,
these hearings are necessarily perfunctory, owing to the meagre time allotted to
each of the nearly four hundred applicants for aid. They are rarely attended by
a majority of the Board, perhaps because the members realize the futility of
attempting to form a judgment in any case upon the scant information obtain-
able at these hearings.
The statement continues: "The actual needs of the institutions are deter-
mined." How does the Board measure the needs of these institutions? The
Board has stated that it analyses "the need for the institution in its community";
"its necessity to apply for aid"; its "need of financial aid from the state"; its
"ability and willingness to be in part self-sustaining." Yet recommendations
have been repeatedly made for appropriations to institutions in localities already
well supplied with such facilities, as compared with other localities where no such
appropriation is recommended: to institutions that receive practically no financial
support in their own communities, except from pay patients, and that have
apparently made little or no effort to obtain such support; to institutions so
heavily endowed by private interests or so largely serving purely local purposes
that the state as a whole and its taxpayers are clearly relieved of obligation to
repair the relatively small deficit incurred. Appropriations have been granted
to institutions that lack facilities required by law, such as laboratories, upon
which the State Board of Medical Education and Licensure is now insisting.
Do these laboratories come within the definition of "need" employed by the
State Board?
The Public Charities Association calls attention to the discrepancies between
the Board's recommendations and the final appropriations as made by the last
Legislature in 1915:
Only 21 per cent of all private institutions received appropriations equal to
the Board's recommendations. Only 6 per cent of all state and semi-state insti-
tutions received grants equal to those recommended. Seven private institutions
received appropriations against the advice of the Board; and fifteen others failed .
to receive grants, though the Board had recommended them. These facts are
to be regarded as the necessary and logical outcome of a system which leads to
extravagance and injustice, in spite of the vigorous efforts of the State Board
to bring order out of chaos.
