The Individual Tests in the Binet-Simon Scale
===============================================

By J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.,
Psycho-Educational Clinic, St. Louis, Mo.
While studying the application of the Binet-Simon scale to
epileptic children in 1910 and 1911, we found an "amazing lack of
uniformity between the difficulty of the tests of the same age-norms for
fully half of the ages of the scale;" we found that scores of our ow
and medium grade epileptics passed one or more tests in five, six,
or even seven higher age-levels, and scores won from ten to twenty
(or even more) points in advance of the first or lowest age in the
scale which they were able to pass completely) we found that
the B.-S. age given to the child might differ by as much as two or
three years according as the rating was figured from the lower or upper
base (in 39 per cent of the children the difference amounted to one y ear
or more); we found that the "collective difficulty of the different agestandards" varied all the way from .00 per cent of passing to 84
Per cent of passing;1 and we were forced to the conclusion that the v
epileptics did "not qualify for a given age on the basis of satisfying the
requirements of that age, but on the basis of the system of advance credits
from higher ages." The question thereupon arose whether these
anomalous results were due to the unequal difficulty or inherent
defects of the individual tests in the different B.-S. ages, or to the wide
range method of testing which we employed, or to "fundamental
deviations or abnormalities in the epileptic mind. From an anal} sis
of the data available then it appeared that the irregularities were not
primarily caused by the method of advance scoring from wi e
range testing,"2 but were due to defects in the scale itself and peculiarities in the "mental make-up of the epileptic." Some of the errors
which we found in the placement of the tests were confirmed, while
others were not confirmed, by the findings of two or three investigators
who at that time had tested groups of unselected school children.
Since our previous study was made we have had the opportuni y
of clinically examining a large number of non-epileptic school children
of various grades of intelligence. In order that we might obtain
Bmet-Simon records which would be comparable with our records
fr?m the epileptic group previously studied we have continued to
u^the 1908 Binet scale and have given the tests as they were admin1 "Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives," 1912, pp. 22, 26, 41, 43.
* "Pr\ KOf
'Pp. 52f.
(79)
80 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
istered to the epileptics.1 Owing to the exigencies of dispensary work
we have not always, however, found it possible to use the wide-range
method of testing as thoroughly as we did with the epileptics. The
time at our disposal has sometimes been too limited. During the last
few years we have also given the new 1911 tests (Vineland version),
so as to make it possible to rate the cases according to both the 1908
and 1911 scales. In this series of articles, which will appear from time
to time,2 we shall confine ourselves to an analysis of the data for the
individual Binet-Simon tests which have been secured from 1000 cases
(703 boys and 297 girls), clinically examined in Pittsburgh and St.
Louis from the spring of 1912 to January, 1916. These cases are consecutive except that no records are included from subjects who
could not be given the B.-S. tests, nor are the records of reexaminations included from subjects examined more than once. Only 16 of
the subjects included were over sixteen years of age chronologically, 7
of these being seventeen years old, 1 eighteen, 3 nineteen, 2 twenty-one,
1 twenty-five, 1 twenty-seven, and 1 thirty-five. The intelligence
classification of the subjects was as follows:
Boys
No.
Girls
No.
%*
Both
No.
Accelerated...
Normal
Retarded
Backward
Borderline....
Deferred
Morons
Imbeciles
Idiots
Feebleminded.
52
87
280
85
17
94
73
7
174
1.1
7.3
12.3
39.8
12.0
2.4
13.3
10.3
.9
24.7
14
21
22
94
26
16
58
44
2
104
4.7
7.0
7.4
31.6
8.7
5.4
19.5
14.8
.7
21.5
22
73
109
374
111
33
152
117
9
278
2.2
7.3
10.9
37.4
11.1
3.3
15.2
11.7
.9
27.8
1 See " Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives," p. 119f. In giving test No. 10 we have never asked "What
is it about?" This question was inadvertently introduced into the Guide. We did not have all the sentences
in tests 8, 21 and 58 standardized at the time some of the epileptics were tested. For test 23 nine-year credit
has always been given for mere descriptions, while the rating has not been based on the replies to the supplementary question given in the Guide, when a classificatory definition was not spontaneously proffered. In test 43,
we have used 25-6c. In 46, the weight test, we have always used metal pill boxes of 6, 9, 12, 15 and 18 grams,
similar to those used at Vineland. We have, however, never suggested to the child to revise his arrangement, as
suggested in the text, except when it has been apparent that an impulsive child has gone through the operation in
a wholly perfunctory manner. These instances of suggested revision have been very few. We have never
arranged "the weights while the subject looks on," as stated by Terman. After the subject has arranged the boxes
we have merely turned them upside down, retaining the same arrangement. We have asked the subjects to use
one hand when two have been used.
2 The general practice of requiring authors to subsidize the publication of their experimental monographs in
psychology, the revenues from the sales of which rarely enable the author to recover his initial investment, makes
it necessary to utilize the medium of the periodical press. At the present time we are more in need of grants for the
publication of original investigations than for the prosecution of researches.
8 Based on the total number of boys (703). 4 Based on the total number of girls (297).
'Based on the total number of boys and girls (1000).
INDIVIDUAL TESTS IN BINET-SIMON SCALE. 81
Only 27.8 per cent of these subjects were diagnosed as feebleminded.
Those who roughly classify children into two categories, normal and
feebleminded, would have classified a considerable majority of them
as normal. In analyzing our mass results it should be remembered,
however, that some of our subjects were feebleminded. Only twelve
of the subjects were epileptic (including one case of masked epilepsy ),
which is so small a proportion of the entire number as not to affect
the general averages.
In this article we shall confine ourselves to a consideration of
the data for the B.-S. weight discrimination test placed in Age IX
in the 1908 scale and in Age X in the 1911 scale.
The Weight Discrimination Test.
Our interest was attracted to this test in 1910 because of the
very unsatisfactory results which we obtained from its use on epileptics, when we strictly adhered to Binet and Simon's method of administering the test. When administered in the classical way, success
in the test depends not only on the ability to discriminate small differences in weight by the kinesthetic sense, but also on the ability to
follow verbal directions. But when so administered it is frequently
impossible to determine whether success in the test depends primarily
on keenness of muscular sensitivity or on ability to understand the
directions. In preliminary trials on epileptics in 1910 we found that
the test was entirely too difficult for epileptics who graded in the B.-S.
age in which it had been placed, or in any of the higher mental ages
Some of these obviously failed because they were unable to distinguish the difference between the weights, but many failed because
they were unable to comprehend the instructions. We found, however, that many of the latter succeeded when once the directions were
understood. Moreover, the only way of getting many epileptics to
understand the test was to demonstrate the method of procedure.
Many were unable to execute the test from repeated instructions
according to the B.-S. procedure, so that almost in despair we adopted
the procedure described in our Guide (pp* 123 and 133). We
usually only hefted three or four of the boxes, but as stated on page 80
we have never placed them in position.
Under this method of administration we still found the test
entirely too difficult for the IX-year epileptics, only 44 per cent of
whom succeeded in the test, while it has also proved too difficult
for the IX-year olds in our non-epileptic group, only 59.4 per cent
of whom passed the test (based on 133 IX-year records). The results
1 We have not followed Lombroso's conception of epilepsy.
82 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
are somewhat discrepant among other investigators who have tested
"normal" or unselected children, only some of whom have adhered
to the original method of administering the test. Decroly and Degand
concluded that it belonged in the fifth or sixth year, while Goddard
retained it in age IX, because 80 per cent of 55 nine-year olds succeeded, while singularly only 40 per cent of 40 eight-year olds succeeded. The record for his ten-year olds is based on only four cases
and cannot, therefore, be used for comparison. On the other hand,
only 30 per cent of Johnstone's, 55 per cent of Terman and Child's,
and 60 per cent of Bobertag's nine-year olds, and 78 per cent of Bobertag's ten-year olds passed the test?the number of cases examined
by each of these investigators in these ages being only 30, 49, 40, 32,
respectively. Binet and Simon placed it in age X in the 1911 revision.
In several of the above investigations, therefore, the test has proved
too difficult for Age IX, on either the 60 per cent or the 75 per cent
standard of passing.
Terman, who retains the test in Age IX in his latest revision,
prescribes a different procedure for the two boxes in Age V than for
the five boxes in Age IX.1 He does not approve of our method of
illustrating the procedure, on the ground that the "experiment was
not devised primarily as a test of sensory discrimination, for it has
long been recognized that individuals who have developed as far as
the 9- or 10-year level of intelligence are ordinarily but little below
normal in sensory capacity." He regards it rather as a test of ability
to comprehend instructions, to keep an objective in mind and find
the means of reaching the objective. He apparently feels that the
test does not correlate very closely with "true mental age." We have
analyzed our data on this point and find, on the contrary, a very significant correlation with mental age (B.-S.),as shown by the percentage
of successes in each B.-S. age from VI to XIII:
B.-S. Age
Boys.
Girls.
Both.
VI
No. %
10.5
20.0
12.5
VII
No. %
28.7
11.7
23.3
VIII
No. %
40.4
28.3
36.5
IX
No. %
65.2
44.7
59.4
No. %
68.0
57.9
65.0
XI
No. %
76.1
71.4
75.3
XII
No. %
100.0
66.6
83.3
XIII
No. %
70.0
100.0
72.7
1 Our percentage of successes for the two boxes in Age V was 66 per per cent for the V-year old epileptics (based,
however, on very few cases), and 92.8 per cent for the V-year olds in the non-epileptic group, being 96 per cent for
the boys and 87.5 per cent for the girls (based on 42 boys and girls). According to our results for the non-epileptic
group the test is too easy for Age V, a finding in harmony with the conclusion of Petersen and Doll: "Sensory Discrimination in Normal and Feebleminded Children," Training School Bulletin, 1914, November and December
This article gives the latest summary of experiments on weight tests.
INDIVIDUAL TESTS IN BINET-SIMON SCALE. 83
There is a decided increase in the percentage of successes in every
ascending age except XIII?the data in the two upper ages, however,
being based on only a few cases. The increase is particularly marked
in the lower ages. The amount of increase in the percentage of passes
between the successive ages from VI to XII is: 10.8 per cent, 13.2 per
cent, 22.9' per cent, 5.6 per cent, 10.3 per cent, and 8 per cent. The
increase holds fairly uniformly for both the boys and the girls. ?sot
only so, when the data are averaged separately for each intelligence
category, we likewise find a decided increase in the ability to perform
the test with each higher category of intelligence, with only one exception, as shown by the following percentage of successes:
Boys.
Girla.
Both.
Imbeciles
No.
%
14.2
20.0
15.7
Morons
No.
83
52
135
%
36.1
28.8
33.3
Borderline
No.
57.1
34.6
51.0
Backward
No.
236
79
315
56.2
44.3
53.3
Retarded
No.
%
52.8
40.0
50.5
Normal
No.
39
14
53
%
61.5
35.7
54.7
Accelerated
No.
%
75.0
80.0
78.5
This is a strikingly significant increase in view of the fact that many
chronological ages are contained in each intelligence category. The
increase between the morons and the borderline amounts to 17.7
per cent.- It is evident from our results that the test, as we have given
it, is not purely a test of sensory discrimination?nor can it be administered purely as a test of sensory discrimination?but also of intelligence. Success in the test, even when given primarily as a sensory
test, depends upon two factors: first, the subject's keenness of sensitivity and, secondly, his grade of intelligence. This is merely a
specific instance of the assumption, justified on other grounds, that
there is a specific and a general factor involved in any mental experiences, the specific factor being correlated with the functioning of
a specific cortical area and the general factor corresponding to the
functioning of the adjacent or associated areas and the general tension or activity of the cortex as a whole. The ability to perceive
differences in the weights postulates the ability to attend, to retain
dental impressions of the weights that have been hefted, to compare
these impressions, and to keep the task constantly in mind as the
weights are being hefted?certainly no insignificant intellectual
problem. In fact, success in the test, when administered as a sensory
test, depends more on central than peripheral factors. We find,
therefore, in harmony with this interpretation, that the normal or
backward pupils do better than the morons, and the morons better
than the imbeciles in this sensory test. In a series of other sensory
84 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
and perception tests on epileptics and normal children the results
point to the same conclusion (described in a monograph on "The
Measurement of Mental Traits in Normal and Epileptic School
Children"). Similar results have been obtained by Wiley and Norsworthy, while the results of both of these investigators, however,
agree with our own in showing that the difference is greater for complex than for simple traits. Binet and Simon's conclusion that the
imbeciles' fineness of perception equals or nearly equals that of normal
persons was based only on three defectives and only one normal,
evidently belonging to the lower grade of normals. Petersen and Doll
in a different experiment on the discrimination of weights found
that the feebleminded were slightly more obtuse than the normal
of the same mental age, but this is ascribed to intellectual rather than
to sensory factors. We do not think it is possible in the way this
weight test is administered to isolate, except theoretically, the sensory
elements in the complex, so as separately to measure the elemental
sensory experience. In practice the intellectual and sensory components are integrated or fused and can be measured only as a unitary
whole.
Incidentally, it may be pointed out that we have found both
imbeciles and morons who have been able to pass the test. Bobertag
had said that no child of eight or nine who performs the test properly
can be feebleminded?and his method of giving the test approximates
our own. We are less sanguine. We do not believe that the passing
of any single test will prove any child to be normal, nor that the failure
on a single test will prove any child to be feebleminded, except in
perfectly obvious cases.
Conclusions.
1. Success in this weight test depends both on kinesthetic and
on intellectual factors, even in the simplest practical form in which
it can be administered.
2. The successful performance of the test increases with ascending B.-S. age and ascending intelligence classification. It is possible
that if the kinesthetic elements could be measured wholly independent of the intellectual?i. e. as elemental sensory experiences?there
would be no such increase or that it would be greatly reduced. But
the increase occurs even when the test is administered in its simplest
practical form. This being the case,
3. It seems unwise to complicate the test by making the directions difficult to follow?by converting the test into a difficult directions test: the test is already difficult to perform because of the small
INDIVIDUAL TESTS IN BINET-SIMON SCALE. 85
differences between the weights, and the ability to perform the test
already varies with mental age or intelligence.
4. Specifically the test is sufficiently difficult for Age IX, without
the addition of the difficult "directions test" feature. Indeed, we
are not convinced that it is not too difficult for this age there is as
yet no agreement on the percentage of passes which should constitute
a test normal for a given age.
5. The improvement in the test with increasing mental age or
intelligence?also shown by Petersen and Doll in their test on feebleminded and normal children?would seem to indicate that its use
as an intelligence test is legitimate. It happens, of course, that some
bright children of considerable maturity occasionally fail on the test,
while imbeciles may succeed.
6. In our results the boys surpassed the girls in all the B.-S. ages
and in all the intelligence categories except two. In our previous test
of epileptics the boys, again, surpassed the girls. These boys, however, averaged somewhat higher in intelligence than the girls. The
findings among other experimenters are somewhat discrepant.
7. Our earlier1 conclusion that epileptics "apparently suffer from
a blunting of the kinesthetic sensitivity" seems to be reinforced by the
data presented in this article, for the percentage of successes in the
test was less for the epileptics than for our non-epileptic group of the
same B.-S. age. Naturally our results for the epileptics are less reliable because the number examined was less.
1 As before, p. 54.
