Clinic Report. XIII
===================

Deborah was brought to the Clinic at the age of 13 years 1 month by two
social workers because of backwardness in school subjects, especially arithmetic.
Her appearance immediately suggested insufficient nourishment, which the
principal of her school gave as the cause of her backwardness He thought it
unwise to place her in a special class as he said that she was behind her grade in
only one subject.

In height Deborah is below the mean for a girl of 12 and her weight is only
the mean for a girl of 11 years; her head girth is the mean for a child of 8. She
is the oldest of five living children. Both the father and mother drank, and in
the few months before Deborah's birth, the man was out of work and the mother
did not have proper food. There was nothing unusual about her birth or childhood. For three months the mother gave her "Mother's Comfort." They then
refused to sell it at the store, saying that it contained a drug.

The mother said that she walked, talked, and cut her teeth as soon as the
other children, but she could not give the dates. She showed a photograph of a
plump little girl of about three years to prove that Deborah was a healthy child,
although she said she recognized now that she was different from the other
children, and she thought that her own drinking and lack of food during pregnancy, or the medicine which she gave to her might have caused it. The only
differences that she could describe were absent-mindedness and inability to learn
arithmetic. An old gentleman, a friend of the family, would teach her numbers
at night and in the morning she had forgotten them. She was proud of Deborah's
ability to read and she said that she read her Bible a great deal and loved to go
to Church and Sunday School. None of the children were allowed to play with
the neighborhood children as the mother felt that they were bad and rough.
A social worker reported that Deborah did a great deal of housework and
the stories which her mother told to illustrate her absent-mindedness corroborated this.
The child's present health is good although she tires easily. Dr Rhein
diagnosed the case as anemia and gave her a tonic. She has had only measles
and whooping cough, no accidents or operations, and she has not yet menstruated.
Her eyes are refracted and the eye defect has been pronounced serious.
Deborah began school at 7 years, 9 months. She was one term each in 1A
and IB; three terms in 2A when she changed schools twice; two terms in each
of the other grades to 4B to which she was promoted in February of this year.
The teacher in whose grade she was for a year, said that she was very good
in all her subjects but arithmetic. She could reproduce what she read if she
wrote it out. She was nervous and might not always do well if she had to tell the
story. She thought it too bad to keep her back because of the one study and
had promoted her. She said that many other children were as bad in arithmetic
as Deborah.

Her present teacher has had her only since February 1st. She was surprised to find that she could remember nothing of a geography lesson that she
had just been studying. The day before she had missed 7 of the 15 words in
spelling. In language and reading her last standing was 8 but in the other subjects she barely passed and in arithmetic she stood at 5. Deborah acknowledged
that she knew nothing about fractions which she was studying. In reproducing
the Legend of St. Valentine she failed, although she could answer some questions about it.
In writing she was the only child who misunderstood the teacher s order to
hold her pen-holder upside down, and the day before she had evidently made
the circles with the pen in that position when they were expected to make them
with the pen-point. There were only two others in the class whose writing lesson
showed as little understanding of the teacher's orders as Deborah s did.
The teacher had just come from a class of backward children and the children in 4B seemed very bright to her with the exception of Deborah who,
however, did not seem to her feebleminded. She thought that she was very
suggestible. The day before she had denied having anything in her mouth,
but when told to take what she was eating out of her mouth and put it into
the scrap basket, she immediately did so. She is usually obedient in school,
likes her teacher and the school, does not have difficulty in getting along with
other children and her teachers like her. A social worker who took her to a summer hotel several years ago, found her most adaptable.
Her home is in a poor neighborhood in a three story brick house out of
repair. Tfce mother is not a good housekeeper, acknowledges that her busband
has to do the baking for the week on Sunday and that she cannot cook well. She
usually has one thing for a meal, as potatoes or cornmeal mush, but the first
are so high now that she is not buying them. Deborah does not like cornmeal
and eats bread and molasses with tea, as she does not like milk. She is very fond
of ham when she can get it. A neighbor made some tomato soup which the
child enjoyed. The mother had never heard of putting milk into tomato soup.
She was willing to have someone teach her how to cook, and seemed pleased that
a teacher in a nearby settlement house would give her lessons.

The family owe nearly a hundred dollars. Most of the debt was contracted
when the man was drinking, but about $15 is due on furniture recently bought.
His earnings are from $15 to $18 a week and he tries to pay from $3 to $5 on his
loans. Three years ago he was persuaded to give up drinking and unite with
the Church. He goes regularly, belongs to a Bible Class and to the Men's Club
which meets Monday evenings. He is 46 years old, a machine repairer, has had
& high school education and might get better work, but his employer has been
very kind to them, loaning them money for coal in the middle of the week and
not taking the full amount out of the man's wages at the end of the week if he
could not spare it, so he does not want to leave him.

The woman was in the third grade at thirteen when she ran away from home
because her parents were strict with her. She got work in a factory. Although
her husband was drunk when she first met him, he was kind to her and gave her
good advice and she was lonely, so at seventeen years she was married. She had
him bring the beer home and drank with him until seven years ago. Just before
her first child was born, her husband was drinking harder than ever and not
working, so that she was hungry and followed him around to the saloons. Her
mother, to whom she had become reconciled, died and she felt the loss. This
eldest child was recently examined at the Polyclinic Hospital and her Binet age
was given as 1 year. The principal of the school says that she can learn nothing.
There are three other children, 8, 6 and 3 years, all bright looking and well
nourished. The two older ones are in school and are respectively in the 3B and
2A grades. The woman said that she had had about ten miscarriages. She is
now 34 years old and is not well. As she seemed very suggestible and uncertain
about dates, one could not be sure of the accuracy of her statements. She
could tell of no relatives who were diseased or mentally deficient.

Deborah's mental examination showed more than backwardness in arithmetic. In the formboard her median time was longer than that of a girl 6 years
old and the performance was qualitatively poor; she failed in the cylinder test
and the Healy puzzle A and had to be prompted in the design blocks. Her
memory span was 6 digits and her Binet age 8.7 years.

The diagnosis was not higher than middle grade imbecile, Barr classification, and she will eventually need institutional care.
In studying the cause of Deborah's mental condition, one's first impulse is
to attribute it to the alcoholic condition of both the father and mother, especially
as the sister is also feebleminded and born during the period when the mother was
drinking. After she gave up liquor, there were three children born who seem
to be normal.

Four other interesting alcholic cases have recently come to the attention of
the Clinic. They are as follows:

2. J. H., 7 years, 8 months old, tentatively diagnosed as middle grade
imbecile (Barr) has a father who drank just before he was born and his mother
said that she did not get enough to eat when she was pregnant. The father's
father died of alcoholism. Other significant facts are that the boy's paternal
grandmother, after being a nervous invalid for 8 years, died of specific paralysis;
that the father of the boy left school at 14 years, and his sister said he was
always bad.

3. M. M., 11 years, 4 months old, diagnosed as probably a middle grade
imbecile (Barr), has a mother who was so drunk when a visit was made at the
home to get information about the family, that she went to sleep while the
visitor was there. Fourteen beer bottles on the table would indicate that others
in the family drank as well as the mother, but no information could be obtained
about the family history.

4. M. D., 13 years, 8 months old, whose school record showed 5 years of
school retardation, has a mother who was drinking before Margaret was born
and is so constantly under the influence of liquor now that it is impossible to
persuade her to do anything for the good of the child. A significant fact in
Margaret's history is a positive Wasserman test.

5. J. M., 18 years old, brought to the Clinic because of his criminal tendencies, has a father who has been drinking for the past 14 years. At that time
the man was threatened with tuberculosis. Three brothers have died of the same
disease and one is now at Mt. Alto.

With these five cases as a text one might preach an excellent temperance
sermon, showing how alcohol injured the germplasm of the child, leaving its
mark upon the brain. But in each case, where the family history could be
obtained, there were other factors that have been assigned by psychologists as
causes of mental deficiency. In the first there was the mental condition of the
mother which might have made the case one of heredity, or the insufficient nourishment of the mother might have affected the germ plasm* or the mental condition
might have been inherited from the father, but so little is known of his history
that no statement can be made. There is simply the significance of the age
at which he left school.

The same may be said in the third case. In that it is not even known when
the mother began to drink. In the fourth case the presence of syphilis might be
as definitely a cause as alcoholism.

The last history shows the necessity of learning the age of the parents when
they began to drink, for the boy was four years old before the father used liquor,
* In the second case there was also given a history of insufficient nourishment of the mother.
so that alcoholic inheritance could not have caused his non-conformed behavior,
although both the father's alcoholism and the boy's behavior might have been
due to the same inherited tendency.

These cases would indicate very conclusively that, before alcohol can be
given as a cause of mental deficiency, proof must be offered that it is the only
factor in the case.
Anna B. Pratt, M.A,
Graduate Student.
XIV.
Judith was brought to the Clinic by the woman with whom she is now
living, at the suggestion of the Social Service Department of the University
Hospital, mental deficiency being suspected.

We have only partial knowledge of the family history, but we know that the
mother died six years ago of tuberculosis after which the father ceased to support
the family. Just why the home was broken up we do not know, but it is thought
that the father was alcoholic and had little interest in the children. He has,
however, again obtained control of an older sister who has reached the working
age, and he has given indication of wanting control of Judith as soon as she
can go to work. We are told that both this sister and an older brother appear
dull and failed to go beyond the fourth grade in school.

Judith is fifteen years and two months of age, but does not look more than
twelve. Her physical retardation is from two to three years and the physiological
retardation is as great. She is still in the preadolescent period. She has the
mobile features and far-away look so commonly found in cases of feeblemindedness. She has been under treatment for enuresis, from which her sister has
also suffered.

The pedagogical history is badly confused. There was probably some
school attendance before the sickness of the mother, but before she came to her
Present home in 1912 there is no evidence of any progress. During the next
three years she made good progress but was then sent to a Catholic Home because
of the illness of her benefactress. From that time until the present school year
she did not attend regularly. She was placed with a family about a year ago,
but ran away one rainy winter night and came to her present home, some twelve
blocks away. She gives as a reason for this that the other woman drank and
abused her, which may have been true, though the abuse seemed to be confined
to language. Since then she has been sent to a Catholic school, where her work
has been unsatisfactory. She wants to leave school and gives the usual excuse,
that she does not like her teacher. She is now in the fifth B grade.

Being of a pleasant disposition, Judith does not give a great deal of trouble
and gets along quite well with the other children at school and at home, there
being three younger girls in the home in which she now lives. She plays but
little, often standing around merely looking on when the others are at their
games, and even when she does take part, her actions are not normal. She plays
at such times very violently and breaks into harsh, uncontrollable laughter.
Little is asked of her in the nature of household duties and even these she cannot perform without repeated instruction and constant oversight. She takes very
little interest in her personal appearance, combing her hair only when told^to
and giving no attention to her clothing. What has given the most concern in
the home has been the periods of stubbornness of a depressed kind, which ari
from slight causes and last for hours, during which she is said to look like
arise a totally different child." The description of these may have been overdrawn,
as is not uncommonly done in the attempt to justify bringing a child to the
Clinic. They do not seem unlike the spells of stubbornness frequently found in
children of low mental status, ,but it would be well to watch for evidences of
insanity.

The mental examination of Judith gave us less than we might have desired.
The cylinder test, the design blocks, the Healy completion and similar tests
gave fair results, though none were above the normal for thirteen years. The
Binet tests (Stanford revision) gave a rating of ten years, eleven months, or an
intelligence quotient of .72, which is rather significant. She fatigued quickly,
showed a slow rate of movement, though with good control and coordination.
Several times when concentration was demanded of her, she stopped completely,
remained looking at the task with no response of any land despite continued
urging, then would suddenly break out with some childish response, as when
looking at a picture for some time she said, "George Washington is going to
leave her and she is crying," or again when she retraced her steps about the
entire field in the ball and field test after an interval of several minutes during
which she had not moved her pencil.

Upon a basis of the history, modified by the mental examination, a diagnosis
of high grade imbecile (Barr classification) was made. It is probable that under
pressure Judith will be able to do housework, with a certain amount of guidance,
but owing to an unfavorable disposition toward work, she may prove incapable
of supporting herself. We would not recommend her for institutional care because
of the fact that she would be displacing others who could not be cared for outside.
XV.
This case illustrates the abnormalities of conduct to be found in cases of
hydrocephaly.

Moses is a colored boy of eight years and eight months, who was brought to
the clinic by his mother and teacher because of his bad behavior and his inability
to make progress.

The parents are a particularly high grade of colored people, of excellent
habits and able to give the boy a good home and the proper kind of care.
This boy is the fourth child; the first and third died following injuries at
birth. All the births were instrumental. He had an injury to his head at that
time, the mark of which still remains in the form of a lump. He was born at
three weeks overtime.

Up to one year he was nursed, walked and talked at normal time and showed
then no abnormalities. From the age of one year up to five, he was under the
supervision of physicians because of stomach trouble, indigestion. The mother
gave close attention to his diet and in time this was overcome. His physical
history has been otherwise negative.

His pedagogical history has given more evidence. He was in the first grade
A class for two terms but has since been passed each time, and this fall he entered
the second grade B class. Last spring it was found necessary to send him to a
backward class, but after he had been there a week without the knowledge of his
mother, he was removed because she objected to keeping him where she considered
his associates to be very bad. A truant school is in the same building and the
children from the two groups intermingle. At present he is not making satisfactory progress at school. He works well at manual work, basket making,
etc., but does not study at all.

In the mental examination, Moses presents the type of results commonly
found among negroes. The formboard, cylinder test and design blocks are
handled very well, his performances being above the mean for his age. In the
Binet tests, he is found to rank at seven years, two months, with an intelligence
quotient of .83. His best performances are on such tests as the drawing of the
diamond, the ball and field, and patience. On the more abstract questions, he
completely fails, such as the definitions, similarities and making change without
coins. The mental examination may be said to show his intelligence to e
normal.

The abnormalities are to be found in his behavior. The mother has no complaint to make of him in the home, except that he is cruel to his younger sister.
He is honest, carrying the clothes for her and returning with the money, running
other errands promptly and correctly. She has followed him in order to discover
whether he does anything that he should not when sent on errands, and has
seen nothing. No trouble is experienced with him on the way to or from school,
but when once there he causes trouble for the teachers and disturbs the classes
by going anywhere he wishes without permission, kicking and pinching other
children, talking aloud when he should be studying, and doing numerous other
petty things. Yet these seem to be done in no spirit of meanness, for he is
surprised when reproved, and immediately breaks into tears. His own account
of some of these things seems to indicate that he is merely playing and has no
desire to hurt, but he wants to do something other than study, for he does not
like his books. So much of tliis has occurred that the teachers feel they
cannot bear his presence longer.

His bodily development is at least in the maximum group of the tenth year.
His head has a girth of over 55 cm., greater than the maximum for the sixteenth
year. His face is not as large proportionately as his skull, and the upper part
of the forehead protrudes slightly. The mouth hangs open.

The diagnosis of this case is hydrocephaly, coupled with an overdevelopment of the body. His acts are particularly objected to, because they are those
of a seven year old boy with the bodily force of an eleven year old. To this disproportion is due the seriousness of his playful acts. His general attitude, his
restlessness under restraint and his lack of inhibition are due to the hydrocephalic
condition.

The recommendation was made that Moses be placed in a special class, where
he could have the supervision that is needed and where his actions are less likely
to cause disturbance than in a crowded school room. There he may be given
work of a kind to occupy his mind and he will gain more than he would do in the
ordinary class room. As the mother objects to placing him in the particular
backward class in her district, it may be necessary for them to move to a part of
the city where a satisfactory school can be found.
Franklin C. Paschal, M.A.
Harrison Fellow in Psychology.
