Clinic Reports VII
====================

When Daniel was first brought to the Psychological Clinic at the University
of Pennsylvania in November, 1915, he was six years and eleven months old.
At that time he was in a Montessori school, and was referred by his teacher to
the Clinic for a mental examination because of his failure to make normal
progress. He was a well set up boy, physically attractive, with a pleasing
manner. His conversation was good for a child not quite seven.
Daniel's mother brought him to the Clinic and gave the following history:
The boy's birth was normal, but at that time, and in fact all during her pregnancy, his mother was nervous and fretful, and much disturbed mentally.
Her nervous condition was due to the fact that her husband was drinking
heavily and mistreating her. At the time of this examination she had obtained a
complete divorce. There was nothing significant in the boy's medical history.
There had been two children before Daniel, the first a premature birth at six
months, the second, a child born at full term, who died shortly after birth.
Daniel's mother reported that he very easily became excited. He was
sent for medical and physical examinations to the University Hospital, with a
recommendation to investigate the possibility of epilepsy. The medical examination revealed nothing positive concerning epilepsy, but Daniel's case was
pronounced a "hard one," and the examining physician thought the boy a
eunuch.
Daniel's social competency and proficiency were not normal for a boy of
seven years. Although he cared for himself at the toilet he was unable to dress
himself. He did not enter into play normally with other children. He allowed
them to impose upon him?a privilege not granted to others by wide-awake boys
of seven. ,
During the mental examination Daniel appeared very nervous. He failed
completely on the first trial of the Witmer form board. His performance with
the test revealed bad distributive and analytic attention. The significance
of his failure is emphasized when it is known that some two year old children
are capable of performing the test without instruction. After his failure the
blocks were returned to their proper recesses and he was given another chance.
He then completed the task twice but his shortest time was 4 m. 45 a. Dr.
Young found the longest time made by a four year old child was 60 s.
Daniel's understanding was slow and his persistent attention very bad.
This was especially well brought out with the peg board. He did not know
the different color names so was told to match the colored pegs, putting in pegs
like a sample. For a while he would work attentively, but his attention soon
wandered and he would peg aimlessly paying no attention to color. He did
not understand the expression "just like that." Daniel displayed poor coordination and muscular control, and his observation was below normal for seven
year old children. When tapping blocks which the examiner had previously
tapped, he would tap an indefinite number of times and continue until stopped.
He knew some of the alphabet names but could not designate the letters.
At times he seemed to know A, B and C, but the examiner was not convinced
that he was sure of them. His memory span was only four digits. Children
of five frequently give six digits. His Binet age was only 3.5 years?showing
(31)
32 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
a retardation of 3.5 years. This would indicate marked deficiency, especially
when coupled with poor results in other tests.
The boy was returned for re-examination in October, 1916. There was
no apparent improvement in his mentality. He behaved in a listless, inactive
way except when nervously excited. His attention at this time was exceedingly
poor, as were also his retentiveness and intelligence.
The diagnosis returned was feeblemindedness not higher than low-grade
imbecility (Barr classification).
Natalie A. Bassett, A.M.
VIII.
Saul was brought by his aunt to the Clinic in February because he was
backward in school. He was an average sized boy of 13, with normal appearance
except that his eyes were crossed. The chief interest in the case lies in the
clearness with which the Witmer Cylinders revealed the deficiency of the boy
In replacing the Cylinders he made a great many errors. The first and
second trials were complete failures. In the beginning he placed a large block
in a wrong hole. This left him with the next largest block to place. He worked
with this for some time and then gave it up and worked with the others. There
was apparently no relation between the size of the block and the size of the hole
into which he would try to place it. At the end of 5 minutes he had placed only
four blocks correctly. In the second trial he began again with the large blocks
and for the moment it seemed as though he had some idea of the test. It soon
became evident that this was an accidental development. In fact he had learned
nothing from the correction of the blocks at the end of the first trial. For the
third trial he was told to place the blocks so that they were smooth on top.
With this idea in mind he began to place the blocks in the proper openings. In
each case he selected the largest block and put it into one opening after another
until it was even with the top. It was not until he had placed nine blocks that
he left one wrongly placed. In this trial he succeeded in getting all the blocks
correct in 4 min. 26 sec. In a fourth trial he became very much interested, and
worked rapidly and systematically; time 1 min. 36 sec. It is evident that the
test was just beyond his ability, and that he could just learn how to do it.
The formboard was easy for him though he worked slowly and without
much show of interest. He had worked with the design blocks before so that
his good record with them had little meaning. The Healy Construction tests
were also too difficult for him and he had to be shown how to do them several
times before he was successful. His memory span was four digits. In school
subjects he was not really able to do first grade work.
His home life seems to be unsatisfactory. His mother looked very dull and
took little interest in the preceedings. His aunt was the one to answer questions.
He gets along poorly with other children, and is not able to dress himself. His
babyhood shows some retardation. The first tooth came at 11 months, he
walked at 13 months, and talked at 19 months.
The family history shows tuberculosis on both the mother's and father's
side. His father's mother and father and the latter's father died of tuberculosis.
The insufficiency of his performances of tests and the non-conformity of
his behavior coupled with lack of attention indicate a diagnosis of low grade
imbecile. Such a diagnosis is borne out by the individual and family history.
As the family is dependent, the recommendation was for institutional care.
Donald M. Marvin, Graduate Student.
CLINIC REPORTS. 33
IX.
Adam, 5 years, 2 months old, was brought to the Psychological Clinic by
his mother at the instigation of an undergraduate student in Psychology, because
he does not talk. His physical development is retarded nearly a year; his height,
weight and head girth are all below the minimum for a child of five years. His
eyes were recently fitted with glasses to counteract strabismus, but with the
glasses he does not see well enough to avoid objects in his path. Test materials
were held close to the face for observation. Only one word, "home," was used
while he was at the Clinic, but grunts separately vocalized expressed his emotions.
The mental examination showed that Adam is retarded about two years.
His work with the formboard and cylinders indicated poor observation, persistency of attention and analytic attention, but this was due, partially at least,
to his eye defects. He recognized colors and matched them when one block was
used as a model for his selection, but he was unable to choose either the correct
colors (one or two) or the correct number of blocks when more than one was
shown. He held up one finger when the experimenter did so, but did not hold
up two when he saw two. He could imitate by touching four blocks in succession
but could not skip from the first to the third, and then to the fourth. It seems
probable that his memory span is short and his concentration of attention poor.
The diagnosis was two years of retardation, due to physical causes. It
was recommended that he be taken to the Nervous Dispensary to determine
whether there was glandular insufficiency to account for the retardation, or
whether the poor sight and absence of speech were connected with a brain lesion
in the visual and voco-motor centers. The physical examination was not made,
but a Wassermann test was suggested.
Gladys G. Ide,
Graduate Student.
