A Pseudo-Talent for Words? The Teacher's Report to Dr. Witmer
===============================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1917, by Lightnor Wltmer, Editor.
Vol. XI, No. 1
March 15, 1917
ORTHOGENIC CASES.1
XI. 
By Sarah Warfield Parker, M.A.
Philadelphia, Pa.
"In my harem, in my harem!
There's Rosie, Posie, Josie."
I stopped on the stairs and listened to a high, childish voice beating
out the measures with exaggerated accent.
"And there never was a minute
King Solomon wasn't in it."
I turned on the landing and saw a dark, undersized little fellow
shuffling, circling about the room with the cr^de rhythmic jerk of
knee and hand which enlivens our vaudeville stage.
"Wise for breakfast, wise for dinner,
And wise for supper time;
Lots of fancy dances,
And it doesn't cost a dime."
He stopped with a laugh of sheer delight in the rhyme of time and
dime.
'I looked at Gordon. If I had not known that on his next
birthday he would be ten, I should have judged him no more than
1 The following reports of Cases treated by the Orthogenic Method, have appeared:
I. A Case of Chronic Bad Spelling. Lightner Witmer. Vol. 1, p. 53.
II. The Fifteen Months' Training of a Feebleminded Child. Lightner Witmer. Vol. 1,
p. 69.
III. Retardation through Neglect in Children of the Rich. Lightner Witmer. Vol. 1,
p. 157.
IV. The Treatment and Cure of a Case of Mental and Moral Deficiency. Lightner Witmer.
Vol. 2, p. 153.
V. The Restoration of Children of the Slums. Lightner Witmer. Vol. 3, p. 266.
VI. The Irrepressible Ego. Lightner Witmer. Vol. 4, p. 193.
VII. Children with Mental Defects Distinguished from Mentally Defective Children.
Lightner Witmer. Vol. 7, p. 173.
VIII. The Outlook for James. Sarah Warfield Parker. Vol. 10, p. 71.
IX. Tom the Enigma. Sarah Warfield Parker. Vol. 10, p. 209.
X. A Fettered Mind. Lightner Witmer. Vol. 10, p. 241.
(1)
2 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
eight. He was frail and undersized, with legs comparatively short,
and long trunk, head, and arms. An unusually heavy mass of
coarse, waving brown hair grew down partially to conceal a fore-
head so abnormally low as to seem no forehead at all. Even then,
with his body all tense, rhythmic movement, I could see how ugly
his face was, with its small broad nose and thick lips, partly opened.
I could see, too, the somewhat underdeveloped ear set far back
and, in the shuffling movement, caught a suggestion of the flat,
square foot.
Suddenly, he saw me and came forward with a courtly bow and
cordially proferred hand that would do credit to the most punctilious
of the old time southern gentlemen. I felt his hand in mine?
coarse, inert, stubby, with short, blunt fingers, For the moment,
he looked almost attractive with his brown eyes sparkling and his
cheeks flushed with the animation of the courteous host. "Have
you ever been to Savannah?" he asked, bending toward me
graciously.
But the welcome over, the light died out of his face, and I saw,
sitting in the corner, alone, a different Gordon. I saw the pallid,
yellow skin of a face that was old, weary beyond any weariness I
had ever seen, a face marked with tired, quivering lines, and eye-
lids that flickered ceaselessly. Yet again, after supper, he was
all animation. "Have you ever heard 'Cavalliera Rusticana' sung
by Enrico Caruso?" he asked.
As the record was played, he stood directly in front of the
graphophone, marking time with head, arms, in fact with rhythmic
movement of his whole body. He came back to me, humming, his
face a bit perplexed. "What is it I am singing?"
"The Toreador," I answered.
His face lighted with recognition. "I heard that when I saw
the play called Carmen at the theater. Carmen was a lady. This
is what she sang," and he hummed again, a few measures from one
of Carmen's solos.
Gordon's abilities were foremost this first evening?his sense of
rhythm, and his audito-motor memory for words and tunes. Only
his physical characteristics led one to suspect the disabilities which
these concealed.
In reality, Gordon, this finished young gentleman of ten with
the society manner and the excellent memory, stood very near the
zero point in the scale of social efficiency, and as sixteen months of
subsequent observation have proved, he is incapable of being trained
to even a passable level of such efficiency. Underneath his excessive
excitability to a certain few stimuli which interest him, lies an
A PSEUDO-TALENT FOR WORDS 3
organism of low vitality and sluggish response to material environ-
ment. With the exception of a few charged areas energized for
immediate and violent response, his mind is in a state of unperceiv-
ing, irresponsive detachment from surroundings.
Not inability to do a thing per se, but inability to do it efficiently,
is his marked defect in practical performances. lie learned to dress
himself but emerges in such a rumpled state that someone must
straighten everything he has on. He learned to fold a napkin, to
lace a shoe, to tie a bow, but unless coerced, does them wretchedly.
He is incapable of putting anything straight, for he lays it down
dreamily, scarcely looking. He will always dream across a city
street, oblivious of traffic, until he is under the horses' very feet.
He will lose himself in the city, for he can wander on for an hour with
no consciousness that he has lost his companion. He continually
bumps into people, for he never looks where he is walking, and
despite his courtesy, does not awake to the situation quickly enough
to apologize. He loses everything he carries, even candy for which
he has an inordinate passion. He drops everything, spills every-
thing, tumbles everything he touches. If his hat blows off, he does
not know enough to pick it up. He never pays enough attention
to a game to remember his turn or to keep consistently in view the
aim of the contest. One season, Gordon was actually energetic
enough to coast in the snow, but at the foot of the hill he remained
lying on his stomach flat on his sled. Some one told him to get
up. "Why?" he asked vaguely.
Though his coordination has improved so that it is possible for
him to fill in neatly the outlines from the Montessori insets, he does
not develop sufficiently sustained attention to boundary and to
precision of line to impel him to do the possible. Though he has
learned to write in good form, and because of his verbal memory
and facile flow of ideas, composes fluently, his penmanship is care-
less and smudgy unless he is constantly stimulated. Though by
persistent illustration, the concepts which at first were totally lack-
ing, of middle, upper, lower, right, left, under, on top of, turn over,
flat, straight, etc., have been formed in Gordon's mind, his habitual
inattention to position makes him unable to use these concepts
without hesitation and indecision.
This inability to react effectively to the animate and inanimate
objects about him cannot be corrected. Persistent drill can, in
many instances, give him the means to such reaction but in him the
will to react is lacking. Perseverant attention to the means as
applied to the end cannot be developed in him. Gordon's responses
are spontaneous only to those stimuli which, in his physical organiza-
4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
tion, are immediately interesting to him. These immediate interests
are reading, music, conversation, words, watches, wasps, twisting,
and soldiers. He cares nothing for other children, in fact, always
resents their interference, and is, indeed, already a leisurely old
gentleman, enjoying only the society of adults. Obviously, if to
this incapacity to look out for himself, you add Gordon's total
deficiency in the concept of numbers, you have an individual who
drops away down the line of imbecility?a total incompetent in the
practical affairs of society. Yet superimposed on this low level of
daily performance is an apparent gift of language that makes us
pause to question:, given a valet, a financial adviser, and a private
secretary, can this boy develop intellectually into an individual
who approximates the normal?
One morning at the breakfast table he asked pleasantly, "Did
you know that George Bernard Shaw had written a new play?
'Androcles and the Lion'?"
"Yes," he added, "I read it in Everybody's magazine."
By the time he has finished a brief and accurate outline of the
plot?remembered, by the way, from the story of Androcles and the
Lion read in his reader eight months ago?the casual observer may
be tempted to believe that this precocious child can indeed realize
his ambition to become "a college professor who teaches psychology
and geology and writes plays."
For an understanding of the real insufficiencies of the child it
is necessary to differentiate between a gift of words and a gift of
language. We shall study Gordon, first, to determine whether or
not he possesses those elements which constitute a gift of words?
sensitivity to verbal impressions and retentivity of verbal images.
If we find that he possesses such a faculty, we shall attempt further
to discover whether he possesses the associated mental qualities
which are required to translate such a gift of words into a gift of
language, that is, into a usable tool of expression.
Is Gordon sensitive to audito-motor impressions? He learns
nonsense jingles, college yells, and rhymes almost on a single hearing.
After he 'had heard another child repeat twice the eight lines of
Stevenson's "Bed in Summer" he knew them perfectly. After six
or seven readings of the story of King Alfred and the Cakes in Bald-
win's "Fifty Famous Stories," he reproduced it almost verbatim.
The original story contained five hundred fifteen words: He repro-
duced it in two hundred fifty-seven words, two hundred thirty-four
of which (45 per cent) were from the book. Similarly, after reading
twice King Canute by the Seashore, four hundred nine words, he
reproduced verbatim one hundred ninety-seven words (45 per cent);
A PSEUDO-TALENT FOR WORDS 5
and of How the Bean Got Its Black Mark, three hundred forty-
seven words, he recalled two hundred eighty-seven words, (82 per
cent). Instances of this immediate sensitivity to words could be
multiplied ad infinitum. I shall add only a transcript of his account
of a visit in the city to show how swift he is to catch the words and
sounds in his environment.
"I'm glad I'm not at the hotel. I like the country. It's so
hot in at the hotel, and babies wakes us up and shades rattle. Our
room was on the fifth floor, number 502. Do you know who manages
the hotel now? Charles Blank. They have a fine dining room.
Monday we had supper,?not dinner. Then we stayed down and
listened to the music. They played something I knew, Tannhauser.
We stayed down until eight o'clock. The next morning I read
to mother from a 'Little Boy Blue' book. I am sending the book
to a little boy named Morgan. I took a bath too, all myself, a nice
hot one. We had lunch at a tea room with Auntie. We went to the
moving pictures?the Edison you know. It is on Market Street.
You know those 'any rags, any bones, any bottles' men? There
was one of them and a boy, and the boy stole a necklace and the
rag-picker man said, 'Did you steal that necklace?' Wednesday we
went shopping in the morning. I went to the moving pictures with
Auntie. We had dinner at the hotel and I stayed down and listened
to the music until half past seven. I went to bed, and after I was
asleep, mother came back and I had been asleep all by myself while
they had ginger ale and things. I could not stay asleep in the morn-
ing because a baby woke us up crying."
In addition to sensitivity to verbal impressions has Gordon
adequate retentivity of the images formed? The poetry he has
learned he remembers over an interval of twelve months, recalling
the lines with very little prompting. After a lapse of three months
he reproduced the story of King Alfred, already mentioned, in two
hundred eight words, one hundred seventy-four (33 per cent) of which
were a direct overhang from the original. Nine months after the
first reading he retold it in one hundred eleven words, sixty-seven
of which (13 per cent) are to be found in the printed story. Gordon
added as he finished, "I saw it in the book, 'Fifty Famous Stories'
by James Baldwin." After two months he recalled 25 per cent
of King Canute, and 61 per cent of How the Bean Got Its Black
Mark,?approximately a drop of 20 per cent of recall in two months.
A month after Howard Pyle's "The Companions of King Arthur"
had been read to him, Gordon showed a distinct and accurate recall
of names.
"King Arthur was a king, and he ruled in the southern part of
C THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Britain. He had knights. Their names were Sir Galahad, Sir
Geraint, Sir Pelleas, Sir Percival, Sir Tristram, and Sir Lancelot of
the Lake, and Sir Gawain. He wore a crown of gold, jewels,
emeralds, and opal stones, and he had a fair lady named Queen Guine-
vere. Her father was King Leodogrance of Cameliard. He had a
court, ladies, damsels, and lords. He had a wonderful sword,
Excalibur. It had jewels, rubies, and opal stones, and emeralds,
and when King Arthur went out to fight it would go through any
one. He went with another knight through the woods and at last
he came to a wonderful and beautiful place?a magic enchantment
place, and he saw a hand coming out of the water and he rode in an
enchanted boat that went very fast, and after he got the sword
Excalibur the hand went under the water. King Arthur had a
Round Table. It was like a ring, but there was one chair that no
one could sit in?Siege Perilous. There was fifty chairs for fifty
knights. He had one for King Pellinore and Sir Pelleas and Sir
Launcelot and Sir Gawain and Sir Bann of Benwick and Sir Percival
and Sir Galahad and Sir Geraint. Merlin was an enchanter. He
was a nice enchanter and he made a ring for King Arthur, that
Round Table, for his marriage. There was another queen, Queen
Morgan le Fay, sister of King Arthur. A wicked enchantress,
Vivian, bewitched Merlin. Sir Launcelot loved Queen Guinevere.
Oh, yes, and
" Elaine the fair, Elaine the lovable,
Elaine the lily maid of Astolat,
High in her chamber up a tower to the East
Guarded the sacred shield of Launcelot."
The basis of this retention is not only the acute sensitivity to
the impression, but the mental repetitions of the verbal image.
Gordon loves the sounds and says them over and over to himself
for sheer pleasure in words. When he is listening to prose or poetry,
he often stops the reader, "Please read that over again. Do you
mind? It is such a nice sound."
There is certainly every indication that Gordon receives and
retains verbal impressions. Of course, it would be impossible to
keep a record of even a hundredth part of the verbal images con-
spicuous in a single day's observations. It is significant, however,
that in a great mass of material collected in sixteen months' study of
Gordon, including diaries, letters, records of conversations, recollec-
tions, oral and written reproductions of stories, etc., I have, exclusive
of twenty-six stories reproduced verbatim almost in toto, a record of
one thousand forty-four distinct verbal images and fifty-four repeated
A PSEUDO-TALENT FOR WORDS 7
fragments of conversation. This enumeration of verbal images
does not include the primary images which are a part of the mechan-
ism initiating speech, the possession of which Gordon's fluent con-
versation justifies us in assuming. They are such phrases as Gordon
treasures for pure pleasure in sound, as "King Leodogrance of
Cameliard," "Geraldine Farrar," "the eminent psychologist," etc.
They are the verbal high lights which signal the conspicuous develop-
ment of the language center. It can, therefore, be strongly sub-
stantiated on inference from behavior, that Gordon's mechanism
for the reception and retention of verbal impressions is particularly
active, in fact, that he has a definite gift of words. Until we look at
the mental qualities which translate this verbal faculty into the
faculty of expression, we may be tempted to believe that Gordon's
gift of language not merely approximates but exceeds the normal.
To own a kiln full of bricks does not make one a mason.
Gordon has a speech center stored with thousands of verbal images,
a store that increases daily. What are the qualities requisite for the
use of these words in expression as the units of language? There
seem to be three most important qualities; (1) a so-called memory
span adequate to link a series of images in sequence; (2) a flexibility
of association which will bring them into significant inter-relation;
(3) a consciousness of meaning that converts these verbal images
into symbols of ideas and concrete images.
Our first concern is with the adequacy of Gordon's memory
span,?the number of images that he can link together in sequence.
His span for numbers is barely five; for disconnected monosyllables,
four; for colors named, three; for colors seen, scarcely three; for
pictures of familiar objects exposed sixty seconds with no inhibition
of voco-motor aid in memorizing, five; for syllables in a sentence,
ten?not a good memory span for a child of ten years. This limited
span showed itself in Gordon's reproduction of stories. After two
readings of a two page story, King Canute for instance, he could
recall the substance of the story in full. After four readings of
King John and the Abbott, a story of double the length, he repeated
it glibly up to a certain point, a little more than half way through,
then remembered not another syllable or another idea. Gordon's
reproductive memory is excessively active up to a certain point,
then the strain snaps the thread. He receives only a limited number
of impressions in sequence.
A still greater limitation comes to light when we pass over the
one, two, three sequence to a radial inter-relation of ideas. The
first signal of the inflexibility of Gordon's associations is seen in the
extreme difficulty he has in reversing an association. An attempt
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to teach him geography met in many ways with considerable success,
but his knowledge is limited to a rigid sequence. He can learn?
"Mexico is a republic?the United States is a republic." If you ask
him then, "What republics do you know?" he either cannot answer
or brings out the reply with visible signals of extreme mental dis-
turbance. To the question, "What rivers do you know that flow
into the Mississippi? " his answer is prompt. At the next question,
"Into what does the Ohio River flow?" he shakes his head with an
expression of abject misery. Moreover, he cannot bring together
two sequences which have a single term in common.
Q. Into what does the Mississippi River flow?
A. Gulf of Mexico.
Q. Into what does the Rio Grande River flow?
A. Gulf of Mexico.
Q. What two rivers do you know that flow into the Gulf of
Mexico?
The reply is only a flushing face, twisting hands, and a miserable
shake of the head. He cannot hold a group of ideas in his mind
under a single category. He knows, for instance, that Georgia
is in the United States, New York is in the United States, Penn-
sylvania is in the United States, etc., but he seems wholly lacking
in the conception of them all as having a common quality of state-
hood, all parts of one country. Gordon is always interested in the
first four or five chapters of a book, and can tell the main points
intelligently, but as the threads of the story are woven into some
complexity of plot his interest flags, and one finds that he no longer
shows any comprehension of the progress of the story. It seems,
therefore, that Gordon has a further handicap in defective asso-
ciability of words and ideas.
Consciousness of meaning brings us into a more vague psychic
field where whatever data we have can only be suggestive. It is
to be expected that such a surplus of verbal images retained as them-
selves a pleasurable element in mental content apart from any use in
expression, would usurp in some measure the place of ideas and
concrete images. There is evidence that this is the case. Gordon's
letters and diaries are often composed of an extended catalogue of
flowers or animals, of a large number of which I am reasonably sure
he has no visual image. One day he was talking about a baby.
He began with a definite auditory image of his actual experience,
but gradually drifted into familiar fairy tale phrases.
"It cried all the time?'e-aa-h.' It was the cunningest of all
the children, and the baby grew more and more beautiful than ever,
?more and more beautiful every day."
A PSEUDO-TALENT FOR WORDS 9
Gordon can tell time quickly and accurately, but it is a purely
mechanical acquirement. A given position of the hands on the
face pulls a string which jerks out, "Ten after five." When some-
one says, "Ten minutes after five" Gordon is mazed. "What does
ten minutes after five mean?" he asks.
He has no association with the intermediate marks other than
five, ten, fifteen, etc. Nine minutes after is no more closely con-
nected with ten minutes than with fifty minutes after.
The compelling interest of verbal stimuli does, indeed, withdraw
Gordon's attention from concrete stimuli. If he is shown a pic-
ture, his attention flies instantly to the words of the title and the
picture makes practically no impression. I showed'Gordon a series
of twelve simple colored illustrations in Madge A. Bingham's
"Mother Goose Village." I concealed the title, allowed him to
study the picture silently for one minute, removed the picture and
asked him to tell what he had seen. The sum of his recollections
was about 50 per cent below the reactions of a low grade imbecile
whom I had tested some few months before, a child of considerably
less apparent intelligence but with a greater interest in visual impres-
sions. Gordon remembered persons and positions fairly well, but
noticed few details, and in his effort to remember color usually
named the wrong color. In the mass of material in which the one
thousand forty-four verbal images were found, only forty-six concrete
visual images appeared, fourteen of which are probably verbal and
only fifteen of which are distinctly vivid visual memories. Ten of
these fifteen are visual images of movement?an interesting point
in connection with the indications from the study of the girl men-
tioned above, that in her case also movement is the most coercive
stimulus to visual perception. On the other hand, fifty vivid con-
crete auditory images are to be found in the material collected and
the majority of the fifty-four repetitions of conversations were
accompanied by imitation of voice. Music, explosions, cries, bells,
and voices were the predominant stimuli recalled. He described as
" Zzzzzzzzzz" the sound made by an electric vibrator, an aeroplane,
and a machine which he had heard. He spoke of wind as making
a "sound like singing." He talked one day about a typewriter,?
"There were keys, and you pressed them, and they went tick?tick,
and then ding-ding."
It would seem that Gordon's sensitivity to verbal stimuli dis-
tracts his attention from all concrete stimuli except such as are
strong enough to compel attention?visual stimuli of movement, and
sounds which are immediately exciting to the over-charged auditory
area.
10 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
There is further ground to believe that the paucity of visual
imagery is conditioned by this withdrawal of attention from visual
stimuli rather than to defect in the visual receptive area. Provided
his attention is properly directed, Gordon readily forms visual
images. He is interested in faces, and recognizes and names
instantly even after a lapse, perhaps of years, a person he has seen
only once or twice. Color design blocks and color cubes were intro-
duced into the school exercises and as of use in developing his defec-
tive sense of vision and as material on which he might exercise
whatever capacity for visual imagery he possessed. In June, 1914,
Gordon watched me take two dominoes and lay them at right
angles. With the two dominoes lying directly before him to copy,
he could not place two others like them. At the end of August,
1914, when I first gave Gordon the design blocks, I made a square
of four red blocks and gave him four others to work with. He
looked at the square, piled four red blocks one on the other in a
tower, shook' his head, knocked them down and strung them out
in a row, and finally ended in tears. In March, 1915, Gordon was
able to copy rather difficult designs requiring thirty-six blocks.
Even more apropos to our inquiry was his acquired ability at that
time to reproduce from his own image, after a sixty second exposure
of the stimulus, any arrangement within a square of four color
blocks. He was able to reproduce from a visual image such rela-
tively complicated designs involving the two-color faces of the
blocks as the pinwheel and the chevron.
An interesting point bearing on the question of memory or
image span is the observation that he was never once able to repro-
duce a group of six color blocks. With his attention directed
definitely to concrete visual impressions Gordon was able to form
simple visual images. This training did not seem, however, to
develop in him any more spontaneous response to concrete visual
impressions. The almost exclusive fixing of his attention on words
and sounds seems to obscure other impressions, and therefore exclude
largely images of other stimuli.
In many instances words "do not know their place" in Gordon's
mind. They establish a tyranny where there should be a service
of ideas. There are other instances of behavior where there is
some little evidence of consciousness of meaning. The unerring
instinct with which Gordon uses a word in its proper context would
lead us to suspect, though it does not prove, some dim compre-
hension of its meaning. There are daily bits of conversation which
startle one with the apparent intelligence with which the child uses
words picked up here and there.
A PSEUDO-TALENT FOR WORDS 11
" I am working industriously, am I not? This is very hard, but
I will demonstrate to you that I can do it."
"I did not like to stay in bed. It was so tedious."
"Heroes are mighty and strong."
"When I was holding the pencil it broke easily because it is
brittle."
Then again, he misses his shot,?"We saw a whole cattle of
cows."
His facility in finding synonyms also stands on this borderline
of evidence. In reading I stop him frequently to ask the meaning
of a word. His answer is always quick and usually accurate.
Dwelt?"lived"
sable?"black"
crimson?"red"
scarlet?"very bright red"
gaze?"look"
curly shepherd lad?"a boy with curly hair, isn't it?"
damsel?"a young girl"
barge?"a boat"
bade?"told him to do it"
Beyond these there are further evidences, I believe, of positive
consciousness of meaning. In the Binet Tests, according to which,
by the way, Gordon's mental age would be reckoned as eight years
on an uneven distribution of credits (five years plus four six-year
tests, plus four seven-year tests, plus four eight-year tests, plus
four nine-year tests, plus one fifteen-year test), Gordon defined a
fork as "something you get things with and put them in your
mouth"; a table is "made of wood and it has five feet, and when
you sit at the table to do puzzles you have to rest your hand on it."
He compared the butterfly with the fly,?"A butterfly has wings.
And does a fly have wings? Yes. It hasn't a head like a fly. The
butterfly isn't so large as a fly?I mean it is larger. His wings are
yellow?the butterfly's are?but the fly's wings isn't."
One day he was asked to write a composition of what he knew
about the earth. "The Earth is round like a ball. We live on the
Earth. We can see the sun shineing up in the sky. We can see the
moon at night. We can say our prars to God at Night. We get up
in the morning and dress ourselfs. We see the people all around
us. We see the flowers growing on the bushes. We can see the
trees blowing from the wind. We can feel the wind blowing hard.
It makes us cold. We can see the horses stamping their feet on the
ground."
In this I think clearly Gordon is expressing ideas and not merely
12 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
using words. The way in which he handles a composition on the
Lady of Shalott shows too how he can in a measure throw off the
tyranny of words even when the ideas have been suggested by
verbal stimulus.
The Lady of Shalott.
"She was a young lady that lived in a castle. She had a spin-
ning wheel and she had a magic web with colors gay?bright red
and bright pink, and bright green, and bright purple. She has
heard a vose say a curse is upon her, if she stay to look down to
meny-towered Camelot. She has a mirrier before her all the day in
the mirrier she sees the road going down to meny-towered Camelot.
She sees the knights on horseback and they come two by two. The
nicest knight in all the land is Sir Launcelot, and the lady of Shalott
looked at him on the road that leads to meny-towered Camelot.
She got in a boat and sailed away in the river and while she was
floating she sang, and she sailed and sailed, and she died, and all the
knights of King Arthur's court crowded around the Lady of Shalott,
and one of the knights was Sir Launcelot, and he said she has a
beautiful face."
One can scarcely deny that in Gordon's mind concrete impres-
sions and consciousness of meaning are often obscured by the over
balance of verbal images. Neither can one deny that Gordon has
some mental content other than verbal images, and has also some
ability to put words in their proper position as symbols for expression
of that content.
We are now in a position to summarize Gordon's status in rela-
tion to the faculty of language. He has to his credit a conspicuous
gift of words, a certain comprehension of their meaning as symbols
of ideas or images, and a certain ability to use them as such symbols,
but the scope of these abilities is rigidly limited by his defects.
A short receptive span of impressions reduces to the briefest series
the number of ideas, images, or words, which in his mind are
registered in sequence. The rigid inflexibility of association tracts
also seriously limits his ability to manipulate single ideas or simple
sequences which are registered. An over-attention to words and
sounds further subtracts from his store of concrete impressions and
his attention to the significance of the symbols he uses.
Gordon's language faculty, which seems so highly developed, is
on the contrary seriously defective. With all its limitation it is,
however, a positive quality?his one gift. On it must be based his
intellectual development. Such development, which on a straight
line may progress far, will be extremely simple and will be m irked
A PSEUDO-TALENT FOR WORDS 13
by long stretches where glib verbal repetition masquerades as knowl-
edge. There are two types of behavior in Gordon which distinctly
influence his progress on this straight line toward culture. In the
first place we have to consider a series of emotions and reactions
which are commonly called hysterical. His sensitive organization
is in a continual state of vibration. Such a high strung physical
organism vibrates to every stimulus, and his mental state is quite as
susceptible to the impetus of suggestion.
Gordon trembles and cowers under the acute pain of the sensa-
tion a loud noise stimulates in his over-senstive auditory processes.
He suffers "when shades rattle and babies cries to wake us up."
He thrills to the sound of music or melodious words. He quivers
with fear when another child raises his hand, even in pretense of
striking him.
An idea has quite as much power to upset his mental and physi-
cal equilibrium. He eats wretchedly at table, stuffing his mouth
in apparent inability to swallow. A reprimand only increases the
difficulty. Gordon then comes to table with a tense, nervous resolve,
"I mustn't fuss with my food." The idea is so in the forefront of
his consciousness that he does fuss and the idea of the consequences
of fussing so fill him with fear that he is reduced to a state of gulping,
quivering tearfulness. I watched him writing one day. He had
been in the habit of making a superfluous loop on the last back
stroke of the s. He was muttering to himself determinedly, "I
mustn't make a loop," but every s emerged with the forbidden loop.
The next day I said quietly, "Remember to come back on the same
line in your s," and lo, the trouble was over.
Suggestibility is the keynote to Gordon reactions. If he hears
a very amusing story read in a somewhat mournful tone of voice,
he will sit in a luxury of grief, the tears rolling down his flushed,
quivering face. A simple "Yes" to his question, "Is it sad?" is
sufficient to make any piece of music bring him to the same emo-
tional state. Another child is always sure of company in his tears,
for Gordon weeps in sympathy with everyone.
Except for his purely physical apprehension of sound and his
fear of losing his balance, which has a physical basis in his ill-balanced
body, I think Gordon's fears are all subject to suggestion. He was
at first afraid of snakes, frogs, and toads. When he saw other
children liking them, and handling them, his reaction changed. He
wanted to touch them; to bring them home. One day in the spring
he found a wasp struggling in a can of water. He rescued the wasp,
spread it on the hedge in the sunshine, and hung over it for a full
half hour until, to his joy, it took wing. This was his first experience
14 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
with wasps. Thereafter, all bees, wasps, and hornets were his special
delight. He had no thought of their sting, and handled them freely.
"My friend the wasp," he called each one gaily, and strangely
enough, though he allowed them to crawl over his hands, and
one afternoon lent the shelter of his trouser leg to a wasp pursued
by a less sympathetic youngster?his friend the wasp never harmed
him. A year later, a hornet stung Gordon. Disillusioned, the child
shrank from his beloved insects, and the friendship is at least tem-
porarily severed.
A thunder storm usually frightens Gordon, though his fear is
sometimes modified by a certain esthetic pleasure in watching the
fall of the rain and the play of the light in the sky. One day, during
a storm I went into his room to see if he was frightened. I found
him lying in bed, his eyes bright, his face eager, his body tense.
"Look," he cried, holding up his arm with the fist tightly
clenched, "I am playing the lightning goes into my arm and makes
me strong, and see it does make me strong," making me feel of the
rigid muscles. That self-suggestion has counteracted the fear of
storms except at times when the crash of thunder is so loud as to set
him vibrating with the physical sensation.
There is much of the hero in Gordon, for he fights his fears with
all the might of his little being. At first he only reached out wist-
fully for reiterated assurance from others that he has nothing to
fear. Early in our experience with Gordon he was taken one day to
the city for a doctor's examination. A dozen times on the train he
asked fearfully, "Is she going to hurt me?" On the way into the
office he accosted the janitor, "Does the doctor hurt little boys?",
and again of the stenographer he asked, "Does the doctor hurt
little boys?" Despite all assurance the fear was too much for him,
and in face of the doctor, Gordon burst out, "Are you going to
hurt me?".
Later he began to reassure himself. He sat through the circus,
tense, quivering, and exclaiming, "I'm not afraid, am I?" Some-
times when the fear rose within him that he might not do his school
work well he would begin, "This isn't hard, is it? Why, there is
nothing to be afraid of. I wouldn't be afraid of a teacher. There
is nothing to cry about, of course not." Gordon began to make
explosive resistance to the teasing suggestions of the other children.
"I won't, I won't, I won't," he would shout, but the moment he
stopped the vehement self-assertion, their strength became too much
for him.
This battle against suggestion foredoomed to failure explains
more than one phase of his conduct. Gordon is afraid of people?
all people, even those who are most kind to him. The cross play of
A PSEUDO-TALENT FOR WORDS 15
their personalities upon his suggestible nature, and the conflict of
their suggestions with each other and with the power of suggestion
in his environment and instincts upset the equilibrium of his mind.
The painful chaos thus created causes a behavior similar to fear
reaction, a quivering tensity, a tip of the body away from the per-
son, and an apprehensive query, "Are you going to do me anything? "
Gordon is too afraid of people to wish to be other than obe-
dient, but in the absence of the suggesting personality, impulse is
often too strong for him. He seems to have little powev of inhibi-
tion. A piece of chocolate candy seen is a piece of chocolate candy
eaten. Even if the suggestion is a bottle of a dozen chocolate malted
milk tablets, the whole dozen are swallowed rapidly. An impulse
to twist and tear cannot be inhibited. At least half a dozen pairs
of glasses have been twisted into bits in a year. Five inexpensive
watches have been similarly destroyed, though a watch is Gordon's
proudest possession. Money has an irresistible attraction?not
money to spend, but money to handle, to pat in a purse, and to
put in one's mouth, to gloat over.
Probably his lies can be traced to this same evil genius?
suggestibility. Not a day goes by that Gordon is not detected in
two or more lies. One type of lie, the denial of a misdeed committed,
can be traced to the over-powering force of fear of punishment;
another type, the confession under pressure of a misdeed not com-
mitted, to the suggestive force of another personality which fully
convinces Gordon of his guilt; a third type, a spontaneous confession
of an imaginary misdeed, to an eagerness to find expression for a
newly formed ideal of truth which he at first confused with mere
owning up. Finally his claims to accomplishing something which
is quite beyond his capacity as, for instance, his claim (one morning)
that he had tied the bow on his shoe several weeks before he had
actually learned to do it, may be traced to the confusion of the
mental image of his aim with the mental image of the actual occur-
rence. Indeed, for Gordon, ideas have quite as much force as
reality, and at a time of conflict and nervous confusion he is unable
to distinguish between the two. In the main he has a vehement
desire to tell the truth even though he doesn't know what is truth.
Such a state of fear, vaccilation, and nervous tension, all trace-
able to high suggestibility, must necessarily stand in the way of his
mental development. It makes every effort to think, a moment of
high nerve tension, so that all mental work is attended by immediate
and excessive fatigue. These are the marks, the marks of weariness,
of nervous conflict which he bears on his face. This confusion also
makes an independent reaction to a problem almost impossible
since his aim is only to give the response that is wanted of him.
16 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
One has only to see his almost uncontrollable impulse to look at the
person directing him rather'than at the task itself, to see that this is
his attitude toward work. Suggestibility, with its resulting nervous
tensity and loss of equilibrium is a very great influence operating
against Gordon's mental development along the lines of such abilities
as he possesses.
A second influence, on the contrary, is one which we may count
as a positive ally. Gordon is a thinker. He may be inactive in
relation to material surroundings, but he is not mentally lazy.
When Gordon compared the butterfly and the fly, there was every
evidence that he was carefully thinking out the differences. In the
record of his responses to the Binet Tests there are other evidences
of thought. He took the questions in the ten-year old group very
seriously though he failed on every one. He made a definite
effort to puzzle out the answers to each question. His responses
came always after a long pause.
Q. What would you do if you were delayed in going to school?
A. Really, I don't know.
Q. What would you do if you were to take part in an important
affair? A. I don't know.
Q. Why is a bad action done when one is angry more excusable
than the same action done when one is not angry?
A. I am thinking and thinking, but I can't make that out.
Q. What would you do if you were asked your opinion of some-
one whom you did not know very well?
A. I don't know what I would say. Do you mean a stranger?
Q. Why should one judge a person by his acts rather than by
his words?
A. I am thinking, but I can't get it. People can do errands for
you, that is one thing.
In the fifteen-year old test Gordon's analysis of the situation, "My
neighbor has just received some significant visits. One after another,
a doctor, a lawyer and a priest called. What is happening at my
neighbor's?" seems really remarkable, in the light of his age, and of
his limitations of experience and of mind. He answered, "Someone
must be sick, and the priest might be there to christen someone,
and the lawyer might be there to find out if someone had done
wrong." When left to itself Gordon's mind is independently active.
He rarely lets pass a question which he fails to answer. An hour or
so later he will rush up to his teacher exclaiming, "I know it now!"
Sometimes a space of twenty-four hours will intervene between the
question and the answer.
The child's thought, too, pushes out beyond the present complex
of sensory stimuli about him. He lives often in an imaginary world.
A PSEUDO-TALENT FOR WORDS 17
He plays sometimes that he is a knight, Sir Gordon, and calls gaily,
"Come my fair Elaine. You may comb my black hair." He
thinks of the future, of himself as a man, how he may get back to
his own home in the South, of marriage, and of a profession. His
thought is tinged at times with a wistful intuition of his incapacity.
"I don't think anyone will ever want to marry me, do you?
I should like to have a wife, because I want someone to love me, and
eat dinner with me, and to go to town with me. How can I ever be
a lawyer? I don't know how to do lawyer's things. Could you
teach me how?"
His mind reaches out toward a concrete spiritual reality. He
says that he is "more braver" when he thinks God is someone very
kind and very near, and with him all the time. He looks at the
stars at night and asks, "Which star is God on?"
Of course, a part of this is mere words, and where the con-
sciousness of meaning enters in, the comprehension is of the vaguest
and most elementary, but that the mind of a low grade imbecile
should be so independently active, and should concern itself with
such abstract problems is to me a curious phenomenon. Perhaps it
is the mind of his race persisting in an unequal, degenerate organism.
Often the defects which bring an individual so far down in the scale
of imbecility are such as to remind us emphatically of our kinship
to the animal. Gordon's external physical defects do remind us of
this kinship, but an acquaintance with Gordon's mental processes
seems rather to reveal the persistence of the distinctly human quali-
ties of mind in a degenerate body in which the neural and cerebral
development are inadequate mechanisms for its operation. Is this
mental activity correlated with the high development of the language
center?one of the specific faculties differentiating man from animal?
The treatment of such a case is, of course, the practical question.
Gordon belongs to the mongoloid type in which we often find a
peculiar union of conspicuous and permanent deficiencies with
equally conspicuous gifts. Such a case, though tantalizing in its
specious doubtfulness, is not hard to deal with when its limitations
are once understood and accepted. The obstinate deficiencies can-
not be remedied. The few capacities are energetic enough, if wisely
directed, to develop themselves. For Gordon the program is simple;
first, the physical building up of his weak and degenerate organism;
secondly, tactful management to eliminate in so far as possible,
the nervous elements of fear and self-consciousness; thirdly, a
careful use of his suggestibility to fix, if possible, the suggestion of
certain useful types of behavior; fourthly, the development of his
appreciation of literature and his gift of expression as a resource
for his necessarily lonely, protected, and inactive life.
