The Superficial Idiot? A Type
==============================

:Author:  Eleanor Larrabee Lattimore, Ph.D.
In Charge Social Service Department, Psychological Clinic,
University of Pennsylvania.

In a psychological examination a diagnosis may be arrived at
in several different ways. Sometimes a tedious array of tests and
several examinations, together with data culled from the home and
the school, are necessary to determine the mental status of a child.
At other times a single characteristic may serve as a key to the
entire mental situation. The two cases cited here illustrate the recognition of a definite type through the presentation of a single symptom.
Alexander was just three years old when he was brought to the
Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania because of his
peculiar behavior and inability to speak. While the mother was
giving the usual data in regard to his birth, babyhood, etc., Alexander
passed through an adjoining room. The examiner had not seen him
but heard him utter a peculiar cry which at once recalled to her
memory Lucius, another three year old who had been examined a
year and a half before. She jotted down Lucius's name with the
words "superficial idiot" and continued the interview. Later on a
comparison of the two cases brought out the following facts in regard
to Alexander and Lucius:

Alexander
Was unable to talk; did not understand commands.
Hearing appeared to be defective.
Gait unsteady and staggering; refused to walk if he could be carried.
Whimpered constantly, excepting
when being carried.
Would sometimes wake up crying
in the night.
Lucius
Tried to say a few words and understood simple commands.
Hearing appeared to be normal in
the right ear but defective in the left.
Gait unsteady and staggering; liked
to be carried.
Whined and moaned a great deal,
crying lustily at times and fretting if
forced to be quiet. Loved to rock,
and to have his mother sing to him;
was soothed by singing, and at times
attempted to join in by humming a
few notes.
Cried a good deal at night. When
put to bed in his crib he would change
during the night from his crib to a
bed, or he would place the pillows from
the bed on the floor, and sleep on them
there.
Alexander
Frequently put his hand to hia right
ear or to the back of his head and cried
as though in pain; banged his head
against the wall or floor. If laid on
his back he immediately rolled over
toward the left side.
Internal strabismus of right eye.
Enuresis night and day; unable to
make his wants known or care for
himself at the toilet; could not dress
himself.
Explored objects with his lips in
simian fashion and put everything
into his mouth, no matter how filthy
it might be; seemed to be unable to
retain objects in his mouth and let
them drop out; did not drool to any
great extent; chewed the corner of
his coat.
Was pale and badly nourished; his
head hung to one side as though it
were very heavy.
Could not feed himself, ate only
bread and milk or bread and tea;
would drink a small cupful of sugared
milk.
Bowels were irregular.
Did not play; could not grasp toys.
Birth and babyhood were normal.
As a baby he was always troublesome,
was slow in holding up his head; cut
his first tooth at eight months and
walked at nineteen months, though
unsteadily. He had no convulsions,
accidents or falls; had whooping cough
and measles. The family history was
reported as negative, excepting that
the mother's cousin was said to be a
deaf mute and a cousin of the father
.did not talk until his sixth year.
Lucius
Frequently bit the back of his hand,
as though in pain, hit his ear or banged
his head with sufficient force to produce a bruise and consequent hemorrhage.
Eyes co-ordinated well; followed a
lighted match readily.
Enuresis night and day; unable to
make his wants known or care for
himself at toilet; could not dress
himself.

Put almost all objects in his mouth;
usually had a bit of twig or a broken
match stick in his mouth and never
swallowed it; did not drool.
A husky looking little fellow, holding his head well up and sitting erect.
Could feed himself but could not
use a knife, fork or spoon. Was
notional about his food, smelling it
before tasting; had no regular meals;
ate bread if sugared, or graham or
vanilla wafers; would drink sugared
milk, but only from a white enamelled
cup.

Bowels were irregular.
Did not play but knew enough to
ring the door bell when he wished to
enter the house. Delighted in banging doors; liked to pull the dishes off
the dinner table, and to smash glass.
Birth and babyhood were normal.
His mother fell on the porch at the
seventh month of pregnancy, but no
bad results were noticed. He walked
at thirteen months; tried to say "mom'
and "pop." He had convulsions from
the eighth month to second year; had
whooping cough at nine months. The
family history was negative.
The diagnosis of superficial idiocy in the case of each of these
boys was reached through their utter failure to respond to tests
which are eagerly attacked by normal children. The simplest tests
were too difficult. The Witmer formboard, which can be done
easily by a normal child of four, aroused no interest in either of these
children. Alexander seized the blocks and put them in his mouth.
When confronted with the Seguin circles, consisting of three discs
of equal size to be placed in similar recesses in a board, Alexander
made some effort to place them in their recesses. Lucius's attention
was very fleeting. He heeded no commands excepting to pick up
a bean bag and place it on a chair. This he did twice but was persistent in his refusal to do it a third time. He would not even imitate the examiner's action in placing blocks in a pile and knocking
them down.

Both children were difficult to handle and almost impossible in
an ordinary home. In both cases the mothers were worn out with
care so the children were placed in a temporary home to relieve the
situation. Lucius improved to some extent in his habits of eating,
although a more stubborn child could not well be imagined. He
could not safely be left alone unless securely tied in his bed or chair.
After six months Lucius returned to his home where he is the most
difficult member of a family group of six children all under eleven
years and one of them a cripple.

The mother is anxious to place him in an institution as soon as
possible but he is still under age and so obstreperous that it will
be difficult to place him in any state institution.

Alexander was cared for for four months in the temporary home
under the same conditions in which Lucius improved, but no progress
could be made toward his improvement. He gradually lost weight
and became less active until death resulted from marasmus and
meningitis.

Lucius is still under the observation of the Clinic but no change
in his general condition is anticipated, excepting that he will become
more difficult to control and more anti-social.
