A Case of Educational Retardation
==================================

By Charles L. Harlan,
University of Minnesota.
Early in October, 1916, Andrew C. applied to Unity House
Settlement for instruction in reading the English language. He
was referred to the writer as a fit subject for instruction and, as an
educational experiment, the writer undertook to teach him to read.
Accordingly he appeared October 12th and, with two exceptions,
every Wednesday evening thereafter until May 16, 1917. He was
given two hours of instruction and practice in reading each Wednesday evening, amounting in all to sixty hours. It is not to be
understood that he read for two hours in any one evening. The
work was varied in character, consisting of word-study, drill on sight
and phonetic words, spelling, copying, writing answers to questions
based on what had been read, both oral and written reproduction,
testing of word recognition, determination of rate of oral and of
silent reading, and some discussion of methods of mastering the
symbols of the printed page and of oral expression. This two hours
work was supplemented by evening study at home. The home
study was also varied somewhat in the ways indicated for the instruction period with the exception that no testing was done at home.
The Mann Readers (1) supplemented by other books and reading
material, formed the basis for the instruction as well as the basis for
determining the progress made.
The following facts are stated in order to make clear the conditions under which the subject worked: Andrew was born of
Swedish parents in Sweden, July 24, 1898. He is eighteen years
and four months old, emigrated to Saskatchewan, Canada, when he
was three years of age, and to Minneapolis when he was sixteen.
He attended a rural school in Canada in all seven or eight months.
His attendance was irregular because of the severe weather, and
the teachers were poor, he claims, since they always had trouble
and left the school before the winter was over and no new teacher
was secured until the following year. When he became older he
had to remain at home and help his father on the farm. He could
not speak English when he entered school, and during the short time
which he attended he learned to speak but not to read or write
English. He now speaks English practically without the accent
1 This experiment was condusted as a part of the work of Dr. M. E. Haggerty's Seminar in Educational
Psychology during the year 1916?17.
212
A CASE OF EDUCATIONAL RETARDATION. 213
peculiar to Swedish speaking people, but he has a very limited vocablary. Swedish is spoken at home by both parents, but he has a sister
who is enrolled in the fifth grade of the Minneapolis schools, and who
speaks, reads, and writes English. When beginning his work in
reading it was discovered that he knew the alphabet, the sounds
of most of the letters, could write the letters and a few words, and
could recognize by sight probably fewer than a hundred words. He
lives at home under favorable conditions, is now working as helper to
a die-setter, and is making 17.5 cents per hour. He desires to become
a die-setter because it offers good wages and he thinks he would
like the work. He wanted to learn to read in order to be able to
read signs, the newspapers, instructions about his work, and rhymes
and stories which he hears his sister read and some of which he can
repeat from hearing them read. He is somewhat handicapped by
defective vision and has to wear thick-lensed glasses.
Arr M?W/\L/1DE
SUBSTITUTION ^rnfT P? ACE
T/mj
Acc.
CAMCBLLATlD/HcX \ / 7\ ^HEIGHT
Tims
INT.FABta? / 2in>s/^   \A\ \ Js>W?IGHT
VOCAPr
E?Asy d;
PAST-WHDLbX y VISUAIi nEf1t
/ Ii(iU
EEWIfS-HFEC. ?? ?^T\ KMffP1MEM. C0N.TRD5E'
Figure I.
The points at which the circles cross the radii represent the norms in the tests represented by the radii and
for the ages represented by the circles. The dotted line indicates the thirteen year old norms which also represents
the subject's mental age as shown by the Stanford Tests. The heary line shows the subject's standing in the
various t?sts.
Figure I.
The points at which the circles cross the radii represent the norms in the testa represented by the radii and
for the ages represented by the circles. The dotted line indicates the thirteen year old norms which also represents
the subject's mental sge as shown by the Stanford Tests. The heary line shows the subject's standing in the
various tests.
214 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
On October 5th he was given the Stanford Revision of the
Binet Tests (2) along with certain other mental and physical tests
(3), (4), (5). His standing in these tests is represented graphically
in figure 1. His performance indicates age-standings of from ten
to eighteen years as compared with the age norms in the various tests.
In the physical traits recorded, in the auditory memory for digits,
and in accuracy in the substitution test he is up to the standard of
the average eighteen-year-old individual. His performance in
terms of time is always slower than the average. His low standing
in cancellation may be due in part to defective vision. This may
also account in part for his low standing in memory for digits
through visual presentation. In all the other tests given him he
ranks from three to eight years below the eighteen-year-old norms.
His mental age is thirteen according to the Stanford Test. His
inferior rank in these mental tests in all probability represents an
educational retardation rather than a mental retardation, or at least
a mental retardation due in large part to lack of schooling and lack of
training in the use of language. In applying the Stanford Tests all
exercises involving reading or visual knowledge of words had to be
omitted. Likewise in the other tests word knowledge or vocabulary
knowledge is involved. If one has never seen certain words in
print, has never written them, and has never heard them understanding^, these words cannot be said be in such a person's
vocabulary. If tested, therefore, on material involving these words,
even though visual presentation be not involved, one's standing must
necessarily be somewhat lower than that of persons whose familiarity
with these words has been acquired through reading them, writing
them, and speaking them. On these grounds it is claimed that
Andrew's case is one largely of educational rather than of mental
retardation.
It is a difficult matter to measure progress in reading. A series
of reading tests of equal difficulty is needed for this purpose. If a
reading test be once given, its usefulness as a test for the same individual is destroyed. Moreover, there are several elements in the
reading process, and in order to measure progress in reading it
is necessary to measure each of these elements. Progress may be
made in rate of either silent or oral reading, in quality of either silent
or oral reading, in mastery of phonetic symbols, in number of words
recognized in context, and in depth of meaning attached to printed or
written symbols. Progress in only a part of these was measured as
the subject learned to read.
When several pages had been read either silently or orally and
the difficult words had been explained and the' pronunciation fixed,
A CASE OF EDUCATIONAL RETARDATION. 215
the pupil was asked to read these pages again at home. By means of
the lists at the back of the books used, the pupil's recognition of the
words previously gone over in context was tested during the following
instruction period- A list of the words which the subject failed to
recognize was made each time. In addition to these tests the pupil
was tested five times on the complete primer and first reader lists,
and four times on the complete second reader list. In these tests also
lists of the unrecognized words were made. By comparing the above
named lists it was possible to determine the difficult words, something
of the nature of the difficulty, and the final percentage of words found
Table I.?Percentage op Complete Lists of Words Recognized in
Successive Tests.
Date
Primer list:
Nov. 22..
Nov. 29..
Jan. 3..
Feb. 7..
Apr. 25..
First Reader:
Jan. 3..
Feb. 7.
Feb. 14.
Mar. 14.
Apr. 25.
Second Reader:
Jan. 17
Jan. 24.
Feb. 14.
Apr. 25.
Total No.
of Words
333
333
333
333
333
457
457
457
457
457
666
666
666
666
Number
Wrong
48
52
42
17
71
85
68
66
28
214
196
151
57
Percentage of
Words Recognized
71.2
85.6
84.4
87.4
94.9
84.5
81.4
85.1
85.6
93.9
67.8
70.6
77.3
91.5
Time,
minutes
27
27
27
30
31
31
35
26
23
42
104
100
47
45
in each book which had not been mastered, or at least not sufficiently
well understood to be recognized at sight. No drill was given on any
of these lists except that involved in the reading of these words whenever they occurred in the context. The results of these tests, therefore, give a basis for measuring the pupil's increase in vocabulary, both
in the recognition and in the understanding of words. The time
required for giving each test was also recorded. Table I shows these
data for the primer, first, and second reader lists.
The results of the tests on complete lists only are given in the
above table. There is a marked increase in the percentages of words
216 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
recognized at successive periods. There are two exceptions to this
statement however. One is in the primer list for January 3d and the
other is in the first reader list for February 7th. The words missed
on each succeeding test are not necessarily the same words, but in
general they are the same words as will be shown in a later table.
The time taken for going over the complete lists does not vary greatly
in the primer and first reader tests, but there is a marked decrease in
the amount of time taken for the second reader list from the first two
to the last two tests.
The curves of figure 2 represent the progress made in word recognition from the first test to the last in the complete as well as partial
lists. All of these curves indicate gradual though not uniform progress
in this performance in all three of the lists used. The curves all
terminate near the same point.
This point in all cases is above 90 per cent- This means that on
April 25th Andrew recognized at sight more than 90 per cent of all
the words encountered in the reading of the primer and first and
second readers. It will also be noted that at all times he was able to
recognize 50 per cent or more of the words he had previously gone
over. The testing was continued after the reading of the texts had
been finished. It will be seen that the improvement after completing
the texts was never quite so marked as while the text waa being read,
2?>cr9C ?
BOH
SC20101
Weeks,
H-H
Coranleted
i 8 9 10
<Jomr)let"t
la
r
Prim
Firs
\?eco
IS " 1 2?1 1 4 1 ^6 " ' ' * Si
er Wo rds.
t Reader \J:
ad Reader
i?r?r;
jrds.
lYo'rds,
Figure II.
Increase in percentage of words recognized in the various tests from week to week without any drill on words
except when found in the context of the Primer, First, and Second Readers.
A CASE OF EDUCATIONAL RETARDATION. 217
nevertheless, there is improvement which is regular and continuous.
Just how much of this improvement is due to repetition of primer
words in the first reader, and of first reader words in the second reader
was not ascertained. The reading of the Mann third and fourth
readers was also completed. In addition to this, material from other
readers, elementary geographies, language books and histories was
read. In amount this additional material would total 125 pages.
When one considers that the pupil had, in all, only fifty-six hours
of instruction, with at least an equal amount of time spent in home
study, it must be said that Andrew's was a remarkable performance.
He did in twenty-eight weeks what it takes the normal child
under ordinary school conditions three or four years to do. This is
significant in view of the fact that the Stanford tests indicate a mental
age of thirteen as compared with a chronological age of eighteen for
the pupil. Andrew's performance seems to verify the statement
that his is a case of educational rather than mental retardation.
When tested on the Haggerty (6) phonetic and sight lists of
words, the improvement is quite as marked as in the case of the Mann
Readers lists. Table II shows the percentage of words in these lists
recognized on three different dates. The lists were the same each
time but the order of words was changed for each successive test.
Table II.?Improvement in Word Recognition.
Date
Nov. 1.
Nov. 22.
Dec. 20.
Phonetic List
Percentage
Correct
Time,
hra. min.
1 50
1 50
2 10
Sight List
Percentage
Correct
Time,
hrs. min.
2 30
2 43
3 05
The standings in the sight test, for corresponding dates, are higher
in every case than the standings in the phonetic test. There is,
however, a material difference in the amount of time required to
recognize the sight words over that required to recognize the words
of the phonetic list. There is also a marked increase in the amount
of time for recognizing the words of the sight list in successive tests.
The increasing percentages of words correctly given is evident in
both lists. The pupil was not tested on these lists later than December so it is impossible to indicate his present knowledge of these words,
but since they are all found in the lists of the Mann Readers the pupil
218 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
probably knows a larger proportion of them than indicated in the
above table.
There was also an increase in the rate of oral reading. A part
of each instruction period was devoted to oral reading. The rate was
ascertained for the total amount of material read orally during any
one period. This would tend to eliminate fluctuations in rate due to
difficulty of reading matter. No correction was made for the increasing difficulty of material as the pupil proceeded from primer to fourth
reader. The increase in the number of words read per minute is
shown in table III, also graphically in figure 3.
Table III.?Increase in Rate of Oral Reading.
Date
Oct. 19.
Oct. 25.
Nov. 1.
Nov. 8.
Dec. 13.
Jan. 31.
Feb. 7.
Feb. 21.
Mar. 14.
Apr. 25.
Words Read
per Minute
9
13
19
27
31
30
39
41
64
72
There is a gradual though not rapid increase in rate of oral
reading as indicated for the different test periods. No doubt the
fluctuations in rate would have been evident had the rate been ascertained for shorter periods of time and at more frequent intervals.
It will be noted that the large increases in rate came during the
earlier periods and again during the month of February. It is also
to be noted that the subject still reads very slowly. This is due in
part to the persistence of the phonetic methods of attacking words.
The curve manifests the plateau aspect of the learning curve. The
long plateau is probably to be accounted for by the fact that it was
during this period the "sight" method of reading was being substituted for the phonetic method. The rapid rise during the February
periods is due in part at least to a dominance of sight over phonic
mastery of words. It is not known how much this curve is flattened
by the increasing difficulty of the material in the texts read.
A CASE OF EDUCATIONAL RETARDATION. 219
The silent reading at first was not at all silent. The words were
whispered and very difficult ones were occasionally vocalized. Later
the sounding was reduced to lip movements and still later, especially
on the easier passages, there were no lip movements. This subordination of the motor aspects of silent reading took place apparently
with no conscious effort on the part of the pupil and no suggestions
Were made by the instructor as to changes in methods. The rate of
silent reading was fifty-five words per minute on March 7th. This
rate had increased to seventy-five words per minute by April 25th.
This is much below the rate of normal children in the grades of the
public schools.
The quality of reading done by the pupil, as measured by the
amount he was able to reproduce or by answers to questions on what
tad been read, indicates excellent ability along this line. Although
he read slowly he was able to grasp approximately half the ideas
presented in the printed page. On March 7th he was given the Fordyce (Narcissus) (7) tests in reading. His rate of silent reading at
that time was fifty-five words per minute with a quality of fifty. He
was again tested April 25th, when he showed a rate of seventy-five and
quality seventy. For understanding of sentences a test was given on
November 8th. He then ranked 4 on the Thorndike scale (Alpha 2.)
(8). On January 31st he had reached and passed exercise of difficulty
6, and on March 7th he ranked at exercise of difficulty 8. In all
these tests his reading was slow but comprehensive.
He was also given the Indiana revision of the Thorndike vocabulary scale (9) on November 8th, December 13th, and January 24th.
On the first test his score was line value 15, on the second, 25, and on
the third, line value 35. In the Trabue language test Scale C (10)
70
. ?
O
! k)
h
O,
?O 40
M
0)
I 20
t?
30
TO
tr
2 3 4 5
Weeks.
Figure III.?Increase in Rate of Oral Reading.
W
"35"
Figure III.?Increase in Kate of Ural Heading.
220 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
on November 8th his score was zero, but on February 7th he made a
score of 7.
Although he knew how to write his name and could write most
of the letters of the alphabet with pencil when he first appeared for
instruction, it can not be said that he could write. He could draw
the letters slowly and laboriously at the rate of about eight per
minute. No instruction was given in writing and no effort was
made to have the rate or quality of the copying improve. He was,
however, asked to copy the script words of the primer and the sentences of the first reader. That he learned to write is indicated by
his writing performance on April 25th, when he wrote a page of
approximately quality 50, Ayres Scale (11), at the rate of fifty-six
letters per minute.
Andrew's attainments in these educational activities in the
GH A3JE
VIS.VMM
language. X \ \??WL-^^ / X "aiJm&
VmiTl N ff
Figure IV.
The dotted line represents the pupil's standing on November 8th relative to the norma of the different grades.
The heavy line indicates his standing on April 25th relative to th? differeit grade norms.
Figure IV.
The dotted line represents the pupil's standing on November 8th relative to the norma of the different gradei.
The heavy line indicates his standing on April 25th relative to th? different grade normi.
A CASE OF EDUCATIONAL RETARDATION. 221
initial periods and in the final periods are represented in figure IV.
In this figure the dotted line represents his achievements on November 8th relative to the achievements of normal children in their
respective grades. The heavy solid line represents relatively his
attainment on April 25th. The distances between the solid and the
dotted lines on the radii of the circles measure, in terms of grades,
the improvement made during the twenty-eight weeks of instruction
in reading. It will be seen that in this time he made from a gradeand-a-half of progress in rate of reading to four grades of progress
m understanding of sentences or in quality of reading. It should
also be noted that although no instruction was given in language as
such, or in writing as such, there was marked progress in both of these
performances. This suggests a close correlation between these
school activities and reading.
Aside from the data of these tests there is the additional evidence
that considerable improvement was made since he passed from the
primer level to that of the fourth reader level in his ability to read.
On May 16th he could read some in the newspapers, in the elementary geographies, histories, and language books.
It is important to note the processes through which this improvement was made. With this in view careful records and notes were
niade as to the difficulties encountered, how they were overcome,
and devices and aids which proved helpful. In addition to these
data the pupil was asked to state what his greatest difficulties were
and how they were overcome.
First of all it must be kept in mind that the pupil wanted to
learn to read. He had been confronted by obstacles which ability
to read would have helped him to surmount. He had been somewhat
chagrined to hear his younger sister read material the meaning of
which he could not get without her aid. He had also discovered that
in order to do the work he desired to do and to secure the wages he
wanted to secure, ability to read was necessary. Under these conditions the services of an instructor, although somewhat necessary,
Were never more than supplementary to the fundamental processes
of learning to read.
No methods of procedure were outlined for the pupil since it
was deemed desirable to discover how the pupil proceeded to learn
to read. However, after a method, device or trick of mastering the
printed page had been discovered by the pupil, its usefulness was
discussed with him. The methods and devices of attacking words
were the ones ordinarily used by pupils in learning to read. The
sounding of letters and syllables, association of new words with
objects pictured on the same page, combination of new syllables
222 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
with stem words already known, similarity in appearance of words,
similarity in sound of words, suggestiveness of rhymes and stories
already known through hearing them read or recited, and recall
of words because of their frequent occurrence in a phrase or familiar
group of words, all proved helpful. It was found, however, that
none of these aids and devices were adequate substitutes for a
reasonable amount of drill and repetition. Pronunciation of the
word by the teacher, although immediately helpful, did not prove
useful in later encounters with the same words except when the
pronunciation was repeated. Neither did discussing the meanings
of words aid in more ready recognition of words at the next encounter.
There were certain difficulties accompanying the use of the
above mentioned aids and devices. In sounding the letters and
syllables the different sounds of each of the vowels were very confusing. Association of words with pictures on the same page often
led to failure to recognize those words in context on the following
pages where no pictures were given. Recall of words through their
phrase or group associations was helpful only when the other words
of the phrase or group were familiar. The method of recognition of
words through similarity of appearance was sometimes misleading
in the case of words different in sound.
In addition to these difficulties of method there were certain
difficulties inherent in the nature of the words or letters themselves.
The following letters and syllables were found to be difficult: the
distinction between m and n, b and d, p and q, and the phonograms,
ch, sh, ea, ow, ou, ough, oa, ie, oo, gh, ght, ing, ly, ph, y, th, ng, sp,
ive, etc. Letters known when alone were not known in certain
combinations. Capital letters were not known as the same small
letters. Contractions were not recognized as such. Words which
begin or end alike were confused, e. g. than,?that, going?doing.
Added syllables or changed endings sometimes make the word unrecognizable, e. g. small?smaller, go?goes, come?coming. Plurals
and possessives were found to be confusing. These are undoubtedly
the difficulties usually encountered by pupils in learning to read.
There were also certain words which seemed to be difficult for
the pupil and which were still difficult at the close. The list of words
missed in the first test and in the last test is given on page 223.
The starred words are the ones missed on both the initial and
final tests and on the intermediate tests. In the primer list 11 of
the 17, or 65 per cent, of the words missed in the list of 333 words
are the same words missed on every test. In the first reader list
of 457 words 28 were missed in the final test. Of these 17, or 61
per cent, are words which had been missed in all previous tests.
A CASE OF EDUCATIONAL RETARDATION. 223
Primer list. (333)
back fur ""business ""seize
*bin ""gate *certain *shout
*buy *gown chase ""silent
*buzz ""grain ""color since
*cabbage ""guess #curious *sour
Mown ""lady daughter *stair
*flour lid *dough *stalk
fun *nut ""fierce *stir
"gnaw ""ought *fury "straight
*Kate plum *Grace *suit
lion ?pond ""grieve sunshine
now pur *groan *sure
pot bailor *insect surround
put scissors *known *throat
*star sleigh ""language ""tickle
*very Spain ""laugh tongue
*want ""tall ^manner tooth
""threw meant treasure
First Reader list. through notion treated
(457) ""toss ""people ""truly
bellows ""watch print ""violet
brown promise ""wear
*claw Second Reader list, puzzle *whine
*eight (666) quite ""whose
^farther ""angel ""remain wigwam
feather *beast replied ""wrinkle
*field ""break ""secret
In the second reader list of 666 words, 57 were missed in the final
test. Of these, 40, or 70 per cent, are words previously missed.
These figures indicate that 60 per cent or more of the words
encountered and presenting difficulties are persistently and inherently
difficult. But since on the final test approximately 10 per cent of
the total number of words encountered were found too difficult for
recognition, this means that approximately 6 per cent were persistently and inherently difficult. That this was true of a small
number of words has already been pointed out by Haggerty (9).
These words should be discovered as soon as possible and selected
for special drill. This was not done in Andrew's case, consequently
his vocabulary efficiency on April 25th was about 90 per cent of
1456 words.
The following summary sets forth some of the conclusions concerning this case:
(1) Although the mental status of the subject indicated retardation of five years, the subsequent improvement in several abilities
indicates that this was due to lack of schooling and not to low
mentality.
224 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
(2) The progress made in learning to read was accompanied by
corresponding improvement in language and in writing, as well as
improvement in the several abilities involved in the reading process
itself, such as increase of vocabulary, understanding of sentences,
rate of silent and of oral reading, and in ability to reproduce what
was read.
(3) The aids, devices, and methods of learning to read which
were found helpful, were numerous and not limited to one process.
These, although worked out independently, were found to correspond
closely to those in ordinary use in most class rooms.
(4) The difficulties encountered, although varied in kind, are
not numerous and the words causing difficulty are limited in number
to about 6 per cent of all the words encountered.
References.
(1) Horace Mann Readers, Primer, and Books One, Two, Three, and Four.
(2) L. M. Terman. The Measurement of Intelligence. New York, 1916.
(3) G. M. Whipple. Manual of physical and mental tests. New York.
(4) Bird T. Baldwin. A Scale for measuring physical growth. Swarthmore,
Pa.
(5) Helen T. Wooley. Mental and physical measurements of working
children of Cincinnati.
(6) M. E. Haqgertt. Vocabulary test for first and second grade children.
Univ. of Minnesota.
(7) Charles Fordtce. A Scale for the measurement of achievement in
reading. Lincoln, Neb.
(8) E. L. Thorndike. An Improved scale for measuring ability in reading.
Teachers College Record, Nov., 1916.
(9) M. E. Haggerty. Ability to read, its measurement and some factors
conditioning it. Indiana Univ. Studies, No. 34.
(10) M. R. Trabue. Language scale C, Columbia Contrib. to Ed. New
York.
(11) L. P. Ayres. A Handwriting scale. Russell Sage Foundation Publications, New York.
