A Study of the Interplay of Personality
========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1017, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XI, No. 6
November 15, 1917
ORTHOGENIC CASES.
XII. 
By Sarah Warfield Parker, A.M.,
Philadelvhia, Pa.
(Concluded.)
The work that Miss B. had done with Albert, based on Dr.
Witmer's mental analysis, was clearly what he has called "diagnostic
teaching." For Mrs. G.'s type of teaching I know no other word
than temperamental. Her own impulses and interests, even her
whims and fancies, determined its time, its place, its manner, and
its content.
It is said that Russians know neither time nor system. Cer-
tainly Mrs. G. knew them only to scorn them. She took Albert's
Work out of the classroom, and out of all conventional routine.
She taught him at any time, and in any place. Indeed, it is small
exaggeration to say that when the passion for teaching was upon
her, it was at all times and in all places. She taught him whenever
and wherever it pleased her.
She taught him on the bench under the wide gray beech tree,
while with swift, expert fingers she did the household mending;
or on the stone parapet of the porch with the soft color and haze
of autumn spread out in the valley below them. She taught him
in the basket wagon as she jogged along to market, whip in hand to
flick the steady old horse into his ridiculous, futile gallop. Some-
times, on chill days, they sat by the great stone fireplace, in the
two chairs which stood straight and distinguished on either side
of the hearth; and sometimes she lay on the long, brown-cushioned
bench over the radiator with a volume of Ibsen, or Strindberg,
to fill the time, while Albert wrote at the flat table desk close by.
Often they worked together up in her own big room with its many
windows looking out to the bare, clean-limbed trees of late fall and
(157)
158 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
winter. Wherever her work or pleasure happened to be, there
Mrs. G. taught Albert.
The manner of her teaching was just as unconventional. Her
method was determined wholly by her temperament. Swift
remarked of Queen Anne that she had only a sufficient stock of
amity for one person at a time. Mrs. G. poured out her energy
and interest with so much intensity in one direction that, like Queen
Anne, she had small surplus for any other object. She did one thing,
and did it hard; was friend to one person, and scarcely to any other;
espoused one cause, and it alone, till the volume of her energy was
spent. Then, after a little, with the same intense, transitive con-
centration, she passed on to another object.
The kaleidoscopic series which passed before our eyes within
the space of a few months was worthy of Mr. Toad in Kenneth
Graham's "The Wind in the Willows."
One day she ate thirteen grapefruit, and little else; for two or
three days she consumed bowlfuls of brandied peaches?then
banished both from the table. For a week, she played bean bag,
for three consecutive hours every evening, holding some adult to
the game long after the children were in bed, and flinging the bags
with tremendous force the full length of the living-room; till at
the end of the week she tossed them aside. For one week, ball;
for another, jumping rope; and, for a longer stretch, checkers,
held the field. In October she bought an expensive riding habit,
breeches and a short-coat, which revealed the massiveness of her
figure. She bought, too, a little round hat with a pompom, boots,
and gauntlets, stocks, and a gold scarf pin?every possible accessory.
In this costume, for a few weeks, she rode doggedly, often impru-
dently, in spite of very real fear and vertigo. Then the habit was
hung away, till its time came to serve with less dignity as a coasting
costume in a brief fever for the Flexible Flyer. For one fortnight,
after breakfast, after dinner, after supper, the house was gay with
the rhythmic measures of the Pavlowa Gavotte, while with practiced
feet and movements not ungraceful, Mrs. G. danced it over and
over again, sometimes alone, sometimes with Albert, sometimes
with one or two others who had learned the steps from her. 'We
never saw her dance again as long as she was with us. v
In objects less trivial her interest was just as concentrated,
but, fortunately, more sustained. For the winter before she came
to us, the major part of her energy had been enlisted in the work
of one of the city rescue missions. During that year she had talked
and thought constantly of her "bums." By her determination,
her force and her magnetism, she had awakened the dormant wills
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 159
of at least two or three of these outcasts till they had freed them-
selves from the bondage of drink and drugs?a winter's work well
worth while. When, however, she ceased to give all her interest
to this work, she could give none of it.
To the energy for regeneration which Mrs. G. had at one time
poured into the rescue mission, Albert was legitimate successor.
Her interest in him was not trivial?it was rooted deep in her
capacity for compassion, in her sportsmanlike response to the chal-
lenge to achieve the barely possible, in her passion to dominate
and mould the lives and characters of others. Therefore the intensity
of her interest was sustained throughout the year that she and
Albert worked together. To the task of raising him to the threshold
of social sufficiency she devoted all the concentrated energy and
will with which she had lifted her "bums" from the gutter.
That was her method?to give all of her time, of her energy,
of herself, to the mental and social regeneration of Albert.
This same temperamental insistence on concentration deter-
mined her program of work. Mrs. G. could not divide her time
and thought into the usual daily program of a half hour of this and
a half hour of that. She must choose one subject as her point of
attack and teach it all day long, week after week. The disciplinary
teaching, without which, though she never acknowledged or,
indeed, realized it, Albert's response to her own teaching would
have been impossible, she threw aside as nonsensical. Her own
criterion of social success as the touchstone of life, made her con-
centrate upon the attempt to introduce into him in tabloid form
such information as she deemed essential to that success. She
chose, of course, to introduce but one kind of information at a time.
"To be dining out," she said, "and not to know where Galeetzia
(Galicia) is; now tell me truly, is it not that which you call really
feebleminded?"
To save him from such a social disaster, Albert, she declared,
must be taught facts as rapidly and as vigorously as possible,?
first of all the facts of geography.
This was not easy. It took two weeks out of the month of
October to teach him the capitals of Europe. This was the stunt
Dr. Witmer had assigned to Mrs. G. to prove that Albert had
developed enough mental ability to learn from her any series of
associated facts. When that test was passed, Dr. Witmer gave
his consent to her usurpation of Albert's school work.
So it came about that all that fall and winter, our house, upstairs
and down, inside and out, was dominated by Albert and geography,?
the geography of the Eastern Hemisphere, of Europe, Asia, and
160 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Africa, of Australia and the South Sea Isles. Mrs. G. never hid
her light under a bushel. She taught volubly, vociferously, all
over the house, and wanted us to stop our work to watch hers.
In the evening we must play audience at an exhibition of what
Albert had learned, or had not learned, through the day. When
at last bedtime delivered us from Albert we still had geography
with us. As in the summer we had played bean bag, so now we
had to listen on into the night to a recapitulation of the day's struggles
and successes with Albert and the German Empire, or the British
possessions in Africa. The very walls seemed to resound with the
guttural roll and hiss of Ekaterinaburg, Schleswig-Holstein, and
Tannarivo.
By her vigorous summer campaign Mrs. G. had scrubbed and
tailored and trained out of Albert many of the external earmarks
of commonness. She proceeded now, by the way she taught him
geography, to sweep him out of his blatant provincialism. The
modern method of beginning geography in your own back yard was
not hers. She carried him promptly overseas?and all of us with
him. On the wings of Mrs. G.'s fluent, staccato English with its
twisted idioms, in the light of her rarely vivid visual imagination,
we left behind us the house on the knoll above the quiet Pennsylvania
valley, and lived for hours in the north of Europe, or even now and
then, in Southern Europe, or Asia. Because of a certain enigmatic
quality in the woman herself, and because of her power to carry
us with her into her stories and pictures, we were willing, for the
moment, to be credulous. Once back again in Pennsylvania we
suspected that Mrs. G.'s participation in the scenes and adventures
she described might be the device of the raconteuse to achieve
dramatic vividness. We could not, however, sift truth from fiction,
and we did not wish to. We sat with Albert on the magic carpet
of Bagdad and were whisked into other lands.
We sped with her at night in sleighs over the frozen Neva;
we danced at the king's ball in Stockholm; we watched her as a
child, laughing while a great Russian general pinned on her white
frock a decoration, the Czar's tribute to his triumphs in the Turkish
War. At Skaagen on Skagerrack we found ourselves dining at a
table next to Ibsen; in "Draysden" (Dresden) we visited her in
her girlhood at a superlatively select school for young ladies and
saw vividly the very pattern on the delicate Dresden porcelain
with which we were served. She took us to a gay restaurant of the
Russian capital where, from a great pool bright with many-colored
fish, we chose the one destined for our meal. We wintered with
her gaily in Corfu, and stayed for a while in England,?a distorted
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 161
England, stupid, scheming, hostile. She gave us a bright glimpse
of Paris, and told us thrillingly of how once, threatened with imprison-
ment in "Bearleen" (Berlin) for presenting a green ticket in the
Wrong compartment of a car, she escaped through the intervention
of a school friend, the daughter of Von Buelow. She pictured for
us Pavlowa dancing in the first da s of her genius in the Imperial
Opera House at St. Petersburg; made us thrill to the great Easter
service in St. Isaac's Cathedral, and immediately swept us into the
traditional stream of Easter callers.
She told us an ironic story of the chagrin of the Czar who,
wishing to travel to the Crimea over a railroad for which the govern-
ment had appropriated money, could find no trace of either funds
or railroad. We exulted with her when she smuggled revolutionary
literature beneath the false bottom of her trunk across the border
from Sweden into Finland, and again, at the gangplank of a Baltic
steamer, where to esca e custom examination, she passed her black
bag to the wife of a cabinet minister. In a city?there was a hint
that it was Riga?she showed us a dinner at her home, a gay com-
pany of officials in uniform. We saw the last guest leave, and eight
revolutionaires steal in to beg for hiding. We were taken next morn-
ing into the office of the city Prefect of Police, one of the evening's
dinner guests, and saw him smilingly, without question, give to
Mrs. G. eight "safe conducts" and a detachment of gendarmes
to escort the eight revolutionaires over the border into safety.
She drew for us the picture of the still black line of workmen,
students, and priests, moving silently one January Sunday, through
the white snow on the Nevsky Prospect, toward the Winter Palace,
and made us hear the three swift volleys of shots which stained the
snow with blood, and see the wild sweep of the bearded Cossacks
with their long pikes, spurring their horses through the frightened
crowd even to the top of steep church steps. She pictured for us
another Sunday, "Red Sunday," in the summer of 1905. In her
dascha on the Gulf of Finland we felt the strange silence which fell
over Russia on that day. We saw a young officer take flight in a
rowboat under the very guns of the warships anchored in the arm
of the gulf, saw Mrs. G.'s husband rescue him from the rushes on
the bank, and contrive his escape to St. Petersburg, disguised in
the uniform of the Imperial Yacht Club. We heard, too, how,
after some days, the long silence was broken by the sharp sound
of eight hundred shots fired in terrible succession, shots that told
the tale of the eight hundred mutineers in Kronstadt.
Albert never again yelled at a passing stranger his vapid remark,
"New York's the only place, eh?" A new world had been opened
162 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
to him, a world full of picture and incident, and above all, a world
completely dominated by a single striking personality. Although
in his childhood he had travelled abroad, he now saw and felt Europe
for the first time, but only as a highly colored background for Mrs. G.
He had hated her, he had cringed to her; and then he had
respected her. He had been stirred by a quick sense of gratitude
for her sympathy; he had been bound to her by the force of her
determination to overcome his social handicap; and now he was
fascinated by her power to extend the straitened limits of his immobile
imagination.
He not only submitted to her extraordinary method of teaching
him all day long and all evening long; he hung about incessantly,
begging to be taught. He demanded her exclusive time and atten-
tion; and she yielded it. Though Mrs. G. was energetic, she often
"treated" herself to a day in bed, but even then, you could always
see, through her open door, the figure of Albert on his knees beside
the bed, his sleek black head bent over Harper's Geography, which
lay open on the counterpane.
Mrs. G., however, did not by any means fill the lesson hour
with stories and adventures. Her temperamental method was as
thorough and inexorable as Miss 33.'s more deliberate teaching.
She made Albert learn by heart every line of his geography lesson,
and her standard in recitation was nothing short of 100 per cent
accuracy. It used to take the boy three or four or even five hours
to learn the day's assignment of eight lines. He went about with the
geography under his arm, and wheedled everyone he saw into helping
him, because he "couldn't get his mind on it" by himself, and he'd
"just got to know it tomorrow for the Madam." Once learned,
he would rattle off the eight lines at terrific speed with all Mrs. G.'s
rolling r's and lengthened vowels, shooting them out at us when-
ever we came into the room. Yet he knew nothing of the content.
She would then spend hours in compelling him to pick out the facts
from the lines he had learned, and in pounding them into him with
map drill and infinite noisy repetition of question and answer.
Those hours were so strenuous that Mrs. G. invariably emerged
with her straight brown hair hanging in untidy wisps, but Albert
knew the passage for the day backwards, forwards, and upside
down, and delighted to perform with it all manner of stunts in
articulation.
Study hour with Mrs. G. was not play. It was hard, hard
work. Albert's devotion to the geography lesson, therefore, was
not born of a desire to be entertained, nor, in the beginning, to any
considerable extent, of the will to learn. It grew almost wholly
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 163
out of his devotion to his teacher. One rarely encounters a per-
sonality so powerful and so hypnotic as hers. She had deliberately
turned the full force of this upon an adolescent boy. The result
of the impact was the total obsession of the mind of Albert by the
personality of Mrs. G. Though he had brooded over his inferiority,
and longed passionately to "be normal," he had not in himself the
will to buckle down to the task of trying to repair his deficiencies.
Now, her will and magnetism took possession of him, and he worked
to please her with an energy born, not of his will, but of hers, an
energy which was almost superhuman.
Toward the end of February, Mrs. G. was anxious to prove
just how much Albert had learned through her vigorous pounding
drill and his own enforced effort- to learn. According to her habit
of doing one thing at a time and doing it thoroughly, she gave a
whole week to an examination in geography. She filled a notebook
with questions written in her extraordinary handwriting,?script
which consisted almost wholly of vertical lines of extraordinary
height. There were 182 of these questions and they covered the
major part of what he had learned in geography.
One who recalls the fact that less than a year before Albert
said London was the capital of Paris, will scarcely credit these
answers as his.
Q. What does Oceanica include?
A. Oceanica includes all the islands in the Pacific Ocean south
of the Tropic of Cancer. It consists of the great archipelagoes
?f Malaysia, Melanesia, Polynesia, and Micronesia, the continent of
Australia, with the islands of Tasmania and New Zealand.
Q. What cities do you know in Siberia?
A. Irkutsk, Tomsk, Tobolsk, Omsk, Tiumen, Ekaterinaburg,
and Vladivostok.
Q. In Persia?
A. Teheran, Tabriz, Ispahan, Meshed, and Bushire.
Q. Where is the naval station of the Russian Black Sea fleet?
A. Sebastopol.
Q. Which rivers do you know in Africa, and where do they
empty?
A. The Nile empties into the Mediterranean Sea. The Senegal,
Gambia, Niger, Kongo, and Orange empty into the Atlantic Ocean.
The Zambezi empties into the Indian Ocean.
Q. Tell me all the English colonial possessions you know.
A. In Asia I know India, Burma, Ceylon, Strait Settlements;
leases Hong Kong and protects Afghanistan and Baluchistan.
It owns in Africa, Gambia, Sierra Leone, Gold Coast, Nigeria,
164 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Cape Colony, Orange Free State, Natal, Transvaal, the Island of
Zanzibar, and parts of Somaliland, Sudan and Sahara. In Oceanica
England owns Australia, the islands of Tasmania and New Zealand,
the northern part of Borneo, and the southeastern part of Papua.
Albert did not write these answers independently. Mrs. G.
could not efface herself even in an examination. For hours, day
after day, he sat at the desk writing slowly in his neat, perfectly
formed hand beneath the long vertical lines of her unique script.
Close beside him Mrs. G. reclined in a long wicker chair. In spite
of her high collar and her pearl earrings, she was at such times
rather dishevelled. She watched everything that Albert wrote,
and alert to his tentative mutterings, guessed even what was in his
mind before he wrote it. She never actually told him what to write
but vigorously prevented his writing anything wrong. Whenever
she scented a mistake she ejaculated, "Idiot!" or "My God, boy,
how can you write such nonsense?" And Albert, of course, took
the hint. She wanted his grading on those 182 questions to be
100 per cent, and, by this method of heading off errors, she got what
she wanted. Such supervision and interference were sufficient to
make this examination paper invalid as evidence of what he really
had learned. Those of us, however, who had had these same lists
of cities, rivers, mountains, colonies, exports, imports, and what
not, dinned into our ears by Albert morning, noon, and night, knew
that he could recite them orally as glibly, and with as much zest
in their articulation as though they were limericks. I think it quite
safe to say that scarcely a handful of fifteen-year-old boys in the
United States know by rote as much of the geography of Europe,
Asia, Africa and Australia as Albert did in February, 1915. A little
of it he even understood.
It is obvious that he might, to advantage, have known less
about Siberia and Oceanica and more about the United States of
America. There could be no better example than this, of just how
far temperament ruled Mrs. G.'s teaching. She realized herself
that he needed to know something about his own continent, but
she put America aside with a shrug,?
"It would bore me too much. Someone else will have to teach
him that."
Therefore, after she had forced into him all the geography
that interested her, she proceeded, in the same manner, to pour
into him Ancient History, and a strange conglomeration of facts
dealing chiefly with comparative religion and the genealogies of the
royal houses of Europe. Mr. H. G. Wells once dubbed the education
offered in a certain American woman's college, "canned culture."
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 165
Mrs. G. used all her energy to stuff Albert with her particular brand
of "canned culture." Remember that in the summer he did not
know that America had defeated England in the War of the Revolu-
tion, had not the slightest idea of the meaning of the word "widow,"
and thought that Jews, but not Episcopalians, were Christians;
yet, in the early spring Mrs. G., by heroic work, made him produce
another examination book of incredible perfection. This examina-
tion, written under circumstances similar to the first, represented
Albert, less than nine months after his betrayal of crass ignorance,
so drilled in a jargon of names and facts that he could pass off as
his own, his teacher's knowledge of the races of men and their sub-
divisions; the dynasties of Egypt, the achievements of each of the
important rulers of Babylonia and Assyria, and the colonies of the
Phoenicians; the descent of the Swedish royal family from Berna-
dotte, the interrelationships of the rulers of Norway, Denmark,
Greece, England, Russia, and Germany, and the names of the royal
houses; the definitions of monotheism and polytheism, the Hebrew,
Christian, and Mohammedan religions as examples of the former,
the chief difference between the Christian and the Hebrew religions,
the two branches of the latter,?orthodox and reformed,?the rise
of the Greek Orthodox Church from the Roman Catholic Church,
the difference between the two in their stand on the celibacy of the
priesthood, Martin Luther and the Reformation, the names of the
more aristocratic Protestant denominations, and the significance
of the words Jehovah, Allah, mosque, synagogue, pagoda, Brahma,
Buddha, Madonna, Osiris, Isis, Zoroaster, and Lucifer. Such a
catalogue may stand without comment.
All through the autumn weeks spent together in this abnormal
concentration upon geography and upon each other, there grew
up between teacher and pupil a new emotional relationship.
One December afternoon Mrs. G., muffled in a white angora
sweater like a big white cat, lay in the long chair As usual, Albert
was with her. One of his black moods had drawn out her abundant
sympathy to meet his discouragement. For her understanding
and interest, he was boyishly grateful, and unconsciously, too, he
was attracted to her by intense physical and psychic forces. So,
when he was leaving her, he exclaimed, "This is what we do at
home," and suddenly stooped and kissed her, as she said, after-
wards in her queer idiom, "middle in the mouth."
She told us of this quietly, with a sort of surprised tenderness
in her voice. The boy had touched in this woman, alone in a foreign
country, cut off from all the claims of kinship and of friends, her
deep craving for affection. This hunger for affection was the exact
166 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
complement to the boy's own full capacity for devotion, that reservoir
of hero worship which had first found an outlet in his sporadic
attachment to Mr. A. In the intense concentration of the weeks
when the two were perpetually working together,?weeks in which
the very success of the work was dependent upon the possession
of the mind of Albert by the dynamic mind of Mrs. G.,?two impulses
met. The boy's adoration, which increased rapidly from the day he
so impulsively kissed her, might be studied as "adolescent love,"
intensified, like all his adolescent impulses. But, in the woman,
too, there was the same hyper-development of emotional energy,
so that she met his passionate outburst of "adolescent love" with
an emotion quite as intense. From this interplay of emotion, there
developed a relationship imbued with all the violence, all the lack
of restraint, all the fineness, and all the pathos of their two natures.
At first, of course, the quality of Mrs. G.'s affection for the
boy was, in part at least, genuinely maternal. She patted his curly
black head and called him "Baby." Albert, however, lacked con-
spicuously any sense of the respect due his elders and was, more-
over, thoroughly familiar in his own home with the flagrant use of
endearing epithets. To her diminutive endearment, therefore,
he responded promptly with "Petsy," and whereas he had here-
tofore always spoken of her as "the Madam" or the "boss," he
now substituted unblushingly the phrase, "my pet." Indeed,
it was not long before he robbed her name for him of its maternal
significance by using it affectionately himself. To our amazement
we heard the fifteen-year-old boy call this big domineering woman
"Baby" and she did not resent it. "Never mind, Baby; I'll fix
it for you," he would exclaim with reassuring familiarity. Less
than six months before, when Albert had presumed to call out in
frank admiration for her smart street costume, "Tres joli, tres
jaunti!" we had seen her lean from the basket wagon to flick him
indignantly with the whip. Now they had swung from their first
antagonism to such a remarkable unanimity that she did more than
tolerate his familiarity. She accepted it with an air of pleased
indulgence.
Albert came from a demonstrative family and of a demonstrative
race. He was, too, at an adolescent period when impulses are
peculiarly strong and inhibitions few. Mrs. G. herself was very
unlike the Anglo-Saxon peoples. She knew little restraint in the
indulgence of her desires, and less in the expression of her opinions
and feelings. Nitikin, the Russian doctor whom Hugh Walpole
has so keenly interpreted in "The Dark Forest," refers to this
characteristic: "We are primitive people. We do what we want
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 167
to do, feel what we want to feel, and show quite frankly our feelings.
We have simply a skin less than you." But this was not Russia!
To the rest of us, Americans, instinct with reserve, bred to recoil
from sentimentality, their frank exchange of caresses, their absurd
bandying of pet names was repellent, disquieting. "I do not under-
stand you Americans," Mrs. G. would protest, "In Russia it ees
good to have emotions. In America it seems it ees a crime."
The new relationship between teacher and pupil, however,
did not retard their work. It increased, if possible, her interest in
what she called "civilizing" Albert, and reinforced in him the will
to make himself conform to her pattern.
We have seen, how, by her insistent supervision through the
summer and fall, Mrs. G. made him more acceptable in appearance
and behavior. Now that it was no longer a mortification to her
to be seen with the boy, now that she took even an affectionate
pleasure in being with him, she extended this "civilizing" process
to his conduct outside the house. Often they lunched together
at L'Aiglon or the Bellevue, so that Albert might learn to carry
himself in such places with the indifferent ease of a man of the world.
She took him to one of the most popular dancing academies in the
city, where, with marked facility, he learned the one-step, the fox-
trot, the hesitation, and the maxixe. With these lessons supple-
mented by much practice at home, he was soon able to dance with
ease and accuracy almost all of the intricate steps popular in that
dance-mad winter of 1915.
That winter, too, Mrs. G. engaged for them season seats in
the parquet circle at the Academy on Saturday afternoons for
Elmendorf's travel lectures. On those days, Albert, conspicuously
conscious of his role as escort, never failed to buy violets for her
from a street vender. The first night that she took him out with
her, he came down to supper, scrupulously shaved and brushed,
displaying with a lordly air a white tie, the badge of his new dignity
as escort for the evening. The lady came a little later, her full,
beautiful shoulders showing cream-white in an evening gown of
gleaming jet. Albert's dark eyes were fascinated by the sheer
beauty of her, by her skin which was dull opaque whiteness, by her
gown which was black, ashimmer with light. That evening he said
unreproved far more than "Tres joli, tres jaunti." I do not doubt
that, as the two sat together in their seats in the fourth row at the
Academy, his thoughts were far more with the glory of the lady
beside him than with the causes of the Great War as set forth in
debate by Mr. Cecil Chesterton and Herr Heinz Ewers.
Albert was required to write exhaustive accounts of these
168 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
expeditions, and r?sum?s of these lectures in compositions, and in
letters to his father. It was a hard and fast rule of the school that
compositions and letters should represent, in so far as possible,
independent work, but Mrs. G. overrode all rules. She would recount
the experiences of the day or evening, the substance of the lecture
or debate to each one of us in turn, first having taken good care that
Albert was there to listen. By the time he sat down to write he
had her account, her impressions and her prejudices well in mind.
He had her, also, at his side, to suggest, prompt, and prod him on.
In his first draft, whole clauses and sentences were stricken out and
the pages generously interlined with sentences of her own, often
with a little twist of phrase that was subtly foreign. This "edited"
version was copied as the boy's final production. The following
selected quotations from Albert's account of the Chesterton-Ewers
debate are evidence of how much of his work was actually his
teacher's. They furnish an extreme illustration of a marked tendency
in untrained teachers of backward children, unconsciously to
merge their own work with that of their pupils.
First draft as written by Albert:
Presently Dr. Ewers was introduced
to us and we were told he was the
author of several books and of witty
sayings. This German orator is
about six feet tall with one of these
glass things which he kept on his
face right near his eye. I'm afraid
if this Prussian had left that behind
he could not speak.
Mr. Cecil Chesterton began his
speech. He said that if a Servian
kills the Crown prince does that mean
war should be started? Austria-
Hungary took it badly so she declared
war on Russia. The Germans got in
the wrong. The Englishman spoke
for thirty minutes and then sat down.
Second draft as "edited" by Mrs. G-
and copied by Albert:
Presently Dr. Ewers was introduced
to us and we were told that he was a
poet and the author of several books,
having a very high reputation in
Germany. This German orator is
about six feet tall. He wore a monocle
?a thing so characteristic for the
"Prussian Junkers," and was very
carefully dressed in latest fashion.
Mr. Cecil Chesterton was the first
one to speak. He said there was no
excusable reason for Germany to de-
clare war on Russia because a Bosnian
had killed the Austrian crown prince.
That there was absolutely no evidence
for the Servian government having
anything to do with this assassination.
He said furthermore that the situation
between Austria-Hungary and Servia
was just getting settled in a friendly
way with Russia as a mediator when
Germany, Austria-Hungary's ally, de-
clared war with Russia. He gave an
intelligent, clear, strong speech. The
thirty minutes were over.
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 169
The people were anxious to hear
what Dr. Ewers's opinion was about
the war, but they don't know yet.
We had all been curious to hear
Dr. Ewers's defence for Germany.
We got no satisfaction. There is
probably no defence for Germany in
starting this world war.
These illustrations, like the examinations in geography and in
history show that Mrs. G. held Albert to too high a standard. The
composition she wished him to write could only be written by an
adult in whose mind were idea-complexes such as his education
thus far had not even attempted to form, and certain powers of
analysis which he could never possess. If need be, she would write
such a composition for him. In very truth, she made everything
that was hers, his,?her culture, her will, her mind, her prejudices.
Indeed, she so dominated, enveloped him by the spell of her per-
sonality that he absorbed something of her ideas, even of her ability.
Her method was scientifically, pedagogically unsound, fraudulent
if you will. Nevertheless, when she thus pooled their resources
and made Albert do work far above his own performance level,
she carried him along with her, not to the impossible level she pre-
sented as his, but to a level a degree higher than his own. He could
not do alone the work she exhibited as his, yet before she was through
with him, the quality of the letter he wrote spontaneously more
than equalled the work of most normal boys of his age. By sharing
with him not only the force of her will, but even a portion of her
niind, she lifted him, little by little.
This woman so gripped Albert with her will, so enveloped him
with her mind and emotions, that for the time he seemed to have
no separate existence. The consequent emotional tension which
filled the house rose, through the winter, in a tempestuous crescendo.
Neither love nor life ever ran smoothly with Mrs. G. Monotony
was anathema to her; she lived only for crises. Though these
are commonly the exception and not the rule of life, in the house
with Mrs. G. crises came in rapid succession. With a veritable
genius for manufacturing "scenes," she could magnify a trifling
incident till it loomed darkly as evidence of the most abysmal
stupidity, the most unspeakable "commonness," the basest ingrati-
tude, or the most treacherous deceit.
As often as every fortnight, she worked up one of these passionate
scenes with Albert. No woman was ever more capricious with her
lover. She would lavish upon him the full abundance of her senti-
mental affection; then, in a flash, violently break with him. The
occasion for such a break was always trivial,?the misplay of a
single card in a game of "Flinch," or a kiss bestowed at the wrong
170 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
moment. A thing which she was accustomed to overlook or to
invite, she would at another time seize as an excuse for throwing
him aside with voluble invective. She vented her passion in stormy
monologues, proclaiming Albert's baseness incessantly to every-
one in the house. The boy himself she treated with cruellest scorn.
Declaring that never, never would she teach him again, she handed
him over to whichever teacher happened, for the moment, to be
high in her favor.
At such times, the boy, too young to know how transient were
her moods, yet precocious in the intensity of his adolescent emotions,
was dropped from the seventh heaven to the lowest hell. He grew,
in an hour, pale, sodden with weeping, the smooth glossiness of his
black hair reverting to its original, unkempt state. He studied
harder than ever, but to no purpose. After an entire day spent in
trying to learn ten lines about Arabia, he dropped his rumpled
head upon his arms, and, with a choking sob, cried out, "I don't
know any of it. I can't even read the words. There's nothing in
my mind but Mrs. G. I'll kill myself if she doesn't teach me."
After one day, or sometimes two, of abandonment to this
violent discharge of the overflow of her emotions, of exultation in
her power to reduce another human being to such desperate misery,
there would come, without fail, a complete reconciliation. This
would be effected in the course of a long session, during which,
for hours, we could hear the ceaseless murmur of low voices. At
length, Albert would emerge, chastened, abjectly penitent for the
enormity of his unknown crime, and bound to her more indissolubly
than ever by the immensity of his relief at being lifted again from
such agony into the light of her favor. Mrs. G. too, would appear,
much subdued, the excited glitter gone from her blue eyes, and the
amplitude of her wrath transformed into the generosity of her for-
giveness. Each crisis plumbed deeper into their emotional reserve
so that the stormy separations grew more agonizing and the intervals
of unanimity more passionately intense.
In May of that year, the month of Albert's sixteenth birthday,
the school moved to Atlantic City for six weeks. There, in a cottage
by the sea, the tide of emotion rose to its height.
Mrs. G. taught more violently than ever. In the brown,
rectangular living room on the first floor, the mornings were clamorous
with Greek History, and drill in diction. No Fourth Grade Speller
for Mrs. G., but words such as arbitrate, persecution, annulled, embel-
lishment, and aristocracy! Albert sat at the heavy mission table,
while she ramped up and down the room, hurling instruction at him.
A teacher, who retreated with her pupils to the third floor, found
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 171
that even closed doors could not shut out the volume of Mrs. G.'s
voice. Only on a stormy day was there peace, when the pound of
the waves against the seawall muffled the uproar of her teaching.
In their work at the seashore, they were to each other more
than teacher and pupil. Albert called her "Sonia," the familiar
name of her childhood. The exclamatory comments in his sentence
book, written in her sharp linear hand, show how much she, too,
injected the personal note into their pedagogic relationship.
Restore. Can you restore him to his senses?
Criticism: If it means you?No!
Permanent. Sonia is a permanent friend of mine if I behave
myself.
Defect. No, my brains are not defective.
Criticism: They most certainly are!
Strife. I never strife with Mrs. G. as she is always right.
Criticism: If you dared you would! Strife is a noun.
Strive is a verb. *
Implicit. I have implicit faith in Soma's promise never to
abandon me.
Despondent. Do you know how to spell "despondent"?
Criticism: Smart! I am very despondent as a result
of your behavior yesterday.
Sound. When I am as mentally sound as Mrs. G. I shall
be very happy.
That Mrs. G.'s own English was not always sufficiently idiomatic
to make this work in diction altogether profitable, is shown by the
following sentences:
Are you adapted for your business?
Wilson is not willing to arbitrate with Germany any longer.
Instantly as you know that you finally have to give in
you are foolish if you don't yield to my wishes.
She persisted, too, in applying the , French rule to the use of the
Possessive and taught Albert to write, "Mr. Smith's, the American
ambassador, hat"! Her insistence on continental manners, her
foreign pronunciation of geographical names and her teaching of
uuidiomatic English, positively expatriated him, making him share
even her uncertain nationality.
In Atlantic City, the waves of her passionate invective broke
over the boy with ever-increasing frequency and violence. She
could be heard to bellow in a voice that carried to the top of the
house above the lash of the sea, "I've had pets before and I've
topped them for far less than this." However, she could no longer
bring herself to banish him. She reviled him, yet she kept him with
172 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
her. Banishment had made study impossible for him, but this new
method tightened in the boy the tension of his effort to please and
resulted in an even swifter acquisition of knowledge.
Thus, the increased force of Mrs. G.'s teaching raised to a higher
power Albert's already almost superhuman effort to learn. One
day, when he had displeased her, she left him alone for the after-
noon, promising his restoration to favor if, on her return, he had
completed a very long assignment of work. To learn anything by
himself was a Herculean task for Albert, but Mrs. G. as an incentive
was stronger than his abhorrence of concentrated application.
So, in the quiet house, spurred on by the hope of her favor, he com-
mitted to memory a list of battles with their dates, the facts in two
pages of history, and the definitions of fifteen words. When, after
three hours absence, Mrs. G. returned, he was raised to the pinnacle
of bliss by her praise.
Except when, with strong, sure strokes, he swam out into the
sea, Albert was with "Sonia" nearly every moment of his waking
hours. All morning they worked together; at table he sat next to
her, and, once or twice, when she was in bed, he wheedled her into
having his dinner sent upstairs on the tray with hers. In the after-
noon, if it was pleasant, they strolled together along the boardwalk,
or whirled down Atlantic Avenue in a jitney to their favorite moving-
picture theater. All evening, if they did not go again to the theater,
Mrs. G. talked eloquently, ostensibly to the teachers, but in reality
for the benefit of Albert. Sunday they sat on the brown mission
settee with a litter of newspapers around them, and all day she
explained the news to him, paragraph by paragraph, in her endeavor
to make the boy, who a year ago had not understood a printed
account of a ball game, comprehend such subtle diplomatic moves
as Britain's stroke to hold her Mohammedan subjects by setting
up a rival Caliphate in Egypt. As they read, she filled him with
all her prejudice against Germany, England, and President Wilson,
all her admiration for France, Russia, and gallant Belgium.
Although she wanted Albert perpetually at her side, she was
never quite happy to be alone with him. To fill her cup of pleasure
to the brim, she must be able to display his adoration before an
appreciative audience. It was not her way to consult the inclination
of others. Whether or not it pleased us, we were required to sit
through weary sessions of newspaper reading, to watch innumerable
moving-picture films while she explained to the boy every detail
of the plot, to eat countless undesired dishes of ice cream or seafood
suppers,?all because it pleased her "baby child." If, by a rare
chance, Albert had gone to bed, or for a welcome moment was
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 173
out of sight, we were allowed to talk only of him, of the tragedy of
his unappreciative family, of the naive sweetness of his character,
of what he had learned, and most of all, of the purely childlike
quality of his devotion to her.
That spring Mrs. G. had taken extraordinary care in choosing
her costumes and Albert's. One afternoon in particular stands out.
The two of them came up the boardwalk, illuminated by the bright
glare of the May sunlight thrown back from the blue stretch of
ocean. She was in immaculate white, her blouse of fine figured
lawn, daintily tucked, and ruffled about the wrists and throat. She
wore a little close hat of cerise, rimmed with tiny roses, and carried
a parasol that gleamed cherry red in the sunshine. Albert, in a
Well-cut blue Norfolk suit, and a new straw hat, the nineteenth
which had been tried on him in the London Shop, hung over her
with an air of infatuated absorption. She looked very young,
there in the light and the gay color, and he all of twenty-five.
Together, they seemed as gay as the sunlight and the blue sea.
But Albert liked her best in a very different gown?one of
heavy black taffeta with a wide, lustrous stripe of black satin.
It fell from the waist line in a long, full overskirt which swung far
out behind as she walked. Her plump white arms showed to the
shoulder through soft, full sleeves of transparent black chiffon.
In this gown she was, at once, dignified, demure, provocative.
All Albert's Oriental sensuousness rose in full tide to meet the
appeal of her luxuriant physical attraction. In the midst of a
meal, the boy would spring from his chair, and indulge in the most
extravagant demonstrations of affection. She would put him aside
weakly with a "There, there, child!", and then give in to his plea,
"I can't help it, Baby, you are so beautiful!"
Such passionate demonstrations made even Mrs. G. pause.
The "baby child" was making love to her. She knew that it must
he stopped, yet it was precisely such emotional dissipation that
made life interesting to her. Because she did not wish to stop it,
she professed that she could not. She who held him in the hollow
of her hand, she who, when her dynamic will was roused, could
create in him a new behavior, a new mind, and new emotions, now
for the first time admitted herself powerless.
By much voluble protestation, she endeavored to convince
herself and others, that the boy did not know his affection was
other than filial. She declared that it would be a crime to wake
him rudely; that he believed his demonstrative caresses to be those
of a child. Yet it seemed she must be aware of how specious were
the premises on which she based this conclusion she so much desired,
174 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Albert, the chubby youngster in knickerbockers who had come to
us eighteen months before, was square and clean, yet not unsophisti-
cated.
At the end of June, when they came up from Atlantic City,
the wave of their emotion was so high that it was bound to break.
Through the nine months since October, the nervous tension had
waxed tauter and tauter. It snapped at last in Mrs. G., her tre-
mendous physique unable to stand the strain she had put upon it.
At first, for a fortnight, she was in a private hospital in the city.
There, in the violent reaction of a nervous breakdown, she blamed
Albert for being the cause of her collapse, and refused to speak to
him on the telephone or to see him. She even expressed the hope
that no one else would waste time and strength in teaching him,
since it was totally unappreciated. After a brief and partial recon-
ciliation she left for two months' recuperation in the mountains.
For perhaps two weeks, or a little longer, Albert went about
in a state of the deepest despair, mourning, in pallor and gloom,
for his "beautiful Baby." Then he ceased to speak of her and
settled down to work quietly and happily.
Miss M., who taught him with as much interest and devotion
as Mrs. G. and with more quietness, found him capable of doing
work such as is assigned to twelve or thirteen-year-old children.
This precisely correlated with his performance level as indicated
by the Binet Test, the Ayres Spelling Scale, the Courtis Arithmetic
Tests, and the Trabue Language Scale A. His formboard index
(19 sec.) was slightly below this level, and the Witmer cylinders
(50 sec.) possibly above. In the previous summer his level of per-
formance in school work was only that of an eight or nine-year-old
boy.
Miss M. worked with Albert chiefly on arithmetic, composition,
and grammar. In June, Mrs. G. had made a strenuous and nearly
futile attempt to teach him arithmetic, particularly decimals. She
counted in some foreign tongue?Swedish, Finnish, Russian?or
whatever was her native language, and insisted on various foreign
devices such as writing the digits after the decimal point in smaller
figures than those before. She found it difficult to translate her
work into English, and the strange new devices she forced upon
him naturally confused the boy.
With Miss M.'s lucid teaching, and with the very genuine
accession of mental ability that had come to him in the preceding
twelve months, Albert advanced rapidly in arithmetic. In Septem-
ber, 1915, Miss M. stated (and her word is to be relied upon): "He
has had review of problems in fundamental operations, and at the
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 175
present time seldom fails in problems of this kind. He knows frac-
tions, decimals, percentage, profit and loss, commission, and simple
interest fairly well. He has not had the 6-per-cent method or
any short cuts. He has not had much oral work." Of language,
she stated at the same time: "He can diagram sentences very well,
can analyze sentences, does paraphrasing but finds it rather difficult,
reproduces stories about famous characters in history, such as
Joan of Arc, and Cyrus of Persia, and shows great improvement in
English when asked to describe something."
Probably the two months that Albert worked with Miss M.
were the quietest, happiest, and most normal, of all the twenty-one
that he was with us. He could count on her interest, affection,
and justice, and, in the now tranquil house, was able to use the
increased ability to concentrate, and the new image complexes
which he had gained through the year. He never made the super-
human effort to learn which had enabled him to touch the impossible
in his work for Mrs. G., but his progress was steadier and more
normal. His constitution, too, splendidly young and strong, had
stood the strain which undermined Mrs. G.'s extraordinary physique.
Miss B. and Dr. Witmer together, by their careful diagnostic
teaching, had laid the foundation of Albert's progress. At the
end, Miss M. had rounded out the work. With their aid Mrs. G.
had almost touched her goal. In October, Albert was to enter
the eighth grade of an eastern boys' school of good standing. In
?ne year, he had been lifted approximately four years on the educa-
tion scale, and had made an even more conspicuous rise on the
civilization scale. He still hovered amongst the dubiates, around
the threshold of social sufficiency, but Mrs. G., by the sheer force
?f her catyclysmic personality, had raised him to that threshold.
Albert was neither very intelligent nor very proficient; it was
doubtful whether he could last even through the first year of high
school. Failure in high school is not, however, an indisputable
indication of imbecility. If he could control his "freshness," and
his nervous, flustered behaviour, Albert, with his handsome features,
his dancing, and the veneer of social polish, would be "sufficient"
in nouveau riche Jewish society. In the business career his father
designed for him, he would almost certainly fail, quite as much
from lack of conformity, because he was scatter-brained, and unable
to apply himself, as from inferior ability; but in a more modest
position, he could undoubtedly earn at least a meager livelihood.
Morally, he emerged from the emotional experience, still funda-
mentally honest, clean, and square. His ideas of truth and temper-
ance were a little less fine because of his contact with her; his ideals
176 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
of life lifted a little above the sordid money bags. How far her
abnormal emotional stimulation had established in him a dangerous
psychosis, or how far it served as a katharsis for the over-developed
sex-consciousness he displayed when he first came to us, only the
years of his life may reveal.
It would, indeed, require a fine adjustment of the scales to measure
whether those twenty-one months counted for good or for ill in the
boy's life.
The story of Albert as we know it has been told in so far as it
touched him vitally. There was, however, in the last of September,
before he left for his new school, another brief fortnight with Mrs. G.
Their devotion to each other appeared to be as deep as ever,
but quieter, less conspicuously demonstrative, and tinged with a
certain seriousness by the thought of their approaching separation.
That separation brought more real grief to Mrs. G. than it did to
the boy. On the last evening, however, he declared that he could
not be away from "Sonia" for a single precious moment.
The next morning, he left. Mrs. G. went with him half way
to New York. She wore her lustrous black gown, and a broad-
winged hat of black illusion. Her face, since her illness, was thinner,
more delicate; and her clear, dark blue eyes softened to a singular
gentleness. Never had she seemed so pretty, so illusive, so instinct
with womanly charm.
As to the handsome, dark-eyed boy, well-groomed, frank and
courteous in his farewell, it was difficult to realize that, not two
years before, he had come into our house, a "fresh," unkempt,
overfed youngster squeezed into shabby tweed knickerbockers
and a Buster Brown collar. There had been little peace in that
house since he came into it, but we saw him drive away that late
September morning, with genuine regret, for, withal that he had
tormented us, he had won our affection, by the quality of his boyish
spirit.
Nine months later, Albert wrote to Dr. Witmer from his new
school:
Mr dear Dr. Witmer:?
I feel highly honored to receive your kind letter which I assure you was
appreciated.
It certainly was extremely nice of Mr. D. to deliver my message. ... I
did not know he was from the "red and blue" until it was announced at the
close of supper. . . . He said he knew you quite well and from then on, he was
a good friend of mine. We made an agreement to see each other at the close of
the Y. M. C. A. I have only missed one of these meetings, that I could possibly
attend throughout the year. I do this because I want to follow the right track.
Dr. Witmer, I must confess to you that you have practically saved my life.
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 177
What I mean by this is, that if I had never gone to your wonderful little school
and gotten acquainted with your enthusiastic faculty I know my progress would
have been fatal. I would have then turned out to be?well, you know the rest.
Yes, Dr. Witmer, I can readily recall those hot summer days when you, with
the aid of Miss B., tried to penetrate those simple examples into my mind. I
remember when you tried your utmost to teach me the definitions of such words
as "obtain" and "retain." I also recall the prose (at the end of each spelling
lesson), which was given to me to learn by memory. It was considered good
tf I learnt about two lines per hour. I cannot see how you could stand it! Any-
how you put me on the right track which I thank you many times over for.
In this case, "thank," is a very mild word. . . .
Tomorrow we play Penn Freshmen base-ball here. I won't use so much
'lung power" if I might call it so, as I have done in the previous games. I
can't say anything against Pennsylvania. I remember when I used to talk about
nothing except "New York." That was nothing except my darn conceit.
Please excuse the slang. Miss B. taught me what conceit was. I mean the
definition. Here's the way it went: "Conceit is having a high opinion of one's
8elf," said Miss B. "What does it mean?" asked Miss B. What does what
mean? was my silly question. Why conceit, she said. Oh! conceit? "Why it
means?let's take a bicycle ride this afternoon and see if we can beat our?"
'You are the worst boy I have ever taught, etc." Well, Miss B. is honest.
I wonder if she would think that of me this day. ... I remember, and will
never forget (as well as I know I will be seventeen in eleven minutes and one
second) the school with the various people and environment.
I have been working hard at my studies all day so that I will have more
success in my final exams which are given within two weeks. I am most unfor-
tunate in my exams. They are what bring my monthly marks down. Thank
goodness that the monthly exams only count one third of the final mark. The
lowest mark I have had in any subject this year was 65 per cent. I am glad
that I will be in high school next year. It was a hard battle to get there. . . .
Do take good care of yourself and don't work too hard. Please give my
best wishes to all, keeping a very large share for yourself. Do not write me except
at your convenience. Again, Dr. Witmer, I thank you for all you have done.
I am, as ever, your good friend,
Albert.
About the same time, in May, 1916, Dr. Witmer received the
following letter from an instructor in the school Albert was then
attending:
Dr. Lightner Witmer,
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pa.
Dear Dr. Witmer:?
I am very glad indeed to give you my opinion of Albert, and also an idea
as to his school work here.
Albert has told me of being with you and has often spoken very highly
you and your school. This noon he was very happy when he came and showed
me a letter he had received from you.
Albert's actions are not normal, and he is the butt for the jokes of the boys.
; ? - He will probably pass most of his grammar school work this year, but
it is doubtful if he will last in the third form (which corresponds to the fresh-
178 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
man year ih high school) next year. It may be of interest to note that the man
in charge of the lower school told me today that Albert has, in his opinion, almost
reached his limit in school work but will probably make a successful business
man. This from a Yale Phi Beta Kappa man with several years teaching
experience. . . .
In March, 1917, ten months after the two letters quoted above
were received, Albert wrote again, a letter not as perfect as the first
in its penmanship.
My dear Miss S.:?
Even though I have not had much of a chance to write you today, I made
up my mind to at least start a letter.
Yes, I received your very nice letter and I am ashamed of myself for not
haying answered it before now. ... I have been working, and hard, too.
Maybe you wonder why it is I have been so busy? Well I am an awful
"bonehead" as they call it, in my studies, and I am making a big effort to suc-
ceed so far as an education is concerned. I spend more time on my work than
any boy that I know does but still many show better results. Yet, there are
some that are worse than I am. ... I wish somehow I could be classified
where I belong, but the chances are very slim. I am taking four subjects not
including Bible. They are: Algebra, English, History, and Latin. The two
latter are my hardest. I certainly agree with Mrs. W. that Latin should be
abolished. . . . We completed our term's work about a week ago and then I
was passing in everything. After the exams I only passed in two subjects, Math
and English. I get very nervous during exam time and those marks never fail
to be a menace to me. Bible, I have not found difficult, but let me tell you a
secret. I have never studied a lesson and I got away with 85 per cent average
for this year. . . .
What do you think about the war? It certainly is fierce. From the little
I see of the papers we are bound to have a part in this conflict. ... To be
frank with you, I am not anxious to go to war, but if they need me, and I have
my father's consent I will make also a good target for the Germans. As I sup-
pose you know, Dad is a German and I really wouldn't want to fight against a
country from which a very close kinsman as he was born. Secondly, I am the
only son and Father has been waiting for me to get the education and experience
so that he can place part of his business in my hands, confidentially. My third
reason is that I haven't the heart to kill people, especially in a bayonette fight.
Maybe if I were over there I should feel different. There is a big possibility
of being killed and I suppose it would bring more sorrow than Father could
stand. What's more, my greatest ambition is to make good. I will be eighteen
in May, and if more men are called, I will fight for America.
No, by no means have I forgotten my dear friends over in Pennsy. . . .
Do the children pass much time at the Pastime Theater or have they in past
times? How is H. getting on, and all the rest of my companions, or "socii"
as we call them in Latin? Just displaying some of my brilliancy! I often think
of the children and the nice times we spent together. Don't be surprised if
you see me some day, on a visit up at the old school once more.
Might as well close now before the sun rises (son if you prefer).
Good luck!
Your sincere friend,
Albert.
