A Study of the Interplay of Personality
=========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1917, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XI, No. 4
June 15,1917
ORTHOGENIC CASES.
XII. 
By Sarah Warfield Parker, A. M.,
Philadelphia, Pa.
It is hard to write a clinical study of Albert, easier by far to
uin it into sheer story. To be sure, it was a case for psycho-
ogical treatment, that came into our household one cold January
And indeed, ours was a household where stern pedagogy and
scientific training were supposed to dominate emotion and senti-
*n su?k a household, came a contact of races, Semite
p1 ,^av' an interplay of personalities, the impression of a mature
Russian woman upon an adolescent Jewish boy, a contact that was
ense, intimate, transitive. In that contact there was some
4 a lty of the elemental that swept aside scientific pedagogy and
erican reserve to let the experience mould the boy as it must.
"W e were fortunate in that of the two, the boy was the first to
come to us. For five months therefore we had the opportunity to
s u y his personality unmodified by the profound impression Mrs. G.
made upon him.
TV. Albert was something over fourteen and a half when he came.
e clinical recorder described him as "a fat boy, big for his age but
a er babyish looking." A pair of baggy brown tweed knicker-
oc . s left most unbecomingly exposed a pair of very pudgy legs;
ck neck was squeezed into a stiff Buster Brown collar a size
00 smaU- A large head was set rather low on this fat body and
crested with a riotous shock of coal black hair, curly and very stiff.
e boy seemed overfed, overlarge for his clothes, but certainly
n?t 0Verclean. Yet there looked out of that full face a pair of brown
e> es, a trifle small, but altogether straight, and the tilt to that curly
ack head was not unattractive.
^1G k?y fidgeted nervously. He crossed his legs, pulled at
e knees of his trousers, hitched up his tie, pawed his face, bit his
nai s and shoved his chair along the rug. The father and mother
(97)
98 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
who had brought him sat one on each side of the fireplace and talked
volubly at cross purposes. On the right sat a tall German Jew of
sixty, a shrewd business man, a little of the tolerant father. His
pride in the persistent shrewdness that had raised him from the
poverty of the immigrant dishwasher in a Bowery chop house to
the millions he had amassed in building up a large manufacturing
business was linked with unconsciousness of his patent lack of culture.
"When I was this boy's age," he said, "I had begun to make
my own way in the world."
"Nonsense!" interrupted the mother. "I want him to pass for
a gentleman in society." Then turning to the boy she snapped,
"Take your hands away from your face, Albert."
She sat on the other side of the hearth, a plump, opulent woman,
irritable and nervous to the point of hysteria. A sense of her superior
culture made her manner toward both husband and son a trifle
supercilious.
"But Albert never did get along in school," she continued.
"He started in when he was six at a convent school and I've had him
in seven or eight private schools since. He never got on in any of
them. He's classed in with little boys of ten 01* eleven years old.
Albert, stop biting your nails. He won't study; he's too lazy."
"He needs to be set to work," interjected the father. "If his
mother would let me start him at the bottom in one of my mills "
Again the mother interrupted, "His father doesn't understand
the boy. Albert, take your hands away from your face. Mr. Y.
takes him down to the office and lets him idle around all morning
and go to a matinee after lunch. I'm the only person that can
manage Albert. Albert, stop fussing with your tie."
The husband caught at the diversion to put in a word, "If
I could get my boy to concentrate, if I could get him to think before
he speaks, he would be all right."
But Mrs. Y. went on as though there had been no interrubtion,
"Albert is lazy; he answers in any fashion to avoid thinking. He
is gluttonous, sluggish, indifferent and thoughtless. Albert will you
keep those hands still? "
"Don't fuss the boy so much, Baby," the father remonstrated.
Mrs. Y. was not to be stopped, "This last month he has com-
pletely disorganized my household. He makes trouble with the
servants, and teases his sister all the time. She is very charming,
quite like my mother, who is a most unusual woman, but Albert
nags her all day long. Albert, I can't watch you chew your fingers
another second. Go upstairs."
The boy went, his black head a trifle bent, and on the first step
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 99
he stumbled. In those first months, we never saw him go up or down
steps without stumbling.
The parents left after a little and the coachman brought bac
the story of an hysterical scene on the way to the station, when Mrs.
stood up screaming, and threatened to jump from the carriage.
So they left with us the boy that together they had born and
bred, to better, if we could, the botch they had made of it.
Albert had been excluded from schools for normal boys for two
reasons: (1) because he could not "get on" in his school work;
(2) because they could not tolerate his behavior. To inquire into
his mental status is our first problem.
At the age of fourteen and a half Albert's proficiency in school
work was not higher than that of a fourth grade pupil. Such an
estimate is at best an approximation, for in some mechanical opera-
tions he had efficiency equal to that acquired in the seventh and
eighth grades, while in others his performance level was as low as
that of the second grade.
In arithmetic he could add, subtract, multiply and divide as
rapidly and nearly as accurately as boys of the eighth grade. Of
decimals and fractions he knew almost nothing. Tables of measure,
he knew only sketchily, and could not apply at all. In the reasoning
examples of the Courtis tests his rating was no higher than the sec-
ond grade. Five months after he came to us Dr. Witmer wrote.
He cannot solve a problem which a boy of ten would be able to
solve even though the problem itself requires nothing more than addi-
tion or multiplication."
Although he had studied geography and history for several
years he knew little of the first and absolutely nothing of the second.
His tutor remarked, "His knowledge of geography was in a nebulous
state." He thought Scotland was in England, and London the
capital of Paris?this in spite of the fact that he had been abroad
three times and had spent many weeks in Paris. The information
that America had whipped England in the war of the Revolution
he received with absurd and pathetic jubilation as though it were a
piece of news fresh from the front. In general information lie was
quite as hazy. He thought that Episcopalians were not Christians,
and that there were five seasons, spring, summer, fall, autumn, and
winter. Of current events he knew almost literally nothing. Pos-
sibly he knew the name of the President of the United States; I
should not be surprised to find that he did not. He was ignorant of
charcoal, metals, hard and soft coal, plants, trees, and flowers.
Albert read "rapidly but with little expression from a sixth
grade reader," and spelled well in the fifth grade. He was deficient,
100 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
however, in the meaning of words. Such words as alderman, widow,
scarf, profit, wares, conceit, deceit he did not know the meaning of.
He did not get the sense of what he read. A teacher wrote "A
child of seven or eight could tell the story (one of iEsop's Fables)
as well as he does." He could not understand a single paragraph in
a newspaper about a baseball game that he himself had seen. He
had read scarcely anything, in fact he could not sit still long enough
to read a book more than five minutes at a time. After reading the
first two pages of one of the "Adventures of Sherlock Holmes" he
was in a maze as to what was happening, floundered a page or two
further and then threw the book aside. We have all had a similar
experience when reading in a foreign language with which we are
but imperfectly familiar. Neither could he follow the relatively
simple plot of a moving picture film.
Grammar was a confused mass of meaningless diagrams and
definitions. He knew nothing of paragraphing, and could not
reproduce stories because he did not understand them. On the other
hand, he composed diaries and letters rather fluently. His sentences
were sometimes involved and marred by misused auxiliary verbs
and prepositions, and the sense suffered often from his inability to
think consecutively. Yet taken all in all, composition was his long
suit?his only long suit.
Nevertheless, Albert seemed to have more mental capacity than
appeared in his school work. His memory span for digits was eight;
under the best of conditions, nine, and even ten. Tested with design
blocks and letter squares, his visual imagery seemed to be partic-
ularly vivid and accurate. He played a good game of pinocle and,
indeed, taught one of the teachers to play. Checkers, a game,
which when well-played, taxes the ingenuity, the resourcefulness,
the genuine intelligence of the players, Albert played exceptionally
well. A game of checkers with Albert was a real match of minds,
keenly stimulating. Mental examination revealed no specific mental
defect in him other than a grave deficiency in persistent concen-
tration of attention, a defect in the trainability of memory due to
the immobility of his mind in the idea-complex forming process,
and following upon these, a distinct limitation in understanding and
in range of interest.
Albert was mentally lazy. He did not like to work and "played
for time" all through his lessons. He failed to realize the serious-
ness of his deficiencies and wasted all his intelligence in the attempt
to "bluff." He talked loftily about algebra and geometry when he
had not yet mastered fractions. He could not fix his attention
upon anything. His mind was darting here and there and every-
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 101
where. Moreover, he had no self-confidence and no self-control.
He could not and would not buckle down to study by himself. He
wanted someone perpetually by his side to drive and coax him on,
and above all, to explain.
I should like, if I can, to picture to you Albert in the class room.
It was 9 a. m. on a spring morning. The class room was in the
second story of the little school house, with sunny windows open
wide. A boy with a stiff mop of rumpled black hair came tumbling
in at the window over the shed roof. Panting, he threw himself
mto his seat, mopped his forehead with a mussy handkerchief, then
?pened his desk, and pulled out a miscellaneous pile of books and
papers. He slammed them on the desk, dropped most of them and
half tumbled out of his seat to pick them up. At length he selected
a note book marked "Diary" and cleared his desk energetically
for work.
Just then, Mr. A. his teacher came in at the door. Albert
Jumped up, giggled, shot at him a volley of foolish remarks and
questions, and finally settled down to work again. But his pencil
needed sharpening. He leaped to the sharpener, and ground away
porously, breaking the fresh point several times in the process.
After a series of wriggles, questions, and accidents, the diary
M as at last done and Albert was given an arithmetic problem involv-
*ng two simple steps. With much rustling of paper, and squirming
0 body he finally succeeded in reading the problem.
'I don't know how to do it," he announced.
, Mr. A. has said of him that there was "no problem of any
"faculty whatsoever that Albert would undertake without a great
?al of prompting, urging, and coercion."
My father isn't a farmer," he went on loftily, "How should I
Know anything about bushels?"
With much grumbling he performed the first step. Then he
?pped. He was unable?Mr. A. says he always was unable?to
^oresee the next step. Mr. A. adds further that Albert applied
not the slightest quantum of reasoning to his work." After he had
?en given one problem of a particular type, he tried to solve all
0 ers in precisely the same way.
Albert was helped through this problem and then through
another. He wrote out the solution of the second carelessly. In
e first line he spelled the word flour correctly. In the second line
e ^rote "flower." The day before he had written flour a hundred
unes because he had made exactly the same mistake.
Ibert then began to study a history lesson but very shortly
arne upon the name "York River."
102 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
"Is the York River half as large as the Hudson River?" he asked.
And he continued at intervals. "What is the largest river in
the world?" "Is the Mississippi River the largest in this country?"
"Does the Nile flow through Paris and Switzerland?" "What are
you writing? I bet you're writing mean things about me."
After several minutes of feeble concentration he grumbled,
"How do you think I can work with that lawn mower going outside?"
With twenty minutes of this kind of study, he announced that
he knew his lesson. He recited in a random manner, and tried to
coax his teacher into asking him questions that would be "leaders."
The boy felt entirely content with his own half-knowledge and thought
it very ill-natured of Mr. A. not to be satisfied with the recitation.
Mr. A. with infinite patience set about explaining the lesson,
and illuminating it by an interesting anecdote and a striking illus-
tration. During the explanation Albert dropped his pencil, twirled
his eraser, balanced his chair on one leg, and gazed at the ceiling.
When Mr. A. had finished, Albert remarked casually, "There
are twenty-six flies on the ceiling."
Albert spent his recess in running and climbing and chasing.
At the end of the recreation period he clambered in at the window
again to find another teacher waiting to give him a lesson in geog-
raphy. She was a teacher remarkable for her firm control in the
class room.
As soon as she opened the book and began to look severe, Albert
burst out impulsively, "Gee! but you look pretty today."
Miss B. ignored the comment with dignity, but her preliminary
explanation of the lesson, given with energy enough to make any
boy sit up and pay attention, bore fruit only in a vague and dreamy
remark, "Your eyes are the same color as your dress."
Judged on the basis of his proficiencies at that time, Albert's
performance level was four or five years below what it should have
been for his age. More than that, in his present nervous and undis-
ciplined state, it was almost impossible to teach him anything. Yet
none of us were willing to pronounce him definitely feebleminded.
Dr. Witmer wrote of Albert from time to time after several
months of observation:
"The boy has a pronounced mental retardation which undoubt-
edly rests on a physical basis of some sort . . . has grave infirmities
of mind and character. ... He cannot exert himself because he so
easily falls into a state of mental confusion. He is extremely feeble
in any effort requiring persistent thinking. He can do arithmetic,
provided the work required of him is mechanical, but if any thinking
is involved he flounders about trying first one process and then
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 103
another. He lives in and for a state of excitement. He has never
been taught to work. ... He inclines to resort to all sorts of expe-
dients to avoid working and this has become such a habit with him
that only little by little can I get him to do work requiring close
application. He has what I should call a mind that skims and in
skimming he fails to be accurate. Nevertheless, I am absolutely
confident that Albert has more capacity than appears in his school
work.
"His mental condition is a very puzzling one. In some ways
he seems very normal, only to have wrong ideas and excessive
Nervousness, and an inability to think a thing out. But when it
comes to making a consistent effort involving either physical or
Rental exertion, he oftentimes gives an impression of being mentally
inferior."
The diagnosis , of Albert's mental status, in so far as it was
ormulated at the time, was serious retardation in efficiency based
uPon mental confusion, and possibly upon actual mental deficiency.
In spite of this retardation in school efficiency we found Albert
a oy of splendid physique, abnormally strong, redundant with energy
aud life. Indeed, his anatomical and physiological development
^as in excess of his chronological age. We found him, moreover,
e typical adolescent, so typical that no school for adolescent boys
^ould tolerate his behavior. He seemed, indeed, the epitome of
oiescent tendencies and reactions pushed to the extreme. And
nd the urge of his physiological age, reinforcing these tendencies,
Were Oriental sensuousness that persists in many of his race, the
crude egoism of the American nouveau riclie, and the pressure of the
Neurotic heredity and environment in such a family as his.
To give substance to these generalizations, we must attempt a
e ailed description and analysis of Albert's behavior. For this
Purpose, it may be well to take G. Stanley Hall's list of "antithetical
unpulses" characteristic of adolescence.1
1- "There are hours, days, weeks, and perhaps months of over-
energetic action," followed by torpor, laziness, low tension.2
Albert was most often at the point of high tension, and with
un tension was very high. On a walk, he never walked. He leaped
own the terrace steps, six at a time, ran zigzag along the road cross-
jug his feet to make the children laugh, vaulted gates, climbed
r ed wire fences in his best clothes, scaled telegraph poles, and
swung out on the limbs of the highest trees. At the station he
usually chose to run the mile to the house, and though the coach-
HaU, G. Stanley. Adolescence. New York: D. Applcton & Co., 1916. Vol. II, pp. 75-88
Ikd- PP.75-76.
104 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
man lashed his horse in a vain attempt to beat him, Albert, pleased
and panting was always at hand at our own steps to open the car-
riage door. In the house he was so strenuous that he broke the
chairs in the living room, the towel rack in the bath room, and
three-cornered gashes in his trousers were accidents of almost daily
occurrence.
One recalls, too, the tendency noted by Hall1 "to phonation in
articulate and sometimes in animal noises, not perhaps so much to
gratify ear hunger as to relieve efferent tension." His voice, grow-
ing each month deeper and deeper, boomed through the house in
crude melody, and it happened often, when you came from town,
that a wild black-headed youngster leaped down the hill to greet
you with a squeak and an absurd shout of nonsense syllables, "Nee-
no-ny! Nee-no-ny!''
At other times, particularly when there was work to be done,
we saw Albert hanging around the house in lazy boredom, grumbling
that there "was nothing to do in this old hole," lackadaisical, listless.
2. There are "oscillations between pleasure and pain," "tears
and laughter," "exultation and depression."2
General good spirits and moods of downheartedness of course
alternated in Albert. But more conspicuous in the boy were the
specific reactions of tears and giggles. The "mental ticldishness"
to which Hall calls attention3 was particularly acute. Albert giggled
excessively, reflexly, uncontrollably?often at the blunders of others,
more often at some allusion that he could in some remote way relate
to his very sensitive consciousness of sex.
On the other hand, in the typical relaxation of energy and of
reaction to stimuli that comes in the evening, tears of self-pity were
frequently shed. He shed them because he was homesick, because
his sister had not written, because his mother no longer cared for
him, because he had offended someone in the household. These
moods were very black and very genuine.
3. "Self-feeling is increased, and we have all forms of self-
affirmation and self-distrust."4
Albert was supremely egoistic. He expected to monopolize the
affection and attention of every adult in the house. He elbowed
every other child away and claimed as his right the place next to
the teacher. The place once gained, he could talk of nothing but
himself, his lessons, his family, his troubles, his future. Several
1 Ibid., p. 21.
1 Ibid., pp. 76-78.
8 Ibid., p. 78.
4 Ibid., pp. 79-80.
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 105
times daily he repeated the insistent demand, "Honest, do you like
me? You like Charles better than me, now, don't you?"
Self-affirmation in its crudest form?"swagger ways, thrusting
oneself in conspicuous places, talking, acting, dressing to attract
notice,"1 made Albert a most embarrassing companion in public
places. I have seen him on the street jostle a total stranger, nudge
him and exclaim, "New York's the best place." I have heard him
thrust a comment into a conversation between two strangers by
yelling across the road, "What did she do that for?" His tutor
wrote, some six weeks after he came to us, "His manners in a car
are very bad. He jumps about in a restless fashion, calls to me,
and on several occasions made remarks across the aisle about some
person who entered the car. He has also a very obnoxious habit
?f making silly, groundless remarks about anything connected with
Philadelphia, exalting at every breath New York City. In the train,
he 'eyes' in a very annoying fashion any girls or young women who
enter."
His attitude toward the wisdom and advice of adults was no
less typical. He made dogmatic statements concerning things of
which he knew nothing, and assumed an air of sophistication that
made him seem most blase. He acted as though he knew more about
Latin than any college graduate who ventured to contradict his
statement, more about social convention than any of the well-bred
People with whom he was living. The writing paper given him was
too cheap," because it could be bought for "ten cents a box," all
motors were "tin Lizzies" beside his father's Pierce-Arrow. Though
he was constantly asking advice he usually rejected it contemptuously
with the crushing remark that "such things were not done in New
York."
Yet deeper than this, beneath these annoying self-assertions,
there was real pride of honor, a wholesome consciousness of integrity.
In the main, by the clean code of a boy, Albert was square. For
Mother reason, too, Albert held his eyes straight. He had not
passed through some eight or nine public and private schools with-
?ut gaining a familiarity with the current vices, but his reaction
had been a healthy hatred of all such things. By his straight eyes,
Albert won a measure of our respect.
Moreover, as Hall suggests,2 all this effrontery, braggadocio,
self-righteousness, was often but bravado to hide a deep-seated dis-
trust of self. A recollection of the conversation of the mother on the
day she left her boy with us, must give us some hint of how thoroughly,
1 Mid., p. 79.
2 MM; P. 79.
106 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
through all his lifetime, the boy's self-confidence had been under-
mined. His was a sensitive nature in which such attacks had made
a deep wound. So, in his "top-lofty superiority" we come to see at
least a touch of the "whistle that keeps the spirits up."
Again and again he cried out from the real tragedy of youth,
"Do you think I will ever be normal?" And once, in the first
months he was with us, before he had quito. outgrown the little
boy in knickerbockers, he said, "If I can't get so I can manage
my father's business I don't ever want to marry anyone. I don't
want people to say to my children that their father couldn't make
good."
One noticed, quite as much, in Albert's behavior, the character-
istic alternations,
4. "Between selfishness and altruism,"1 generosity and total
disregard for the rights and feelings of others;
5. "Between good and bad conduct,"2 between submission and
rebellion, between dissipation in matching pennies and shooting
craps, and renunciation for religious scruples of all athletic games.
6. There are antitheses in the "great groups of social instincts."3
In this particular case the antithesis takes the form, not so much of
alternation of contradictory moods, but of a constant complex of
conflicting social impulses. In actual contact with strangers, Albert
was shy, so shy that on a cross country tramp he was always afraid
to ask the road. Yet, at times, his very nervousness made him
unspeakably fresh. With boys of his own age he was never com-
panionable; nor did he often seek such companionship. Those who
were on a par with him mentally irritated him and he treated them
contemptuously, but neither did he have sufficient self-confidence to
meet normal boys of his age on equal terms.
Nevertheless, he was in no sense anti-social. He never wanted
to be alone. He was anxious to please, affectionate, demonstrative,
and had an immense capacity for hero-worship, for devotion to any
older person who showed toward him friendliness and interest.
This impulse was so strong, so inherent in the nature of the boy,
that he poured out his devotion upon such unresponsive objects as
his mother and sister. Though Albert never acknowledged their
unresponsiveness, it none the less served to dam up these instinctive
efferent impulses, till there was within him a great reservoir of adora-
tion, of discipleship, waiting only for an object, an outlet.
In addition to this capacity for hero-worship, we observed in
1 Ibid., p. 81.
s Ibid., p. 82.
3 Ibid., pp. 84-85.
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 107
him a distinct attraction to all pleasing individuals of the opposite
sex, irrespective of age, to mother, sister, teachers, little children,
waitresses in a restaurant, girls of the neighborhood,?even the
snake-charmer at the circus,?an attraction that was open, frank,
and entirely immediate.
7. There are "changes from exquisite sensitiveness to imper-
turbability and even apathy, hard-heartedness, and perhaps cruelty."1
Albert very nearly fails to typify this antithesis. Warm-
hearted and sympathetic he certainly was; kind to animals, gentle
with children, sensitive to the unhappiness of others, impulsively
generous. This attitude was a constant quantity in his temperament.
With the muscular power and sharp irritability that was his,
it would not have been surprising had his flood of energy occasionally
vented itself in cruelty, but kindness and generosity were too
inherent in his nature. Though he loved to tease the younger chil-
dren, to wrestle and toss them about with his powerful arms, he
stopped instantly at the first signal of genuine fear or hurt. And
though he was self-centered and thoughtless of the rights of others,
the moment his eyes were opened to the discomfort or pain he was
giving another, he was full of consideration and remorse. Whatever
pain he inflicted was but the consequence of his thoughtless egoism.
At no time, and in no sense, as long as we knew him, was there
apparent any impulse of cruelty, or of conscious intent to wound.
The remaining five antithetical impulses of Hall's series are so
p^Uch more applicable to individuals who have advanced further in
intellectual development than had Albert at the outset of our study
that they do not seem apropos to this analysis. There are, however,
several other typical sets of reactions that we cannot overlook.
Dr. Hall writes that "this period ... is preeminently the age
sense, and hence prone to sensuousness not only in taste and sex
where the danger is greatest, but in the domain of each of the sense
species."2 In Albert this adolescent dominance of the senses was
reinforced by a redundant physical development and a certain
Oriental luxuriance of temperament.
In the pleasures of the palate, he reveled. Quantities of candy
Were bought and consumed at every opportunity. In the begin-
^jng, he ate with his left thumb planted firmly on the table to brace
nimself for rapid, energetic action. He shovelled immoderate por-
tions of food into his mouth, bolting the meal in one-half the time it
took the boy next him, and promptly asking for more. Once, in a
Restaurant, Albert ordered deviled lobster, lobster salad, chocolate
p. 85.
2 Ibu., p. 3s.
108 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
with whipped cream, ice cream, and French pastry. The adult
who curtailed this gastronomic dissipation was frankly labelled as
a provincial Philadelphian who knew nothing of what was done in
the elite circles of New York City.
His olfactory sense was sophisticated. His delight was in the
perfume of toilet powder, sachet, shaving soap, cologne,?never, I
think, in the fragrances of out-of-doors.
In the same manner, his auditory sense responded pleasantly
to the stimulus of crude sound. He liked to play rag-time on the
Victrola, to sing and whistle it. The sound of words pleased him;
he extemporized meaningless rhymes, and snatched at a word in a
conversation to quote a phrase from a music hall song in which it
was used. Nothing set him off more easily into fits of giggling than
a sudden or unusual series of sounds.
Associated with this was his sense of movement, kinesthesia.
Movement, per se, was pleasant to him. He loved to leap, run,
climb, jig up and down, twirl on one leg of a chair, juggle with plates
and phonograph records, and jabber foolishly to release voco-motor
impulses. He was "prone to yell and indulge in vocal gymnastics,"1
and as movement became ordered in a feeling for rhythm, there
developed in him a love and an aptitude for dancing.
Vision was no less keenly alive to stimulation. The boy felt
quickly and expressed frankly, keen pleasure or displeasure in the color
of a gown, the cut of a dress, in a pretty face, or a graceful figure.
Peculiarities of gesture and posture he saw instantly and mimicked
with glee.
In no department of sense, however, was adolescent sensuous-
ness so imperative in Albert as in that of touch. Touching was
well-nigh a mania with the boy. It is a literal fact that, with very
few exceptions, he never passed a table, a chair, a person, that he
did not touch, or yank, or pat, or pull. He rubbed his knees, pulled
at his tie, smoothed his face. Smoothness was an exquisite sensa-
tion to him.2 He loved to stroke silks and furs, and sulked child-
ishly because, unlike his mother and sister, the teachers would not
let him sit on the floor and stroke a silk-stockinged ankle. In a similar
way, he had a passion for handshaking, and demanded it on the
slightest of pretexts, or on no pretext at all. With Albert, to touch
objects, animate or inanimate, was an impulse, a habit, a craving.
And, as final point, to prove Albert true to adolescent type, he
washed with his collar on!
Albert was true to another type?to the type of the newly-rich
1 Ibid., p. 30.
* Ibid., p. 6.
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. 109
Jew. Money was his standard of value. The possession of money
and success in acquiring it were the qualities that commanded his
respect. If the color of a dress pleased him he at once assumed
that it must have cost "a lot of money." If the waitress in a res-
taurant were pretty, he expressed a hope that she received a good
wage, and wished to leave a preposterous tip. Whoever earned his
respect he concluded must have a large bank account stowed away
somewhere. It was an axiom that no individual shorn of this bank
account could possibly possess such fine qualities of mind and
character. Though there might be a few estimable people in the
world whose incomes were not yet large, those exceptional individuals
were keenly unhappy and were undoubtedly working with might and
main to gain a place in the wealthy class. The school must neces-
sarily be a money-making enterprise. No teacher could be con-
ceived of as having any other interest in the work than the salary
she received for it. This was his fundamental philosophy of life;
the failure that he feared for himself, was a failure in business; and
the hero that fired his boyish imagination was his father, the penni-
less lad of thirteen in the Bowery chophouse, who had built from
the nickle he earned, a business spreading over the country, with a
central office in lower New York, and a home on upper Fifth Avenue.
All day long Albert talked of money, money, money. A dozen,
dozen times he asked the salary of each teacher, the cost of this and
that article. He boasted of the cost of his father's motor, of his
mother's clothes. He haggled with a peanut-man over the size of
the bag he sold for a nickle. He tried to wheedle the tailor into press-
ing his suit for less than his usual charge. When he was given a
pile of letters to mail, he would look rudely at the addresses, asking
impertinently, "Has he much money?" or more rarely, "Is she
pretty? "
I have described Albert as fully as I am able, and, outside of
this "money complex," I have not mentioned a single impulse or
reaction that is not included in Dr. Hall's description of the behavior
typical of normal adolescence. One had to spend but a single day
with Albert, however, to know that if all those typical impulses and
all those normal reactions are packed into one boy, and raised to the
nth power the product is so abnormal as to drive uiose who have
to live with that boy to the verge of nervous prostration.
No wonder he disorganized his mother's household; he threat-
ened to disorganize ours. That he did not, I count as sure test of
lts stability. In your attempt to imagine Albert you cannot possibly
overdraw the wriggling, impertinent, ill-bred, ill-clothed, unsquelch-
able, "fresh" thing he was. Yet you would miss the picture if you
110 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
did not see, too, how much we liked him. Because he was nervous
energy spurting out at every time and in every direction, and
"freshness" that was absolutely irrespressible, he very nearly drove
us crazy; but because he was never mean, because he was generous
and warm hearted, because he was straight and square, and because
his curly blue-black head was winsome, he won something of affection
from us all.
This was the boy that came to us, and these were the impusles
ready to respond to whatever stimuli might present themselves in
our household.
Perhaps, of all these impulses, the latent reservoir of adoration
and discipleship was fraught with greatest potentiality. We glimpsed
the force of this very early. Albert's tutor, Mr A., the first to be
drawn to him, showed very genuine kindness and interest in his
work with the boy. Albert responded with ardent and immediate
hero-worship. He dubbed Mr. A. affectionately, the "professor"
and followed him about like a devoted poodle. Mr. A. could go
nowhere in the house that Albert did not follow; sit nowhere that
Albert was not beside him with his arm across the back of the chair.
Even when he went into the city, he was pursued by trivial and
facetious notes to the "professor." This way of expressing devotion
was so persistent as to be irritating to a busy man, and only added
to the nervous strain involved in teaching and disciplining the boy.
For five months, Albert was Mr. A's pupil and disciple. In
spite of painstaking teaching, it is not too much to say that Albert
did not settle down enough in those five months to learn anything
in the classroom. Outside the classroom, however, he gained much.
With Mr. A. and the other boys, he "hiked" and wrestled and
climbed, shot crows, and played baseball. He lost much of his
city flabbiness, both of mind and body. He learned something of
the trees and flowers and rocks and came to take sheer boy delight
in burrowing under stones for slippery, wriggling newts, which he
collected by the dozen and brought home in a pocket handkerchief.
Mr. A. gave Albert his first taste of creek and countryside in a way
that only an athletic man could. He took him, too, to see a big
steel manufactory, the docks along the river front, a hospital in the
city, objects chosen definitely to enlarge his experience of some of
the practical things of the world. Beyond all this, Albert gained
something through mere contact with the man, because for the first
time he admired someone whose interest was not in money but in
work. This contact did not in the least modify Albert's nouveau
ricke standards, but it opened a corner of his mind to the knowledge
that there were other standards.
THE INTERPLAY OF PERSONALITY. Ill
With the fickleness of youth, Albert ceased to think of his tutor
very soon after Mr. A. left us. There was a certain flag, however,
drawn upon a blackboard, and a sentence beneath in Mr. A's hand-
writing. This Albert defended from erasure for many months.
In defense of this fetish, the boy expressed in adolescent fashion
an unconscious loyalty to the "professor" who had dropped so easily
out of the stream of his conscious thought.
At the end of the five months the boy's appearance had changed
only in that the plumpness of his body had been somewhat hardened
by exercise, and he wore a "first pair of long trousers." These last
made Albert look older and served only to exaggerate the silliness
of his actions, the vulgarity of his appearance.
(To be continued)
