The Feebleminded in the State Of Missouri
===========================================

By J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.,
Psycho-educational Clinic, St. Louis, Mo.
We shall first consider the present situation in the state with
respect to the state care, control, education and identification of the
feebleminded; and secondly, some of the needed remedial measures
which we have recommended in connection with our work on the
Children's Code Commission.
In 1911 it was estimated that there were 11,427 feebleminded
persons in the state of Missouri. The basis for this estimate was not
revealed. On the basis of figures published in connection with a small
Psychological research in 1914 the number of feebleminded children
between the ages of 6 and 21 was estimated to be 38,260. This esti-
mate exceeds by 2598 the estimate made by the British Royal Com-
mission on the Feebleminded of the number of feebleminded children
in all of England and Wales. After having spent about seven years in
the almost daily clinical examination of mentally deviating children,
we are of the opinion that the larger estimate of the number of
feebleminded in Missouri is very considerably exaggerated while the
smaller estimate is also probably too large. In the interval between
September, 1914, and November 24,1916, we examined 1181 children
from the St. Louis public schools (exclusive of 31 re-examined cases,
and 45 other cases which do not properly belong to the series), the
majority of whom were sent to the clinic as candidates for special
schools for the feebleminded. Of these children, however, only 28.1
Per cent could be definitely classified as feebleminded, while 46 per
cent were classified as feebleminded, potentially feebleminded and
borderline. Some of the later will eventually prove to be feeble-
minded but the larger number will probably prove to be merely
backward. In order to determine whether the children who were
most seriously retarded were being sent to the clinic and in older to
get at the children from the schools which had not referred any
cases, we made a census of pedagogically retarded children last
February and March. This census included all children of 9 years
age or less who were pedagogically retarded two years or over, and
all children over 9 years of age who were pedagogically retarded three
years or over. From the reports sent to the clinic by the principals
we examined 67 pupils who had the most serious record of peda-
gogical retardation. The percentage of feeblemindedness found
1 Delivered before the Missouri Conference for Social Welfare, Columbia, November, 1916.
(55)
56 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
among these children was 31.3, which is only 3.2 per cent higher than
the percentage found for the entire group. The percentage diagnosed
as feebleminded and borderline was 56, which is 10 per cent higher
than the corresponding figure for the entire group. In the belief
that a large number of feebleminded children still remained in the
schools, the principals of the schools were definitely and emphatically
instructed in September, 1916, to submit the names of all the pupils
in their schools whom they considered to be feebleminded. Under
this strong-arm method of rounding up the feebleminded, we have
thus far this fall examined 318 new cases. Owing to the hurried
and hampered conditions under which these examinations have been
made our data on these cases are not so satisfactory as those for the
two preceding school years. However, we have been able to classify
only 22.6 per cent of these children as definitely feebleminded, while
33.3 per cent were diagnosed as potentially feebleminded and border-
line, giving a total of 55.9 per cent of feebleminded and borderline
cases. In other words, the percentage of feebleminded found by the
strong-arm method of routing them out was 5.5 per cent less than
the per cent found in the entire group of 1181, while it was 6.9 per
cent smaller than the number found in the school year 1914-1915,
8.2 per cent smaller than the number found in 1915-1916, and 8.7 per
cent smaller than the per cent found among the cases examined from
the census of retardates. On the other hand the percentage of
feebleminded and borderline cases was 9.9 per cent larger than the
per cent so classified among all the cases, 15 per cent and 12.2 per
cent larger, respectively, than the per cent so classified among the
1914-1915 and 1915-1916 cases, and .1 per cent less than the per
cent so classified among the cases examined from the census of
retardates. During a period of two years and three months in which
we have been mentally examining children in the St. Louis public
schools, we have identified 333 as feebleminded and 544 as feeble-
minded, potentially feebleminded and borderline in an elementary
school population of over 80,000. This is exactly 333 too many
feebleminded?so much human excess baggage?while there is
plenty of humble and crude work in the world for the borderline to
do. The point is, however, that on the basis of our studies in the St.
Louis schools1 we feel warranted in saying that we do not believe
that the percentage of feeblemindedness will exceed one-half of one
per cent of the public elementary school population. This estimate
is very much more moderate than the claim that from 2 per cent
to 3 per cent of school children are feebleminded.
1 The details of these studies may be found in the Reports of the Board of Education of the city of St. Louis
or 1914-1915, pp. 129-160 and 1915-1916, pp. 142-211; and in the Problems of Subnormality.
FEEBLEMINDED IN MISSOURI. 57
This huge difference in estimates is undoubtedly largely due to
a difference in standards of judgment. The liberal estimates made
during the last six years have almost invariably been based on certain
arbitrarily assumed standards of mental retardation. But the
ultimate test of all these standards is socio-industrial competency.
We do not think that the concept of feeblemindedness should be
applied to anyone unless he is so deficient mentally from birth or
from early life that he is unable to make a living or to get along
without external support. This concept is in harmony with the
definition of Tredgold, the most eminent authority on feebleminded-
ness, and with the definition of the English Mental Deficiency
Act adopted by Parliament in 1913, according to which the highest
grades of the feebleminded, often called morons in America, are
'persons in whose case there exists from birth or from an early age
mental defectiveness not amounting to imbecility, yet so pronounced
that they require care, supervision, and control for their own pro-
tection or for the protection of others." In other words, only when
the social or industrial incapacity is due to mental deficiency dating
from birth or from early life and when it is so extreme that the person
cannot get along without external support, should the person be
classified as feebleminded. We must remember that there are other
causes of social inefficiency besides feeblemindedness.
How many feebleminded, then, are there in the state? Nobody
knows. Personally we are not prepared to say that the number
exceeds 6000. This is based upon an old estimate of one feeble-
minded person to every 600 in the general population which we
believe is more in harmony with the facts than some of the recent
estimates. But this figure is almost staggering in view of the
deplorably inadequate facilities afforded for the care and control of
the feebleminded in the state. The number of inmates in the insti-
tution for the feebleminded at Marshall last September was only 588,
and of these 162 were epileptics, most of the latter probably being
mentally deficient. No more can be admitted because of lack of
accommodations, although there are 800 names on the waiting list.
The number of feebleminded now confined permanently or tempora-
rily in improper kinds of institutions, such as private or public hos-
pitals for the insane, workhouses, industrial schools, reformatories,
prisons, jails, and infirmaries, is probably very much larger, say
1500. This would leave 4000 feebleminded at large in society. It
is probable that not much over one-half of these are properly sup-
ported, safeguarded or controlled at home, leaving at large possibly
2000 dependent, or neglected, or unprotected, or delinquent feeble-
minded persons who, for their own good and for the protection of the
58 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
state, should be permanently confined in institutions and colonies
specifically organized for their proper training, care and control,
and for the utilization of their labor possibilities.
There is no state in the Union of the same population and wealth
as Missouri, with possibly one exception, which has provided such
meagre institutional facilities for the care of the feebleminded. This
is shown by the following data which were secured through corre-
spondence during the month of October this year.1 Massachusetts
housed at that time 2900 feebleminded and epileptics in two institu-
tions for the feebleminded, one colony annex, and one epileptic
colony. If Missouri provided the same accommodations as Massa-
chusetts in proportion to population she would care for almost the
same number. Massachusetts is doing almost 500 per cent better
than this state. Iowa provided accommodations in one institution
for 1185 feebleminded and 299 mentally deficient epileptics, or a
total of 1484, and has under construction a separate colony for epi-
leptics which will be ready next summer. If Missouri did as well as
Iowa in proportion to population she would now provide institutions
for over 2200 feebleminded and epileptic inmates. Iowa now does
almost 400 per cent better than Missouri. Pennsylvania provided
beds for 3984 inmates, of whom 3384 were feebleminded and 600
epileptics, in three institutions for the feebleminded, including one
semi-public institution, and in one colony for the epileptic, while a
separate village for feebleminded women is now being constructed.
If Missouri did as well as Pennsylvania in proportion to population
she would care for about 1700 feebleminded and epileptic. Pennsyl-
vania does almost 300 per cent better than Missouri. The true
figure, however, is somewhat less than this, as the semi-private
institution contains inmates from outside of the state. New York
had accommodations for 6000 feebleminded and epileptic in five insti-
tutions for the feebleminded and one institution for the epileptic.
If Missouri did as well as New York in proportion to population she
would now care for about 2100 feebleminded and epileptic instead of
less than 600. New York does 350 per cent better than Missouri.
We do not wish to be understood as implying that we have the same
ratio of feebleminded and epileptics as the three eastern states
mentioned above, but there can be no doubt that our institutional
facilities are utterly inadequate.
The state of Missouri has likewise been equally remiss in
establishing special classes in the public schools for the proper
training of feebleminded children. In this state it is entirely optional
1 From Dr. George Mogridge, Iowa; Dr. J. M. Murdoch, Pennsylvania; Dr. Geo. M. Kline, Massachusetts;
and Dr. Charles Bernstein, New York. We do not have data for this year from Ohio and Illinois, but both of
these states do very much better than Missouri.
FEEBLEMINDED IN MISSOURI. 59
with the local boards of education to open special classes for the
feebleminded. In New Jersey school districts are required by law
to open such classes when there are ten or more mental defectives in a
given school district (but they would not all be feebleminded,
according to the standards which have been laid down). In Minne-
sota the establishment of special classes has been assured by the
granting to local school districts of a state subvention, authorized in
1915, of $100 for every child in attendance throughout the year
in a special class. Under this regulation many cities of this state
have already opened special classes. Only two cities in our entire
state have established special classes for the feebleminded, namely,
St. Louis, where special classes were organized in 1908 and where the
number of classes is ample, and Kansas City, where two classes were
opened in the fall of 1915. In all the other public school systems
of the state, if our information is correct, the feebleminded children
are trained in the regular classes for the normal children, where they
impede the progress of the normal pupils and rob them of the time
and attention which by right are theirs?unless indeed the teachers,
driven to despair, neglect the feebleminded, as is not infrequently
the case?where they sometimes exercise a pernicious influence
upon the morals of the normal pupils, and where they fail to obtain
the type of training which fits their peculiar needs. In fact, most
of the feebleminded merely vegetate in the regular grades year after
year. The economic waste suffered by the taxpayers of the state
due to the education of feebleminded and normal children in the same
classes, amounts to many thousands of dollars every year. More-
over, there is a large number of children?far more numerous than
the feebleminded,?who are so pedagogically or mentally backwaid,
although not feebleminded, that they cannot keep up with the pace
of the normal pupils. These pupils are a heavy drag on the regular
classes where they rob the normal pupils of their birthright and
where they vainly try to do work for which they are not adequately
prepared or for which they have no aptitude. The work m the
grammar grades, because of its abstract nature, is largely incompre-
hensible to these slow minds which function only in concrete terms.
Many of these children, because they were denied appropriate
training in school, later in life become an economic burden to the
state and a moral menace to society. Children of this type of mind
should be trained in ungraded classes (which should be distinct from
the feebleminded classes.) Borderline cases will necessarily gravitate
to the ungraded classes and indeed should be tried out in these classes
before being considered for the special schools for the feebleminded.
In the ungraded classes abundant opportunities should be afforded
60 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
for individual help and the instruction should be predominantly
concrete, and, for the more backward types, industrial and motor.
A beginning has been made to organize classes of this kind in the St.
Louis schools, but merely a beginning. It is safe to say that where
there is now one ungraded class in the public schools of the state
there should be a hundred such classes, together with supplementary
elementary industrial schools for vocational or prevocational
training.
The third defect is the woefully inadequate provision afforded
by the state for the proper educational and psychological examination
and classification of feebleminded, backward and other types of
mentally variant children. There is not a single college, university,
institution, or police board or criminal court in the state which
supports a properly manned psychological or educational clinic.
The St. Louis schools support a clinic, but the staff is not large
enough to make it possible to examine all the children who should
be examined or to do the work with the requisite thoroughness.
Mental tests, largely the Binet tests, are being given in the Kansas
City schools, in the Juvenile Courts of St. Louis and Kansas City, in
one of the dispensaries connected with Barnes Hospital, and probably
in other places. But none of these agencies supports a psychological
or educational clinic, technically so-called, with a specialist on
feebleminded and backward children. The inadequate provision
in the state for accurate psychological and educational diagnosis is
a very serious handicap, because the differential diagnosis between
feeblemindedness and backwardness is by no means always easy, and
the consequences of a blundering diagnosis may be very grave to the
individual or to society. On the one hand, backward children may
be mistakenly diagnosed as feebleminded and then assigned to
special classes for the feebleminded or committed to institutions for
the feebleminded. We could give numerous instances where both
of these things have happened. We need not dwell upon the manifest
injustice of treating backward children as though they were feeble-
minded. On the other hand, feebleminded children are often
diagnosed as backward, and thereupon given the educational and social
treatment befitting backward or normal children, and the parents
are assured that there is no cause for worry as the children will
eventually "outgrow the trouble" when, as a matter of fact, there is
no method known to modern science by which the defective can be
brought to even approximate normality. It is well to emphasize
that the diagnosis of mental defect and deficiency is often difficult
and that a correct diagnosis is of vital practical consequence to the
individual concerned.
FEEBLEMINDED IN MISSOURI. 61
The fourth defect is the inadequacy of the state statutes for the
legal commitment and permanent detention of the unsupported,
uncontrolled and delinquent feebleminded in the state. There is no
law by which an improperly supervised or restrained feebleminded
person can be committed for permanent detention to the state
institution for the feebleminded against the wishes of parents or
guardians. The consequence is that the commitments are usually
of persons whom the parents or guardians wish to have committed
although these persons may be less in need of commitment, so far as
the state's interests are concerned, than other feebleminded persons
who are not under adequate restraint. Furthermore, there is now
nothing to prevent parents or guardians from removing a committed
person when the fancy strikes them. When persons are returned to
homes in which they are not properly protected or restrained they
are liable to become a serious menace to the community, either
because of their industrial incompetency or because they become
willing cat's-paws or unsuspecting dupes of evil designers, or because
they become aggressive offenders.
The defects pointed out above reflect accurately, we believe,
the lack of popular interest in the state in the problems affecting our
feebleminded dependents. In order to remedy these defects in some
measure we have recommended, through the Children's Code Com-
mission,1 among others, the following measures:
1. The enactment of a law providing for the mandatory com-
mitment and permanent detention in institutions of all dependent,
unsupported, or unprotected feebleminded persons in the state.
2. The enactment of a law forbidding the commitment of any but
feebleminded persons to a feebleminded institution and providing
for the release of persons committed as feebleminded who later prove
on careful study not to be feebleminded.
3. The enactment of a law providing that certification of feeble-
mindedness shall be made only by psychologists or by physicians who
are specialists on feebleminded and backward children.
4. The establishment of a state bureau for mental defectives, to
aid in the examination and classification of feebleminded and back-
ward children. The most modest proposal is to organize a small
bureau in the extension division of the state university.
5. The enlargement of the state's institutional facilities so as to
provide shelter and protection for 1500 or 1600 feebleminded persons,
in a central colony at Marshall, combining the features of an asylum,
school, farm colony and workshop, in an auxiliary institution near
St. Louis, designed especially as a school for educable feebleminded
1 The complete report is available in the published report of the Code Commission.
62 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
children, and in small permanent or temporary camps. It is further
recommended that the epileptics be colonized in a separate institution.
6. The abolition of the present political method in favor of a
merit or efficiency method of appointing the superintendent of the
institution or institutions for the feebleminded.
7. The permanent detention of feebleminded prostitutes in
detached cottages, either in the Industrial Home for Girls or in the
central colony for the feebleminded as well as the permanent deten-
tion of feebleminded delinquents and criminals of any age and of
either sex in detached cottages.
8. The enactment of a law providing for the mandatory establish-
ment of special classes for the feebleminded whenever ten feeble-
minded children are found in any given public school district.
Ungraded classes should also be established for slow and backward
children. Eventually the establishment of these classes should also
be made compulsory by law.
9. The appropriation of $5000 by the state for the conduct of a
census by qualified investigators, of the number of the feebleminded
at large in the state, and in the elementary schools, penal and
eleemosynary institutions and county infirmaries, and the making
of further recommendations with respect to the care and control of
the feebleminded in the state.
Let us say, in conclusion, that the question of the elimination or
reduction of the feebleminded by sterilization, or birth control, or
regulation of marriage is worthy of consideration, but it is not
believed that effective legislation could be secured at this time, or if
secured that it would be enforced.
