Constance Kent And the Road Murder
===================================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Y
Akt. I.?
BY JOHN PAGET, Barrister-AT-LAW.
The public interest in the questions connected with the Road
Murder, and the confession of Constance Kent, has been revived
by the remarks of Dr. Bueknill in his Lumleian Lectures, and
by the observations of Dr. Winn in the pages of this Journal.
Questions which arise out of the consideration of confessions
of'guilt are equally interesting to the jurist as to the psycholo-
gist, and forty years' experience at the Bar, fifteen of which
have been spent in discharging the duties of a Police Magistrate,
may, I trust, protect me from the charge of presumption, when
I say that it appears to me that important considerations have
escaped the notice of both these very learned and distinguished
gentlemen.
So many years have elapsed since the occurrence of the Road
Murder, that it is necessary to recall the material facts of the
case, so far as they relate to Constance Kent, before considering
what may have been her share in the transaction, or what
weight ought to be attached to her confession. I may as well
say in the outset that I have no intention to suggest criminality
in any one, that I have no pet theory to maintain, and that
unless the confession of Constance Kent can be relied upon to
solve the mystery, I believe the Case to be still involved in the
deepest obscurity. How far that confession is to be relied on
is the question which I propose to consider, and for this pur-
pose a recapitulation of the facts of the case is absolutely
necessary.
In the month of June 1860, a gentleman of the name of
Kent resided at Road House, near Frome. He was a sub-
inspector of factories in the district. His family consisted, in
PART I. VOL. V. NEW SERIES. B
Cvi
2 CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER.
addition to himself and his wife, of one son, a boy of about 15
years of age, and three daughters, Mary Ann, aged 29, Eliza-
beth 27, and Constance 16: these were children of a former
marriage. By his second wife he had three children?a little
girl about 5 years old, Saville, a boy 3 years and 8 months
old, and another girl still younger. A nurse of the name of
Elizabeth Grough, a cook, and a housemaid, completed the esta-
blishment, and on the night of Friday, the 29th of June 1860,
all the inmates were at home.
On that night Mr. Kent left the drawing-room window and
shatters closed and fastened when he went to bed about eleven
o'clock, and on leaving the room he locked and bolted the door.
The nurse Grough slept in a room on the first floor. On the
opposite side of the same room Saville Kent slept in a crib, and
in another crib, adjoining the bed of the nurse, the little girl, his
younger sister, slept. The elder girl was in her mother's room
on the opposite side of the passage. About five o'clock the
nurse woke. She stated that looking across to the little boy's
crib she saw that he was not there, but did not feel any alarm,
as she supposed that his mother had fetched him during the
night. It was not until some hours afterwards, that on going
to her mistress's room she found that he was not there. It
should be mentioned here that on the housemaid going down
stairs to open the windows, she found the shutters of the draw-
ing-room window unfastened and the window partly raised. On
the child being missed a search took place, and on examining the
closet in the garden a pool of blood was found on the floor, and the
body of the child was discovered in the vault amongst the soil.
The condition of the body was minutely described by Mr.
Parsons, a surgeon, the usual medical attendant of the family.
His evidence given on the first examination is as follows:?
" On my arrival I saw the body of Francis Saville Kent in
the laundry. He had his nightdress on. He was enveloped
in a blanket. The blanket and the nightclothes were stained
with blood. I observed nothing more than the stains of blood and
soil on the clothes. There ivas a mark of an incision on
the nightdress and flannel on the left side, cutting through
the cartilage of the two ribs. The mouth of the child had a
blackened appearance, with the tongue protruded between the
teeth. My impression was that the blackened appearance
had been produced by forcible pressure on it during life. I
examined the interior of the mouth, lips, and cheeks, and found
no abrasion such as would lead me to suppose that anything
had been forcibly pushed into it. I then saw a large incision
of the throat, extending from one ear to the other, and divid-
ing the ivhole of the structures down to the sjpine. I made a
post-mortem examination of the body. I found all the internal
CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER. 5
organs of the body completely drained of blood. The stomach
was in a healthy state, and I saw no reason to suspect the
administration of a narcotic or poisonous drug. I found that
the stab in the chest had not penetrated the heart, but had
pushed it out of its place, and had penetrated the diaphragm
and slightly wounded the outer coat of the stomach on the
right of it. There were also two very slight incisions on the
right hand, which appeared to have been made after death.
The child appeared to have been dead at least five hours. I
think the incision of the throat, and not the stab, was the im-
mediate cause of death._ A long pointed knife, in my opinion,
would be the instrument to have caused such wounds. The
deceased was a very heavy child for his age. In my judgment
the incision in the chest was made by a pointed knife, but not
with the point coming obliquely, but a dagger-shaped knife
like a carving knife. I came to that conclusion from the way
the clothes are cut. It would have required very great force
to inflict such a blow through the nightdress, and to the depth
to which it had penetrated. The ribs of a child are very
flexible, and the great amount of force necessary for such a blow
would depress the ribs and cause the heart to diverge from its
position, and if the clothes had not been cut the heart must
have been penetrated."*
An inquest was held on Monday the 2nd July. The in-
mates of the house, including Constance Kent, were examined,
and a verdict of wilful murder against some person or persons
unknown was returned."}"
The inquiry still proceeded, conducted by the magistrates
with closed doors.J Constance Kent was again examined, and
a suspicion being entertained against the nurse, Elizabeth
(rough, she was apprehended on Tuesday the 10th July and
brought before the magistrates.
An application was now made to the Home Secretary for
assistance, and Inspector Whicher, of the metropolitan detec-
tive police, was despatched to aid in the inquiry, and arrived at
Trowbridge on Sunday the 15th July.? Eewards amounting to
?200 were offered, and a promise of pardon to any one but the
actual perpetrator of the crime. In the meantime the house
had been minutely re-examined, and every inmate, except the
little girl of five years old who slept in her mother's room, had
been called on to state what they knew in reference to the
matter. The inquiry was then adjourned until Friday the 20th
July, when Inspector Whicher appeared before the magistrates
* Annual Begister, June I860, p. 95.
f Examiner, July 7; Times, July 11.
t Times, July 12 and 14 ; Examiner, July 14.
? Examiner, July 21; Times, July 16 and 21.
4 CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER.
having Constance Kent in custody. Elizabeth Grough, having
been discharged from custody, was Called and examined as a
witness, but stated nothing in any way implicating the pri-
soner. Inspector Whicher was then examined ; he stated that
on showing the prisoner a list of her linen, which she admitted
to be in her handwriting, and in which three nightdresses
were mentioned, he had asked her where they were, and she
replied, " I have two; the other was lost at the wash the week
after the murder."
The prisoner was remanded until Friday the 27th, Whicher
n. stating that he should be able to prove tha\i an " animus "
against the child had existed in the mind of the prisoner. As
the proceedings on that day contain all that can by any possi-
bility be held to connect Constance Kent with the commission
of this crime, apart from her own confession, and are therefore
of the utmost importance in testing the value of that con-
fession, they deserve a careful examination. The report will
be found at length in the Times of the 28th July, and more
concisely in the Examiner of the 4tli August. Elizabeth
Grough being recalled, her examination was continued. The
only circumstance stated by her, and which was obtained from
her on cross-examination, was, that Constance Kent had
uniformly treated the little boy with kindness, and was
playing with him on the very day preceding the night of the
murder. The circumstances attending the finding of the body
of the child having been proved, Inspector Whicher called two
girls, schoolfellows of Constance Kent, with the view of proving,
as on the former occasion he had stated that he should be able
to do, that an " animus " against her brother existed in the
mind of the prisoner. The evidence amounted to nothing more
than that Constance had expressed some displeasure at what
she considered the partiality of her parents to the children of
the second marriage, and proved nothing but the extreme zeal
and activity of Inspector Whicher. Mr. Parsons, the surgeon,
was then examined, and after describing the condition of the
body, he says : " I accompanied Inspector Foley over the house.
We went into Constance Kent's room in the course of our search.
I examined her drawers, and the nightgown and nightcap which
were on the bed, and the whole of the bedclothes. My atten-
tion was not attracted to the nightdress ; it had no stains upon
it. It was very clean."
Sarah Cox, the housemaid, was then called. She stated
that it was her duty to collect the dirty linen for the wash;
that it was usually sent on a Monday; that on the Monday
following the murder she found a nightdress of Constance Kent's
on the landing where she was in the habit of placing it, and
put it into the basket, and had it entered on the list in the
CONSTANCE KENT AND THE 110AD MURDER. O
washing book. She then placed the clothes in two baskets,
covering- one over with a dress belonging to Mrs. Kent, and
the other with a tablecloth, so that it would not be easy for
anyone to take anything out. She says that, after the clothes
were in the basket, Constance Kent came and asked her to look
in her slip pocket to see if she had left her purse in it; that
she took the slip out, searched it, but found no purse. The
witness then says : " She then asked me to go for a glass of
water. I did so. She followed me to the top of the bach stairs
as I ivent out of the room. When I returned with the glass
of water I found her where I had left her. I do not think I
had been gone a minute. On Saturday the 30th June I took
down a clean nightdress of Miss Constance's to be aired. I
took another clean nightdress to be aired the following Satur-
day. The dirty one I put into the basket on the Monday, and
the two I aired would make the three. I am clear these were
all Miss Constance's nightdresses. I did not observe any mark
or stain on the one I put into the basket on Monday the
2nd July*
Mrs. Holly, the laundress, and her daughter were then called
and swore, with a considerable number of contradictions,
that the nightdress in question was not amongst the clothes
sent to the wash. If the question of the lost garment
had come before a county court judge or a police magis-
trate (as such questions of lost linen frequently do), and
he had been obliged to decide between the evidence of
Martha Cox, that it was sent, and that of Mrs. Holly, that it was
not?inasmuch as Mrs. Holly admitted that when inquiry was
first made by the constables, she told them that the clothes
were all right, though, as she said, she knew at the time that
the nightdress was missing, and accounted for her falsehood by
saying that she expected one to be sent to supply its place?
he would probably have considered the evidence of Cox the
more trustworthy of the two. The gossip of the two school
girls and the mare's nest of the missing nightdress was all that
rewarded the zeal of Inspector Whitcher, stimulated by the
hope of a reward of ?200, and exercised during a period of
twelve days, from the 15th to the 27th July. Constance Kent
was of course discharged.
A circumstance then occurred which might well draw one's
attention to the care which should be exercised before attaching
* Mrs. Dallison, the wife of a policeman, examined subsequently on the 3rd
October, says: "On the afternoon of the 30th January I examined the night-
dresses of the young ladies, among the rest that of Miss Constance. I found
nothing on it to lead to the discovery of the murder. The nightdress of M ss
Constance which I examined appeared to have been worn a week. I did ) ot
observe any difference in the amount of wear between hers and the other yoi ig
ladies."
6 CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER.
belief to confessions of guilt. A man of the name of Gadd*
gave himself up to the police at Wolverton in Northampton-
shire, stating that lie had committed the murder, having been
induced to do so by a promise of money from Mr. Kent, who had
himself " handed the child to him out of the drawing-room
window, and that he then took it away and killed it."| He
was brought before the magistrates at Trowbridge the next day
remanded until the 23rd August, and then discharged, his
confession being satisfactorily proved to be the result of an
insane delusion.
Time passed on without any further light being thrown
on these most mysterious circumstances, and in the early part
of September application was made to the Government for the
appointment of a special commission to examine into the case.*
This was of course refused; but it was intimated to the
magistrates that it would be desirable that further inquiries
should be made, and the case was therefore proceeded with
under the conduct of a solicitor of the name of Slark, and an
examination, strictly private, was made at the house of Mr.
Kent during the week ending 22nd September.? All the
inmates were examined. The examination of Constance Kent
commenced on Friday the 21st and continued during the whole
of Saturday the 22nd. [|
On Monday, 1st October, Elizabeth Gougli was again placed
at the bar charged with' the murder. Upon this occasion Mr.
Saunders of the Western Circuit appeared for the prosecution.
Mr. Ribton, a barrister of long experience in criminal cases,
defended the prisoner Elizabeth Gough, and Mr. Edlin, now the
assistant judge at the Middlesex Sessions, watched the proceed-
ings for Mr. Kent and his family.^
Amongst other witnesses Constance Kent was called and
examined by Mr. Saunders on behalf of the prosecution. The
following is her evidence:?
" I am the daughter of Mr. Kent of Road Hill House. I
was at home on the 29th June, and had been so about a fort-
night. I had previously been at school at Beckington as a
boarder. I saw Saville last when he went to bed on the evening
of the 29th June.
" He was a merry, good-tempered boy, fond of romping. I
played with him often, and had done so on that day. He
appeared to be fond of me, and I was fond of him. I went to
bed about half-past ten. I slept on the second floor, in a room
between my two sisters and the maid-servants. I remember my
sister Elizabeth coming into my room that night after I was
* Times, Aug 13; Examiner, Aug. 18. f Times, Aug. 13,14,23; Examiner, 25, 1860.
+ Times, Sept. 8. ? Examiner, Sept. 22. || Examiner, Sept. 29.
1T Times, Oct. 2, 3, and 4; Examiner, Oct. 6,
CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER. 7
in bed. I was nearly asleep then, and remember nothing more.
I awoke about half-past six in the morning. I heard nothing
during the night. I got up immediately after I awoke, and soon
after heard of my brother being missing. On the Friday night I
slept in a nightdress. I had slept in the same dress from the
Sunday or Monday before. I usually wore the same night-
dress a week, changing it on Sunday or Monday. When I got
up on Saturday morning I rolled up my nightdress and put it
on the bed. My bed is made by the cook and housemaid. My
nightdress was before them when they made the bed that
morning.
" On Saturday night, the 30th, I slept with my sister Mary
Ann. Elizabeth slept with my mamma. Papa stayed up. I
slept with Mary Ann for company. I do not know whether
anyone slept in my room that night. I wore the same dress on
Saturday that I had worn the night before.
" When I got up on Sunday morning I believe I put my
nightdress in my own room. On the Sunday night I slept in
my own room. I am not certain whether I put on a clean
nightdress that night or on Monday. One of my nightdresses
goes to the wash every week. I was in the habit of putting out
my clean nightdress to be aired. I did so on the Saturday.
The dirty linen for the wash was collected on the Monday
morning. It was the duty of the housemaid to collect it. One
of my nightdresses is missing. I do not know what has be-
come of it."
Cross-examined by Mr. Ribton:?
" I had been away half a year at school. I. was the only
girl of the family who slept alone. The prisoner was examined
when I was charged with the murder. The nurse told me of a
missing blanket before the child was found.
" Q. Are you sure it was not after the child was found ?
"A. I am not certain which it was. I heard the prisoner
go to my sister's door and ask whether she had the child with
them. I heard her knock, and came to the door to listen."*
This is word for word the whole of the evidence of Constance
Kent, and it must be borne in mind that it was given subject
to the cross-examination of an experienced counsel, whose duty
to his client required him to extract any answer that might
raise a presumption of guilt on the part of the witness, and
thus tend to exonerate the prisoner.
The inquiry, which lasted from] the 21st September until the
4th October, terminated in the discharge of Elizabeth Grough.
In the month of November agentleman of the name of Thomas
Bush Saunders (who must in no way be confounded with
the learned counsel of the name of Saunders who appeared in
* Times, Oct. 3.
8 CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER.
the case of Eliza (rough) instituted a kind of irregular extra-
judicial inquiry, which continued for several days, in the course of
which he collected a mass of absurd and irrelevant gossip, the
only circumstance which deserves notice being that some dirty
linen was found in the boiler hole, which was satisfactorily
proved to have no connection with the case. A report of these
proceedings will be found in the columns of the Thnes from the
5th to the 15th November.
Now be it observed, that during these protracted proceedings,
which lasted from the end of June to the early part of October,
a period of fully three months, in which three barristers, two
attorneys, a coroner and his jury, Captain Meredith, the Chief
Constable of the county, with Inspector Foley and his whole
staff of police, and above all Inspector Whicher, the astute
detective, specially selected by the authorities of Scotland Yard
as best adapted by his experience and ability for the conduct of
such an inquiry, besides every inhabitant of the neighbourhood,
some stimulated by horror of the deed, and others by the hope
of reward, were engaged?Constance Kent was examined and
cross-examined five several times, yet not one particle of
evidence could be found that had the slightest tendency to
criminate her. Not only did the attempt to prove her guilt
signally fail, but the effect of the searching examination to
which she was subjected must, to any reasonable mind, have had
the effect of proving affirmatively her innocence.
Is it possible to suppose that a girl of sixteen, if guilty,
could have baffled such an array and withstood such an ordeal ?
We now lose sight of Constance Kent until the month of
August 1863, when she was admitted as an inmate of a kind
of conventual establishment, called St. Mary's Hospital, at
Brighton. There she remained until the 25th April 1865,
when she was brought by the " Lady Superior " and the Rev.
Mr. Wagner, who appears to be a kind of chaplain to the
institution, to Bow Street, charged on her own confession with
the murder of her brother. Mr. Wagner produced a paper,
stated by him to have been received from Constance Kent, and
which was admitted by her to be in her handwriting. It was
in the following words : " I, Constance Emelie Kent, alone and
unaided, on the night of the 29tli of .Tune 1860, murdered at
Road Hill House, Wiltshire, one Francis Saville Kent. Before
the deed no one knew of my intention, nor after it of my guilt.
No one assisted me in the crime nor in the evasion of dis-
covery."
Will anyone believe that this formal document, which
might, from its language, have been drawn up by an attorney's
clerk, was the genuine and spontaneous burst of expression from
the lips of a girl seeking to unburden her soul from a load of
CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER. 9
long-concealed guilt ? No doubt it was her handwriting; no
doubt she admitted it before Sir Thomas Henry to be hers ; but
who drew it up ?
Many years have not elapsed since a clergyman, no less
respectable than the Rev. Mr. Wagner, avowed at the bar of the
House of Lords that he had drawn up a confession of guilt in
the form of a prayer, and commanded an accused person to " go
down on her knees and pray that prayer," and then appeared
as a witness against her to prove the confession so obtained.'*
A more able, experienced, patient, and humane magistrate
than the late Sir Thomas Henry it would be impossible to find,
but his duty in this case was little more than ministerial, and
having satisfied himself that this confession had not been
obtained under such circumstances as would render it inad-
missible in evidence, all he had power to do was to remit the
case to the magistrates of Wiltshire, within whose jurisdiction
the crime had been committed. The Wiltshire justices there-
upon committed Constance Kent to trial, and on the 20th
July 1865 she was arraigned before Mr. Justice Willes, pleaded
guilty, and was sentenced to death?a sentence afterwards com-
muted for imprisonment for life. Here, so far as any public or
judicial inquiries are concerned, the case ended.
A letter, dated the 24tli August, appeared shortly after-
wards in the public papers. In this letter, Dr. Bucknill states
that he examined Constance Kent by permission of the Lord
Chancellor. By whom Dr. Bucknill was selected for this im-
portant duty, or by whom the solicitor who seems to have been
joined with him in the inquiry was employed, does not appear.
The following is Dr. Bucknill's account:?
" Constance Kent says that the manner in which she com-
mitted her crime was as follows : A few days before the murder
she obtained possession of a razor from a green case in her
father's wardrobe and secreted it. This was the sole instrument
she used. She also secreted a candle, with matches, by placing
them in a corner of the closet in the garden where the murder
was committed. On the night of the murder she undressed
herself and went to bed, because she expected her sisters would
visit her room. She lay awake, watching, until she thought
that the household were all asleep, and soon after midnight she
left her bedroom and went downstairs and opened the drawing-
room door and window shutters. She then went up into the
nursery, withdrew the blanket from between the sheet and the
counterpane, and placed it on the side of the cot. She then
took the child from his bed and carried him downstairs through
the drawing-room. She had on her nightdress, and in the
* Minutes of Evidence, House of Lords, Talbot Divorce Bill, 1857 ; Question
1995. Evidence of the Rev. Robert Gage.
10 CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER.
drawing-room she put on her goloshes. Having the child in
one arm, she raised the drawing-room window with the other
hand, went round the house, and into the closet, lighted
the candle, and jplaced it on the seat of the closet, the child
being wrapped in the blanket ancl still sleeping, and while
the child ivas in this position she inflicted the wound in the
throat. She says she thought the blood would never come, and
that the child ivas not killed, so she thrust the razor into its left
side, and put the body, with the blanket round it, into the
vault. The light burnt out. The piece of flannel she had
with her was torn from an old flannel garment placed in the
waste bag, and which she had taken some time before and sewn
it, to use in washing herself. She went back into her bedroom,
examined her dress, and found only two spots of blood upon it.
These she washed out in the basin, and threw the water, which
was but little discoloured, into the footpan in which she had
washed her feet over night. She took another of her night-
dresses and got into bed. In the morning her nightdress had
become dry where it had been washed. She folded it up and
put it into the drawer. Her three night dresses were examined
by Mr. Foley, and she believes also by Mr. Parsons, the medi-
cal attendant of the family. She thought the blood stains had
been effectually washed out, but on holding the dress up to the
light a day or two afterwards she found the stains still visible.
She secreted the dress, moving it from place to place, and she
eventually burnt it in her own bedroom, and put the ashes, or
tinder, into the kitchen grate. On the Saturday morning,
having cleaned the razor, she took an opportunity of replacing
it, unobserved, in the case in the wardrobe. She abstracted
the nightdress from the clothes' basket when the housemaid
went to fetch a glass of water. The stained garment found in
the boiler hole had no connection whatever with the deed. As
regards the motive of her crime, it seems that, although she
entertained at one time a great regard for the present Mrs.
Kent, yet, if any remark was at any time made which, in her
opinion, was disparaging to any member of the first family,
she treasured it up and determined to revenge it. She had
no ill-will against the little boy, except as one of the children
of her step-mother. She declared that both her father and her
step-mother had been kind to her personally; and the following
is the copy of a letter which she addressed to Mr. Eodway on
this point, while in prison, before her trial:?
. " Devizes, May 15.
. ir> ^ ^as heen stated that my feelings of revenge were ex-
cited in consequence of cruel treatment. This is entirely false. I
CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER. 11
have received the greatest kindness from both the persons accused
of subjecting me to it. I have never had any ill-will towards either
of them on account of their behaviour to me, which has been very
kind.
" I shall feel obliged if you will make use of this statement in
order that the public may be undeceived on this point.
" I remain, Sir, truly yours,
" Constance E. Kent.
" To Mr. Rodway."
" She told me tliat when the nursemaid was accused she had
fully made up her mind to confess if the nurse had been convicted,
and that she had also made up her mind to commit suicide it
she was herself convicted. She said that she had felt herself
under the influence of the devil before she committed the mur-
der, but that she did not believe, and had not believed, that the
devil had more to do with her crime than he had with any other
wicked action. She had not said her prayers for a year before
the murder, and not aftenuards until she came to reside at
Brighton. She said that the circumstance which revived reli-
gious feelings in her mind was thinking about receiving the
Sacrament when confirmed.''''*
Such, word for word, is the account given by Dr. Bucknill
of the confession of Constance Kent?not one syllable of this
appeared either before Sir Thomas Henry at Bow Street, before
the magistrates at Trowbridge, or when she pleaded guilty before
Mr. Justice Willes.
No step, so far as I can ascertain, appears to have been
taken to compare the statements made by Constance Kent to
Dr. Bucknill with the facts proved five years before during the
inquiry at Road. Yet this was clearly the first thing which
ought to have been done for the purpose of ascertaining whether
the confession of guilt was not in this, as it has been in num-
berless cases, the mere product of a diseased imagination.
The very careful evidence given by Mr. Parsons, the surgeon,
on the former inquiry, affords an obvious and most valuable
means of applying this test.
He describes the wound in the throat, which was the cause
of the death of the child, as " dividing the whole of the struc-
tures down to the spine," severing, therefore, the carotid arteries
and other large blood-vessels. The discharge of blood must
have been instantaneous and violent. Constance Kent says she
thought the blood never would come. If it be urged that Mr.
Parsons afterwards expressed an opinion that the death might
have been occasioned by suffocation before the infliction of the
* Annual Ketjislir, 186.").
12 CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER.
gash on the throat,* and that therefore the spurting of blood
from the arteries would not have taken place. This is equally
inconsistent with the confession, in which no mention whatever
is made of any violence having been inflicted upon the child
until its throat was cut, and that it was asleep at the time.
The next contradiction is even more remarkable.
Mr. Parsons states that the instrument with which the
wound in the side was inflicted had passed through the night-
dress and flannel, which it appears that the child wore, cut
through the cartilage of two ribs, penetrated the diaphragm,
and slightly wounded the outer coat of the stomach. This
wound, in his judgment, had been inflicted by a " dagger-
shaped knife like a carving knife," and even with such a weapon
it would, he says, " have required great force to inflict such a
blow through the nightdress and to the depth to which it had
penetrated." Constance Kent says expressly that a razor " was
the sole instrument she used," and she says afterwards that,
thinking the blood would never come from the gash in the
throat (!), and that the child was not dead, she " thrust the
razor into its left side."
Now, to stab with a razor is simply an impossibility, and if
anyone doubts it, let him make the experiment upon some
substance which shall afford a resistance even far less than that
offered by a nightdress, a flannel, and the ribs of a " very heavy
child " of nearly four years old. The comparison of the con-
fession of Constance Kent with the evidence of Mr. Parsons,
appears to be so conclusive of the utter worthlessness of that
confession as evidence of her guilt, that had it been brought to
the notice of Sir Thomas Henry, of the Wiltshire magistrates,
or of Mr. Justice Willes, the probability is that the result would
have been that Constance Kent, instead of being condemned as
one of the most atrocious monsters that ever disgraced
humanity, would have been regarded as the victim of a terrible,
but by no means unfrequent, affliction.
It seems hardly necessary to pursue the inquiry into the
minor inconsistencies of the confession with the facts. But it
may be asked what became of the candle which burnt out in
the closet ? How happened Constance Kent to have a fire in
her bedroom in the month of June, and to be able to burn a
nightdress to ashes and place the ashes in the kitchen grate
without attracting notice in a house so full of inmates and so
carefully watched ?
The person (whoever it was) that cut the child's throat must
* On his cross-examination on the 3rd October Mr. Parsons said: "My own
impression is that the child was first suffocated by pressure on the mouth, and
that after that the throat had been cut."
CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER. 13
have been deluged with blood. Not " two spots only," not
merely the nightdress, but the hands must have been drenched
with blood. A razor can only be held close to the wound which
it inflicts. What became of this blood ? Everyone knows how
little blood it requires to discolour a large quantity of water.
Be it remembered that upon the occasion when Elizabeth
Grough was before the magistrates she was defended by an expe-
rienced counsel, who had, as I have before observed, every motive
to test the evidence given by Constance Kent in the strictest
manner. Had he been able to extract any fact from her which
tended to raise a suspicion of guilt on her part, it would have
tended also to the exculpation of his client. He was in posses-
sion of all the facts which had been elicited in the course of the
inquiry, and also of all the information which he could derive
from his client, the prisoner Gough. Had even a suspicion
existed in his mind that there could be criminality on the part
of Constance Kent, it would have been his duty to test her
evidence by the strictest and most searching cross-examination,
?a duty which he no doubt would have performed with ability.
Now, let the wild, contradictory, and most improbable story
which she told to Dr. Bucknill, five years after the event, and
after two years of seclusion from the world under the spiritual
guidance of the Bev. Mr. Wagner?her memory full of the
horrors of that fatal night, and her soul oppressed by the dark
cloud of suspicion which she knew was hanging over herself and
everyone that was dear to her?be compared with the simple
and plain tale told under the sanction of a judicial inquiry, and
subject to the test of hostile cross-examination by a skilful and
experienced counsel, and let it be asked which bears most
strongly the indications of truth ?
Is it strange that her reason should have given way, and that
she should have fancied that she had been an actor in scenes
which had impressed themselves so vividly on her memory and
her imagination ?
If it be asked, why did no one come forward to demand
investigation ? the answer is obvious. Those who felt that they
were innocent, that an unjust suspicion had attached to them,
must have accepted with gladness a confession which relieved
them from suspicion. Anyone who felt conscious of guilt had
even a stronger motive for silence.
I have already said that I do not suggest criminality in
anyone. Indeed, I think that the opinion generally entertained,
that the crime must have been committed by some one of the
inmates of the house, has been arrived at somewhat too hastily.
That the murderer must have been in the house when the child
was abstracted is no doubt clear, but there is no proof of the
14 CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER.
return of the criminal. Indeed, the evidence rather tends to an
opposite conclusion. Had that been the case, it would have
been next to impossible to have destroyed all traces of the crime.
The case, therefore, rests solely on the confession of Constance
Kent.
" Confessions," says Blackstone, " are the weakest and most
suspicious of all testimony."*
" Confession," says Lord Stowell, " is a species of evidence
which, though not inadmissible, is to be regarded with great
distrust; and though it is evidence which is not absolutely
excluded, but is received in conjunction with other circum-
stances, yet it is on all occasions to be most accurately
weighed."f
The distinguished German jurist, Heineccius, says : " Con-
fession is sometimes the voice of conscience. Experience,
however, teaches us that it is frequently far otherwise. There
sometimes lurks under the shadow of an apparent tranquillity, an
insanity which impels men readily to accuse themselves of all kinds
of iniquity. Some, deluded by their imagination, suspect them-
selves of crimes which they have never committed. A melan-
choly temperament, the ' tsedium vitse,' and an unaccountable
propensity to their own destruction, urges some to the most
groundless confessions, whilst they are extracted from others by
the dread of torture or the tedious misery of the dungeon. So
far is it from being the fact that all confessions are to be
attributed to the stings of conscience, that it has been well
said by Calpurnius Flaccus, ' Confessio voluntaria suspecta
est,' and by Quintilian, 'A suspicion of insanity is inherent in
all confessions.'
Justly has the same author remarked, that "a religious duty is
cast on the judge to guard well lest an innocent person should
be betrayed by this most foul species of false accusation, and
punishment fall on those who are guilty of no other crime but
that of calumny against themselves."
The tendency of the human mind to imbibe false impres-
sions of guilt is well known, and examples are of constant
occurrence.
Hardly any crime of an exciting nature is committed, but
some one is found to come forward and avow that he is the
culprit. This has happened recently with regard to more than
one of the murders committed within the last few years in the
metropolis, the perpetrators of which have not been discovered.
The purest life and the highest intellect afford no protec-
tion against this terrible malady. The poet Cowper was con-
* Com. 4, 357. f Williams v. Williams, 1 Con. 304.
t Hein. Ex. 18, 22.
CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER. 15
stantly oppressed with the consciousness of having committed
some crime of the deepest dye.
A gentleman of high character and social position has left a
record of the creations of his disordered brain during a state of
mental derangement. One delusion that vividly impressed
itself on his diseased consciousness, was that he had " entered
the sacristy of a monastery in Portugal, assassinated the vicar,
stolen his money and garments, disposed of them, and fled to
Cintra."* Happily he was consigned to medical and not clerical
care, and after a time was restored to sanity and to his friends.
From the earliest periods of which we have any records, cases
of this kind have been of frequent occurrence in the courts of
justice in all countries.
One of the best authenticated, and, from the accompanying-
circumstances, most interesting among the early cases, is that
of the Perrys, executed for the supposed murder of Mr. Har-
rison, in 1660, and popularly known as " The Campden
Wonder." It is to be found in a note to the case of Captain
Green, 14 How. State Trials, 1313. The facts were shortly as
follow : An old gentleman of the name of Harrison, residing
at Campden, in Gloucestershire, having gone to a village in the
neighbourhood to collect some money, and not returning as was
expected, his servant, John Perry, was sent to meet him.
Neither returned that night, and the next morning Mr. Har-
rison's son went early in the direction of the village to which
his father had gone the previous day. On his way he met John
Perry returning. In the course of the day circumstances were
discovered which tended to show that Mr. Harrison had been
subjected to foul play, and suspicion attached strongly to Perry,
who was taken into custody. At first he stoutly denied his
guilt, but after some days he desired to unburden his conscience
to a magistrate, and then lie gave a most minute and detailed
account of the murder of his master by himself, his mother,
and his brother. The readiness with which his delusion adapted
itself to circumstances as they arose, and wove them into his
narrative, is marvellous. Thus, it happened that Richard Perry
accidentally drew out of his pocket a cord, with a noose at the
end of it, and upon its being shown to John Perry, and his
being asked if he knew it, he " shook his head and said Yes,
to his sorrow; for that was the string his brother strangled his
master with." Upon this confession, coupled with other cir-
cumstances of suspicion, the three Perrys were executed.
In about two years Mr. Harrison returned to Campden
alive and well. He gave a romantic and not very credible
* Narrative of a Gentleman, $c., published by Effingham Wilson, 1838.
16 CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER.
account of his absence, the real cause of which has always been
involved in considerable mystery. It was clear, however, that
he had not been murdered, and it did not appear that the
Perrys had anything to do with his disappearance, or knew
anything about it. The whole case will repay a careful
perusal.
Dr. Southwood Smith, in his Lectures on Forensic Medicine,
mentions the following very remarkable case:?
"In the war of the French Revolution, the 4 Hermione'
frigate was commanded by Captain Pigot, a harsh man and a
severe commander. His crew mutinied and carried the ship
into an enemy's port, having murdered the captain and many
of the officers under circumstances of extreme barbarity. One
midshipman escaped, by whom many of the criminals, who
were afterwards taken and delivered over to justice one by one,
were identified. Mr. Finlaison, the Grovernment actuary, who
at that time held an official situation at the Admiralty, states:
' In my own experience I have known, on separate occasions,
more than six sailors who voluntarily confessed to having struck
the first blow at Captain Pigot. These men detailed all the
horrid circumstances of the mutiny with extreme minuteness and
perfect accuracy; and, nevertheless, not one of them had ever
been in the ship, nor had so much as seen Captain Pigot in
their lives. They had obtained by tradition, from their mess-
mates, the particulars of the story. When long on a foreign
station, hungering and thirsting for home, their minds became
enfeebled ; at length they actually believed themselves guilty of
the crime over which they had so long brooded, and submitted
with a gloomy pleasure to being sent to England in irons for
judgment. At the Admiralty we were alivays able to detect
and establish tlieir innocence in defiance of their own solemn
asseverations.'' "*
The thousands of miserable wretches who perished at the
stake or on the gallows for crimes which we now know it was
impossible to commit, almost invariably confessed their guilt,
generally accompanied by the most minute details. " Alas!"
exclaimed poor Isabel Gowdie, after her four days' confession of
her intrigues with the devil, and her visits to fairy land, " I
deserve not to be sitting here, for I have done so many evil
deeds, especially killing of men. I deserve to be rievin upon
iron harrows, and worse if it could be devised."f
We have left off burning witches, but in the reign of Queen
Anne, in the days of Pope, of Swift, and of Addison, the Rev.
* London Medical Gazette, Jan. 20, 1838, p. G27.
?j" Pitcairn's Grim. Trials, iii, ap. vil.
CONSTANCE KENT AND THE ROAD MURDER. IT
Godfrey Gardiner, rector of Walkerne, a village in Hertford-
shire, the Rev. Francis Bragge, Yicar of Hitchin, and Sir Henry
Chauncy, serjeant-at-law, Recorder of Hertford, a Welsh judge
and author of the " History of Hertfordshire," prosecuted an
unhappy woman of the name of Jane Wenham for witchcraft, at
the assizes at Hertford. The jury found her guilty for con-
versing with the devil in the shape of a cat. She confessed,
and was sentenced to death. Happily she was tried before
Powell, a man of sense and humanity, and by his intervention
her life was saved, and she lived many years, supported by
Colonel Plumer and Earl Cowper.*
An unhappy woman of the name of Hickes and her child,
a girl of nine years old, had not the same good fortune. They
were prosecuted for witchcraft at the assizes at Huntingdon,
before Justice Wilmot. They were " visited by several divines,"
they confessed their crime, and were hanged at Huntingdon on
the 28th of July 1816.f Yet Wilmot was a judge no less re-
spectable than the late Mr. Justice Willes. Were I to proceed
further with instances of this kind they would fill volumes.
Those who may wish to pursue the inquiry will find ample
stores to repay their curiosity in the State Trials, in Pitcairn's
Criminal Trials, and in the writings of Sir George Mackenzie,
of Bodin, and of Wier.
I have laid before the reader all the evidence that, after a
careful search, I have been able to discover with regard to this
murder?
Murder most foul as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
I have also given the grounds for the conviction at which I
have arrived, that Constance Kent has been guilty of no crime
but that of " calumny against herself." That she has fallen a
victim to thick-coming fancies, groundless creations engendered
in her brain by a diseased imagination dwelling on circum-
stances of inexpressible horror, and fostered by seclusion and
religious terrors till they assumed to her mind the aspect of
realities.
The mystery of the Road Murder, in my opinion, is not yet
solved.
* See a report of this trial, Blackwoods Magazine, May 1859.
f Gough's Brit. Topog. vol. i. p. 439 ; Blackwood's Magazine, May 1859, p. 580.
PART I. VOL, V. NEW SERIES.
