The Brain" and its Diseases
============================

Syphilis of the Brain and Nervous System. By Thomas
Stretch Dowse, M.D. London: Bailliere, Tindall & Cox.
Vol. i.
This little book is a first volume of a series the author proposes
writing upon diseases of the Nervous System. He commences
by giving a complete account of the history and nature of
syphilis. This part of the subject is illustrated by diagrams.
He passes on to consider the diagnosis of syphilis as affecting
the brain and spinal cord. Dr. Dowse says, very properly,
" I would remark, however, that a heavy responsibility rests
upon the shoulders of any medical man who neglects to en-
force upon his patients the absolute necessity of a mercurial
course in the primary stage of syphilis, for an incomplete,
hesitating treatment of external syphilis specially predisposes
to subsequent affections of the nervous system."
It appears from the book before us that there are two prime
factors which tend to induce syphilis to extend itself upon the
brain and nervous system. The first, we are told, is an irri-
table condition of these parts from hereditary predisposition;
the second is due to an irritability, the result of inflammatory
change, which may be either traumatic or idiopathic in its
origin; or from molecular derangement, followed by want of
due selective nutritive capacity in the nerve or connective tissue
cells, by which their tonicity is impaired. Some very interest-
ing remarks are made on the " protean signs of syphilis of the
nervous system." " Syphilis in its working is slow, alternately
progressive and retrogressive." A number of characteristic
cases are now given, where pressure on the brain and cord
were caused by endosteal gumma, as well as by other varieties
of syphilis.
The author carefully discusses the diagnosis of the disease
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 155
as affecting- the sympathetic system, treatment of syphilis, here-
ditary syphilis, and syphilitic epilepsy, and the pathology of the
disease. The work is very interesting, and the plates and dia-
grams beautifully executed; it is complete in itself, and is well
worthy the perusal of all interested in the subject. The pro-
duction of such a work reflects great credit on the author, and
we welcome his book as a valuable addition to the treatment
and study of nervous diseases in their relation to syphilis.
INDEX MEDIGUS.
We think this an excellent idea and commend it to our
readers, and publish with pleasure the following communications
we have received on the subject:?
" 37 Park Row, New York,
"Bee. 14, 1878.
" Journal of Psychological Medicine and Mental Pathology.
" Gentlemen,?
"The publishers of the Index Medicus, in joining the editors
in their request for the co-operation of publishers and con-
ductors of journals, would lay stress upon the fact that the
enterprise in no way enters into competition with any medical
publication, but rather supplements each by furnishing an Index
not only to its own subscribers, but to the profession at large.
Instead, therefore, of being a new rival in the field, it renders
practical, i.e. advertising, service, such as is rendered by no
journal to other journals. In reciprocation, the publisher would
ask simply :
"First, cordial compliance with the request of the editors for
earliest copies of your issues.
" The Index will be regularly mailed in exchange.
" Secondly, such friendly mention in the reading matter of
the journals as may show the enterprise in the light of a useful
aid to the profession.
" The specimen number of the Index will be sent as soon as
issued. " Yours respectfully,
" F. Leypoldt."
Literary Note.?The following mem. of a new biblio-
graphical enterprise is submitted as of public and prof essional
interest. The publisher ivould, of course, greatly prefer the
insertion of an original notice from the editor.
F. Leypoldt.
15G REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.
It is generally known to the medical profession and those
interested in bibliography that Dr. John S. Billings, Surg.,
U. S. A., in charge of the National Medical Library, at Washing-
ton, is now ready to print his great "National Catalogue of
Medical Literature," as soon as Congress grants an appropriation
for the purpose. This indexes under subjects, and by authors,
books, pamphlets, and original papers in nearly all the medical
periodicals of the world; including over 400,000 subject
entries, and making ten volumes royal 8vo. of 1,000 pages each.
This will be of the greatest value to physicians the world over,
as it enables them to find analogues for peculiar and difficult
cases, and thus often to save lives. In continuation of this
work, it is now proposed to publish monthly, under the editor-
ship of Dr. Billings and of his assistant, Dr. Robert Fletcher,
M.R.C.S., a current medical bibliography under the title of the
Index Medicus. It will be issued by F. Leypoldt, the
bibliographic publisher, 37, Park Row, New York, at 3 dollars
per year, and will enter all medical books and index the leading
medical journals and transactions in English and other
languages. A full list of the latter, numbering over 600, will
form a part of the specimen number of the Index, soon to be
issued.
