On Epilepsy
============

Art. III.—*
The most accurate exponent of tlie advance of science is ever to be
sought in tlie extent to which, it is applicable to the true interests of
man; in the extent to which it promotes wisdom, as distinguished
from mere knowledge, and in the amount of its applicability rather to
the wants of man, than to the gratification of his curiosity. In the
infancy of any science, facts are imperfectly observed, loosely described,
and their significance misunderstood; they appear as a chaos of phe-
nomena, unconnected, or but very feebly connected, by hypothesis ; and
it is only when their true bearing and mutual connexion and depend-
ance being clearly perceived, they become constantly recurring illustra-
tions of one grand principle, that the parent science becomes worthy of
its name. Casual observation, wonder, hypothesis, mystery, over-ap-
preciation, and neglect, are a few only of the preliminary phases through
which truth has to pass, before obtaining its proper recognition, and
paying its proper quota to the service of mankind.
These remarks are suggested by a perusal of the works before us,
where we find the three sciences of Physiology, Electricity, and Sta-
tistics, applied to the elucidation of the phenomena of a disease, which,
* Epilepsy and the Allied Affections. By Charles Bland Radeliffe, M. D.
London: John Churchill.
Du Prognostic et du Traitement Curatif de l'Epilepsie. Par Tli. Herpin. Paris:
Bailliere.
D 2
80
ON EPILEPSY.
if not one of the most fearful scourges of the race, is certainly one of
the most formidable and incomprehensible which can attack the indi-
vidual, whether viewed in reference to its immediate invasion, or its
ulterior consequences.
These branches of knowledge have not been exempt from the various
phases of opinion already alluded to. When Harvey discovered the
circulation of the blood, it appeared to those of sanguine and hopeful
temperament that now a sure and certain method of curing' all manner
of disease was, or would speedily be, indicated. This was the stage of
over-appreciation; it passed by a natural transition, through disap-
pointment, to neglect. And so has it been with regard to physiological
discoveries in general, till the science, instead of serving as the true
foundation for distinguishing and treating disease, has but too fre-
quently been prostituted to the co-ordinating of theories, or the justifi-
cation of a foregone conclusion. Electricity was long the plaything
of the child, the toy of the philosopher; it is now the potent analyser
of mysterious compounds, the vehicle of a nation's thought; and com-
bined with physiological reasoning, we find it in the hands of Dr Rad-
cliffe, applied as a powerful calculus to the hitherto crude and incon-
gruous mass of facts and opinions, bearing upon muscular action in
general, and epileptic convulsions in particular. Statistics have been
alternately the weapon, the jest, and the shield of the statesman; yet,
carefully and properly applied to the investigation of this disease by
M. Herpin, we shall find it lead to many useful and interesting re-
sults, as regards its prognosis and treatment.
Taking these two works as our text, and availing ourselves of other
sources of information, where it may appear necessary, we shall proceed
to examine what is the present state of our knowledge, and what
are our future prospects in reference to this interesting and fearful
disease.
For facilitating this investigation, we propose to ourselves the fol-
lowing subjects of inquiry:—
1. What are the phenomena of epilepsy ?
2. What are its varieties ?
3. What is its general pathology ?
4. What are the conditions favouring the development of the epi-
leptic tendency ?
5. What are the influences presiding over periodicity?
6. What place in the natural history of disease can we assign to
epilepsy ?
7. How is epilepsy distinguished from other diseases ?
8. What is our prognosis, generally, and in any individual case ?
9. What is the proper and rational treatment of epilepsy ?
ON EPILEPSY.
I. What are the phenomena of Epilepsy?—There are two distinct
forms in which th a Jit of epilepsy appears—the epileptic convulsion, and
the epileptic vertigo ; the grand mal petit vial of the French
writers. The general characters are—loss or great diminution of con-
sciousness, generally with convulsion, hut occasionally with extreme
relaxation, always with great modification of the muscular system ;
•oppression and embarrassment of the respiratory and circulatory func-
tions ; the attack lasting from a few seconds to many hours, termi-
nating very frequently, if not usually, in a state of apparent health ;
recurring sometimes not at all, hut most frequently at intervals, not
usually marked by any regularity, though this is subject to exceptions.
We extract Dr lladcliffe's vivid portrait of the epileptic convulsion
entire:—
" The fit is ushered in by a cry or scream, and the patient is at once
dashed to the ground. The whole frame is seized with violent and
frightful convulsions, the features are horribly drawn, the head is
twisted to one side, the eyes are distorted and half protruded from
their sockets, the teeth are gnashed together, and the tongue is man-
gled between them until the mouth overflows with bloody foam, the
limbs are dashed about violently, the chest is so fixed that all proper
respiration is at an end, and, last of all, the bladder, intestines, and
seminal vesicles participate in the spasm and expel their contents.
The temperature of the skin is usually below the natural standard, and
the hands and feet are cool or actually cold; but, in the course of the
paroxysm, and as the asphyxial symptoms gain ground, the head and
neck become warm and tumid, the tumidity rapidly increases, and the
colour changes from dull red to deep blue or black. In a less degree
this change extends to the rest of the body, but, as a general rule, the
hands and feet remain cool and pale throughout, or only acquire a
slight venous or bluish tinge. The pulse rapidly becomes insensible,
or nearly so, though the heart beats with tumultuous violence. There
is no consciousness whatever, and the most violent stimulants fail to
rouse the dormant senses. For some time after the violence of the fit
is over, the limbs are shaken by passing quivers, and the breathing in-
terrupted by sobs or gasps, but at length these residuary troubles end
in a state of comatose sleep, in which the breathing is often loud and
stertorous. Then the lungs resume their natural action, and, conse-
quent upon this change, the veins of the head and neck become un-
loaded, the colour and pulse return, and the patient wakens to an
obscure and troubled consciousness."—Epilepsy and Allied Diseases,
pp. 49—51.
The less formidable attack, in appearance at least, is without con-
vulsion, turgescence of face, or foaming of the mouth. There is sudden
loss, or great diminution and embarrassment of the consciousness,
relaxation of the muscular system, tottering, staggering, or falling; a
cold clammy skin, a feeble pulse, and, in many cases, an almost imme-
38
ON EPILEPSY.
diate return of the faculties. Still milder forms than this are de-
scribed, and, indeed, in the confirmed epileptic we meet with every
variety of attack, from the simple vertigo, which lasts hut an almost
inappreciable moment, to the violent and long-continued convulsion
above described. Some patients are only affected by the vertigo, and
never have the convulsion; yet we cannot consider their cases as less
serious than the others, for we have the high authority of M. Foville
for asserting that intellectual degradation occurs more constantly and
more quickly amongst those affected by vertigo, or petit mat, than
amongst those who have only the convulsions, or grand mal. Most
frequently, however, the forms are found combined in the same indi-
vidual. In sixty-eight cases mentioned by M. Herpin, there were only
five where vertigo existed alone.
Most frequently these attacks, whether of vertigo or convulsion,
take place without warning. In a few instances there are distinct
premonitory signs, which may be taken advantage of by the sufferer.
Thus, Dr Radcliffe observes, that, " on the eve of a fit, confirmed
epileptics are noticed to sit or move about in a moping and listless
manner;" to complain of chills and shiverings, or of faintness and
sickness. " The respiration is interrupted by frequent sighs; the
pulse is weak, irregular, and slow." Occasionally there is headache,
dazzling of the eyes, singing in the ears, and other excitements of sensa-
tion ; slight flushing of the face, dilatation of the pupils, and extreme
irritability of temper. In some rare instances, there is, immediately
before, or at the commencement of, the attack, a phenomenon of a
more specific nature. For the following description we are indebted
to M. Foville. " A peculiar sensation, it may be of cold, pain, heat,
or itching, is developed suddenly in a toe, a finger, a limb, in the belly
or the back, and from the point whence it originates, mounts gradu-
ally to the head; it arrives there, and immediately the patient falls (as
if struck) ; the convulsions break forth at once." This sensation has
received, from the earliest times, the name of aura epileptica. It is
rare; so much so, that by many its existence is doubted or ignored,
and by others, explained in a different manner. Thus, M. Herpin con-
siders it as nothing more than the commencement of the tonic spasm
of the muscles of the limb. This view can scarcely be admitted; we
know that modifications of sensation do frequently precede an attack ;
and in an affection where sensibility and motility are equally affected,
it seems but reasonable to suppose that the attack may be heralded
sometimes by changes in the one class of nerves, and sometimes in
the other. For an interesting resume of the various phenomena of a
sensor, motor, or psychical character, which occasionally precede the
attack of epilepsy, we refer our readers to Romberg's treatise on
ON EPILEPSY.
39
" Diseases of tlie Nervous System," article—Epilepsy, and to the article
—Epilepsie, in the " Diet, des Sciences Medieales," by M. Esquirol.
Of the frequency of the occurrence of premonitory signs in general,
very different accounts are given by various authors. Dr Badcliffe
considers them nearly constantly to be observed; Professor Romberg
notices them in about one half of his patients; M. Herpin states the
proportion to be about one-fourth; M. Georget states that not more
than four or five per cent, of those attacked with an epileptic seizure
have any premonition; M. Beau gives the proportion of seventeen per
cent.; M. Foville, M. Esquirol, and Dr Clieyne give no numerical
ratio, but state that in much the greater number of cases there are no
precursory symptoms. We believe, however, that careful observation
would most frequently detect some changes in the system, analogous
to those above described.
Though there be this difference of opinion concerning the outset of
the attack, there is but little doubt as to the results. Except in the
very slightest seizures, and in the epileptic vertigo, the fit always
leaves behind it some sequelae, such as headache, drowsiness, pain in
the limbs, stiffness and soreness of the whole body, pain in the back
of the neck, swollen and bitten tongue, ecchymoses, and bruises.
These all appear to be the natural results of the attack, produced
chiefly mechanically. But there are other effects, more serious in
character, and more insidious in their invasion. Death but rarely
occurs in the fit; after a day or two, however severe the attack, the
patient appears in his usual health ; but, by-and-by, another and
another fit supervenes, and the nervous centres begin to suffer, and
not to recover their due functions in the intervals. The features alter
and become ugly (Esquirol); the limbs become gradually emancipated
from the control of the will; hemiplegia often occurs; the memory
becomes feeble ; and we observe in the intervals a diminution of the
intelligence, which, gradually augmented, brings on at length a state
of confirmed dementia. These fearful results have been known to
occur after one fit (Esquirol) in children, but this is not usual. On
the other hand, we have known many epileptics whose intellect has
not appeared to suffer in the least by attacks, severe, long-continued,
and of many years' duration. Dr Cheyne gives similar instances,
(article—Epilepsy; " Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine.") Yet we
may take it for granted as a general rule, that such severe functional
derangements, even if in the beginning they be no more than functional,
cannot continue long without leading to serious organic mischief, and
deterioration of the mental faculties in the great majority of cases.
A few words on some of the individual symptoms will conclude our
remarks on the phenomena of epilepsy.
40
ON EPILEPSY.
The premonitory symptoms are evidently due to modifications of
innervation, and of tlie circulation in the nervous centres, or to disorder
of the particular organ or viscus in which the exciting cause of the
convulsion is situated. The "aura" may sometimes be the commence-
ment of spasm, hut more frequently we believe it to be indicative of a
change in the nervous centres themselves, and to be strictly a reflected
sensation, a centrical impression. The scream with which the attack
is ushered in is one of the most fearful sounds in nature. Many
accounts are given, some ludicrous, and some very melancholy, of the
effects produced upon excitable persons hearing it,—its nature is not
well understood. That it is not indicative of pain or fear, at least in
all instances, is capable of clear demonstration. We are well acquainted
with an epileptic patient who screams dreadfully on the attack, and who
has frequently described to us the sensation of the invasion as most
delightful, and this though dreading the attack to the utmost extent.
He says that he hears sounds and sees colours all of the most beautiful
character, but cannot clearly satisfy himself at the time which is sound
and which is colour,—
" The hues seemed music, and the music, hues."
He has no sensation of pain whatever. All writers concur in affording
illustration of the same principle. The noise is most probably pro-
duced by the first convulsive action of the chest, together with that
of the larynx.
The convulsion is partly tonic, though chiefly clonic, (the existence
of the former may often be traced even during the most violent pre-
valence of the latter ;) it may be general, more frequently it is partial;
it may be wanting altogether, as in the vertiginous form, and many
varieties of the mal. The fall generally precedes the convulsion,
but in some instances follows it, as in a case cited by Esquirol. The
embarrassment of the respiratory function is, we believe, correctly
attributed by Dr Kadcliffe to the spasmodic fixture of the parietes of the
chest; but at the same time it appears that changes take place in the
organs themselves, as evidenced by the increased secretion of' mucus in
the trachea. The loss of sensibility appears to be simultaneous in its
invasion with the convulsion and fall. It is generally complete, but
not invariably.
It is a strange and suggestive fact, that whilst those diseases which
are obscure and variable in their symptoms, proteiform in their mani-
festations, insidious in their invasion, and of difficult diagnosis, have
been discovered, hunted to their homes, and traced to their proximate
cause—epilepsy, which has not varied in its phenomena since the days
of Hippocrates, which is easy of recognition, plain and palpable in its
iittack and its results, still remains one of the opprobria medicinuc. It is
ON' EPILEPSY.
41
interesting, as an illustration of the constancy of this disease, to com-
pare the account given by the great father of medicine with that
which we have given above. He says—•
" The patient loses his speech (and intellect), and chokes, and foam
issues by the mouth ; the teeth are fixed, the hands are contracted,
the eyes distorted; he becomes insensible, and in some cases the
bowels are evacuated. He kicks with his feet .... and these
symptoms occur sometimes on the left side, sometimes on the right,
and sometimes on both." Aretaeus and Paulus iEgineta give similar
or identical accounts.
Such, constant and well marked, have been the symptoms of this
disease since the days of Hippocrates ; and yet it would appear that no
step has been taken in the meantime, tending to the discovery of its
real cause and essential nature. But nature cannot be ever obdurate
to the patient observer of her phenomena, and we hope to indicate
shortly, that an advance is being made in the right direction.
II. The Varieties of Epilepsy.—A very natural division of the sub-
ject has always suggested itself to systematic writers on this disease—
viz., into E. Cerebralis and E. Sympathetica, according as the root of
the disease was supposed to be in the brain or in some distant organ.
We prefer the terms E. Centrica, and E. Excentrica, the division being
essentially the same, but the expression more comprehensive, as in-
cluding in the former not only the brain, but the spinal cord. The
second grand division has again been subdivided into various classes,
taking their names from the special organ supposed to be affected, as
E. Stomachica, E. Hepatica, E. Nervosa, E. Uterina, E. a Dolore
(Dr Cheyne). We venture, however, to suggest that, in a nosological
point of view, these divisions are unnecessary and uninteresting; though,
as affecting the treatment, their recognition is important; but, con-
sidered as a disease simply, the manifestations are alike in all these
cases, and, therefore, not requiring separate description. The pre-
liminary symptoms, however, will sometimes differ, obviously in
accordance with the derangement of these special functions, and this
will be of essential service in the treatment.
III. The Pathology of Epilepsy.—The most cursory view of the
subject leads us at once to the nervous centres as the source of, or
agent in, the production of these strange phenomena; but having
arrived there, we seem as far from the truth, practically, as ever. Is
it a disease of nervous excitement ? Whj', then, is consciousness de-
stroyed or suspended F—Is it one of depression ? Why, then, is muscular
action so violently increased ?—What is the condition of the brain on
the eve of, and during an attack of epilepsy ? Is it congestion ? Why,
then, do the symptoms decrease when the congestion is on the increase
42
ON EPILEPSY.
towards the close of the fit ?—Is it inflammation ? This is obviously-
incredible, from the very transient nature of the attack. These are
important questions, and deserve the most serious consideration. An
answer to them is found in Dr Radcliffe's work, marked by such
originality of thought, and such earnest research into the phenomena,
that we cannot resist laying it, at some length, before our readers.
And in order to do this, it will be necessary to enter into our author's
views on the subject of muscular contraction in general, as, without
this, his pathology of epilepsy would not be comprehensible.
At p. 41 we find the following law stated, which contains a most
remarkable deviation from the received views of muscular motion, but
which is the basis of Dr Radcliffe's account of the pathology of
epilepsy and all allied convulsive affections :—
11 All stimulants, yital and physical, antagonize muscular
CONTRACTION, AND CONTRACTION HAPPENS EROM ORDINARY
MOLECULAR ATTRACTION, WHEN THE MUSCLE IS NOT STIMU- *
LA.TED."
This opinion our author founds upon a great number of facts and ex-
periments, of which the following is an abstract:—
1. Rigor mortis (analogous to ordinary muscular contraction) occurs
after all stimulus has ceased. It may be proper to mention that " stimu-
lus" includes the sum of the influences brought to bear upon muscle,
such as innervation, blood, temperature, and the like. Rigor mortis,
then, only occurs on the cessation of " stimulus."
2. The daetos contracts on the application of cold, which is but
the abstraction of the stimulus of heat; the skin under the same cir-
cumstances shrivels.
3. " Comparing voluntary and involuntary muscles, their contracti-
bility is found to be related, in an inverse ratio, to the supply of nerves
(p. 7), and to the supply of blood (p. 8)," and convulsion occurs on
bleeding an animal to death at the shambles. Also rigor mortis may
be relaxed by the injection of warm blood into the vessels.
4. The argument adduced from mechanical irritation as inducing
contraction, and from the action of the hollow viscera, as the uterus
and bladder upon their contents, does not admit of condensation. We
must refer our readers to the work itself, pp. 8 to 11.
5. The testimony which electrical phenomena bear to this view
are very closely investigated and clearly stated. The result of them
is, that an electrical current exists in a muscle during rest, and ceases
altogether during contraction, the needle of the galvanometer at such
times pointing to zero, as it does also in cadaveric rigidity. It also
appears from these experiments, that artificial electric currents pro-
OX EPILEPSY.
43
duce contraction in a limb, by neutralizing tlie already-existing natural
current.
6. From the action of cold and heat upon the animal tissues, it
appears that the former always produces contraction, and the latter
relaxation.
7. The condition of the bloodvessels, under various circumstances,
affords, according to our author's view, further corroboration of the
law. Thus, "joy flushes the skin, and fear blanches it; in other
words, the superficial capillaries expand when the nervous energy is
exuberant, and shrink when it is deficient." (p. 25.) In inflamma-
tion and various pathological states of the system, there are other
illustrations of the same principle. This question is still more fully
discussed in a previous work by the same author, on "Vital Motion."
8. It is impossible to condense the argument deduced from the
action of the heart, so as at once to make it comprehensible, and
bring it within our limits. We can but state the result arrived at, viz.,
that the diastole of the ventricle is the active state, and is synchronous
with the greatest innervation, and the most free supply of blood to
the vessels of the heart; that the contraction is a passive state, syn-
chronous with the diminution of innervation, and consequent upon
that and the diminished supply of blood. This our author supposes
also to furnish a solution of the mystery of the rhythmical action of
the heart; but for the full illustration of this part of the subject,
we can but refer to Chapter 3, which contains many interesting and
suggestive remarks, and which concludes thus :—
" The doctrine, then, that all stimulants, vital and physical, anta-
gonize muscular contraction, and that contraction happens from ordi-
nary molecular attraction when the muscle is not stimulated, may
be said to receive its final physiological confirmation in the physical
explanation which it affords to the three great and fundamental problems
in physiology,—muscular contraction, the movements of the blood
in vessels independently of the heart, and the rhythm of the heart.
And hence the necessity for the full investigation of the law of mus-
cular contraction, before entering upon the investigation of epilepsy,
and other disorders, in which muscular contraction is in excess; for
if the old doctrine that muscular contraction is the result of stimula-
tion must fall to the ground, then all pathological deductions founded
upon that doctrine must fall along with it."
To complete the physiological view of this question, it is incumbent
upon us to allude to those phenomena which appear to militate against
this view, or which at least require further elucidation, before they can
be deemed illustrations of the same general law.
1. The phenomena of muscular contraction differ in many respects
from molecular attraction,—in its sudden occurrence, in the absence,
44
ON EPILEPSY.
or almost absence, of diminution in the absolute bulk of the muscle,—
in its great lessening of length, and great increase in breadth and
thickness.
2. In diseases of deficient innervation and circulation, as in chlorotic,
anaemic, and syncopoid states, muscular contractility and tonicity are
low, and only as exceptions become spasmodic.
3. In cases where, from injury or disease, the nervous energy is ab-
stracted, as in paralysis, or the division of a nerve, the rule is, muscular
relaxation.
4. The phenomena of rigor mortis do not occur at once, sometimes
not for hours after the cessation of life, and the consequent abstraction
of stimulus.
5. It appears from general testimony that convulsion may occur
from plethora, as well as from anaemia, as Esquirol observes, that it is
in accordance with many facts, that Hippocrates and all subsequent
observers have regarded plethora as one of the causes of epilepsy.
These and similar facts may serve to indicate the class of phenomena
which do not appear subservient to the same law. We do not doubt,
however, that so acute a physiologist as Dr Eadcliffe has foreseen and
provided against these apparent objections,-—indeed, some of them are
urged by himself; but until further explanation of them is afforded,
we must allow the question to remain sub judice,—a more full discus-
sion of the subject would lead us too far from our purpose at present.
In the meantime, adopting these physiological views, we are now
prepared to understand our author's pathological opinions on the
nature of epilepsy and convulsion in general. Commencing the investi-
gation by interrogating the three great systems, the vascular, the
nervous, and the muscular, he finds that in each there is a depression
of proper power, the circulation low, the system "unnerved," and the
muscular system indicating want of tone and energy, all which is
clearly demonstrated.
" Viewed in this manner, the vascular and nervous systems of the
epileptic, as well as the mobile structures in which the convulsive phe-
nomena are manifested, are seen to present unequivocal evidences of
inactivity; and this inactivity—so far, at least, as the vascular and
nervous systems are concerned—is found to be most marked in the fit
itself."
" It is, then, sufficiently evident that epilepsy cannot be caused by
any excitement of the muscles, consequent upon the excessive supply
of nervous or any other stimulus. On the contrary, everything is in
harmony with the physiological premises, and, as might be anticipated
from these premises, the convulsion would seem to depend upon want
of vital stimulation, which want had allowed the molecular attraction
of the muscles to come into play, and gain the ascendancy."—
JSpHejpsi/, pp. 59—01.
ON EPILEPSY.
45
In that part of the work which is devoted to the affections allied to
epilepsy, and marked by convulsion, tremor, or spasm, we find still
ampler confirmation of these views ; but as it is our intention to con-
fine our remarks chiefly to epilepsy itself, we must leave these for some
future occasion. Having, then, got a clear and definite statement of
the general pathological condition of the system, we are prepared to
enter upon our next question:—
IY. The Conditions favourable or conducive to the Development of
tJie Epileptic tendency.—In answering this question, we shall take
advantage of M. Herpin's division of the subject, and examine suc-
cessively,—
1. Hereditary tendencies.
2. Anatomical conditions.
3. Physiological conditions.
4. Hj'gienic conditions.
5. Morbid antecedents.
1. It is generally acknowledged that the tendency to epilepsy is
hereditary, not always in the direct line of ancestry, but either so, or
in collateral branches ; thus Boerhaave observes :—" Silente sccpe morbo
in genitore, dumex avo derivatur in nepotem." General as this admis-
sion is, the statistics are rare by which its absolute frequency could be
determined. M. Herpin gives us the particulars of 68 cases, with all
the information which could be gathered as to the family affections.
The result is interesting, not only as showing absolutely that this class
of affections is hereditary, but as indicating those diseases which seem
most closely allied to it. Thus he found 11 cases of epilepsy, 24 of
mental alienation, 11 of apoplexy with hemiplegia, 13 of chronic
meningitis and hydrocephalus, 2 of general paralysis, besides a few
isolated instances of suicide, melancholia, &c., and 1 of softening of the
brain. Some of these affections were found in more members than one
of the same family, so that part of the 68 cases might appear free
from the hereditary tendency; but it must be remembered that there
are very great difficulties in the way of ascertaining these facts, and
that it is more than probable that, could everything relating to the
antecedents of an epileptic be known, the instances where the disease
appears unpreceded by any of these, its allies, would be very rare. Dr.
Cheyne, indeed, considers that it never originates in a family except by
exaltation of the strumous diathesis, through intermarriage, or some
accidental cause. To this we shall have to refer again.
2. The anatomical conditions which appear to favour the develop-
ment of epilepsy are various and doubtful, and from their frequent
absence and want of constancy, throw but little light upon the nature
of the disease. In an epileptic who has had but few attacks, whose
46
ON EPILEPSY.
intellects or muscular powers have not permanently suffered, and who
has died from accident or from some other disease, a post-mortem in-
vestigation will probably reveal no lesion whatever of the nervous
centres, or, as M. Foville observes, " We may, perchance, meet with a
tubercle, a cancer, an osteo-calcareous production, which may be re-
garded as the occasional cause of the disorder; but the disorder has
disappeared, the tubercle still remaining, and no symptom betraying its
presenceAccording to the investigations of the Wenzels, the most
frequent alteration is found in the pineal body, and they supposed this
to be always the case in centric epilepsy. In those who die during
an attack, the most constant appearances are those of congestion and
extreme gorging of the vessels, but this, as Dr Radcliffe observes, is
evidently due to the action of the fit and to the manner of death. In
old, confirmed cases, besides these appearances, we find marks as of the
effects of long-continued modifications of the circulation, as induration,
or sometimes softening of the white matter, changes in the appear-
ance, also, of the grey substance, and almost always enlargement of
the vessels of the brain. Of the special alterations of structure we
cannot speak, but must for details refer to systematic works on the
subject. Suffice it to say, that all imaginable morbid conditions have
been met with, but can scarcely be considered as the causes of the
disease, inasmuch as they exist when the disease itself is not actively
manifested; and the disease frequently exists with equal or greater
virulence when no such changes are to be met with. The same obser-
vation applies with still greater force to those anatomical conditions in
various organs,which are found in epilepsy originating in irritation at the
distal extremity of nerves, in what we have called " excentrie epilepsy."
3. Physiological conditions. — Amongst these we have, perhaps
rather irregularly, included sex. It appears, from reports of hospitals,
that females are much more frequently affected than males. M.
Herpin gives the proportion as 6 to 5; Frank, of 8 to 7. Esquirol
mentions, that in the Salpetriere there are 389 women, and at the
JBicetre 162 men, in 1813. Georget states, that in 1S20, the relative
numbers were 324 and 160. Age appears to have a material influence
in predisposing to epilepsy. From various documents by Leuret and
others, it appears that nearly 70 per cent, are attacked before the age
of 20. Real congenital epilepsy is very rare, not occurring in more than
1 per cent. One-fotirth appear to be attacked before 5 years old; from
5 to 10, not more than 3 per cent, occur ; from 10 to 15, and from 15 to
20 years, about one-fifth each. With regard to the after ages, the con-
clusions appear not sufficiently ascertained. The influence of tempera-
ment, of dentition, and of the establishment of menstruation, has yet
to be determined. They appear to be small, though this is not in
ON EPILEPSY.
47
accordance with tlie popular impression. The recurrence of the
function of menstruation, however, may frequently he an exciting
cause in those otherwise predisposed to the affection. The proportion
of married epileptics is very small compared to the unmarried; hut this
is no etiological indication, as cause and effect here mutually react.
4. Hygienic conditions.—We have no accurate means of judging of
the proportion of epileptics among the rich and the poor. Hospital
practice gives no assistance—private practice is not a correct test;
hut out of M. Herpin's 68 cases, 21 belonged to rich families, and 26
to workmen in comfortable circumstances. Of the rest, only 11 were
in positive indigence. It needs little proof that excess of various kinds
—drunkenness, gluttony, and excessive intellectual occupation, having a
tendency to the general depression of the powers—tends to favour the
epileptic condition. We have no account of moral causes, except as
they act as exciting causes.
5. The morhid antecedents which have been observed in patients
afterwards epileptic are often of a tubercular nature. Besides which
we notice mental alienation, hydrocephalus, infantile convulsions,
chorea, hysteria, nightmare, and somnambulism.
The exciting or accidental causes are innumerable—strong impres-
sions on the senses, as pain, startling sounds, flashes of lightning ;
mental emotions, chiefly those of a depressing nature, but sometimes
the contrary—fright, grief, extreme fatigue, anger, drunkenness, self-
abuse. The excentric epilepsy may be brought on by anything tend-
ing to the derangement of its particular seat, as an overloaded stomach,
an engorged liver, an irritated uterus, a calculus in the pelvis of the
kidney, or the like.
Certain circumstances favour or impede the operation of the acci-
dental cause upon the constitutional tendency. Among these are the
season of the year and the time of day. In accordance with Dr Bad-
cliffe's pathological views, cold seasons seem to be about twice as
favourable to the development of the attack, as warm ones. There
seems to be a difference of opinion as to the relative frequency of
attacks in the day and in the night. Dr Badcliffe and Leuret con-
sider that the fits happen most frequently by night. M. Beau gives
an equal proportion. M. Herpin decides that, though the most
violent attacks occur by night, the numerical majority is in favour of
the day very decidedly. Thus, in 56 cases, the attacks occurred nearly
always in the day in 42, nearly always in the night in 11, and equally
by day and night in 3. To complete this subject, though not strictly
in place here, we may add, that epilepsy is essentially a chronic com-
plaint, and may last any length of time within the ordinary limits of
life, though, of course, with a tendency to shorten it; and that its
48
ON EPILEPSY.
attacks may occur at any intervals, from a few minutes, to months, or
even years. There is occasionally, especially in old confirmed cases, a
periodicity, but usually this is wanting, or extremely irregular. But
this belongs to our next question.
Y. The Influences whichpreside over these and similar Phenomena.—
In answering this question, we are tempted to make very liberal
extracts from Dr Radclifie's third chapter on Periodicity, as well to
give an example of the pleasing style in which the work is written, as
to afford us the required information. The illustrations used are the
sensitive plant and the newt.
" The periodical changes in the life of the sensitive plant are both
plain and simple. In spring the seedling emerges from the cradle in
which it had slept during the winter; in summer it puts forth its
foliage; in autumn it droops ; in winter it dies. In spring it gives
new signs of life; in summer it regains its verdure; in autumn it
fades; and in winter it again becomes a bare and lifeless twig. Year
by year these phenomena succeed each other with unfailing regularity
and the vitality ebbs and flows in direct relation to the ebbing and
flowing intensity of the sunbeams.
" At daybreak also the leaves recover from the closed and pendant
condition in which they have been all night, and— if not disturbed in
any way—they remain erect and unfolded until evening, when they
again close and droop ; and these changes alternate with perfect regu-
larity, so long as the leaves retain their characteristic irritability.
In each case the vital movement corresponds with certain changes in
the relative positions of the earth and sun; the one referring to the
annual, the other to the diurnal revolution.
" The periodical changes in the life of the newt are not less plain
and simple than those which occur in the life of the sensitive plant.
The egg, like the seed, exhibits no sign of development, except it be
quickened by the sunbeams, and the animal, like the plant, continues
dependent upon the same fostering aid, throughout the whole course
of its future life. As spring advances it grows day by day into a more
active and sentient being; as autumn wanes it droops by degrees into
a state of unbroken sleep. This winter slumber passes off at the re-
newal of spring, and returns at the end of autumn. ... In the active
period of its existence also the newt wakes in the day-time, and sleeps
during the night. In a word, the life of this creature appears to be
as closely wedded to the sun as that of the sensitive plant, and yet
that life embraces a sentient principle, which is endowed with memory
and other mysterious gifts.
" The diurnal changes in the life of the newt are reflected also by
diurnal changes in the lives of other animals. Sleep still attends
upon night, and wakefulness upon the day. At sunset the butterfly
descends from the sky, the snail withdraws within her shell, the dace
lies motionless in the pool, the frog ceases to leap across the path,
the lark folds his wing and hushes his song, the deer retires to his lair,
ON EPILEPSY.
49
and sleep reigns over tliem during tlie night; hut when the dawn
illumines the east, the spell is broken, and all are released to life and
enjoyment until the evening."
All this is no less philosophical in conception than beautiful in ex-
pression. In pursuing the subject the author shows how all vital
activity is dependent upon, or closely related to, the amount of light
and heat. He shows also, quoting Humboldt's eloquent account of
the nocturnal life of animals, how the light of the moon has a similar
influence to that of the sun, though in a less degree, and also that
artificial light and heat have somewhat the same effects as the natural
agents. It is then shown how, in the life and functions of man, there
are distinct evidences of periodical action, and then we find this appli-
cation of the doctrine to epilepsy:—•
" It may be expected that the signs of periodicity will always be
masked and obscure in man, but that they will be manifested most
distinctly in him who is deprived of that active inherent life, which
constitutes the badge of distinction between man and the plant, and
not in the person who is acted upon by inflammation, or who is excited
in any other way. And so it is.
" There can be no doubt as to the obscurity of the evidences of peri-
odicity, even where that obscurity is least, as in epilepsy and the allied
affections ; but there can also be no doubt as to the existence of these
evidences. Thus, on looking at a number of cases, it is found that
convulsion and spasm occur more frequently at night than in the day;
more frequently about the time of new moon than the time of full
moon, and more frequently in the winter than in the summer months.
Of these evidences of diurnal, monthly, and annual periodicity, the
diurnal are the most frequent and the best established; but all are
sufficiently frequent and obvious. And in this point of view the signs
of periodicity become only so many additional evidences of that con-
stitutional want of innate strength which appears to be the prominent
fact in the pathology of epilepsy and the cognate disorders."—
Epilepsy, p. 118—120.
It must, however, be acknowledged that as yet no general law of
recurrence has been discovered to which epilepsy is amenable; and if
the "formula of determination" be ever announced, it will of necessity
contain so many "variable unknown quantities" as to render it nearly,
if not altogether insusceptible of investigation in reference to individual
instances. We have next to inquire—
VI. What place in the natural history of disease does epilepsy claim?
—It is evident from what has been stated as to the morbid anatomy
of this affection, that there are no changes sufficiently constant in the
nervous centres to allow epilepsy a place in any anatomical classifica-
tion of disease whatever. It is by its physiological relations that its
true locality must be determined.
Epilepsy has generally been classed, apparently without doubt or
NO. XXIX. E
50
ON EPILEPSY.
misgiving, amongst the convulsive affections; yet, we think that a
careful consideration of the phenomena will make its claim to this
position appear less clear, notwithstanding that convulsion is so very-
frequent an attendant or symptom. We do not consider irritation of
the neck of the bladder, or of the . uterus, or dentition, or menstrua-
tion, as convulsive affections, on the grounds that convulsions fre-
quently accompany these states. Passing slightly over the obvious
difference between the acute nature of convulsions generally, and the
essentially chronic nature of epilepsy, we have to notice the very im-
portant fact, that spasmodic muscular action, though a frequent, is by
no means a constant attendant upon epilepsy. In the epileptic vertigo
and many forms of the petit mal the convulsion is entirely or chiefly
wanting, and in its place is a total and extreme relaxation of the whole
muscular system. And these must not be considered as slight and
imperfect attacks, for it is important to bear in mind that such patients
as are affected with epileptic vertigo alone, are more rapidly and more
constantly deteriorated in their intellectual functions than those in
whom convulsion is prominent. It may be said that, even in these
cases, there is some degree of convulsion, but surely so small an amount
of any action as that which is imperceptible can scarcely be sufficient
to characterize a disease. We saw very recently an epileptic attack
which lasted above twenty-four hours, where the whole muscular system
was in a state of the most complete relaxation, and the most careful
investigation failed to discover any indications of spasm. That these
and similar cases are truly epileptic, the history, connexions, and general
symptoms sufficiently prove. If this be so, we conceive that epilepsy
has no claim to be considered essentially a convulsive affection. The
one constant symptom is, loss (or great diminution or embarrassment)
of consciousness, accompanied with considerable modification of the
muscular system.
What, then, is the position of this disease nosologically? We pass
over all those opinions as untenable, which connect it with inflamma-
tion of the white matter of the brain, with alterations in the pineal
body, or with any constant change whatever. Dr Cheyne writes
thus:—
"We conceive that epilepsy is as certain a manifestation of the
strumous diathesis as tubercular consumption, psoas abscess, hereditary
insanity, or certain congenital malformations or defects of organiza-
tion, which are inherited only from scrofulous parents. We have no
recollection of a case of cerebral epilepsy in a patient, who, when due
inquiry was made, did not appear to inherit a strong disposition to
scrofula."—" Cyclopedia of Practical Medicine," article—Epilepsy.
This appears a very probable hypothesis, but by way of further in-
ON EPILEPSY.
51
dicating the connexions of epilepsy, we will refer once more to its
ultimate phenomena. A person, apparently in good health, is seized
with an epileptic fit ; in a few hours or a few days at most he is in
perfect health again. After an interval more or less prolonged the
attack returns, and again and again departs, leaving no particular
alteration behind in any of the functions. But, by degrees more or
less insidious, a change is observed, perhaps first in the memory, per-
haps in the motor functions, gradually augmenting till it terminates
in mental alienation and paralysis, perfect or imperfect, and, finally, in
death. Mental alienation, as a result of epilepsy, is so frequent, as
almost to be considered a constant termination of those cases which
last lonsr enough.
o o
Esquirol found, amongst 339 epileptics, 269 in a state of mental
alienation, a very large proportion, and one which would be increased
if the final history of the remainder could have been investigated. In
such cases as these, then, the final condition is one of mental deteriora-
tion, muscular degeneration, and occasional convulsive attacks. The
morbid appearances usually found are, adhesions of the membranes,
sometimes with thickening and opacity, induration of the white matter
(but occasional softening) ; the same changes in the grey matter with
a mottled appearance. (M. Foville.) These appearances are precisely
identical with those found in another class of cases, viz., insanity com-
plicated with paralysis. The history of these is similar to that of
the others, with this exception, that in these the psychical degenera-
tion comes on first, and is succeeded by the muscular degradation, and,
finally, by the epileptiform seizures which are so constant an attendant
upon this form of insanity; the final condition is the same—mental
deterioration, muscular degeneration, and occasional convulsive attacks.
This similarity of history with identity of results, whether we regard
the last living state or the morbid appearances after death, cannot fail
to indicate strongly and clearly the close connexion which exists be-
tween the two diseases ; and we therefore conclude that epilepsy is
much more closely allied to insanity than to convulsive affections in
general. The most frequent form under which insanity invades the
epileptic patient is dementia, the next, mania; monomania is occa-
sional, but very rare. (Esquirol.) We need scarcely add our testimony
to the almost universal conviction of the intractable nature of these
allied affections; singly they are frequently amenable to treatment,
but, whether commencing by epilepsy and passing into insanity, or by
insanity passing into epileptiform attacks, no sooner does the one
threaten to complicate the other than the prognosis is much more un-
favourable, and almost hopeless.
To le continued.
E 2
