Opening of an Institution for the Treatment of Idiocy in Edinburgh
===================================================================

587
Hitherto only one institution lias existed in Scotland for the treatment and
training of imbecile and idiot children; that, namely, which was founded two
years ago by Sir John and Lady Jane Ogilvy, at Baldovan, near Dundee. It
is with pleasure we announce that another is nearly ready for opening in
Edinburgh.
So much of the hoped-for success must depend upon the careful adaptation
of the physical treatment to the circumstances of each ease, that it appears
essential to the efficient working of such institutions that they be superintended,
if not conducted, by well-qualified medical men. We are, therefore, happy to
learn that the Edinburgh School will have the aid of Drs. John Smith and
Coldstream, as physicians; while the immediate management and superintend-
ence will be in the hands of Dr David Brodie. It will be, we trust, the care
of these gentlemen to establish a psychical sanatarium for the young, worthy of
the metropolis of Scotland, and of the Medical School of Edinburgh.
It is, indeed, rather a humiliating consideration that, whereas it was in
Edinburgh that the first institution that ever existed for the education of the
deaf and dumb, was established (in 17G0 by Mr. Thomas Braidwood), we have
been so tardy in commencing operations for the benefit of a section of society
so long ncglected, but so much in need of such aid as science can give, and
this notwithstanding the encouraging results reported as having been ob-
tained elsewhere. Our dilatoriness in this matter is all the more remark-
able, seeing that it was in Edinburgh that the first earnest appeal on behalf
of the neglected idiot was published, and that so long ago as in 1819. In
his interesting Essay on Education, which first appeared in that year as
an article in the Encyclopedia Edinensis, and subsequently (in 1825) as a
separate treatise, Dr Richard Poole thus wrote :—" It is obvious that there is
ground for employing medical advice in cases of general imbecility presenting
in early life; and there cannot be a doubt that cases of this kind, which are
allowed by despair to become confirmed and deteriorated, might have been
relieved bv professional interference. The correctness of the principles on
which Dr Poole ventured to found so strong an asseveration, has latterly been
fully proved by the experience obtained in several institutions established for
the treatment of congenital idiocy; the general result being, that, under
suitable means, almost all are improveable ; and that " for three-fourths of the
children treated, much may be done to rouse intelligence, and even to fit for
usefulness."
This unlooked-for result has stimulated some of the European governments,
and several benevolent individuals in different countries, to exert themselves
on behalf of the poor idiot. The existing institutions at lledhill and High-
gate, near London, at Colchester and at Bath, are probably known to most of
our readers; also the schools for adult idiots at Hanwell, in England, and
Bicetre, at Paris (not to speak of the world-renowned hospice of the Abend-
berg, conductcd by Dr Guggenbuhl, whose success in treating cretinism has
gone far to excite a general interest in this subject); but it is perhaps not so
generally known, that some distinguished members of the medical profession
in Denmark, Prussia, Saxony, and Wurtemburg, have, more or less recently,
devoted themselves to the forwarding of this good work in various ways. For
example, in Copenhagen, the learned Professor of Physiology in the Univer-
sity, Dr Eschncht, published last year an interesting treatise " On the Possi-
bility of Educating Idiotic Children to become useful Members of Society." In
the same city, Dr Hybertz has published an elaborate statistical inquiry into
the extent to which idiocy prevails in the various countries of Europe, and
has also devoted himself to the treatment of a certain number of childrer
no. xxxii. q q
588
INSTITUTION FOR THE TREATMENT OF IDIOCY.
affected with it. Still, in the Danish capital, M. Moldenhawer has commenced
a work of the same kind; while, in Schleswig, Dr Hansen is similarly em-
ployed. Dr Siigert of Berlin, Director of the Royal Institution for the Deaf
and Dumb in that city, has written much and well on the treatment of idiocy,
and has for several years laboured personally in training imbecile children.
At Bendorf, near Coblenz, Dr Erlenmeyer has a small establishment of the
same kind. In Saxony, Dr Kern at Leipsic, and Dr Gliische at Hubertsburg,
near Dresden; in Wurtcmberg, Dr Muller at Winterbach, and Dr Zimmer at
Mariaberg—are all in charge of institutions for treating idiocy, varying in
extent.* In the same way the work is extending in the United States of Ame-
rica. There are now, we believe, at least four establishments (one in each of
the States of Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia) sup-
ported at the public expense, besides private ones. The reports of that at
Boston, published by Dr Howe, are of great interest and value.
A proof of the zeal in this good cause which exists in Denmark has lately
been shown in the mission of a gentleman, in all respects well qualified, charged
by the Government of that country to visit, and report upon, all the institu-
tions for the cure of idiocy in Europe. This commissioner (Mr. John Molden-
hawer, who published last year an account of the German establishments), after
having visited the English schools, came to Edinburgh in expectation of seeing
something worthy of his attention, and was disappointed. Dundee alone, in
all Scotland, could furnish him with the material for his report.
The subject of the treatment of idiocy lately engaged the attention of the
Academy of Medicine at Paris; a paper on it having been read before that
body, in July last, by M. Delasiauve, physician in charge of the epileptics and
idiots at Bicetre. This author homologates the axiom of Voisin, regarding the
object of the education of the idiot,—namely to develop what already exists.
He announces a classification of idiots with reference to their various degrees
of aptitude for education, and suggests some improvements, both of a general
and of a special kind, which he thinks ought to be introduced into establish-
ments devoted to the cure of idiocy.
The above narration will serve to prove how earnestly our brethren in other
lands arc endeavouring to carry into practical operation the idea of its being
possible to rescue the poor idiot from that hopeless degradation and neglect to
which he has hitherto been consigned. Let us now, although late, do what wo
can to emulate the good example thus set us.
To return to our projected Edinburgh Institution, we have further to state,
that, as it is desirable to make it self-supporting, the lowest rate of board to be
charged will be forty-five pounds per annum, and for the first-class accom-
modation, the charge will be seventy-five pounds. It is expected that the house
(which is No. 10, Gay field Square) will do ready for the reception of pupil-
patients in the beginning of October.
The prospectus bears that,
"The institution will receive a certain proportion of children and youth not
affected with mental imperfection or peculiarity, but who arc, from bodily
ailments or other causes, unable to take their place at ordinary schools. The
combination which this Institution presents, of practical medical experience
with efficient educational resources, will supply, it is hoped, a want which is
much felt by the parents of children in the condition here referred to."
We cordially recommend this infant institution to the favourable regards
and support of our readers.—Edinburgh Medical Journal for September.
* If to this list be added the establishments of Pastor Frobst, at Exberg, in
Bavaria, and of Pastor Bost, at Laforce, (Dordogne,) in France, we have a tolerably
complete enumeration of the institutions for the benefit of idiotic children, now
existing in Europe.
