On,The Causes and Treatment of Insanity
========================================

BY D. C. CAMPBELL, M.D.,
Physician to the Essex Lunatic Asylum.
Religious excitement forms 110 small number of the assigned causes; and, in
accordance with the humane purpose of the institution, I feel it a duty to
mention any cause, against the operation of which it may be possible, in some
degree, to guard. I do not believe that true religion is ever a cause of insanity,
though fanaticism or erroneous theological views undoubtedly may. Mental
derangement never can be produced by just views of the essential truths of the
Gospel; but intense and long protracted meditation on abstruse points of
religious doctrine, or 011 prophetic mystery, remorse in highly sensitive minds
on account of supposed unpardonable sins, and above all, innovation in
established religious belief, have been fruitful causes of insanity.
An eminent physician, of great experience in the treatment of mental de-
rangement, in his writings remarked, " Were I to allege one cause which I
thought was operating with more force than another to increase the victims of
insanity, I should pronounce that it was the overweening zeal with which it is
attempted to impress on youth the subtle distinctions of theology and an unre-
lenting devotion to a dubious doctrine. This practice is an alarming error. It
is growing to an excess fatal to the preservation of intellectual sanity, and in a
manner especially dangerous to the rising generation." I would recommend to
parents to use their best efforts against the influence of new and questionable
religious doctrines. The mental distress occasioncd by the conflict between
such doctrincs and earlier religious impressions ends often in confirmed
maniacal melancholy; or, as there is a tendency to reaction in our moral as
u-, iS 111 our physical nature, I have seen a sudden transition from the deepest
e -abasement to triumphant confidence, with belief in supernatural communi-
j0USj miraculous gilts, and all the phantasies of an insane mind. Such
ness is lamentable in itself; but, in some instances, doubly lamentable,
lC1+n i Pa^ent awakes from his delusion. Ilis religious opinions arc then
unsettled and it would be well if lie could return to the consolations of that
quiet and soothing faith which has given peace to christians in all ages.
Jliinpioyment in the open air not only improves bodily health, but also
58G ON THE CAUSES AMD TREATMENT OF INSANITY.
powerfully co-opcrates, with other means of regulating the mind, in promoting
the cure of lunacy. Many of the male patients have laboured most assiduously
011 the farm and in the garden, from which 110 small saving to the county lias
arisen; four large airing courts have been laid out by them, which are now
finished, and a large garden has been brought into cultivation, now supplying
sufficient vegetables for the establishment. Two of the patients are daily em-
ployed as carpenters, four as shoemakers, and two assist the engineer and
smith. It will be seen by the tables that a considerable quantity of profitable
work has also been done by the females, who in addition to that necessary for
the establishment, have made a number of shirts for the Springfield prison, and
also for a house in London. The females arc principally employed in washing,
dressing, sewing, and knitting, and a large number of males and females give
their assistance in the wards and at domestic work. In several instances I
have remarked that the cases were retrograde or progressive, according as the
patients were idle or employed. Among those patients who laboured daily,
not a few proceeded with a steady pacc to recovery, until soundness of mind
was perfectly restored.
It requires 110 proficiency in the study of mind, nor any experience in the
treatment of the insane, to comprehend the utility of labour in promoting the
cure of lunacy.. Any occupation which serves to arrest the attention of the
lunatic necessarily arouses him from his waking dream; and the repose induccd
by toil no less cfl'cctually excludes the visions of the night.
The great object is to make the necessary arrangements of the institution
available for the treatment of the patients, to secure as much occupation as
possible for them consistent witli their health, and to render their services as far
as possible advantageous to the institution. The amusements consist of baga-
telle, cards, draughts, and dominoes; and books arc provided for those who are
disposed to read. Several derive much enjoyment from variety of sccnc, and
arc permitted to make little excursions into the country, and entertainments
with dancing and vocal and instrumental music have bceu found verv service-
able.
The treatment of insanity in all its forms consists less in the administration
of medicine than in surrounding the patients with infiucnces, each of which
may apparently be very trifling, nay, unfelt and unseen, but the combination of
the whole of which produces the most powerful cfl'cct; thus they are per-
mitted to enjoy the greatest possible degree of liberty, consistent with their
safety, and furnished with the means of such suitable employment, amuse-
ments, and recreations, as serve both to relieve the irksomeness of confinement
and to promote the cure of the malady. I cannot omit this opportunity of
pressing upon public attention the importance of early medical treatment, and
the unhappy consequences which arise from the delay so frequently prompted
by mistaken affection and shortsighted economy. It is at the commencement
of the disease that medical treatment is most obviously demanded and most
likely to be efficacious; for notwithstanding the most violent symptoms, if the
disorder is of recent occurrence, it generally yields to proper treatment. This
important truth, wliich prejudice, ignorance, and false delicacy are too apt to
overlook, is forcibly illustrated in the experience of eveiy asylum. Nothing is
more imprudent of the friends of such individuals in trusting, for any period,
an unfortunate relative to their own inexperienced, and too often injudicious
management, for it is one of the most melancholy attendants 011 this disease,
that it frequently destroys and disregards the ties of nature, and that a patient
never can be more unhappily placcd than in the circle of his own dearest friends
and relatives.—From the last Report of the Asylum.
