Suggestions in Reference to the Study of the Philosophy of the Human Mind
==========================================================================

BY THOMAS HUNT, F.ll.C.S.
To the Editor of the Psychological Journal.
•L always read the papers of the "Psychological Journal with interest;
and assuredly the objects which it embraces are second to none connected with
medical science. An essay " On the Uses and Influence of Mental 1 hilosophy,
uy Dr Rae, which appeared in the number for July, has attracted my careful
attention; and whilst I a°Tce with the excellent remarks of the author on the
importance of the study o? man in the higher departments of his nature, I must
beg permission to introduce the subject of this communication with some
friendly criticisms on that paper. . . .
In the first place, I cannot agree with Dr Rae in the opinion that the
slow progression of mental sciencc" has been due to the general preference of
mankind for the study of physical rather than of intellectual science : neither
can I assent to the belief that the prejudice against psychological investigations
which exists in the majority of mankind has anything to do with the matter.
On the contrary, the study of mental philosophy has so many charms for a
mind at all capable of applying itself to these subjects, that one cannot see how
the disinclination of the majority of mankind can have diminished the ardour of
the student. But, waiving this question, I am disposed to think that ingather-
jng up arguments in favour of the cultivation of mental science, Dr l£ae has
inadvertently confounded the subject of mental philosophy with the popular
study of human nature in its moral characteristics ; otherwise lie would scarcely
have classed "the Jesuits," "the present Napoleon," or "the Abyssinian
traveller, Bruce," amongst the students of mental philosophy. Nor would lie
have attributed " the movement that is now going on in theChurch of England
to the "kind of philosophy taught in the Universities." It is, however,
extremely dillicult for any writer who eschews technicalities to make himself
clearly understood when discoursing on the arcana of the human mind.
My object 011 the present occasion is to oirer a few suggestions to those who
K K 2
494
PHILOSOPHY OF TIIF. HUMAN MIND.
may hereafter pursue this subject, which I trust may be useful in diminishing
in some degree the obscurity in which it is involved.
First of all, it should be observed that the students of human nature are
naturally and actually divided into three classes—the metaphysical, the moral,
and the physical. Tlie class of students who have attempted the elucidation
of the metaphysical philosophy of the human mind have of late somewhat
obscured the naturally indistinct outline which bounds the objects of their study
by dignifying the science with the name of moral philosophy. The scope of
metaphysical inquiry having no nccessary connexion with morals (or the doc-
trines concerning virtue and vice), the study would be better described as your
correspondent defines it—"mental philosophy;" or, as Dugald Stewart calls it,
" the philosophy of the human mind."
I propose to show, that beyond its utility in improving the powers of the
mind and sharpening the wits of the student, mental or moral philosophy, com-
monly called metaphysics, is a pursuit utterly useless, and incapable of any
practical application either to physics or morals; and that if we would study
niman nature to any good purpose, we must leave these abstractions, ana
examine the mind not as an entity but as we find it palpably presented to
our view in its physical and moral relations. Within these plain and homely
limits, I am ready to grant, that (as Dr ltae justly remarks) "the study of
the human mind is one of the noblest and most important which can engage
the attention of mankind." I will endeavour to define these limits by a more
ample illustration of the subject; and regarding the writers on the human
mind as distinctly divisible into the three classes above alluded to—the meta-
physical, the popular, and the medical—I propose to make a few remarks on each.
1. The metaphysical writers study the human mind in the abstract. Overlook-
ing or purposely neglecting both the moral and physical peculiarities of indi-
viduals, they confine their attention to those features of the mind which are
common to the whole species. They regard man simply as a being susceptible
of impressions, and the precise objects of their study are the natural order and
phenomena of mental processes. I'licy endeavour to ascertain how the mental
machine works; they wish to analyse its susceptibilities, its powers, properties,
or states ; they ask how reason acquires its powers and performs its wonders;
and they endeavour to trace back every mental phenomenon to its source.
They study t lie mind partly by regarding its connexion with the external world,
and partly by endeavouring, though, as we think, in vain, to examine the
objects of their own consciousness; they thus undertake to discover th°
cause, origin, and history of idciis, sensations, emotions, and all purely intel-
lectual processes. This is the end and aim of modern metaphysics. A1®
ancicut philosophers never attempted so hopeless a task as to explore 11
human mind. Aristotle was too much of a philosopher to undertake anything
so utterly impracticable. The schoolmen, it is true, were fond of abstraction
and intellectual speculations, but these all had a practical reference to the de-
velopment of virtue ; and their design seems rather to have been to arrange
and define the objects of thought than to explore the mental faculties
themselves. It was reserved to our modern philosophers not only to attempj
the disscction of thought, but to essay the analysis of the elements of niinn
itself; and so much gravity, and pomp, and pretension has been(throw
around the operations of this mental chemistry, as to fascinate and bewiin
almost every accomplished mind which has lent attention to the scheme. in
is scarcely a more humiliating fact in the intellectual history of man than '
for the last two centuries, many minds of the highest order shoun ^
been from one generation to another grappling with metaphysical abstra^ ^
which were to become the foundation, the measure, fc!Ktoand
human science, but which the result lias shown to be utterly intang
PHILOSOTHY OF THE HUMAN MIND.
void. During this enlightened period, every accomplished natural philosopher
who has made pretensions to discovery, has established a reputation which
cau never die. Bacon and Boyle, Newton and Davy, Watt and Jcnner, are
names which will be familiar to distant generations. Their discoveries will
never be ignored by improvements in physical science. Every future new in-
vention will be built upon the foundation already laid by them. But a
principle of mortality appears to be inherent in every theory of mental philo-
sophy which has, during the same period, obtained a fleeting hold upou the
human mind. Every new speculator who has appeared on this stage has, in
his turn, done little more than sweep away the fragile monuments of the past,
leaving in their place an edifice equally unstable and unsound. The Ethics of
Aristotle, having survived the ordeal of two thousand years, are even now in
the hands of the Professors at Oxford and Cambridge; but where are 1 lie
"Vibrations" of Hartley? In what school is inculcated the "Idealism" of
Berkeley ? Who regards with respect the " Materialism " of Priestly ? In
what hidden sepulchre arc entombed the " Categories " of Kant ?
■The great error has consisted in attempting the investigation of mind by a
method analogous to the chemical analysis of matter. The method of Aristotle
partook rather of the synthetic than of the analytic. He gathered his know-
ledge of mind from the qualities of known objects related to mind. The
modern philosophers set to work with the attribute of mind itself, as though
they were separable and divisible like the atoms of matter.
It is no longer a mystery, therefore, that "the reputation of 110 modern meta-
physician has continued with undiminished lustre through the revolutions ol a
century." The celebrated Essay of Lockc has lost its charms. The names of
Berkeley and Hartley, men of great wortli and high attainments, are associated
with ideas now regarded as preposterous. Ilume and Reid, Stewart and
Brown, names once highly esteemed amongst modern philosophers, Mill
scarcely be mentioned in the next generation.
Por what earthly purpose, then, shall we attempt to cultivate a (so called)
science, which, after engaging the attention of highly accomplished minds for
several generations, has not left us oue single principle, one undisputed inch
of ground 011 which we can set our foot ? If it be alleged that metaphysical
philosophy is the gymnasium of the youthful mind—that all things seem easy
and simple to the man who has long contended with these remote abstractions,
and that without such exercises the mind cannot attain to its normal develop-
ment—my reply is, the giants of antiquity needed 110 such helps. Aristotle,
Tlieophrastus, Hippocrates, Galen—all achieved their respective successes
without entering the arena of modern philosophy. Let it be fully granted that
these exercises do give strength and agility to the mind, that they enable
it to discriminate more readily, to distinguish shades of difference between
ideas and propositions which the vulgar would confound,—still, 1 maintain
that all these advantages would be better securcd, as well as more readily
acquired, by the study of logic and mathematics. Young men who have neg-
lected these first principles of reasoning and become bewildered 011 the en-
chanted ground of metaphysical abstraction have rarely distinguished them-
selves in alter life. The nund is liable to become paralysed by attempting
what is evidently beyond its strength, and the moic liomely studies which fit
men for the duties and business of life bccome distasteful to the towering
spirit, just as the panorama of Primrose llill offers 110 attractions, the Peak
ol Snowden 110 wonders, to the practised aeronaut. A man who only thinks he
can lly despises pedestriauism even while he walks.
2. The moral or popular writers 011 human nature have no sympathy with
the metaphysicians. They sec the mind of man through a different medium,
and study it. with other views. If our modern philosophers, who look at man
40G
PHILOSOPHY OF THE HUMAN MIND.
only in the abstract, have scarcely shed a ray of light on the phenomena of
mind, still less have they expounded the moral and social qualities of human
nature. But it is here that the moralist takes his stand. He studies and
>ortrays mankind just as he individually is, not in his essence or abstractions,
>ut in his social relations and moral attributes. That this mode of investiga-
ting human nature (correctly speaking, the true vioral philosophy) has been
abundantly successful, is obvious to all. Our divines, historians, poets, novel-
ists, and dramatic writers well understood their task; and they have earned a
fame as imperishable as that of Bacon and Newton. The names of Addison,
Johnson, and Shakspcre, will be known when modern metaphysics audits pro-
fessors are forgotten. It is to this popular study of human nature that we
are indebted, and not to mental philosophy, for the influence cxereiscd by the
writers alluded to by Dr llae, who has evidently confounded these two de-
partments of study, as unlike each other as commerce and classical literature.
3. But the physical study of man, in his mental development, the de-
partment of the physician, is that which most concerns the psychologist: and
this brings me to the question, the importance of which first induced me to
take up my pen :—Is it advisable, or desirable, that a student of medicine, in-
tending to practise his profession, should give his mind to the study of meta-
physics ?
It is essential, certainly, that the physical relations of the mind should be
most carefully studied. The healthful condition of both body and mind,
especially in their mutual relationship to each other, must be observed and
understood, before their morbid conditions can be apprehended. And in
disease, whether of body or mind, who can exaggerate the importance ol'
rightly estimating the reciprocal inllucnce of both 011 each other ? If it be the
special business of the psychologist to ascertain and diagnose the physical
causes of insanity, it is not less the duty of the physician, ay, and of the
surgeon too, to mark well the influence of affections of the mintl in producing
disease of the body. Much has been written on the efl'ects of mental hysteria
in inducing simulations of disease; but the influence of mental emotion 011 the
corporeal lrame of both sexes is a subject which, though forming the staple
commodity of novel writers, has perhaps scarcely attracted sufficiently the
study of the profession. An accomplished girl ot extraordinary personal at-
tractions, and the heiress of a pretty fortune, fell in love with a lame cobbler
of diminutive stature and repulsive physiognomy. Such things will happen,
lier attachment was warmly returned; but the course of true love never did
run smooth, and an impediment existed, besides the natural opposition of the
parents to so preposterous a match. She was, and had been for some time
(under the care of a celebrated oculist) suffering from severe pain in the
orbit and globe of each eye, whenever she opened her eyes or attempted to use
them. The disease was diagnosed " an hysterical intolerance (not of light but)
of vision." The lameness of the cobbler was attributed to some strumous
allcction of the hip joint, and he had been treated accordingly, but with 110
benefit. One fine morning the couple contrived to accomplish a clandestine
marriage. They entered the church respectively blind and maimed: he with
his usual halt, walking with a crutch, she with a green shade over her brow,
her eyes closed, and led by her lover to the chancel steps. The ceremony over,
the cobbler recovered the use of his leg and threw away his crutch; the lady
found her vision auite as marvellously restored, and from the time she made
her egress from the church, suffered 110 pain or inconvenience in reading the
smallest print. These 1 know to be facts, and, after the most rigid inquiry,
I am satisfied there was 110 sham or imposture in either case. The diagnosis
of the cobbler's lameness might have been erroneous, though it was made by a
highly respectable surgeon. This case, aud a hundred others which might bo
PHILOSOrilY OF THE HUMAN MIND.
407
quoted, serve to show that when we cannot readily account for disease, it will
be as well to inquire into the state of the mind. And this leads me further to
insist that,
The moral study of human nature is highly desirable for the student of
medicine; and in order to pursue this to an available extent, he must study
mankind as Shakspere did—not metaphysically, overlooking the individual,
nor by observing the conduct of an individual or a sect or a province, only;
but by observing human nature in all its relations and phases, and, so far as is
possible, at all times and seasons. Men and women, except on special occa-
sions, arc very apt to conceal their emotions, motives, and springs of action;
but dramatic incidents and occasions, and the not less romantic events of real
life and historic record, bring them out, and show how closely interwoven are
the infirmities of mind and body. And so universally is mankind subject to
moral aberration, folly, and vice, so weak in resolve, and when resolved, so
indeterminate in action; so easily led into errors which he sees are wrong, so
readily tempted to conduct which he knows he shall repent—or else reckless
of consequences, unscrupulous and wicked — that every sensible writer on
human nature, of whatever nation, or class, or date, has invariably portrayed
mankind as morally deranged. Some have even excused his excesses on this
very ground; but the common sense of mankind, as expressed in the criminal
code of every civilized nation, has pronounccd dillerently, and made man respon-
sible for his crimes. For many generations the commission of crime was
regarded as a sufficient ground of punishment. The physical condition of the
brain, as concerned in perverting the moral sense, was seldom or never taken
into the account. The subject has cxcited the most diligent attention of lateyears,
and medical men are now in danger, not of overlooking the state of the brain
m criminal lunatics, but of underrating the moral derangement which may exist,
even in its most atrocious forms, when the brain is perfectly sound, and the in-
dividual consequently responsible. Now, the remedy for this liability to error is
the diligent study of human nature in its moral aspects. The historical portions
of the Bible, and the works of Shakspere, contain the best illustrations of this
subject. Scott delighted to mingle the immoral and the insane affections so
hazily together for the purpose of effect, that many of his most prominent
characters throw little light on the question; but his subordinates for the most
part make excellent studies.
I cannot conclude these remarks without pointing out a great deficiency in
the medical mind of this country, arising from some error in education. I
allude to the strange want of logic in the medical authors of the day. Every
medical reviewer is constantly pointing out how this, that, and the other
author is " reasoning in a circle," " begging the question," " reasoning on
opinions as though they were facts," "assuming as facts things only probable,"
or " representing as facts, and reasoning on them, events which have never
occurred;" and there are ten chances to one that, before the reviewer has
finished his criticism, he falls into the same error himself. Now, all this is
due, if in j)art to prejudice, yet ehielly to the want of mental discipline, and
instruction and practice in the rules of logic in early life. As men begin to
link when the mind is expanding into maturity, so they continue to think till
leir lives' end. If they get into early habits of vicious ratiocination, these are
almost sure to become inveterate and incurable; some of the highest orna-
ments of the profession, so far as diligence, tact, and perseverance have brought
them into note, are at this moment rendering themselves ridiculous and con-
temptible by their notoriously false reasoning about opinions, persons, and things,
it is but charitable to suppose that the same defect (easily rectified in early lite)
May have plunged some hopeful aspirants into the slough of homoeopathy.
-1-t is certain, at all events, that a man who cannot reason well (lor I am not
408
ON THE MIND.
alluding to dishonest reasoners), must find a limit to his fame and influence as
he advances towards the higher degrees of professional reputation. Nothing
can compensate for this radical defect. A want of classical knowledge may
cripple his reading and limit his influence with the higher classes of society;
but this will not clip his wings. A good surgeon is scarcely the better
surgeon for classical lore, though he may the more adorn his profession : but
no physician, nor even surgeon, can clearly understand his profession without a
knowledge of the art of reasoning. Mathematics, though absolutely necessary for
understanding the mechanism of the human frame, will not supply the want; for,
although the mind requires the discipline of mathematical study to render it
capable of understanding logic, yet, it must be remembered, medicine is not an
exact science. It deals, and must deal, with probabilities as well as fact s.
Medical doctrines must for the most part be received, as Bishop Butler has
shown the Christian doctrine must be embraced, not by absolute demonstra-
tion, but by a balance of probabilities. In the case of Christianity, the balance
is, to every candid mind, overwhelming; but in medical matters the prepon-
derance is very small, often where life and death arc suspended in the scale.
And, though our lenient laws make due allowance for a man who, with the best
intentions, errs, yet it is easy to see how the life of a patient may be sacrificed
to the misapprehension of a mind duly informed, but not uuly skilled iu
balancing the weight of evidence.
