American Institutions for the Insane
=====================================

433
We are again indebted to Dr. Pliny Earle for the subjoined analysis,"published
in the last number of our able contemporary, the " American Journal of Medical
Science," of the reports of the principal American Asylums for the Insane.
Commencing with the Maine Asylum, it appears that the number of
Patients at the beginning of the year was
Admitted in course of the year .
Whole number
Discharged, including deaths
Remaining at the end of the year
Of those discharged there were cured .
Died
Men.
50
05
115
54
61
28
11
Women.
34
59
93
35
58
17
4
Total.
84
124
208
89
119
45
15
Deaths from apoplexy, 4; consumption, 3 ; general paralysis, 6; pneumonia,
1; and laryngitis, 1.
No epidemic prevailed, and no suicide occurred during the year.
We commend to the physicians of other asylums the method pursued by Dr.
Harlow, in reporting the complete list of patients. The following is a synopsis
of it.
Persons admitted
re-admitted
admitted a 3rd time
4th „
5th „
6th „
7th „
8th „
9th „
Cases aggregate
1033
194
50
17
11
5
5
2
1
1318
Discharged
cured.
404
79
26
10
8
4
2
1
0
534
Improved. Unimproved.
190 234
43 33
2 7
1
2
1
2
0
0
241
3
0
0
0
0
1
278
Died.
118
18
2
2
0
0
0
1
0
141
they have not only had the most perfect knowledge and recollection of all the rela-
tions they stood in towards others, and of the acts and circumstances of their lives,
hut have in general been remarkable for subtlety and acuteness.
krskine knew perfectly well, as matter of fact, that persons, truly and fully
answering to the requirement of law—namely, being " wholly deprived of under-
standing and memory"—not knowing what they are doing any more than infants,
than brutes, or wild beasts," scarcely ever appear in any court whatever. He
Bays, indeed, " these cases are not only extremely rare, but never can become the
subjects of judicial difficulty. In other cases, reason is not driven from her seat,
hut distraction sits down upon it along with her, holds her trembling upon it, and
frightens her from her propriety," an admirable and strikingly characteristic portrait
of the malady, at least in one of its forms. (See more in " State Trials," vol.
x*vii.} Hadfield's Case.) I shall again and again have to trace the same features
without dread of rebuke.
1- Of the Maine Insane Hospital, at Augusta, for 1853.
2. Of the Massachusetts Lunatic Hospital, at Worcester, for 1853.
o. Of the New York Insane Asylum, at Utica, for 1853.
4. Of the 131oomingdale Asylum, New York City, for 1853.
5. Of the New Jersey Lunatic Hospital, at Trenton, for 1853.
C. Ot the Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane, near Philadelphia, for 1853.
7 Of the Pennsylvania State Hospital, at Harrisburg, for 1853.
8. Of the Western Asylum of Virginia, at Staunton, for 1853.
y. Of the Ohio State Asylum, at Columbus, for 1852 and 1853.
434
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
Of these, 71 were homicidal, and 129 suicidal; yet no accident has ever
occurred from either of the former, and but two of the latter have destroyed
themselves at the asylum. One of the homicidal men, removed from the insti-
tution against the advice of its officers, killed a man with an axe, in September,
1853.
Another wing for female patients is to be added to the establishment.
2. The Massachusetts State Lunatic Hospital went into operation in 1833.
Under the energetic executive guidance of the late Dr. S. 15. Woodward, it
soon became very extensively known; and it has generally been esteemed,
even to a comparatively recent period, not only as one of the best conducted,
but also as one of the best constructed establishments of the kind in the country.
But its Trustees now assert, in their report prefixed to that of Dr. Chandler,
that it " has not only ceased to be regarded as a model institution, but it has
fallen into the rear-rank in the march of improvement." The halls arc " low-
studded, being only eight and a half and nine feet high. They are warmed by
lurnaces, which arc very dangerous, and now nearly worn out. Their ventila-
tion is so imperfect as not to deserve the name. The frequent occurrence of
erysipelas is out one of the indices" of these defects. " There are forty-eight
strong-rooms, or cells, nearly all of them constructed of solid masonry, with
iron doors." Some of them " arc totally unfit for human habitations. There
is an entire want of suitable yards (airing courts) connected with the
buildings."
Tor these reasons, the Trustees, after having visited twenty-six public insti-
tutions, ten of them for the insane, in several of the States, recommend the con-
struction of another establishment, and the evacuation and sale of that which
now exists.
Let us follow these gentlemen in their tour of observation. " The Superin-
tendents of the Lunatic Hospitals laid us under particular obligations for
their generous courtesy, and the very frank and unreserved manner in which
they exhibited their establishments, together with their methods of manage-
ment and modes of treatment, pointing out improvements and criticizing
defects. * * * No cell was found without a wooden fioor, a wooden door,
and plastered or ceiled walls. There is not a brick and mortar cell, with iron
doors, in either of the public establishments of the great States of New York and
Pennsylvania, nor in the New Jersey State Lunatic Hospital, the design of
which is quite generally regarded as a model.
" In the large establishment on Blackwell's Island, containing at the time of
our visit, 57-1 patients, but two were found locked up, and those only tempo-
rarily, for a part of the day. The Superintendent, Dr. Rawney, stated that
half-a-dozen strong rooms would be sufficient for that establishment, as not more
than five or six a day were ever locked up, and those only for a few hours at a
time. These rooms were used as sleeping apartments, and did not differ materi-
ally, in size, form, and appearance, from the other rooms occupied by patients,
except the doors, which were stronger. These remarks in reference to the
strong rooms are applicable to all the other establishments visited by us. I"
nine hospitals out of New England, containing about 2250 patients, the number
found under restraint, by being locked up, was oidy six. In one instance ouly
had that restraint been continued more than two days, and that one had not
exceeded a week.
" In the State Hospital, at Utica, but one person was found under restraint,
and that one was confined in what they called a chicken-coop bedstead. Tht^0'
they were in the proccss of demolishing their strong rooms, as useless. 'I heir
hospital was built some ten years after ours, and their strong rooms were com-
fortable apartments compared with ours, having wooden lloors and plank d°ulhl
and were each furnished with a bedstead and bed.
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
435
" There are 110 more perfectly warmed and ventilated establishments in
the country than the New York Hospital, the Pennsylvania Hospital, the
New Jersey State Lunatic Hospital, the State Lunatic Hospital at Harris-
burg, and the State Lunatic Hospital at Utica. In all these establishments,
steam is the agent employed, and it gives perfcct satisfaction. The plan at
Utica, being the most recent, is believed to combine more of modern im-
provements than any other. The Hospital at Utica, in all its appoint-
ments, may justly be regarded as a model institution, although^ its
ground plan, in our opinion, is inferior to that of Trenton and Harrisburg."
That the buildings of the Massachusetts Hospital are very defective as
compared with those of the institutions of recent origin, there can be no
doubt; but it is very evident that the Trustees have placed those defects
in as bold rehef' as possible, by exhibiting them in the light of the broadest
contrasts.
In reference to the practical application of the doctrines of Pinel, the Trus-
tees make the following remark :—
"Dr. Tuke, being the Superintendent, and possessing the whole control, found
but little difficulty in testing them in practice at the York Retreat." No " Dr.
Tuke," and 110 man named Tuke, was ever Superintendent of that Institution.
We never heard, in England, of any Doctor Tuke.* This is not the first time,
however, that a myth of that name has been introduced into the profession, by
persons on this side of the Atlantic. Samuel Tuke, for many years one of the
Irustees of the Retreat, and well known by his publications upon insanity, was
a tea-merchant, in York. Of the occupation of his ancestor, who was a member
°f the first Board of Trustees, we know nothing.
We now come to the report of Dr. Chandler.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Hospital, Dec. 1, 1852 . . 264 268 532
Admitted in the course of the fiscal year . 136 152 288
Whole number '100 '120 S20
Discharged, including deaths. . . . 134 166 300
Remaining November 30, 1S53 . . • 266 251 520
Of those discharged, there were cured 65 80 145
Died   21 20 41
No patients were received excepting such as were sent by order of the
Courts, or by the Overseers of the Poor of towns, llie Hospital was in-
tended for a number of patients not exceeding 400; yet, at one time in the
course of the year, there were 567. Of the 520 at the close of the year, 216
■were foreigners; that is, not natives of Massachusetts; and of the latter
number, HO were Irish. "The Irish," says the report, "arc almost in-
variably State paupers. Only three instances have come to my knowledge of
their bills, or any part of their bills, having been paid by themselves, or by their
inends."
Men. Women. Total.
Whole number of patients from 1S33 to 1853
inclusive ...... 2239 2225 4164
Discharged, recovered..... 994 1059 2053
Died  253 239 492f
Causes of Death.—"Marasmus, 78; consumption, 58; apoplexy and palsy,
1 . Iuaniacal exhaustion, 49; epilepsy, 45 ; disease of heart, 20; disease oi
rain, 20; suicide 19; lung fever, 18; diarrhoea, IS ; erysipelas, 15 ; old age,
* Dr. Pliny Earle is not aware that there is a Dr. Tuke residing near London.
T In one table the report gives but 41)1. The number of admissions in 1835,
18 8tated in one place as 113, in another, 119. This discrepancy affects the whole
number, making it but 4458, if the 113 be correct. We have quoted l'rom the
table in which the number of each sex is given.
430
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
13; typhus fever, 11; dysenteric fever, 9; inflammation of the bowels, 8 ;
dropsy, 8 ; haemorrhage, 6; gastric fever, 5 ; cholera, 4; cholera morbus, 4;
chronic dysentery, 4; mortification of the limbs, 3; disease of the brain
from intemperance, 3; bronchitis, 3; hydrothorax, 3; congestive fever, 2 ;
convulsions, 2; land scurvy, 1; concussion of brain, 1; disease of the
bladder, 1; fright, 1; rupture, 1; asthma, 1; cancer, 1; pleurisy, 1; jaundice,
1; chorea, 1."
Dr. Chandler gives a table, in which 400 of the patients who died are in-
cluded, showing the relationship of insanity to longevity. Its substance is as
follows:—
Years. Mouths. Days.
Average age of 201 males when attacked ... 42 8 10
Average age of 205 females when attacked . 39 1 10
Average age of the whole number, 406 ... 40 11 1
Average duration of insanity before admission, 201
males 4 2 9
Average duration of life after admission, 201 males .1 9 24
Average duration of life after the attack, 201 males .00 3
Average duration of insanity before admission, 205
females 3 3 6
Average duration of life after admission, 205 females 1 7 29
Average duration of life after the attack, 205 females 4 11 5
Average duration of life after attack of the whole
number, 400   5 5 20
Average age at death, 201 males .... 48 8 13
Average age at death, 205 females .... 44 0 15
"The chance of life," says the report, " for persons in health at corresponding
periods, as calculated and acted upon by life-insurance companies, is four times
greater than is here exhibited for the male, and more than Ave times greater for
the female. This shows pretty conclusively that insanity, when not recovered
from, tends to shorten life."
3. The movement of patients at the New York State Asylum, in course of the
fiscal year ending November 30, 1853, was as follows:—
Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the commencement . . .215 210 425
Admitted  251 173 424
Whole number . . . . . 400 383 849
Discharged, including deaths .... 227 17G 403
llemainmr* at end of the year. . . . 239 207 440
Of those discharged, there were recovered . 95 74 109
Died  19 20 39
Deaths from phthisis, 11; exhaustion, 7; general paralysis, 5; epilepsy, 3;
exhaustive mania, 2; apoplexy, cerebral effusion, tumour of brain, pericarditis,
hypertrophy and dilatatation of heart, typhoid fever, dysentery, chronic diarrhoea,
phlegmonous erysipelas, erysipelas from wounds received prior to admission,
contusions received! before admission, 1 cach.
" The seven cases reported as having died of exhaustion, were wasted by
disease or vicious habits. Three of them, at the development of mania, had
been purged, blistered, and profusely bled, and were brought to the Asylum on
beds. This injudicious treatment cannot be too strongly condemned. The re-
cuperative powers in these were so far exhausted, that no amount of care,
stimulation, and nutrition could arouse them. It may bo proper to state tna
a number of persons received in a state of extreme feebleness, after long nursing
watchfubiess, and free stimulation, recovered."
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS, FOR THE INSANE.
437
"No case of suicide lias occurred for more than two years."
The number of men admitted was greater than in any preceding year; that
of women was diminished by an inability to receive them, on account of the
extensive alterations in their department, necessary for the introduction of
the new apparatus for heating and forced ventilation. Sixty applications
were rejected, and forty-seven incurable cases discharged, to make room for
curables.
In eleven of the cases admitted, the insanity was complicated with epilepsy.
" In six of them, epilepsy came on at puberty, preceded the derangement, and
was the exciting cause. In others, the epilepsy commenced in childhood, and
early induced dementia. In the table of causes, two of these cases are put
down to the intemperance of the father, the father being represented as in a
state of beastly drunkenness most of the time for a few years previous to their
birth. Nine of the whole number of epileptics had a drunken parentage, and,
in some, this vice extended several generations back."
Of seven cases in which the mental disorder was accompanied by general
paralysis, six were of intemperate parentage, and three of the six " had a
drunken and licentious ancestry." In fourteen patients, ten men and four
women, the insanity is ascribed to " spiritual rappings."
"No epidemic prevailed during the year. One case of variolous disease ap-
peared in May, which was immediately isolated, and the entire population of
the house vaccinated, after which no other case occurred. This was a case of
acute dementia, of eight months' standing and seven months' residence. The
tnental affection entirely disappeared simultaneously with the full eruption of the
disease."
There may be imprudent haste, as well as unwise delay, in regard to the
removal of insane persons to the institutions devoted to their treatment.
Especially is this true when the removal involves a long and wearisome
journey, which the patient, disabled by physical disease or debility, is un-
qualified to bear. A woman mentioned in this report, while labouring under
acute puerperal mania, "was brought from a distant State, a journey of eight
hundred miles, three weeks after delivery, and was wasted to a skeleton,
and not able to speak when received. She had not taken food or drink for
four days, nor slept for seventy-two hours." If any reader should have a
doubt as to the result of this case, he may remove that doubt by referring to
the report.
In the record of general results already quoted, it will be perceived that 1G9
cases arc reported as " recovered." In a subsequent and more specific table,
these recoveries arc arranged under two heads,—viz., " Well," and " in usual
health." Of the former there are 120, and of the latter 42. Our former notices
of the reports from Utica have given Dr. Benedict's reasons for this distinction.
A similar method of reporting is adopted in some of the German institutions.
It is probably a more accurate method than that which is the most generally in
vogue.
As the results of the industry of the female patients and attendants, it is
stated that they repaired all the clothing and bedding, and made 5700 garments
and articles of domestic use. The tailors' shop produced 00 coats, 149 vests,
and 205 pantaloons; and the carpenter's shop, numerous articles of household
A?Srcgatc of patients, from Jan. 10, 1S43, to Dec. 1, 1853 . 3923
Discharged, recovered 1025
Died   440
. .f- 1 rom the general statistics of the Bloomingdale Asylum, we abstract the
following;
438
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
Men. Women. Total.
Number of patients, Jan. 1, 1853 ... 52 (37 119
Admitted in course of the year . . .73 02 135
Whole number „ ,/ ... 125 129 254
Discharged, including deaths .... 09 61 130
Remaining, Dec. 31 ..... 56 68 124
Of those discharged, there were cured 21 28 49
Died  13 9 22
Deaths from typho-mania, 4; chronic mania, 4; abscess in the brain, 3;
epilepsy, 3 ; paralysis generate, 3 ; puerperal mania, 2 ; mania-a-potu, 1; apo-
plexy, I; serous effusion within the cranium, 1 ; pleurisy, 1.
Seven of the patients died within one week after admission.
The subjoined extract presents the views of Dr. Brown in regard to the
numerical method as applied to insanity :—
" The terms recovered, improved, and not improved, as used in reports of this
character, must, necessarily be in some degree indefinite in their signification;
they represent only the opinion of the reporter on the cases embraced in the
opposite numerals. That this opinion will be determined, or modified by the
observer's temperament, is a fact so well known to those familiar with the sub-
ject that the 'statistics of insanity' are very generally regarded as collections of
individual opinions, rather than as reliable scientific data. With the sincerest
desire to arrive at entire accuracy, it is not unfrequcntly difficult to determine
the exact state of the mind at the moment of the patient's discharge. While,
in one instance, we may be discomfited by the sudden relapse and return of one
dismissed as convalescent, our chagrin may be smoothed by the assurance
that another, whose removal we had strongly resisted as imprudent and critical,
has progressed to complete restoration. It may even be somewhat questionable
whether that degree ol improvement which justifies enrolment among the ' re-
covered,' can, in every case, be adequately determined as the patient is leaving
the asylum, as yet unsubjected to the test of association with the world, and
unexposed to iniluences which may have produced his disease.
"The marked contrariety of opinion as to the justice of characterizing certain
phases of a still existing malady as an improvement, may well qualify confidence
in the numerical method of estimating results of treatment in mental diseases.
The subsidence of agitation, noisy declamation, and violence, followed by a pro-
longed period of calm, does not necessarily indicate a better condition of mind;
nor do improved physical health, and discontinuance of bad habits, invariably
point toward recovery. Yet, each of these supposed changes is desirable as an
improvement on its antecedent state, and while some physicians exclude from
the class of improved all cases in which an approach towards recovery from the
mental derangement be not apparent, others with equal respect for truth,
admit all in which the above-named desiderata are attained."
So fully have we concurred in the opinions advanced in the paragraph last
quoted, that, for several years, in making our extracts from the statistics ot the
reports, we have entirely omitted those under the heads, " much improved,'
and "improved." That the temperaments of the superintending physicians of
the various asylums differ, it is reasonable to suppose; and that tlio judgment
of each physician is somewhat infiucnced by his specific temperament, is a pro-
position which will not be contested by any person much versed in physiology
and psychology. But, that this influence is sufficient to destroy our confidence
in the statistics of cures, reported agreeably to a sincere conviction of truth, we
cannot believe. If it be, the sooner the practice of reporting them is discon-
tinued, the better will it be for the progress of true science. _ .
There is much truth, as well as appropriateness, in the following rcmai
near the close of the report before us :—
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
430
" We have been too prone to regard the balance sheet, the farm account, and
the report of articles manufactured, as matter of special solicitude, contemplating
the patient as an agent in the industrial hive, rather than as the object of all
the accumulated means of treatment. In the lunatic hospital, as in society and
in the State, the individual must be prominent. The very disease for which lie
is admitted tends ultimately to destroy individuality. For this reason his
identity must be preserved, his just claims recognised, his self-respect en-
couraged, and his mind incited to useful or refining occupation. In this kind
of moral treatment, some of our co-labourers of the Old World excel us. To
emulate their merit, we need a courageous zeal which shrinks from no obstacle,
a generous enthusiasm that waits not to weigh restored minds against a
diminished credit balance, and the stimulating conviction that laurels yet un-
gathered line the steeps above us."
Large additions to the " lodges " of the Asylum have recently been erected,
and the new method of heating, in connexion with a forced ventilation, intro-
duced into those buildings. The number of applicants for admission into the
institution is greater than the means of.accommodation. In 1S3G, there were
upwards of 100 patients. The departments now occupied by patients arc at
least fifty per cent, more extensive than at that time; yet Dr. Brown proposes
to limit the number, in future, to 150. This recognition of the importance of
sufficient room is one among many evidences of improvement.
Men. Women. Total.
5. By the report of Dr. Buttolph, it appears that
the number of patients in the Asylum at
Trenton, Jan. 1, 1853, was. ... 91 91 182
Admitted in course of the year . • .50 03 11J
Whole number 147 1^4 301
Discharged, including deaths. . • .49 47 90
Remaining January 1, 1S55 .... 98 107 20o
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 27 20 53
Died .  10 7 17
Deaths from general exhaustion, 4; consumption, 3; epilepsy, 3 ; apoplexy,
4; congestion of brain, 1; congestion of lungs, 1; chronic diarrhoea, 1.
- -The patients enjoyed "a remarkable exemption trom all acute and epidemic
noses '' throughout the year. , . ^
4he liberal donation from Mr. Randolph, mentioned in the last preceding
Report, has been devoted to the construction ot an octagonal stone building,
thirty-two feet in diameter, lighted from the top, and surrounded by a portico
eight feet in width. The interior will be finished in a style appropriate for a
iandsome reading-room and museum.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients admitted from May 15, 1848, to Dec.
31, IS53   320 314 034
Discharged, recovered . 108 100 214
Died    • 30 35 71
1o this brief report are appended the "Propositions relative to the construc-
,1011 of Hospitals," and those "On the organization of Hospitals," which have
>een issued by the Association of Medical Superintendents of American Insti-
utions for the Insane. Had that Association achieved no other good, the pro-
j. uc"on. ol these two documents would alone have been a sufficient recompence
or all its labours. In future, should there be a hospital for the insane erected
and put in operation, with the imperfections of those which were established
wenty years ago, it will not be for the want of available means lor their pre-
vention.
G. Ihe report of Dr. Kirkbridc, for 1853, furnishes the following statistics
440
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
of the movement of the inmates of the Pennsylvania Asylum for the Insane in
the course of the year :—
Men. Women. Total.
Patients, December 31, 1852 . . . 215
Admitted since that time .... 191
Whole number  205 201 400
Discharged, including deaths. ... 93 78 171
Kemainin^, Dec. 31, 1853 .... 112 123 235
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 88
Died 10 5 15
Deaths from acute mania, 4; softening of the brain, 3; exhaustion from
long-continued refusal of food, 2; tubcrcular consumption, chronic iullammation
of the lungs, chronic diarrhoea, disease of the bladder, sloughing of the perineum,
and old age, 1 each.
Of seven patients prematurely removed from the hospital, five were believed
to be curable.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients admitted since the opening of the hos-
pital  1299 1099 2398
Single  708 427 1135
Married  536 530 10(56
Widowed  55 142 197
Cured   622 515 1137
Died  142 103 245
Insanity commenced before the patient was 10 years of age, in 5; between
10 and 20 years, in 282 ; 20 and 30 years, in 915 ; 30 and 40, in 577; 40 and
50, in 290; after the fiftieth year, in 229.
During the whole of the past year, " the institution has been rather more
than comfortably filled, the average number being 229, while 220 is regarded
as the capacity of the building." The highest number was 248. Some appli-
cations for admission were refused. The elaborate system of moral manage-
ment heretofore pursued at this hospital, and pretty fully described in our pre-
vious noticcs of the reports emanating from it, is still continued. We still
await, however, the introduction here, as well as at all the other similar estab-
lishments in the United States, of one feature in tlie general treatment, without
which it is believed that no institution for the insane can be perfect. We
allude to an active, thorough, energetic system of disciplinary, gymnastic,
hygienic, physical and mental improvative and curative management of the
chronic cases—even of those who may have been more or less demented,
torpid, and stupid, and perhaps given up as incurable, for years. In short, a
school for idiots, technically speaking, is needed in every large institution ipr
the insane. We have wonderful results from those schools in Germany, Swit-
zerland, France, England, and, to some extent, in this country, where the sub-
jects were congcnittilly imbecile. We anticipate success no less eminent among
those whose dementiou is acquired, for we arc l'ully convinced that the physical
lesion to be overcome is, iu a large proportion of cases, a less discouraging
obstacle in the latter than in the former. All things, and especially the power,
by his facilities for the acquisition of the means, point out Dr. Kirkbridc as
the man to become the pioneer in this undertaking. The hospital under his
superintendence already approximates so nearly to perfection, that there is
some danger of his becoming the Alexander of his sphere, and weeping that
there arc no more realms to conquer. But while among his patients, one nn-
bruted remnant of that which was once a man, moves only in obedience to t ie
calls of nature, and of his attendant, perhaps to the latter alone, everything
is not accomplished. \Y hile along the benches, or on the floors, in c°rnef^__
partially secluded nooks, lying, sitting, crouching, or standing in listless ilia
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
441
tivity, are those who still bear some relic, how slight soever it may be, of their
former intellectual manhood, so long will the necessity be indicated for that
systematic physical and mental schooling, which has been mentioned. Be it
understood that we are pointing to an entirely new era in the history of our
institutions specially devoted to the insane ; an era within the first gleams of
the aurora of which we have been brought by the progress of the last half-cen-
tury. "VVe believe, that at the present time, the class of patients in question
receive no more etlicient treatment in any of our Asylums, than in the Penn-
sylvania Hospital; and we have alluded to them there by partial description,
only because we know that such a class exists, and, but too often, a very
numerous class, in every establishment of the kind.
Among the important improvements of the past year, mentioned in the
report before us, is a serpentine carriage-road through the pleasure-grounds of
the department for females. A similar road is in progress through the grounds
devoted to the men. When the latter is completed, a drive of one mile and
three-quarters can be taken within the walled inciosure of the Hospital.
Gas has been introduced, for lighting the buildings, and, with three times the
amount of light formerly furnished by oil, the actual expense is less.
Dr. Kirkbride devotes several pages to the discussion of the question whether
insanity be increasing in a greater ratio that the population. " It is not diffi-
cult," he remarks, " to understand that there may be elements in operation in
tliis country more likely to produce mental derangement than in most others;
but at the same time, it must also be conceded that other causes, elsewhere
prevalent, are here absent; and which, different as thev are in their general
character, tend to produce nearly the same ell'ects. While the general preva-
lence of comfort among our own population, the comparative ease with which
nearly every individual may earn a livelihood, and the absence of tyranny and
a grinding oppression of the poor and dependent, ought to contribute 110 less
to the mental than to the physical well-being of the whole community; still,
some of the characteristic traits of our people, originating in this happy state
of things, tend to a dilferent result. The very active and wide-spread commer-
cial speculations of our citizens, the incessant taxing of the mental and phy-
sical powers to their utmost, the absorbing pursuit ot business, aiming at rapid
success and the hasty accumulation of wealth, is a state of constant mental
anxiety, of labour without relaxation; and it is too often a mere lottery, in
which great and sudden good fortune is the exception, and loss and disappoint-
ment the more common, though less noted results." Ihe man of business,
when able to retire, is unfitted for the change ; " he discovers, with surprise,
that long habit has rendered the excitement, the toil, and the anxieties of busi-
ness, great as they may have been, among the necessaries of his existence ;
and irksome as he may occasionally have found them, he now concludes that
they are infinitely preferable to the ennui which presses so heavily upon him.
fortunate is the man thus situated, who can take a hearty, permanent iuterest
111 other pursuits, who can engage in works of benevolence or of public utility
that will render him not only a benefactor to his species, but will also preserve
him from an indulgence in habits that may rum him physically, and from yield-
nig to feelings which may seriously impair the functions of the mind." After
mentioning other causes, the conclusion is arrived at, that, " it will probably
he found that the number of cases (of insanity) among us has not increased in
a greater ratio than that of the general population." Ihe greater prominence,
during the last few years of the subject of insanity, and of its subjects, is men-
tioned as only an apparent, not a real indication of the increase of the disease.
Ihe filling up of the hospitals, also, "does not prove that insanity increases
more rapidly than the population." " Philadelphia, in 1830, had accommoda-
tion for 385 insane, with a population of 1S8,(J61. At the end of 1S40, with
a pop id at ion of 258,037, she could provide for about 530, and now, with half
44 a
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
a million of inhabitants, her different institutions can receive 030 patients."
Tims, in regard to that city, the provisions for the cure of the insane have not
kept pace with the population.
But further accommodation is needed, and hence Dr. Kirkbride suggests,
" that a new Hospital, replete with every modern discovery, and all the improve-
ments suggested by a large experience, and capable of accommodating 200
male patients, should be erected on the seventy acrcs of land now comprising
the farm of this institution, and directly west of its present inclosed pleasure-
grounds ; while the present buildings, with everything included within our
external wall, should be given up for the exclusive use of a similar number of
females."
7. We glean from the report of Dr. Curwen, the subjoined sketch of the
movement of the population of the Pennsylvania State Hospital, in 1S53.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Hospital, Dec. 31, 1852 . . 59 47 106
Admitted in coursc of the year ... 95 G8 1G3
Whole number  154 115 2G9
Discharged, including deaths .... 55 32 87
Remaining, December 31, 1853 ... 99 83 182
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 27
Died  17
Causes of Death.—Epilepsy, 5 ; exhaustion consequent to chronic mania, 5 ;
paralysis, 3; " disease of the lungs," 2; acute inflammation of the brain, 1;
gradual decay of the vital powers, 1.
" The general health of the household has been good. We have been spared
the visitation of any epidemic, and only a few cases of disease incident to the
season were under treatment during the summer and autumn." " Several of
those who were much improved at the time of their removal, subsequently re-
gained their former mental vigour." "A little girl, fliree years and four
months old, evincing unequivocal symptoms of mental disorder, was admitted
in the early part of the year. The mental disorder was recent. This case, so
interesting on account of the age and mental peculiarities, still continues under
treatment."
In the table of supposed causes we find the following: "Millerism, 1; spi-
ritual rappings, 1; religious cxcitemcnt, 2."
Small libraries have been established in some of the wards. " Pictures of a
cheerful character hung on the walls, and mottoes suggestive of pleasant ideas,
and printed in large letters, have been introduced into the wards, more parti-
cularly of the excited classes." The donations from Philadelphia, collected by
Miss l)ix, and mentioned in our notice of the report for 1S52, amounted to
$5182. " The museum and reading-room buildings have been finished. They
are 42 feet long, by 25 feet wide. A portico runs nearly the whole length of
the front, from which a very pleasant view is obtained. They are placed one
on either side of the front of the building; and each is easily accessible from
the wards of the sex for which it is intended. It is proposed, so far as can be
done, to procure the mineral and geological productions of the different parts
of the Commonwealth, and to give to each county so much room as may be
needed to exhibit the specimens obtained."
8. In the twelve months preceding the 30th September, 1853, the number of
patients at the Western Asylum of Virginia, exceeded, by twenty-two, that of
any preceding year. No malignant or epidemic disease occurred among them;
neither was there a case of suicide. Of the 12(54 patients received since the
opening of the Asylum, only five have terminated their existence with their
own hands. In two of these there was no certainty that the death was not
accidental.
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 443
Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the beginning of the year . . 202 138 3 i0
Admitted in course of the year . . .09 51 120
Whole number . . . . . .271 189 460
Discharged, including deaths .... 54 29 83
Remaining at the end of the year . . . 217 100 377
Of those discharged, there were cured . .20 15 41
Died 17 10 27
The diseases terminating fatally are not reported. Among the causes of in-
sanity, we observe that the " excessive use of tobacco" is mentioned in three
of the cases, " inhaling tobacco fumes" in one, and the " excessive use of
tobacco and ardent spirits" in one.
Of the 400 cases, the insanity commenced before the age of 20 years, in 07;
between 20 and 30, in 100; between 30 and 40, in 93; between 40 and 50, in
50; after the fiftieth year, IS; unascertained, 72. The great preponderance
of the decennium from 20 to 30 years will be perceived.
Men. Women. Total.
Aggregate of patients admitted since July 1,1S3G 711 474 11S5
Discharged, cured ...... 270 1S4 454
Died  150 80 230
Aside from the statistical tables, the report of Dr. Stribling is almost exclu-
sively occupied in the description of improvements recently made upon the
premises, and the suggestion of others. Gas was introduced for the purpose
of lighting the apartments, on the 1st of January, 1S53. " We are now satis-
fied," says the report, "that the institution can be supplied from the gas-works
with an 'amount of light far greater than that which it formerly derived from
oil, lard, and candles, for a small fraction of what these materials cost.
^ As this establishment and the Eastern Asylum can accommodate but about
700 patients, and as there are within the State, according to the last census,
922 insane whites, and 945 white idiots, many of the latter probably not con-
genially idiotic, the Doctor urges upon the Legislature "to make at once a
liberal appropriation for the erection of another Asylum for 250 patients.
9- On the 1st of July, 1852, Dr. S. Hanbury Smith retired from the super-
intendence of the Ohio Lunatic Asylum, and was succeeded by Dr. Elijah
Kendrick. The reports heretofore emanating from this institution have been
more voluminous than those from any other similar establishment in the country,
with perhaps a sin"le exception. The one now before us is ot more restricted
limits.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Asylum Nov. 15, 1851 . . 150 151 301
Admitted in course of the fiscal year • • 149 120 275
Whole number „„„••• 298 277 570
Discharged, including deaths . . . 109 147 310
Remaining, Nov. 15, 1852 . . . . 130 130 200
Of those discharged, there were curcd . . 70 71 141
Died  37 21 53
Deaths from consumption, 13; diarrhoea, 8; dysentery, 8; epilepsy, 4; ma-
rasmus, 4; maniacal exhaustion, 4; typhoid fever, 4; gastritis, 2 ; anaemia, 2 ;
inanition, 2 ; suicide, 2 ; apoplexy, organic lesion of brain, caries of vertebne,.
typhoid pneumonia, .and erysipelas, 1 each.
Of the cases admitted, the mental derangement of 22 is ascribed to " reli-
gious anxiety," and that of 20 to " spirit rappings." In the latter class, Dr.
kendrick remarks, that " the suicidal tendency is especially prominent, while
the constant resting of the thoughts upon the scenes of an imaginary world
renders it more dillicult to attract attention to those of the real. Such cases,
<144
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
though recent, have proved more unfavourable than many others of the same
class."
Thirty-eight of the patients received had previously been inmates of the Asy-
lum, and discharged recovered. Sixteen of them had been absent less than a
year. When will the physicians of all our institutions for the insane report this
item of their statistics ?—an item of more importance than many which they
regularly place before us.
Of the 275 persons admitted, the insanity commenced before the age of 20
years in 45; between 20 and 30 years, 94; 30 and 40 years, 65 ; 40 and 50,
41; 50 and 60, 23; 60 and 70, 6 ; 70 and 80, 1.
From the fact that one hundred and fifty-one applications for admission were
rejected in the course of the year, we infer that Ohio is beginning sorely to feel
the want of another hospital.
The bodies of deceased patients not reclaimed by their friends, have hereto-
fore been privately interred. The funerals are now conducted openly, and in
the presence of many of the patients. The circumstances which induccd this
change, and the residts of the experiment, are thus related:—
" On a visiting tour through tnc grounds, my car caught the following dia-
logue between two patients at work. Said A.: ' What disposition do you sup-
pose is made of our bodies after death here ?' 13. replied: ' In my opinion, the
doctors boil us up.' 'Very true,' continued A., 'that may be the fate of some;
but my opinion is, that many of us are taken to doctors' shops, so have our
bones picked and stuck up to view as our bodies are here.' From that moment
I was resolved, if possible, to dispel this mental delusion. Accordingly, on the
first occurrence of a death, the chaplain, the officers, and assistants, accom-
panied by many of the male patients, followed the deceased to his final rcsting-
placc. Here they were addressed by the chaplain, in language chaste and ap-
propriate, in every way calculated to convince their understanding that not only
were they fed, clothed, and cared for during their lives, but that, at their deaths,
they should not be forgotten. The effect was strikingly impressive.
" In this first experiment we realized our highest hopes. Many who were
denied the privilege, reproached us for not having permitted them to unite witli
their friends in rendering the last tribute of respect to a departed fellow-suf-
ferer. We still observe all the rites and ccrcmonics due and proper on such
occasions; take out at all times a large number of patients, both male and
female, and nothing indecorous or disorderly has yet transpired to interrupt
the practice. So far as we are capable of judging, the influence has been salu-
tary and controlling."
Dr. Kcndrick does not give a very flattering description of the condition of
the buildings in regard to the facilities for promoting the comfort and restora-
tion of the inmates. The water-closets and bathing apparatus, " in plain terms,
arc a disgrace to the institution." There arc no means of forced ventilation,
and the patients' " sleeping apartments arc not warmed." He rccommends an
appropriation of $33,800 to remedy these and other defects.
Report for 1853 :—
Patients remaining Nov. 15, 1852
Admitted in course of the fiscal year
Whole number „ „ „ .
Discharged, including deaths .
Remaining Nov. 15, 1S53
Of those discharged, there were cured
Died
Men. Women. Total.
. 130 130 260
. 110 129 239
. 240 259 499
. 125 122 247
. 115 137 252
. 71 62 133
. 12 12 24
Causes of Death.—Phthisis pulmonalis, 7; inanition, 4; maniacal exhaustion,
3; typhus fever, 2 ; bilious remittent fever, 1; congcstive fever, 1; variola, 1 >
AMEItlCAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
445
pleuropneumonia, 1; paralysis, 1; ulceration of bowels, 1; exhaustion from
journey, 1; suicide, 1.
A case of smallpox was " developed, under most inexplicable circumstances,
in the male department," and every precaution was taken to prevent the pro-
pagation of the disease among the patients. No other case occurred until two
months afterwards, when a female patient was attacked, had the disease mildly,
and recovered. An endemic fever, of a mixed character, commenced among
the inmates about the middle of July, attained its height about the middle of
August, and continued, " sporadically," to the time at which the report 'was
written. " Though commencing as a common bilious remittent, owing to the
hospital tendency, after the first few days it assumed the typhoid or typhous
type; and again, in the case of convalescents, at the end of two weeks, reas-
sumed the remittent form. Among the patients there were 31 cases." These
were mostly of males, and one of them ended fatally. There was, also, one
case of congestive fever, of which the patient died. Of the 31, "through the
renovating influences of physical disease, and the necessary remedial agents
used for their recovery, 13 were restored to reason concurrently with their
convalescence from the fever. Several were also much improved mentally, but
again relapsed. In all the cases, even in the demented, the mind seemed more
clear during the attack than when in usual physical health."
Sixteen cases of the fever occurred among the employees of the institution,
0ne of them terminating in death. Dr. Kendriek attributed the disease to mal-
aria rising from the " illy constructed sewers and most offensive cesspools,
and from the earth thrown up in digging numerous ditches for steam and
Water-pipes through " the sub-soils charged with the accumulated impurities of
years." The disease was treated, in its early stage, with alteratives, aperients,
and diaphoretics; when typhoid symptoms arose, by the addition of tonics and
stimulants, and, upon the reassumption of the remittent type, by anti-periodics
aud tonics.
Of the 239 patients admitted, G8 had suffered from former attacks of insanity,
^mong the " probable causes" of the disease, " religious excitement" ranks the
highest in numbers, 32 being assigned to it. It is evident that the etiology of
the disease is differently viewed by diilerent physicians. Dr. Stokes, ot the
^lt. Hope Institution, asserts, in one of his late reports, that he has nc\ cr seen
a case clearly traceable to the cause in question. Eleven cases are attributed
J° "spirit rappings." " For some of these," says Dr. K., "my sympathies have
been strongly awakened, and, though deprecating the impious tolly, I cannot
Refrain from here entering my feeble protest against the indiscriminate commit-
ment of such persons to lunatic asylums." He then quotes some medico-legal
remarks of such tenor as to lead the reader to the inference that, in some of the
patients alluded to, there was no delusion or insanity, other than that which
Kught exist in regard to the so-called " spiritual manifestations."
Forty-eight of the patients admitted had the suicidal propensity. Thirty-five
oi them had attempted self-destruction. Of the thirty-five, thirteen had recovered
rom their mental disease at the close of the year.
.. Men. Women. Total.
Wliole number of patients, 1839 to 1S53, in-
clusive   1220 1135 2355
Discharged recovered G01 570 1171
Died 1S8 135 323
Diseases which proved Fatal.—" Exhaustion and general decay, without dis-
coverable local lesion, 50; consumption, 52; dysentery, 31; diarrhoea, 30,
epilepsy, 28; fever, 28; inanition, 20; apoplexy, 10; palsy, 9; inflammation
ot the lungs, 7; dropsy, 0; inflammation of the brain, A; inflammation of the
lvcr, 3; chronic inflammation of the peritoneum, 3; tabes mcsentcnca, o; sui-
N0. XXXI. G Q
44 G
GREAT WILL CASE.
cide, 3 ; inflammation of the pericardium, 2; inflammation of the stomach, 2 ;
erysipelas, 2 ; organic lesion of the brain, 1; caries of the vertebra;, 1; chronic
inflammation of the bronchia, 1; bilious colic, 1; ulceration of the bowels, 1;
inflammation of the kidney, 1; cancer of the womb, 1; cutaneous cancer, 1;
gangrene of the face, 1; exhaustion from journey, 1; confluent smallpox, 1;
cause not assigned, 1."
The State Legislature has made appropriations for warming the buildings by
steam, in connexion with forced ventilation, and for the construction of an
infirmary.
