Miscellaneous Notices
======================

Bethlem Hospital.—We have read with much pleasure the last report of this
hospital. It appears that oil the 1st of January, 1854, there were (including
those out on leave) 329 patients in the hospital, of whom 176 were males
and 153 females. Prom this date until the 31st December 1854, there were
232 admitted, 218 discharged, and 21 died; leaving in the establishment on
the 1st of January, 1855, the following 317, with 5 out on leave:—
Males. Females. Total.

Curable  58 79 137
Incurable 38 3G 74
Criminal. ........ 88 18 10G
184 133 317
The number of admissions during the year was below the usual average. The
average of those reported as cured is 50t8q on the admissions. The health of
the patients during the past year has been remarkably good. Dr Hood makes
some sensible observations m reference to the employment of the criminal
lunatics. He says the marked effect of constant recurring occupation on the
bodily health is only equalled by the improvement in the mental condition of
the patients. We regret that, owing to this report only having just reached
us, we are unable to quote more extensively from its pages. It is well and
carefully drawn up, and embodies many points of deep interest. In our annual
summary of the reports of British asylums, we shall again refer to this
document.

The American Journal of Insanity continues its onward career of usefulness.
The papers published in this periodical are always of great practical value. In
an early number we propose doing ourselves the pleasure of analysing, at
length, the last five or six numbers of this journal. We hope, in this article,
to make amends for all our past omissions, quoad this able magazine. Want
of space has alone prevented our doing so before.

On the Construction, Organization, cfc., of Hospitals for the Insane. By
Thomas S. Ivirkbride, M.D., Physician to the Pennsylvania Hospital for the
Insane, Philadelphia, 1854. This is an able, valuable, and deeply interesting
work, from the pen of an eminent physician, who has a thorough practical
knowledge of the subject-matter of the book. We have only space in this
number to direct the attention of our readers to this essay. In our next pub-
lication we intend to review Dr Kirkbride's work in detail, and to quote exten-
sively from its pages.

Letters to His Excellency Governor Manning on the Lunatic Asylums. By Dr.
H. Tregevant, M.D., Columbia, S. C., 1854. We postpone our critical re-
marks on this deeply interesting series of letters until our next number, when
it will be reviewed in conjunction with Dr Kirkbride's essay. The pamphlet
has only just reached our hands.

Insanity in Italy. The observations of Dr J. M. Gait (of America), and of
Dr Girolami, of Italy, relative to this subject will form the basis of an article
that will appear in an early number. Dr Girolami's books were unfortunately
sent through the general post, and, in consequence of the extravagant postal
charge demanded, we were reluctantly obliged to refuse the parcel. Many
American periodicals, alas ! meet with the same fate. It occasionally happens
that four and five shillings are asked for magazines, the selling price being
only one and two shillings ! All books and periodicals should be sent through
a London bookseller. Pamphlets and books are occasionally entrusted to
private hands, and they consequently find their way into the post office.
Ilence their non-delivery, in consequence of their being charged as letters.
