Heigh and Hall Lunatic Asylum, Norwich
======================================

108
It is so seldom that the public mind is ill directed or unfairly prejudiced by
the public press, or that the latter appears to lend its aid to attack the innocent
or minister to vindictive and personal feelings, that whenever such an event.
does occur, the attention of thinking and unprejudiced men is arrested, and the
mind seeks some explanation of such an apparent anomaly.
There are few subjects which have of late occupied earnest and philan-
thropic minds more than the management of asylums for the insane, and the
treatment of their inmates; nor is there any more vexed question than the
boundary which separates soundness of mind from insanity.
The very fact of mental disease requiring peculiar treatment, and that for
obvious reasons such treatment is at all times attended with a certain amount
of secresy, and that the interior of a private asylum should be as private as its
name designates, gives rise in the minds of the public to a certain feeling of
curiosity, not unattended by doubt and suspicion. Hence anv apparent depar-
ture from the laws which govern such institutions' is watched .with jealous
scrutiny. The antecedents of private asylums before the appointment of Com-
missioners in Lunacy are not of the most favourable kind; while the super-
vision of that body has not been long enough established, nor their peculiar
functions sufficiently understood by the public, to give them the assurance that
the misrule of former days is now practically impossible. Hence it is, we
believe, that a jvhisper of mismanagement in any public or private asylum is
eagerly listened to; and minds already prepared for startling disclosures seize
with avidity upon the first intimation of illegal practices, and at once draw the
conclusion that heinous offences can be and still arc perpetrated and sheltered
under the existing laws of lunacy.
Time alone can give a different bias to public opinion upon this subject; and
it is not until the public mind is satisfied that, by the machinery of the lmiacy
laws, a watchful eye is ever kept on the conduct of asylums, and that misdeeds
arc inevitably detected and as surely punished, that mistrust of such establish-
ments will be removed.
We have been led to make the above remarks by the report of a recent case
which has excited 110 little public interest, and not less public scandal—a case
which, if the facts are as represented by the public statements, should for ever
deprive the parties accused of all public confidencc; and it is not without
much pain, seeing that gentlemen of high and rising repute in their profession
arc implicated as to character and reputation, that we commence the nivestiga- )
tion of this case. There is in the city of Norwich a private lunatic asylum,
known as Hcigham Hall, which lor more than twenty years has been con- 1,
ducted with repute by its proprietors. Its position was so good that during
the past year Dr llanking, a gentleman well and most favourably known in
medical literature, as well as highly esteemed in his immediate neighbourhood,
was induced to become a co-proprietor with Messrs. Nichols and Watson, the
original proprietors. Immediately after this union reports were circulated by
Dr Hull, that, two years before, Mr. Nichols had solicited him to become a
party to a breach of the law. Now, it is not our intention to discuss the
private squabbles of Mr. Nichols or Dr Hull, or entertain the question of the
motives of the one or the credibility of the other. We have a higher and
more serious object in view. We desire to enter dispassionately into the
inquiry—seeking the truth, and awarding an unprejudiced judgment. The
allegations against Messrs. Nichols and Watson maybe considered under three
heads:—
Firstly. That thev, in June, 1852, received into their house a person guilty
HEIGHAM HALL LUNATIC ASYLUM.
1G9
of an offence, of whose insanity there was doubt, and by such reception rescued
him from the probable consequences of his crime.
Secondly. That upon liis discharge he was appointed chaplain to the asylum.
Thirdly. That after the visiting justices, in June, 1854, made the discovery
that, in their opinion, he was not a proper person to have been appointed, or
continue to officiate, as chaplain, lie was, in contravention of the Lunacy Act,
retained in the house as a boarder. These, apart from a vast deal of personal
and extraneous matter, constitute the gravamen of the charges against the
proprietors.
Let us now investigate the first, and by far the most serious chargc :—TV as
Mr. Holmes (the patient) sane or insane?—and was he protected, by the
admission to the asylum, from the operations of the law ?
It appears that his family, on a previous occasion, entertained doubts as to
his sanity, and, at that time, Mr. Nichols had an opportunity of adding a
patient to his establishment, but declined, because, in his opinion, the evidence
of insanity was insufficient, a line of conduct not in accordance with the charges
recently brought against him: being again consulted, he deemed him of un-
sound mind, and advised his confinement; and, in this opinion, he appears
supported by the testimony of all the parties concerned in the transaction, as
is apparent from the statements of the rector of the parish, the magistrate who
was applied to, the policeman who investigated the charge, the mother of the
girl upon whom the assault was committed, her auut, Mr. Holmes' house-
keeper, and her husband, who all came to the same conclusion, that lie was
not and had not been for some time in his right mind before his removal to the
asylum. On the other hand, a Mr. Mills, who had been requested to examine
Mr. H , coidd not discover any symptoms of insanity (he does not say that
he was of sound mind), and upon this point much stress has been laid. With
us it has but little importance; for it must be considered that Mr. Mills saw
the patient but once; now there arc many cases in which a single interview is
sufficient to detect unsoundness, but it not imfrequently occurs that several
examinations are required before the experienced and practical psychologist
can venture to pronounce upon the existence of insanity, and we cannot help
thinking that the evidence of those in daily intercourse with Mr. Holmes is
more than sufficient to counterbalance the negative opinion of Mr. Mills. It
is stated, upon credible testimony, that this unfortunate gentleman expressed
to the Rev. Mr. Andrew that it was his desire to be placed in the N orwich
Castle, as that would do him good. The husband of this housekeeper states,
that he had, on many occasions, to hold him down 011 the floor as a protection
from his violence; and the general evidence of other parties is to the eifect
that his demeanour was that of a lunatic. The llev. Mr. Cobb says, that,
" during his sojourn at Wymondliam, lie became less and less responsible
for his actions." In the face of such an amount of testimony, can we
draw any other conclusion than that the mind of Mr. Holmes was upset;
the contrary would be to suppose that a vast conspiracy existed to establish a
fact which 110 one beyond Mr. Nichols had any interest in making apparent.
The fact that the accused have again and again made efforts to be put upon
their defence, should have its due consideration; at present they appear, owing
to feelings adverted to in the earlier portion of this article, to have been un-
fairly assailed, and condemned unheard. The chargc that Mr. Holmes was
rescued from the gripe of the law involves a simple absurdity, as any one
acquainted with English law must know; his admission to the asylum in 110
way protected him, but rather securcd his person until the ministers of the law
had prepared to seize him: had such a course been adopted, Mr. Nichols
would have found to his cost that any opposition would have been followed by
fatal consequences to his asylum. We cannot help thinking that some under-
current prejudicial to the interests of the asylum exists, since, even after the
170
HOSPITALS FOR THE INTEMPERATE.
expressed opinion of tlic Commissioners in Lnnacy that tlxe Rev. E. Holmes
was insane when admitted to Heigham Hall Asylum, the public mind is dis-
turbed by frequent returns to the subject. Our space prevents our entering
more than generally upon the other and more insignificant charges. The pro-
priety of the appointment as chaplain is a matter of opinion only; there was
nothing morally or legally wrong in such appointment, nor can we see that a
lunatic restored to reason should be held responsible, and punished for acts com
mitted while of unsound mind, or precluded from a return to the duties of his
profession.
The breach of the Lunacy Act, upon which the Recorder of Norwich made,
we think, much too severe remarks, appears to us 110 breach at all. Mr. Holmes
was suspended from his office by the proprietors; tlicy were anxious (and
diligently sought) for further investigation into the charges against them.
During this time Mr. Holmes, as was most natural, remained, with the know-
ledge of all parties, in the house, which he at once left when the Commissioners
found themselves unable to sanction his residence as" boarder. The published
correspondence of the Commissioners upon this point must disarm all feeling
of prejudice. We have now a more pleasing duty to discharge towards the
proprietors of Heigham Hall Asylum. We observe that an active magistrate,
Mr. Guttren, speaks of the management of the asylum in terms of unqualified
praise, an occurrence studiously overlooked in the various articles winch have
appeared to the prejudice of the proprietary. We are unable to account, upon
reasonable grounds, for this omission. We, however, must congratulate
Messrs. Nichols, Ranking, and Watson, upon having obtained, at such a time,
so unqualified a commendation of then* management. Let them but persevere
in such a course, and wc hesitate not to say they will outlive the attacks of the
evil-disposed, or the attempts of unsuccessful rivals to injure an establishment
winch now, the first time for twenty years, has had a breath of scandal wafted
against its walls.
