British Asylums for the Insane
===============================

THE JOURNAL
OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE
AND
MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
JANUARY 1, 1855.
Akt. I.
We propose inaugurating our new volume by placing before our
readers an analysis of the most recent reports of the British County
Asylums. These annual records contain a vast body of useful general
and statistical information in reference to the condition of the pauper
portion of our insane population. These reports are not easy of access
to many of our foreign subscribers, and it becomes, therefore, important
that we should annually publish a fair resume of their contents. The
official documents now under review are evidently drawn up with great
care. The tabular statements embodied in the reports must have
entailed upon the medical officers much thought and laborious work.
Without further preface, we now proceed to an analysis of the " Ninth
Report of the Hanwell County Lunatic Asylum for 185-1:"—
"The number of patients admitted during the year was 126, of
whom 61 were males, and 62 females. The number discharged cured
was 43, of whom 17 were males, and 26 females. Three males also
left the Asylum improved. The number of deaths was 68, of whom
45 were males, and 23 females. The rate of mortality, though some-
what higher than last year, is not above the average."
Dr. Begley says—
" The number of patients in the male division of the asylum at the
commencement of the year was 411; 64 have been admitted since,.
NO. xxix. . B
2
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
making together 475 ; 17 have been discharged cured, 3 as improved,
and 45 have died, leaving 410 now under care.
" The patients admitted during the year were generally in so chronic
a stage of their disorder, or the malady was so much complicated with
general paralysis or epilepsy, diseases which usually render insanity
incurable, that hope could not be entertained of the recovery of many
of them. Some of those, however, who were received during the early
stage of the disease, and who were not affected with either of the com-
plications referred to, have left the asylum well; others of them are
progressing favourably, and are likely to be discharged cured in the
ensuing spring.
" In 38 of the cases admitted the disease assumed the form of mania,
and in 9 that of melancholia. Imbecility was the type of the disorder
in 15 cases, and dementia was manifested in 2. Mania was associated
in 6 cases with general paralysis, and in 6 others with epilepsy.
There was a double combination of general paralysis and epilepsy in
1 case of mania. Melancholia was found in union with general
paralysis in 1 case. Imbecility was combined with that affection in 8
cases, and with epilepsy in 1; in 1 other case of imbecility there was
a combination of both paralysis and epilepsy. The 2 cases of dementia
were complicated with general paralysis.
" A tendency to suicide was united with 1 case of mania, and with
melancholia in 7 cases; 1 of the suicidal cases of melancholia was
affected with general paralysis."
Dr. Begley refers to the cases of three patients who were discharged
" cured," after being 11, 4, and 6 years inmates of the asylum. He
justly observes, that " recoveries like these 3, after so long a residence
in the Institution, are occasionally met with in every asylum, and
tend to show that hope is not to be abandoned in any case, however
unpromising or protracted."
The deaths were, as usual, " caused by general paralysis, apoplexy,
epilepsy, and general debility; some others resulted from dropsy,
diseases of the heart and lungs, stomach and bladder."
Mr. Denne, the medical superintendent of the female department,
has made but a short report. He says—
" On the first of January, 1853, there were 552 female patients in
the asylum.
" The average number resident during the year has been 557.
" Sixty-three patients have been admitted; about half of whom,
fi;om either age, infirmity, or advanced stage of disease, must be added
to the list of incurables.
• " Twenty-three patients have died; of whom 2 were upwards of 90
years of age, 5 above 80, 2 above 70, 8 above 60, and 6 between 20
and 50, the average of the whole number being 61^ years."
The Chaplain's report is satisfactory. The majority of the patients
manifest an eagerness to be present at divine service. At the last
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
3
celebration of the holy communion in the asylum, 55 patients attended!
The following case forcibly illustrates the importance of bringing the
insane within the soothing influences of religion:—
" On entering the wards after the evening service, a patient came
to meet me, and said, ' I thank you, sir, very much for your sermon
to-day, it has taken a load, as it were, from my mind, for I feared I
should not be able to resist the dreadful thoughts I have lately had;
but now I believe, through God's help, that I shall be able to get rid
of them.' On my remarking, ' But you were not at chapel, N.,' he
replied, ' No, I was too ill to sit so long, but I stood outside the door
and listened.' Surely in this we have an example of the Word being
blessed, ' to strengthen the weak hands and confirm the feeble
knees.' "
The Hanwell committee have thought proper to publish a report from
the Matron of the asylum. Surely this is unnecessary ? It places her in
a false position, and is, we think, derogatory to the dignity, and detri-
mental to the usefulness of the medical staff. There is nothing in her re-
port that entitles it to this honour. It is entirely devoid of interest:
the facts she records are of no practical importance or value. In making
"these observations, we repudiate all intention of depreciating the talents,
activity, industry, and humanity of Mrs. Macfie; but we would advise
her for the future to leave to the medical officers the duty of doing the
literary work of the asylum. She must have much to occupy her time
in discharging faithfully the onerous duties that specially devolve upon
one holding her responsible post. In writing accounts of cases in the
asylum for publication in the annual report she is evidently out of her
element. The committee of Hanwell Asylum will do well to omit,
for the future, this kind of addenda.
The report contains several valuable tables well worthy of attention.
The " Third Annual Report of the County Asylum at Colney Hatch"
next merits attention. It appears that—
" During the past year, 392 patients have been admitted,—namely,
254 males and 138 females. The deaths during the spring were more
than the average, on the male side; but during the year the number
has not been more than might have been expected, considering the
state in which many are sent to the asylum.
" On the female side, the mortality has not been greater than in
former years.
" The total number of deaths is 208,—namely, 135 males and 73
females.
" The discharges of patients recovered during the year have been—
100 males and 42 females—a number which, if not equal to our bene-
volent desires, is beyond what might have been expected, and exceeds
that of last year by 10 cases."
B 2
4 BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
Mr. Tyerman, head of the male department, records the following-
statistics :—
There remained in the male department, 31st Dec., 1852 514
There have been admitted since   254
Total males under care during the year   76S
There have been discharged—
Recovered  100
Relieved   23
Unrelieved  ... G
Died  134
Total discharged and dead    2G3
Remaining under care Dec. 31st, 1853   505
Daily average number   500
In speaking of the epileptic cases, Mr. Tyerman says that " 10,000
epileptic fits occur annually among the male patients alone."
It appears that—
" Post mortem examinations have been instituted in 104 cases, the
results proving very generally the long previous existence of organic
affections; pulmonary disease, tubercle, &c., was associated in 81) in-
stances, heart disease in 51, and kidney disease in 42. Abnormal con-
formation of the brain has been occasionally observed; e.g. want of
symmetry between the hemispheres and central portions, and in rare
instances the posterior conua of the lateral ventricles were not de-
veloped."
Mr. Marshall, medical superintendent of the female department of
the asylum, says,— v
" In consequence of the house being nearly full at the end of the
year 1852, the admissions of patients have not been quite so numerous,
amounting to 138, whilst during the year, 42 have been discharged as
recovered, 16 relieved, and 8 not improved, have been removed to other
asylums, and 73 have died, leaving 728 patients under treatment in
the asylum on December 31, 1S53, vacancies for 8 persons only re-
maining in the various wards of this department of your asylum."
This gentleman appends to his report several interesting tabular
statements. The account of tliq post mortem examinations appear to
be clearly and ably drawn up, and do credit to the medical officers of
this national establishment. From Colney Hatch Asylum we proceed
to another great public institution, the annual report of which is now
before us. We allude to Betlilem Hospital. We have been much
pleased with Dr. Hood's account of the state of this asylum. His-
report is drawn up with ability, and embodies many facts of deep in-
terest to the psychological physician. First, as to the statistics of
liethlem, Dr. Hood says,—
" On the 1st of January, 1853, there were 356 patients (including
those out on leave) in the hospital, of whom 194 were males, and 1.62
emales ; and during the year 242 patients were admitted—105 males,
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
5
and 137 females ; so that since the last annual report 598 patients
have been under medical treatment and moral surveillance.
" The admissions were as follows :—
M. P. Total.
"Curable   72 12S • 200
Incurable   1 3 4
Criminal    32 G 38
105 137 212
" The number of admissions in this, and in all other public institu-
tions, is subject to remarkable fluctuations: thus, in the year 1819
there were received into this hospital 311 patients ; the next year the
number rose to 371, and in the following year, viz. 1851, the admis-
sions fell to 306.
" It is, therefore, neither surprising nor disparaging to find the num-
ber of admissions last year was less than during preceding years, which
was reasonably accounted for by my predecessors, who observed, in
their report addressed to you in 1851, that ' this diminution of admis-
sions may be ascribed to the numerous county asylums which have
been erected in different parts of the kingdom, and which must neces-
sarily diminish in a material degree the applications for admission into
this and similar institutions.' We have also to consider that in the
metropolitan district alone competition has induced the proprietors of
some private asylums to adopt such a reduction of terms as render
many of these establishments available to the middle classes of
society—persons on the verge of poverty, who would otherwise require
charitable assistance. Among the admissions you will observe 38
criminal lunatics—32 males and 6 females—being an increase of 10
upon the number admitted in 1852, and of as many as 21 upon the'
number admitted in 1851.
" The discharges and removals of patients during the year amounted
to 212, of whom 82 were males, and 130 females; of these numbers it
is satisfactory to state that 121 were dismissed cured. The details
are as follows :—
M. P. Total.
"Cured      15 70 121
Uncurcd   35 IS 83
Removed at request of friends 2 0 8
82 130 212
" The peculiar constitution of this hospital, which by its regulations
restricts the period of a patient's residence on the curable establish-
ment to one year, with a discretionary extension to three or six
months—which was wisely devised with the view of making it a
strictly curative institution — may explain the reason of so many
patients being discharged uncured. The majority of them were in
fact still under medical treatment, though with little if any hope of
permanent amendment: it being well known that the chances of re-
covery are materially diminished after the first year ; and the majority
-ot cures here reported will be found to have taken place within the
first three months after admission.
G
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
" The deaths which took place during the year, it is highly satisfac-
tory to state, were not so numerous as I had reason to anticipate in.
my last report."
When referring to the adoption of the " Non-restraint System,"
Dr. Hood gives some interesting details of the barbarous mode of
treatment pursued towards the insane during the " dark ages." We
are glad to perceive that Dr. Hood is directing his attention to
moral treatment, and that he is disposed to carry out in a liberal and
enlightened spirit the curative principle acted upon with such great
success in the majority of the best first-class private asylums in this
country. He justly observes,—
" In the moral management of the insane we cannot attach too
much importance to those occupations and recreations which tend to
divert the mind from its delusions, and which rouse and invigorate the
healthy exercise of its reflecting faculties. Speaking generally, we
find lunatics of every class, unless urged to the contrary, disposed to
be indolent; some few indeed may be mischievously restless: but the
majority succumb under their morbid feelings, and are indisposed to
exert themselves with any degree of steadiness.
" There can be no doubt that every description of occupation has a
curative tendency, and it is desirable that such patients should receive
every possible encouragement. Even recreation, whatever be the kind
of amusement, is only another term for mental employment, and
judiciously promoted, cheers the mind, and excites a healthy tone of
feeling. Hence some of the patients during the year were permitted
to walk out, under the care of nurses and proper attendants, which
was esteemed a great indulgence, and had perceptibly a good effect.
Four of the male patients, who were, however, not fit to be discharged,
were allowed to spend a day at Kew, another day they went by steam-
boat to the JNTore; and conducting themselves well, under the charge
of careful attendants, during the year visited many different public
exhibitions, the National Gallery, the Crystal Palace, Marlborough
House, the Zoological Gardens, Smithfield Cattle Show, &c. &c. This
privilege was awarded to them gradually, and was suggested by their
enjoyment and quiet demeanour when first taken for a walk round the
garden: and I have no hesitation in stating that this indulgence
having been highly appreciated by them, has had a beneficial effect
upon their minds. If we can succeed in giving a patient the impres-
sion that we repose confidence in him, if we can make him sensible of
the importance of keeping his parole dhonneur, we are greatly im-
proving his mental state : for the recovery of self-respect is often the
first indication of impending cure. Hence we find the reports of
many lunatic asylums attesting the advantages which patients derive
from such excursions."
We regret that our limited space prevents our quoting more at
length from this valuable report. We can specially commend it to
the notice of our readers. The tabular statements deserve careful
study.
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
7
The following is the statistical statement of the medical department
of the Surrey Lunatic Asylum, for 1853, published in the report
for 1854:—
" At the date of our last report there were 396 male patients, and
488 female patients—together 884. Since then, there have been
admitted 136 males, and 193 females—together 329; and 342 have
been discharged, or died, leaving, at the close of the year, 871.
" The total number of patients in the asylum, during the year, was
1213 ; the highest number at any time was 911, the lowest was 864 ;
and the average number under treatment, during the whole period,
was 887.
M-
" Remaining 31st December, 1852   396
Admitted in 1853   136
532
" Of whom have been discharged—
M. F. Total.
Recovered   65 104 169
Removed, not recovered   26 30 56
Died   65 52 117
156 186 342
376 495 871
" The number of recoveries is nearly the same as last year, being in
the proportion of about 14 per cent.; that of deaths is rather greater,
being about 9 per cent.
" Of the deaths of 65 male patients—
27 died of apoplexy and general paralysis.
13 „ exhaustion, general debility, and old age.
7 „ epilepsy.
8 „ pulmonary disease.
10 „ of various other causes.
" Of the 52 female patients—
17 died of apoplexy, cerebral disease, and general paralysis.
9 „ pulmonary disease.
7 „ epilepsy.
7 „ exhaustion.
3 „ old age.
7 „ of various causes.
" Three cases came under the investigation of the coroner and a jury,
whose verdicts were as follows :—
" In one case, a male, ' natural death—sudden exhaustion upon ex-
citement, after an attack of delirium tremens.'
" In one case, a male, 1 suicide, by thrusting a portion of a glove
into the throat, producing suffocation—he being insane.'
" In one case, a female, ' natural death, from apoplexy.' "
With the exception of the tables, the report contains no facts or
remarks calling for particular notice. Sir A. Morison, whom we be-
F. Total.
488 884
193 329
681 1213
8
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOIt THE INSANE.
lieve prepares the tabular statements of this asylum, deserves much
praise for the ability with which he conducts this department of the
asylum.
From the " First Annual Report of the Norfolk County Lunatic
Asylum" we ascertain that—
" During the past twelve months, 83 patients have been admitted ;
viz., 36 males and 47 females.
" On the 31st December, 1852, there were in the asylum, 139 males
and 159 females; total, 298. The whole number under treatment
during the year has been 381; the average number daily, resident,
304.91, or 139.66 males and 165.25 females.
" The number of deaths has been 36, or 19 males and 17 females;
and the number of recoveries 39, or 17 males and 22 females; and
the number discharged, not cured, has been 6 ; viz., 2 males and 4
females."
The report, which is drawn up by Dr. Foote and Mr. Firth, is en-
titled to our warmest commendation. We regret that Dr. Foote should
have been removed from this sphere of usefulness, and sincerely hope
that, ere long, he will be again in harness, and busily engaged among
the insane in the work of labour and love.
We extract from the " Second Annual Report of the Derbyshire
County Lunatic Asylum, for 1854," under the able management of Dr.
Hitchman, the subjoined interesting particulars:—
" It is a remarkable coincidence that the admissions during the past
year are almost numerically the same as those of the year 1852. From
January, 1851, to January, 1852, there were admitted into this
asylum, 73 male and 57 female patients, and during the year that has
just passed, there were admitted,—
Males  74) ,0-1
Females   57 J
being the precise number of females, and only one in excess of the
number of males admitted during the corresponding period of 1852.
" There were more patients admitted in the month of June than
in any other month of the past year—the largest number of admis-
sions being 17 in June, 16 in April, and 13 in September. As,
however, only 4 out of the 17 were of recent origin, this fact does
not throw much light upon the influence of seasons in the produc-
tion of the malady. The largest number of recent cases were brought
to the asylum during the month of January; whether an equal
number of cases sprung up in any other month of the year, it is not
possible to state, as there is much reason to fear that patients are
still kept back from the institution by financial and other considera-
tions.
" In those countries where cretinism and idiotism are endemic, it has
been found that the greater number of cretins were resident on the de-
clivity of the mountains towards the north. This fact has been
proved by the Sardinian Commission, and by the private researches
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
9
of scientific men, but has been most specially enforced by Dr. J. C.
Hubertz, of Copenhagen. This observer has also found that insanity
in Denmark is more prevalent in the northern 1 herreds,' or divisions
of the kingdom, than in the southern portions. All the facts which
have hitherto fallen under the observation of your physician would
appear to substantiate this conclusion, as far as idiotcy is involved
in this county, but it does not appear to hold good in reference to
the number of the insane in the two divisions of Derbyshire. Of
258 patients sent from this county since 1851, 92 were from the
northern division, and 166 from the southern portion, in which
the town of Derby is included. The population of the two divisions
being—
the proportion of the insane to their respective populations will be—
Or, leaving Derby out of the calculation, which in common with all
large towns has special influences in operation upon the human mind
and feelings—the statistics would be as follow:—96 from the southern
division, containing a population of 125,408, making a proportion of
1 in every 1806^. This would give a slight preponderance in favour
of the mental salubrity of the northern division; as the-parliamentary
division has been taken in this calculation, some villages are included
in the southern division which are, in truth, more northerly in their
geographical position than those which are enumerated as northern,—■
for instance, Matlock in contrast with Alfreton, or Pinxton; but the
population is not sufficiently large to affect in any essential degree the
above conclusions. From the town of Derby 70 patients were
sent, which in a population of 40,609 give a proportion of 1 in every
5S0?V
" Even if the whole island be taken into calculation, we observe no
especial exemption in favour of the southern counties. Dorset, one of
the most southerly, abounds in lunatics and idiots, ranging as high as
1 in 640 of the population, while Derbyshire, Durham, and Lancashire,
according to the Poor-law returns, have not above 1 lunatic or idiot in
1000 of the population. Thus teaching us that there are other causes
as potent in the production or prevention of nervous diseases as geo-
graphical position.
" The social condition and occupations of the patients admitted
during the year were various, as shown by the following tables:—
Northern Division
Southern Division
.. 130,007
.. 160,017
Northern Division ... 1 in every 1413
Southern Division ... 1 in every 1000
Males.
Females.
Single
Married ...
Widowed ...
Unknown...
31 Single ...
3S Married
4. "Widowed
1
30
21
0
74
57"
10
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
When speaking of the effects of religious excitement in producing
insanity, Dr. Hitchman observes,—
" All impassioned religious excitement which does not culminate in
some useful act, has a tendency to agitate and overwhelm weak and
sensitive persons, and that the peculiar dogmas embraced are largely
determined by circumstances, and by inherent and special character-
istics of the individual mind; and that it is unjust to charge upon any
special religious theory the fearful consequences ascribed to the Calvin-
istic creed. Minds linked to a special organization become excited and
bewildered by the stern, exclusive, and yet impassioned tenets of the
Geneva Reformer; but then minds of another character become equally
disturbed by the more diffusive creed of Wesley and his followers.
Indeed, during the early career of John Wesley, it is certain that more
persons became convulsed, and ultimately insane, than during the
preaching of George Whitefield. Southey informs us, when speaking
of the convulsions which agitated many of Wesley's followers, that
'These effects had never as yet been produced under Whitefield's
preaching, though they now followed Wesley wherever he went; and
it appears that Whitefield, who came once more to Bristol at this
time, considered them as doubtful indications at least, and by no means
to be encouraged. But no sooner had he begun to preach before a
congregation, among whom these ' outward signs' had previously taken
place, and who therefore were prepared for the affection by their state
of mind, as fear in times of pestilence predisposes the body for receiving
the contagion, the four persons were seized almost at the same moment,
and sunk down close by him. (Southey's 'Life of Wesley,' p. 281.)
4 According to a moderate computation four thousand people were
within a very short time affected with this convulsive malady.'—
Hecker on the ' Dancing Mania,' p. 134. These susceptibilities are
dependent rather upon constitutional peculiarities than upon the effect
of special tenets ; thus we have perceived in the history of individuals,
that even the Holy Scriptures may breathe a solace and a peace to
one individual, and yet arouse, as if with the tones of a trumpet, the
combativeness and energy of another. ' Scripture,' said Melancthon,
1 imparts to the soul a holy and marvellous delight, it is the heavenly
ambrosia.' ' The Word of God,' exclaimed Luther, ' is a sword, a war,
a destruction; it falls upon the children of Epliraim like a lioness in
the forest.' The excess of fanaticism, its immoderate ecstasies, and
selfish raptures agitate the nervous system, disorder its functions, and
bring the reason and the will under the sole dominion of imagination
and feeling, and thus occasionally render the individual insane and
irresponsible, both in our own church or in the church of the Vatican,
as in the wildest of the sects which spring up in this and other coun-
tries ; but where one man now falls a victim to ' religious excitement,'
ten others are the prey of exhausting anxieties contingent upon com-
mercial affairs—the fatigues of overwork—or of vicious indulgence in
forbidden pleasures ; whilst to many in asylums, as to thousands in the
world, the religion of the Gospel has been ' a message of glad tidings,'
and a balm, a consolation, and a peace more sustaining and restorative
than any other single agency."
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
11
Dr. Hitchman says, when speaking of the causes of insanity,—
" In a very large proportion of the cases the malady was hereditary
—and on more than one occasion during the past year, two and three
members of the same family have been under treatment at the same
time. Intemperance, domestic trials, disappointed affections, and
bodily ailments of a special kind have been the other most clearly
ascertained causes, and their frequency has been in the order in which
they have been enumerated."
Again, when referring to the effect of "anxiety" and "mental
shock" in disturbing the functions of the brain, Dr. H. observes,—
" Emotion and shock are far more frequently the cause of insanity
than prolonged intellectual exertions of any kind. Intellectual labour
rarely disorders the mind permanently, unless anxiety or some other
powerful emotion is superadded to it. The student ambitious of dis-
tinction and fearful of defeat—the merchant harassed by business,
and dreading an altered position in his circumstances, or the discredit
and disgrace of bankruptcy—the devotee perplexing himself with con-
flicting creeds, anxious to be of the true church and yet distrustful of
his previous convictions—the fanatic yielding himself up to wild and
rapturous emotions—the mechanic or labourer toiling too much under
the anxieties of home and family—are all engaged in dangerous pur-
suits, which have wrecked and will continue to wreck many minds,
no matter what may be the peculiar study, the especial business, the
particular creed, the special sect, or the kind of labour which may be
engaging their respective attentions. In carefully investigating the
histories of patients, it has been usually found that physical weak-
ness and moral shock have combined to produce the unhappy result."
It is undoubtedly true that there exists an essential distinction be-
tween the pathological effects of pure intellectual exertion and emo-
tional influence; but we do not agree entirely with our author, that
"intellectual labour rarely disorders the mind permanently." We
have seen many distressing cases of incurable insanity, which would
clearly be traced to "intellectual labour." Softening of the brain and
permanent impairment of the intellect, ending in general paralysis,,
according to our experience, are often the consequences of excessive
devotion to literary and intellectual pursuits. We admit, however,
the difficulty of disassociating severe intellectual work from anxiety of
mind; they appear to us very often to proceed pari passu. When
speaking of the medical treatment of insanity, Dr. Hitchman ob-
serves,—
" In cases of aggravated hysteria associated with corporeal debility,
the tincture of sumbul combined with Battley's sedative, has been
a most useful medicine, and especially when the milder preparations
of iron, such as the citrate, have been administered in the interval."
When referring to the question of " Non-restraint," our author
remarks,—
"No less than forty-seven suicidal individuals have been under treat-
12
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOIl THE INSANE.
ment, and some of these have been so energetically bent upon effecting
their purpose, that it was impossible to leave them for day or night for
many weeks in succession. A few of them involved great responsi-
bility, and formed, indeed, these especial cases which are said to test
.and to refute the principle of non-restraint. The opponents of this
practice are constantly asking—'What would you do with a man
who had cut his throat and was determined to pull it open again
after it had been dressed?' Indeed, all kinds of imaginary cases are
•conjured up, to which you are expected to give an explicit and cate-
gorical reply. But no treatment can be defined for such ideal cases,
and no defined treatment will succeed (because never heartily carried
out) in the hands of an unbeliever in the efficacy and humanity of the
principle."
We should be disposed, with deference to Dr. Hitchman, to repeat the
question he has put into the mouth of "the opponents of this practice,"
.and ask, how he would treat a case of this kind ? We cannot conceive
why Dr. Hitchman should call such cases "imaginary" or "ideal,"
when they are of ordinary occurrence. Lunatics do, alas ! sometimes
cut their throats—ligatures are occasionally required for the treatment
of these cases ; and patients resolutely determined upon self-destruction
often do their utmost to effect their purpose, by tearing the wound
open! Under such distressing circumstances, who would for one
moment question the necessity and humanity of preserving life, by
restraining the hands of the patient until the wound has cicatrised ?
We find nothing in the " Fifty-eighth Annual Report of the Friends'
Retreat for 1854," calling for special comment. We can only afford
space for one extract. Mr. John Kitching, the resident medical officer,
when speaking of the treatment of the insane, justly remarks :—
" That mode of treatment approaches most nearly to our idea of
perfection, which adapts itself to the specialities, physical and moral, of
each case, and seeks to maintain each individual in the highest condi-
tion of which bis mental faculties are capable. Kindliness and sym-
pathy for suffering and misfortune form the foundation-stone on which
.all effectual treatment is based. It may, however, happen that the
kindest treatment requires a very different plan to be pursued from
what the patient may approve, and he may form a very mistaken esti-
mate of that which is really the most conducive to his welfare; to him
the greatest kindness may put on the disguise of its opposite, and the
conductors of asylums must be prepared to be misunderstood and mis-
represented in much that they do with the single-hearted desire to
promote the interests of those under their charge."
There are several valuable tabular statements appended to the report,
to which we can only direct attention. We glean the following statis-
tical facts from the " Third Annual Report of the Medical Superin-
tendent (Dr. Thurnam) of the Wilts County Asylum" :—
" At the beginning of the year which has now expired, there were
*
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE. 13
in the asylum 219 patients; namely, 103 males and 116 females. In
the course of the twelve months, there have been 105 cases admitted ;
of which 44 were males and 01 females :—the average being almost
precisely at the rate of two cases per week. Of the whole number of
admissions 18 were persons who had previously been discharged, or
cases of re-admission. There are now in the asylum 255 patients;
namely, 110 males and 145 females. The average number resident
during the year has been 244" 6.
" There have been 40 discharges ; and of this number, 34 were con-
sidered as recovered when they left the asylum. The majority of the
remainder were much improved in their mental condition, and were for
the most part discharged at the request of their friends. A few were
removed to other asylums, as not chargeable to parishes in Wiltshire.
Two patients are absent on trial.
" Of the whole number discharged since the opening of the asylum,
19 cases have been re-admitted during the year, in consequence of a
relapse or recurrence of the disorder."
Dr. Thurnam, when referring to the liability to relapse in cases of
apparent recovery from attacks of insanity, observes—
"Many also, who whilst subject to the regular discipline of an
asylum, appear well and fully capable of self-government, are no sooner
at liberty than they display symptoms of the disorder, which had been
restrained or concealed, rather than eradicated or cured."
According to our experience, such is often the case. It is said that
Zimmerman, the author of the celebrated vfork on "Solitude," was
never sane outside of the walls of a lunatic asylum, but became rational
and free from excitement soon after being placed under restraint; but
immediately upon his release, relapsed into his former condition.
The statistics of the "Lincolnshire County Lunatic Asylum" for the
past year are conveyed in the following paragraphs, taken from the
first annual report. This asylum, we would premise, was opened for
the reception of patients on the 9th of August, 1852 :—
" On the 31st of December, 1853, the number of patients who had
been admitted was as follows, viz.:—84 men and 92 women from other
asylums; 8 men and 12 women from workhouses; and 04 men and
57 women from their homes; making a total of 317 patients, of whom
156 were men and 161 women.
" Seventeen men and 18 women were discharged recovered; 5 men
and 3 women (out-county patients) were removed to other asylums;
and 19 men and 14 women died; making the total of discharges and
deaths 76—41 men and 35 women.
" The numbers remaining in the asylum on the 1st of January,
1854, were 115 men and 126 women; total, 241.
" The average daily resident number for the year 1853 was 228.23 ;
and for the whole period of seventeen months, 205.81.
" The mortality was 10.41 per cent, of the whole number under
treatment, and 16.03 per cent, of the mean resident number; which,
regarding the infirmities and bad bodily condition of a large number
14
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
of the patients when admitted, is by no means an unfavourable
result."
Nothing can be more just than the following remarks on the im-
portance of early and prompt treatment:—
" In cases of recent occurrence, however, the importance of early
removal cannot be too strongly urged. All experience and all autho-
rity assert that when once insanity is manifested, the very foundation
of curative treatment consists in removing the patient from the ex-
ternal influences which have occasioned or are likely to protract
the disorder, in overcoming resistance to remedial agents, and in
adopting an appropriate regimen and diet. These conditions of treat-
ment, so far at least as the indigent classes are concerned, can only be
complied with by removal to an asylum; and any delay in effecting
this, whether from false economical motives on the part of parish
authorities, or from repugnance of friends to the separation, is fraught
with injury to the patient and ultimate expense to the ratepayers. A
week's procrastination may protract the treatment to months; a
month's delay may allow a favourable crisis to pass by unimproved,
and determine the chronic stage of the disease."
When alluding to the previous occupations of the patients admitted,
as well as the hereditary character of the insanity, it is observed—
" As would be expected in a county whose population is essentially
agricultural, the admissions have included a large number of farm-
labourers, their wives and families. From the healthful and unex-
citing nature of its employment, it might be supposed that such a
population should enjoy a larger immunity from insanity than that
of manufacturing counties, but such does not appear to be always the
case. The proportion of insane paupers to the population of Lan-
cashire is as 1 in 1083, in the West Riding of Yorkshire as 1 to 1176,
and in Staffordshire as 1 to 1079 ; while in Lincolnshire it is as 1 to
806—a proportion which, it is believed, is largely attributable to
hereditary predisposition. In many of the cases received from the
towns the mental disorder has been distinctly traceable to habits of
intemperance and dissipation; but in those coming from the rural dis-
tricts of the county such causes have been comparatively rare, and a
congenital want of mental power to resist ordinary excitants and
depressants has appeared pretty generally to have been the fons et
or iff o mali
A high authority has declared that the stomach-pump is never
necessary in the treatment of the insane. What would, we ask,
have become of Dr. Palmer's patient if he had not forced food into
the stomach by means of this instrument ?
"A few instances of refusal of food have occurred, but, with the ex-
ception of one female patient, yielded to change of diet and medical
treatment. The patient alluded to fell, soon after her admission, into
a cataleptic state, during which no inducement whatever succeeded in
getting her to swallow anything. If her mouth was opened, and food
put into it, she would remain with the food resting on her tongue
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE. 15
until somebody removed it. After several days' abstinence her
strength began to fail, and the odour of her breath indicated that
feeding could be no longer delayed with safety. The stomach-pump
was employed three times a-day, without her offering the least resist-
ance, for six weeks, when her health became much improved, and she
began to eat again of her own accord. She subsequently mended very
rapidly, and has since been discharged quite recovered."
There appear to have been four inquests at the asylum; one patient
died during a fit of epilepsy; the second died suddenly from ulcera-
tion and perforation in the upper portion of the intestinal canal;
the third was a case of suicide from hanging; and the fourth
case was " also a male patient, who died in consequence of his ribs
having been severely injured during a paroxysm of maniacal violence,
and while two of the attendants were conveying him down a flight of
stairs for the purpose of placing him in a padded-room. The verdict
returned by the jury was ' homicide by misadventure.' The whole
of the circumstances attending the case were subsequently investigated
at a special meeting of the visitors, who were of opinion that the verdict
of the inquest was entirely supported by the facts."
We do not affirm this accident could have been averted if the , j
strait-waistcoat had been at once applied; but of this we feel strongly j
convinced, that it is much more humane to apply such restraint for a
short period than for four or five powerful men to struggle with a
patient in " a paroxysm of maniacal violence." Severe and serious
injuries may and do often occur from these absurd contests with the
insane.
Dr. Palmer's report does him great credit. We congratulate the
committee on having so active and intelligent an officer at the head
of the Lincolnshire Asylum.
According to the " Eighth Annual Report of the Medical Superin-
tendent of the Devon County Lunatic Asylum, for 1850," there were
admitted—
" During the past year, 96 patients, of whom 49 were men and 47
were women. The largest number resident at one time was 472 ; the
number under treatment has been 555; and the average number resident
has been 460.
" The number of patients at the commencement of the year was
459; and the number resident at this date is 445, of whom 195 are
men and 250 are women.
" Sixty-two patients have been discharged, of whom 26 were men
and 36 women; of these 55 were discharged recovered—6 were dis-
charged relieved—and 1 unimproved.
" Forty-seven patients have died, of whom 25 were men and 22 were
women.
" The mortality which last year was 6.6 per cent, of the average
1G
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
number resident, has this year been 10 per cent, of that number, and
8.4 per cent, of the number under treatment.
" Many of the patients whose deaths have this year swelled the
obituary, were admitted in a dying state. No. 1072, a melancholic,
was unable to retain any food after admission, and died in twenty-six
days, from'disorganization of the stomach. The appearance of this
organ suggested the probability that the unhappy man had taken
some deleterious substance before admission, with a suicidal intent.
" No. 1099 was admitted in a state of extreme exhaustion, from
general paralysis, with mania, and sank twenty-two dajrs afterwards
from decay of the powers of nature. No. 1151, who died in six days
after admission, was a similar case. No. 1100, a miner, was admitted
with both lungs in a state of disorganization from that form of con-
sumption, known as coal miners' lung ; he survived about four months.
No. 1110 survived nearly as long; he had sustained two attacks of
apoplexy, and was suffering, on admission, from double hemiplegia,
which paralysed both sides of the body, and left him in the most per-
fect state of wreck—mental and bodily. No. 1163, who had been in-
sane three years, (but had only recently become chargeable), was
admitted in a dying state, with one lung and part of the other in a
state of decomposition, from pneumonia; he survived sixteen days.
No. 11GS, admitted with inflammation of the intestinal canal, survived
six days. With the exception of the last, who was G8 years old, the
above patients were of middle age.
When speaking of medical and moral treatment of the cases con-
fided to his care, Dr. Bucknill observes,—
u During the past year no efforts have been neglected which were
requisite to maintain the medical treatment of the patients in prox-
imity with the ever-advancing steps of medical science. Among the
novelties of treatment it may be mentioned that epilepsy has been
relieved in the most satisfactory manner by tracheotomy; that de-
mentia has been relieved by phosphuretted oil; that chorea with
mania, threatening a fatal termination, has been cured by the internal
administration of chloroform ; and that extreme excitement, in which
other remedies had failed, has been removed by frequent small inha-
lations of the same remedy. Of these results some have already been
communicated in detail to the profession, and others will be so through
more appropriate channels than this general report.
" The same system of moral treatment mentioned in former reports
has been continued with satisfactory results in the recovery of those
patients whose malady was capable of cure ; and in the reform of bad
habits, the amelioration of symptoms, the increased quietude, comfort,
and happiness of those whose malady is irremovable, and for whom the
asylum must be considered a permanent home.
" During nine months of the year (and in all the wards except those
occupied by the idiots) the evening reading classes are kept up with
benefit and punctuality four evenings in every week. Of the other
three, one is devoted to the duties of Saturday night, and the other
two to recreation.
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
17
" During the three summer months the evening reading classes are
discontinued, as the patients remain in the pleasure grounds until
bedtime.
" The useful and profitable employment of the patients has been
carried as far as appeared to be consistent with their sanitary
condition."
Appended to the report are several valuable tables, and a highly
eulogistic report from the Commissioners in Lunacy, who speak in
glowing terms of the condition of the asylum. With deference to the
medical officers of county asylums, we question the good taste of pub-
lishing these reports of the official visits of the Commissioners ; they are
not written for publication, and we think should not be ostentatiously
paraded in the annual records of the asylum. However, Dr. Bucknill
errs, if error it can be called, in good company, and is only adopting
the course generally pursued by all the medical superintendents of
public asylums.
The " Sixteenth Annual Report of the Suffolk Lunatic Asylum"
embodies many interesting particulars. But first, as regards the
statistics of the asylum, it appears from Dr. Kirkman's statement
that—
" At the close of the last year there were 255 patients in the house;
there have been admitted in this year 93; 42 have been discharged
cured; 9 have been removed or returned to their friends very much
relieved, and 36 have died. The numbers of male and female patients
have been nearly equal in the admissions, discharges, and deaths.
H. f.
Admitted   49 4-4
Discharged   22 20
Ditto relieved   2 7
Died   19 17
" These numbers show but little variation in any respect from those
of the late previous years. The mortality, which was unusually low
last year, has been increased by nine this year; an event most fully
anticipated, and noted in the report for 1852, from the different stages
of great bodily exhaustion, in which many of the aged inmates were
received."
The subjoined facts speak volumes in favour of this institution:—
" If the general expressions of contentment amongst the patients
are any proof of this healthy feature, we have as conspicuous indices
to judge by as any to which we could point at any time. A man
after an absence of several years was lately re-admitted; he was a
tailor, and directly he entered the house he went up to take possession
of his former place of occupancy, and he asked for some work with
the expression of satisfaction, ' Well, I'm glad to get home again.' It
is this home character that we would endeavour to secure; and lest
the paramount importance of this domesticity should ever be lost
sight of, it may be well to record it as being the chief object of at-
NO. XXIX. C
18
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
tainment for successful treatment of the insane. They are almost
universally ready to recognise it themselves, and it is a feeling which
is very seldom disturbed or broken by the patients in this house.
" The truth of the above was shown in no small degree only a few
weeks back, by two out-county patients who left us for Essex. They
were both old residents ; one having been here twenty-one years, the
other twenty-five years. They were much distressed at leaving, the
longest resident the most so. She had always looked upon this house
as her permanent home, and she would echo the desire of another old
patient, most singularly but expressively conveyed, £ that she should
have the privilege of being buried in the asylum ground.' This
attached faithful creature had been for all these years a most valuable
assistant in the wash-house and laundry, she was always regularly and
willingly employed. Three days in the week in each of these places
she worked for twenty-five years, taking little notice of others, unless
something very provoking excited her displeasure. When she was
prevented from going into the laundry on the morning of her expected
removal, and when the reason of it was explained to her by signs (for
she was very deaf), she looked very sorrowful, and said, ' she would
not take any clothes with her, but leave them till she should come
back again,' she positively refused to believe that she was going
entirely away. It was a c sorry sight' to witness the removal of this
grateful and attached patient: as the carriage came up to the gate she
turned very pale, and the tears dropped into her lap, as she took leave
of one after another, fondling over them and kissing them. Her
industry had procured her some trifling articles of fancy dress, and
which always delighted her, but she could not be persuaded to take
any of them, with her. We have always encouraged this feeling of
possession in trifling changes of dress, and we look on it as one of no
small importance to gratify."
We have only room for the following account of a remarkable case
of attempt at suicide. We would premise that this patient had on
several previous occasions endeavoured to accomplish self-destruction.
Immediately before admission he had tried to strangle and drown
himself:—
" On the afternoon of the 15th the house surgeon was suddenly
called to him by his attendant, and he found him suffering from
symptoms evidently arising from the existence of some foreign body
in the throat, nothing either solid or fluid could be swallowed, there
was a choking sensation with sudden spasmodic cough. A probang
with an ivory top was introduced into the oesophagus, which rested
half-way between the lower part of the pharynx and the cardiac orifice
of the stomach upon something hard. By careful manipulation this
substance was pushed down into the stomach, and now several hard
bodies conveying the sensation of stones could be distinctly felt with
the probang. Upon questioning the man he acknowledged that he
had swallowed 200 common gravel stones, with the hope that they
would kill him, at the same time he expi*essed great thankfulness for
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
19
the relief afforded him and promised never to attempt self-destruction
again. By repeated doses of castor-oil a great number of stones were
brought away, and all were supposed to have passed safely through.
At the end of six days, however, he sent for the house-surgeon again,
saying that there was a large stone at the lower end of the bowel, and
he could not pass it. On the introduction of the finger, several stones
with sharp jagged edges could be distinctly felt impacted in faecal
matter, and the mass appeared to be so large that it seemed impas-
sible without laceration. Whilst an enema was being prepared for
him, he suddenly passed a large mass, 8§ inches in circumference, and
containing seventy-two stones, and many small pieces of brick, &c.,
the whole weighing nearly 7 ounces. There was no laceration. His
bodily health improved after this, but his mind remained unsettled.
It was imagined and hoped that this unsuccessful effort, with its pain-
ful instruction, would have been his last attempt, but it was not so.
He continued with maniacal obstinacy to resist all food, and he was
obliged to be fed frequently by the stomach-pump with good beef-tea
and wine. On the 11th of August he made another fearful attempt
to burn himself to death. He was assisting the attendant in cleaning
the galleries, with several other patients about him, when, as if on a
sudden impulse, he ran and threw himself into the fire under the bath.
He burnt his chest a good deal and the cartilages of his ribs; and for
a long while he refused to take any medicine, or to have any applica-
tion to the burn. He has of late, however, been gradually more
yielding, and is now very much better, and recovered entirely from the
injury; he will occasionally talk with some degree of cheerfulness, and
seems apparently struggling against an almost irresistible impulse.
Though this is a very aggravated case (the man literally having tried
every element, earth, air, fire, and water, to accomplish his end), it is
only one out of the number alluded to before."
This is a type of case met with in most asylums, public and
private. Considering the degree of indulgence and liberty extended
towards the insane in all well-conducted asylums, as well as the
cunning, ingenuity, and cleverness frequently manifested by such
patients, Ave are astonished that accidents of this kind do not more
frequently occur.
It appears from the " Sixth Report of the Somerset County Lunatic
Asylum for 1853," that " at the termination of 1852 the number of
patients remaining in the asylum were 342, being only an increase of
2 on the preceding year. In 1853, the admissions have been 69 males,
64 females, making a total of 133; of these 7 males and 12 females
were re-admissions. During the year there were discharged 33 males,
30 females; and died 28 males, 21 females ; total at the end of the
year, 363."
Dr. Boyd's report is full of interesting matter. The tables are
extremely valuable, and must, in their preparation, have entailed upon
him great labour. They are well worth the study of all engaged in
C 2
20
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
these abstruse inquiries. The analysis appended to the tabular
statements very much enhances their importance.
The last " Annual Report of the Medical Superintendent of the
Dorsetshire County Lunatic Asylum" contains a gratifying account
of the condition of that institution. It appears " there have been ad-
mitted during the year 3G patients, (19 males and 17 females) ; 14
patients have been discharged, (8 males and 6 females); and 7 have
died."
The report contains the usual statistical tables, which appear to be
carefully drawn up.
We have before us the " First Annual Report of the Joint Lunatic
Asylum for the Counties of Monmouth, Hereford, Brecon, Radnor,
and the City of Hereford." This asylum was built for 254 patients,
at a cost of 37,083?., including the purchase of a site and'all expenses,
at a cost of 146?. per head. The report says,—" With a probable
additional outlay of 1200?., which ought to be immediately under-
taken, they will have a building capable of receiving 30G patients, at
a cost of 125Z. per head."
The charge for the " maintenance was, from the opening of the
asylum to the 31st December, 1852, 10s. per head per week; since
that time it has been 8s. Gd. In consequence of the present high price
of provisions the charge must be again raised to 10s."
Dr. Allen presents us with the following statistics of the asylum:—
" A second year has now elapsed since the opening of this asylum
for the reception of the insane poor.
" At the close of the year 1852 there remained in the asylum 207
patients, viz., 88 males and 119 females. 93 persons have been ad-
mitted during the year 1853, 46 males and 47 females; of these 1
male and 1 female were criminal lunatics, admitted under the warrant
of the Secretary of State. There have been 6 re-admissions during
the year.
" The discharges during the year have amounted to 42, viz., 23
males and 19 females; of these 22 males and 18 females were recovered
or relieved, and 1 male and 1 female were discharged by the desire of
friends, but they were not improved.
" The deaths during the year have amounted to 24, viz. 10 males
and 14 females. The mortality, it will be observed, among the males
has decreased, while that of the females has considerably increased in
comparison with that of the previous year—one person died two days,
one three days, one eight days, one ten days, one fifteen days, and one
a month after admission. With two exceptions, all had well marked
symptoms of cerebral disease, which in the majority of cases was
verified by post-mortem examinations. The two exceptions were, one a
female, who on admission was suffering from acute [phthisis compli-
cated with intermittent mania, the other an idiotic girl, who died from
inflamed sore throat.
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
21
" There now remain in the asylum 234 patients, viz. 101 males and
133 females."
It appears from the last report of the " Littlemore Asylum for
1853," under the medical superintendence of Mr. William Ley, that—
" The number of patients resident, at the close of the year 1853,
was 28 more than at its opening. It had risen from 366 to 406, and
had again been reduced to 394. The admissions in the year (includ-
ing the readmission of three patients within twelve months of their
discharge, and eleven after longer periods,) were barely less than in
preceding years, being 107; they were in 1852, 109; the average
number of patients sent by their parishes in five years was 110 in
each. The recoveries (39 in number) were equal to those of the pre-
vious year ; and the mortality (namely, 34 deaths) was diminished."
The report contains the usual number of tables and a full detail of
the yearly expenditure of the asylum. The former we cannot transfer
to our pages, and the latter has only a local interest.
The " Report of the Gloucester County Lunatic Asylum for 1853"
contains little else than numerous tabular statements. Dr. "Williams
has made no special report; of course the statistical tables are drawn
up by himself, and for these he is entitled to credit. The following
information we extract from the report:—
Remaining in the house, Dec.
31, 1852
Admitted during the year ...
He-admitted
Chronic cases re-admitted
from Fairford
Total under treatment during]
the year
Discharged—
Recovered and gone ..
Out on trial
Relieved
Not relieved, removed by
friends
Died   ... ..
Total
Remaining in the house, Dec
31, 1853
1st Class. 2nd Class.
M.
16
F. i M. I F.
7 I 21
12
16
3rd Class.
115
56
10
M. F.
181
151
55
21
24
46
135
236
40
196
M.
139
65
14
218
63
155
F.
171
63
10
21
265
46
219
310
128
24'
21
483
55
1
10
3
40
109
374
Average number in the House each week in the year 355
Ditto attending Chapel (two Services) ... 289
Ditto daily employed   216
22
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
Total number admitted from opening of Institution in 1823   2871
Ditto discharged   ditto   2497
Ditto recovered  ditto    1454
Ditto relieved   ditto   183
Ditto removed or transferred   ditto   253
Ditto discharged, harmless or improper, ditto   73
Ditto died  ditto   533
Ditto remaining on the Books    375
Out on trial .   1
Remaining in the House, Dec. 31, 1853   370 "
According to the "Fortieth Report of the Staffordshire Lunatic
Asylum," under the medical superintendence of Mr. Wilkes, there
were, at the termination of the year 1852,—
" Four hundred patients in the asylum—viz., 212 males and 188
females. During the year 1853, 91 males and 81 females were ad-
mitted, making a total of 572 patients under treatment. Of these,
43 males and 53 females have been discharged recovered; 11 males and
8 females relieved or incurable; and 34 males and 24 females have
died; leaving on the 31st December, 399 patients in the house, of
whom 215 were males and 184 females.
" The average number of patients resident throughout the year
was 405.
" The admissions have slightly exceeded those of the previous year,
being respectively 172 and 166. Of these 107 may be termed recent
cases, the disorder being reported to have existed for various periods
not exceeding six months, whereas in the previous year only 87 were
of this class. Fifteen were stated to have been insane from 6 to 12
months, and 50 for much longer periods; consequently nearly the
whole of these must be regarded as chronic and incurable cases, and a
permanent burden to the rate-payers."
It appears from the " Report of the Physician of St. Luke's Hos-
pital for 1853," that, during the preceding year,—
"Fifty-eight male and 117 female patients have been admitted,
there having remained from the previous year 26 males and 63 females,
under treatment, making together 84 males and 180 females ; of these
37 men and 82 women have been discharged cured, 12 men and 28
women uncured, and 6 men and 8 women have died; 5 men and 12
women have been removed at the request of friends. The total number
therefore of patients discharged cured is 119, uncured 40, deaths 14;
giving a per centage of 68*79 cured, of 23'12 uncured, and of 8*09
deaths.
" The per centage of recoveries has been higher this year than in
any previous year, except those of 1842 (when it was 70-37) and 1851
(when it was 74'01)."
The physicians (Drs. Sutherland and Philp) report favourably of
the sanitary state of the hospital. They recommend to the governors
the establishment of a branch asylum, and propose that a farm should
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
23
be purchased in the neighbourhood of London, for the reception of
hoarders and convalescent patients. "VYe hope the governors will take
this excellent suggestion into immediate consideration. Eight cases
of recovery are referred to in which the insanity had existed for from
five to twelve years !
The " First Annual Report of the Medical Officers of the Norfolk
County Asylum" is evidently drawn up with great care by, we pre-
sume, the late resident physician, Dr. Foote, who was, we think, so
unfairly dismissed from the institution. The subjoined facts will illus-
trate the statistics of the asylum:—
" During the past 12 months, 83 patients have been admitted—viz.,
36 males and 47 females.
" On the 31st December, 1852, there were in the asylum 139 males
and 159 females; total, 298. The whole number under treatment
during the year has been 381; the average number daily resident,
304'91, or 139"6G males and 165*25 females.
" The number of deaths has been 36, or 19 males and 17 females;
and the number of recoveries 38, or 16 males and 22 females ; and the
number discharged, not cured, has been 6—viz., 2 males and 4 females."
The " Report of the Lunatic Asylum at Rainhill for 1853" contains
no extractable matter likely to prove interesting to our readers, with
the exception of the subjoined table:—
ADMISSIONS AND DISCHARGES DURING THE TEAR 1853.
Remaining in the Asylum, Jan. 1,
1853   ;..
Admitted daring the year
Discharged recovered
Ditto improved
Ditto unimproved
Escaped
Died
Remaining in the Asylum, Jan. 1,
1854
Per centage of recoveries on the
numbers under treatment
Per centage of deaths on the num-
bers under treatment
Per centage of recoveries on admis-
sions during the year
Average number resident during
the year
M.
170
75
29
1
1
2
31
F.
204
70
23
1
4
1
28
Total.
375
145
52
2
5
3
59
M.
245
64
181
F.
274
57
217
Having briefly analyzed the reports of the English asylums, we now
proceed to consider the Scotch institutions for the insane. The
24
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
" Fortieth Annual Report of the Glasgow Royal Lunatic Asylum for
1853," under the able management of Dr. Mackintosh, the resident
physician, is of peculiar interest. In the preliminary portion of the
report, Dr. Mackintosh refers to the remarkable increase of cases of
lunacy in the west of Scotland, by which all the accommodation, good,
bad, and indifferent, has been called into requisition. It appears
that—
" The number of patients admitted during the year was 319, being
53 more than last year. And the increase Avould have been greater
had it not been found necessary to cease admitting patients for the
reason already specified—viz., the want of room. So great appears to
be the increase of lunacy in this part of the country, that though a
very great number of patients have been taken to parochial receptacles
whenever the parish was of sufficient population to admit of having a
poor's house, the numbers in this asylum have always, more or less,
tended to increase."
When attempting to account for this increase of cases of insanity,
Dr. Mackintosh observes,—
" The more immediate cause of the increase of lunacy is to be sought
for rather in the social condition of the time in which we live. Ours
is a time of great mental activity and excitement. Men's minds are
constantly on the stretch. Nor is this state of things confined to the
higher and more opulent classes of society. Among the great mass of
the labouring population during the past year, there has been much
commotion and excitement, manifesting itself particularly in the shape
of ' strikes,' and the like. There has been, if not war, at least rumours
of war. In the increase of population, and the excitement of the
times, in the varied mental emotions to which passing events have
given birth, and probably to the increase of intemperance, do we look
for the more immediate cause of the increase of lunacy which has cha-
racterized the past and some of the preceding years.''
According to the statistics of the asylum, it appears that—
" The cases of mania exceed those of monomania, including melan-
cholia ; that the number of males exceeds that of females; and that
the ratio of melancholia to mania is much higher in females than in
males."
The number of married and unmarried patients were nearly equal.
The married and widowed together considerably exceed the number of
those unmarried. The ages of the patients—
" Range between 20 and 90. There were none under 20 years of
age. Between the ages of 30 and 50, or in the prime of life, it is found
that there were by far the greatest number of patients."
It appears that the cases of insanity from intemperance were in a
ratio of 1 to 5 in the whole number of patients admitted. Hereditary
predisposition appears to have been a fruitful cause of insanity. It is
observed that—
" It sometimes happens that two, three, or even four members of the
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
25
same family are confined in asylums at the same' time; and there are
some families who have at least one member constantly in confinement.
From the unwillingness which the friends of patients manifest to reveal
the circumstance of the previous existence of insanity in the family,
whether in the direct line or in lateral branches, the above can only
be considered as an approximate estimate of the numbers of those in
whom the malady is hereditary."
Dr. Mackintosh says that—
" In those admitted during the past year, we find that the physical
causes very much exceed both the moral and mental ones combined,
a result which does not coincide with the speculations of many eminent
men on this subject, and which may, according to M. Gruislain, arise
from insufficiency and incorrectness of investigation, or the want of
close personal intimacy with patients. As to the latter circumstance,
it is to be remarked, that a very great number are either unable or
unwilling to give correct information on the subject, and that the
information which many communicate is found to be manifestly and
totally at variance with the truth. As to the insufficiency of investi-
gation which is supposed to be inevitable, in the inquiries of physicians
connected with large public institutions, this may be true to a certain
extent, as regards the minute psychological analysis, which is presumed
to be necessary to the discovery of the moral causes, by which, in
many cases, the disease has been produced."
This physician concludes, from the table recording the occupations of
those who were admitted, that one occupation does not predispose
more than another to insanit}'". He says, " The active or sedentary, the
mental or physical nature of the occupation does not seem to exer-
cise any particular influence in the production of mental disorder."
One hundred and sixteen patients were discharged as cured. Out
of this number—
" Thirty-eight males and 57 females were cases of mania; 3 males
and 16 females were cases of monomania; and one male and one
female were cases of dementia;—in all 42 males and 7f females.
" Of the whole, 50 or about one-half were less than a month ill
previous to admission, showing what all statistics prove, that recovery
is most likely to occur if the patient is put early under treatment; that
the probability of recovery becomes less and less according to the
length of time during which the patient has been ill previous to
admission till all reasonable hope disappears."
When speaking of the social treatment of the insane, Dr. Mackintosh
makes some sensible remarks :—
" To many who are convalescent, the restraint of an asylum be-
comes irksome in the extreme; but when there is a large number
freely associating with one another, and meeting daily—in the library,
billiard-room, or drawing-room, in the bowling-green, and in the
grounds of the asylum—friendships are formed and feelings are excited
of a wholesome and salutary kind; so much so, indeed, that not
unfrequently, however strange it may appear, it happens that some
£& BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE..
leave the asylum with feelings rather of regret than pleasure. And
though such feelings are considerably modified by return to the active
business of life, they delight to revisit and correspond with their less
happy friends in affliction."
We regret that the pressure of other matter upon our space
deprives us of the pleasure of quoting more at length from this
excellent and interesting document. This asylum, we can report from
personal examination, is in capital order, and reflects great credit upon
the talented physician who presides over it. Dr. Skae's " Report of
the Royal Edinburgh Asylum for 1853" is, like the preceding one,
replete with valuable and interesting matter.
The subjoined table gives the general statistics of the year:—
Number of inmates at the close of 1852..,
Admitted during the year 1853  ,
Total number under treatment ...
M. F. T.
Discharged...79 78 = 157
Of whom were cured
M. P. T.
58 50 = 108
uncured... 21 28= 49
Died
36 41= 77
Total number at the close of 1853 ...
Males.
275
103
378
115
263
I Females.
268
133
401
119
282
Total.
543
236
779
234
545
Average number daily resident during the year 1853.
Males. I Females. I Total.
273 I 280 I 553
When speaking of the causes of insanity, Dr. Skae remarks :—
" Of the males, two were caused by imprisonment; in the one, the
disease was suddenly developed by the shock experienced at being im-
prisoned on a charge of theft, of which the lad continued to protest
his entire innocence; and, in the other, the insanity seemed to have
developed itself under the peculiarities of prison discipline acting upon
a mind naturally weak. In another, the terrors incident to having been
left alone in a house with the dead body of his master; and in another
the anxiety, and fatigue, and grief of nursing a young gentleman who
died, appear to have operated in the development of the malady. Two
of the young men had been abroad; the one in America, the other in
Australia; and in both the novelty, excitement, and mode of living,,
are supposed to have been the principal causes of the insanity. Of
the females, three became insane as the sequence of early marriages,
for the anxieties and responsibilities of which they were incapacitated,
partly by natural deficiency, and partly from deficient education.
Three were servants, brought up in the innocence and seclusion of
pious homes in the remote north, and suddenly exposed to the worry,
and exactions, and temptations attendant upon service in metropolitan
houses."
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
27
We quote in extenso Dr. Skae's account of the post mortem examina-
tions made in 61 cases :—
" Of those examined, 3 had been cases of acute, 2 chronic, and 1
periodic mania, 23 dementia, 3 dementia with epilepsy, 1 mania with
epilepsy, 1 melancholia, 1 moral insanity, 1 delirium tremens, 11 mono-
mania, 12 general paralysis, 2 congenital imbecility.
" Calvarium was of unusual thickness in 32 cases: 1 of chronic
mania, 1 of acute dementia, 13 of dementia, 1 of dementia with
epilepsy, 5 of general paralysis, 8 of monomania, 1 of moral insanity,
and 2 of congenital imbecility.
" Calvarium was thinner than usual in 13 cases: 3 of acute mania,
1 of chronic mania, 1 of melancholia, 3 of dementia, 2 of monomania,
and 3 of general paralysis.
" Diploe was absent in 14 cases: 1 of acute mania, 1 of acute de-
mentia, 6 of dementia, 3 of monomania, 1 of moral insanity, 1 of
general paralysis, 1 of congenital imbecility.
" Elongation of anterior clinoid process on right side was observed
in one case of mania with epilepsy.
" atheromatous deposit in arteries of brain was found to a great
extent in one case of general paralysis.
" Increased thickness of dura mater was found in 18 cases: 1 of
acute mania, 1 of moral insanity, 4 of dementia, 2 of dementia with
epilepsy, 3 of monomania, 6 of general paralysis, and 1 of congenital
imbecility.
" Thinness of dura mater was noticed in 5 cases: 3 of dementia, 1
of monomania, and 1 of general paralysis.
" Ossifie deposit in falx cerebri existed in 2 cases: 1 of dementia,
and 1 of monomania.
" Adhesion of dura mater to calvarium existed in 17 cases: 3 of
acute mania, 1 of chronic mania, 1 of melancholia, 3 of dementia, 1 of
dementia with epilepsy, 5 of monomania, 1 of moral insanity, 1 of
general paralysis, and 1 of congenital imbecility.
" Opacity and thickening of arachnoid was found in 39 cases : 2 of
acute mania, 1 of periodic mania, 1 of chronic mania, 1 of acute de-
mentia, 9 of dementia, 1 of dementia with epilepsy, 1 of melancholia,
7 of monomania, 2 of moral insanity, 12 of general paralysis, and 2 of
congenital imbecility.
" Crystalline-like deposit over general surface of arachnoid was
noticed in two cases : 1 of dementia, and 1 of general paralysis.
" Congestion of membranes was noticed in 19 cases: 2 of -acute
mania, 1 of periodic mania, 1 of chronic mania, 7 of dementia, 1 of de-
mentia with epilepsy, 2 of monomania, 4 of general paralysis, and 1 of
congenital imbecility.
"Adhesion of membranes to cortical substance was found in 10
of general paralysis.
" Serous effusion into sac of arachnoid existed in 53 cases: 3 of
acute mania, 1 of periodic mania, 1 of chronic mania, 1 of acute de-
mentia, 18 of dementia, 2 of dementia with epilepsy, 1 of mania with
epilepsy, 11. of monomania, 2 of moral insanity, 11 of general paralysis,
and 2 of congenital imbecility.
28
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
" Sub-arachnoid serous effusion was found in 47 cases : 3 of acute
mania, 2 of chronic mania, 1 of periodic mania, 1 of acute dementia,
17 of dementia, 2 of dementia with epilepsy, 10 of monomania, 2 of
moral insanity, and 9 of general paralysis.
" Sero-sanguinolent effusion into sac of arachnoid was found in 5
cases : 1 of chronic mania, 2 of dementia, 1 of dementia with epilepsy,
and 1 of general paralysis.
" Sub-arachnoid sero-sanguinolent effusion occurred in 2 cases : 1 of
mania with epilepsy, and one of dementia.
" The convolutions of cerebrum were noticed to be remarkably
diminished in size in 4 cases : 1 of dementia, 1 of epilepsy with dementia,
1 of general paralysis, and 1 of congenital imbecility.
" Wasting of optic nerves and commissure occurred in one case of
general paralysis.
" Paleness of the grey- matter was noticed in 24 cases : 1 of acute
mania, 1 of periodic mania, 1 of melancholia, 13 of dementia, 3 of
monomania, 1 of moral insanity, 3 of general paralysis, and 1 of con-
genital imbecility.
" Grey matter was of a dark tint in 10 cases: 1 of mania with
epilepsy, 1 of dementia, 2 of monomania, 0 of general paralysis.
" Grey matter of a violaceous tinge in 3 cases : 1 of chronic mania,
and 2 of general paralysis.
" Grey matter was softened in 31 cases: 1 of acute mania, 2 of
chronic mania, 1 of acute dementia, 10 of dementia, 5 of monomania,
1 of moral insanity, and 11 of general paralysis.
" White matter was softened in 1G cases: 7 of dementia, 1 of de-
mentia with epilepsy, 5 of monomania, 3 of general paralysis.
Serous effusion into lateral ventricles was found in 37 cases : 2 of
acute mania, 1 of chronic mania, 1 of melancholia, 11 of dementia, 2
of dementia with epilepsy, G of monomania, 2 of moral insanity, 11 of
general paralysis, and 1 of congenital imbecility.
" Sero-sanguinolent effusion into lateral ventricles occurred in 2
cases : 1 of acute mania, and 1 of mania with epilepsy.
" Foramen of Monro unusually large in 15 cases : 1 of acute mania,
1 of chronic mania, 3 of dementia, 1 of dementia with epilepsy, 4 of
monomania, 1 of moral insanity, 3 of general paralysis, and 1 of con-
genital imbecility.
" Crystalline-like deposit in membrane of lateral ventricles was
found in 8 cases : 1 of acute mania, 1 of chronic mania, and G of
general paralysis.
" Cystic bodies in choroid plexuses occurred in 27 cases: 2 of acute
mania, 1 of chronic mania, 1 of periodic mania, 8 of dementia, 1 of
epilepsy with dementia, 1 of acute dementia, G of monomania, and
7 of general paralysis.
" Disorganisation of the right corpus striatum was found in a case
of monomania.
" Pineal body was unusually large in 4 cases : 1 of chronic mania, 1
of mania with epilepsy, 2 of monomania.
" Absence of grit in pineal body in 19 cases : 1 of acute mania,
1 of chronic mania, 1 of mania with epilepsy, 1 of acute dementia, G of
BRITISH ASYLUMS FOR THE INSANE.
20
dementia, 1 of melancholia, 2 of monomania, 1 of moral insanity, 4 of
general paralysis, and 1 of congenital imbecility."
On the question of medical treatment Dr. Skae says:—
" In regard to treatment, I may repeat in general terms, that I
have continued to derive the greatest amount of benefit in acute
and recent cases, from the employment of the prolonged warm bath,
accompanied by cold affusion on the head, in some instances the
effects being almost sudden, and in not a few very rapid and per-
manent. The judicious use of opiates in another class of cases,
and the removal, by appropriate remedies, of local affections in
others, are the next sources from which the greatest amount of
benefit from medical treatment has been derived. In a very large
class of cases brought to the institution, the disease has supervened
in persons of a scrofulous and feeble constitution, upon habits of
over-exertion, combined often with insufficient nourishment, poverty,
and anxiety; and in these a generous diet and a moderate allowance
of stimulants have been found of great efficacy in the removal of the
disease. The beneficial influence of a liberal diet, and a liberal
allowance of malt liqours in the treatment of the insane, has been
fully proved by the statistics of the various asylums throughout the
empire, the proportion of recoveries bearing a very remarkable
relation to the dietary and the amount of malt liquor comprised
in it.
" In the treatment 'of patients, on the other hand, whose disease
has been brought on by the excessive use of whisky, wine, opium, and
other stimulants, I have not found in those cases where it has been
adopted, any bad effect to result from the sudden and total cessation
of their use, but, on the contrary, it appears to be the. rp'jthod
ultimately most agreeable to the patients themselves, the complete
suspension of the stimulants being followed within a very short time
by a complete absence of the craving for them."
The " Thirty-fourth Annual Report of the Dundee Ro3ral Asylum
for 1854" contains the following statistics :—
" At the date of the last report there were 201 patients remaining
in the asylum: there have been 41 admissions since—making the
total number of patients during the year 242. Of these 25 have been
■discharged—19 of them cured, 4 improved, and 2 by desire; and 12
have been removed by death. The total number of patients, therefore,
in the institution is 205. The daily average number throughout the
year has been 204."
We are compelled for want of space to postpone our prepared an-
alyses of the Perth, Kilkenny, Belfast, and North Wales Asylums.
They all contain valuable statistical and general information to
which we shall more particularly refer when analyzing their contents.
Dr. Boisrogon's excellent " Report of the Cornwall County Lunatic
.Asylum" will also be noticed in our next number.
