American Institutions for the Insane
=====================================

1. In July, 1852, Dr Andrew McFarland resigned the officc of Superinten-
dent of the New Hampshire Asylum for the Insane, having, in the language of
the Trustees of the Institution, " with signal ability and devotion discharged
the duties for about seven years." He was succeeded by Dr John E. Tyler,
in whom the Trustees believe that they have "a judicious, efficient, and devoted
Superintendent."
The report of Dr Tyler for the fiscal year ending on the 31st of May, 1853,
seven months after he became connected with the asylum, is limited to about
half a dozen pages, and contains but little matter of general interest to medical
men. It is a very prudent and sensible production for a beginner.
Patients in the Asylum Mav 31, 1852
Admitted in the course of the year
Whole number ....
Discharged, including deaths
Remaining May 31, 1853
Of those discharged, there were curcd
Died
Men.
G3
G8
131
61
70
41
5
Women.
55
64
119
46
73
22
3
Total.
118
132
250
107
143
03
Dr Tvler complains that the number of patients is so great as to prevent a
proper classification of them.
* 1. Of the New Hampshire State Asylum, for 1852 and 1853.
2. Of the McLean Asylum, for 1853 and 1854.
3. Of the Retreat at Hartford, for 1853.
4. Of the Asylum for the Poor, Blackwell's Island, N. Y. City, for 1853.
5. Of the Indiana State Hospital, for 1853 and 1854.
6. Of the Illinois State Hospital, biennial for 1853-54.
7. Of the Missouri State Asylum, biennial for 1852-53.
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS TOR THE INSANE.
563
The report for the year ending May 31, 1854, is somewhat more extended
than its immediate predecessor, but is in a great measure confined in its sub-
jects to the materiel of the establishment, and to topics already familiar to our
readers. The doctor complains of the pressure from without of patients, and
proposes that an additional wing and a building for the violent shall be erected.
" The house is now lighted with gas, and we not only find its use more conve-
nient, comfortable, "and cleanly than oil, but its brilliant light a curative means
in making our previously half-lighted halls chcerful and pleasant." He says
nothing of the comparative expense.
Men. "Women. Total.
Patients, May 31,1853  70 73 143
Admitted in course of the year . . .72 09 141
Whole number . . " . . . . 142 142 284
Discharged, including deaths ... 67 56 123
Remaining, May 31,1S54 .... 77* 84* 161
Of those discharged, there were cured 34 29 63
Died 7 7 14
The whole number of patients cxcccds that of any previous year by 64.
"During the whole year our household has enjoyed remarkable physical
health. We have been entirely exempt from epidemics of all sorts, and acute
disease has been almost unknown. Cleanliness, regularity of life, and a most
healthful location have been the chief causes of this desirable state of things.
The deaths which have occurred, with a single exception, were of those who
for a long time had been considered incurably insane, and who at last were
literally worn out by the continued and unremitting force of their malady."
Patients admitted from 1843 to 31st May, 1854 . . . 1199
Cured     497
Died 106
2. Dr Bell, of the McLean Asylum, has written but a few reports of any
length, and in the two which are now before us he is even unusually brief, both
of them occupying but about a dozen pages. One reason of this brevity is
mentioned in the extract which we subjoin, merely remarking that, although it
may be good and sufficient for the district from which the McLean Asylum is
principally supplied with patients, it is hardly equally so for many other sec-
tions of the country. ..... „ , .
" There was a period in the liistory of the institutions for the insane of this
country when their annual reports were looked for with an interest natural to
a new topic, and when so many communities were about engaging in the great
work of providing for the insane, that all information which could throw light
upon the path of duty was eagerly and gratefully accepted. That time is now
passed, for the demand has been essentially met, and good taste and propriety
are no longer in antagonism with philanthropy, as to spreading to the world the
often painful incidents connected with a sad disease and its victims. It would
ever be an easy service to furnish a prolonged and interesting narrative of the
cases of an asylum, were the motives now allow*able which formerly justified
such communications Avitli the public."
Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the commencement of 1853   ... 201
Admitted in course of the year oi 53 114
Whole number  > 315
Discharged, recovered  30 28 58
Died   7 10 17
Remaining at the close of 1853   ... 195
"Trom a minute, kept during a portion of the year," says the report, " it is
* According to the previous figures, these should be 75 and 86.
564 AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
probable that we have been obliged to refuse three times as many patients as
have been received."
It will be remembered by those who have read our previous notices that Mr.
Appleton gave a large fund to this institution, for the purpose of constructing
apartments specially intended for persons able and willing to pay a liberal
remuneration for their accommodations. The object of the donor has been
partially accomplished. The " Appleton ward" for men lias been completed,
and in reference to its operation we find the subjoined remarks :—
"The patients themselves, in these rich and spacious quarters, can draw no
unfavourable comparisons with their situations at home, and arc spared one
pang in the distress incident to their disease. The only drawback suggested
or anticipated—that the patients who did not enjoy the new accommodations
might indulge a certain sentiment of jealousy towards their more fortunate
associates—has never been manifested."
Report for 1854 :—
Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the commencement of the year . 9*1 101 195
Admitted in course of the year ... 70 50 120
Whole number 1G J. 151 315
Discharged, including deaths . . . . G7 53 120
Remaining at the closc of the year ... 97 98 195
Of those discharged, there were cured 32 27 59
Died 5 11 16
The McLean Asylum was opened on the Gth of October, 1S28. It was under
the superintendence of Dr Wyman about sixteen years, and of his successor,
Dr Lee, two years. Dr Bell has been the incumbent of the office since the
commencement of 1837, a period of eighteen years. We believe this to be the
longest term of service of any officer who has occupied an office of the kind in
this country.
Patients admitted under Dr Wyman . . 1122
Dr Lee . . . 189
Dr Bell . . . 2572
Whole number admitted . . . .3783
Discharged, including deaths .... 3588
Cured 1802
Died   322
" I cannot but believe," remarks Dr Bell, " that the time is near when the
necessity of dividing this asylum, and establishing a department for one sex
elsewhere in the vicinity, will result in action. The financial experience of
this establishment, for many years past, would seem to demonstrate that the
first outlay for such an addition to the means of treatment of those classes of
the insane who arc now mainly received here, would be all the demand needful
upon the philanthropic and liberal of our community."
3. The last report from the Be treat at Hartford, Connecticut, which wc
passed under review, was issued during the absence of the Superintendent, Dr.
Butleb, upon a European tour. The one now before us bears his signature.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Retreat, March 31,1853 80 90 170
Admitted in the course of the fiscal year . 74 103 177
Whole number   154 193 347
Discharged, including deaths ... 05 96 161
Remaining March 31, 1854 .... 89 97 186
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 22 42 64
Died .   13 9 22
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOE THE INSANE.
565
The Retreat was opened oil the 1st of April, 1824. For ten years it was
under the superintendence of Dr Todd, six years under Dr Fuller, and three
years under Dr Brigham. At the date of this report it has been eleven years
under Dr Butler.
Patients admitted in course of the term of Dr Todd . . 520
Thus the deaths of cases, during thirty years, was 10*05 per cent. But, upon
reference to another table, we find that the whole number of persons who made
up these 2653 cases was but 1798. Of these 1798 persons, 218 were admitted
twice each, 65 three times, 17 four times, 10 five times, 1 six tunes, 1 seven
times, and 1 nine times. Of 1798 persons, 265 died, which is 14*73 per cent.
The proportion of cures, upon admissions, was 50*05 per cent. But the same
person may, in many instances, have been cured two or three times, and, in
some instances, four, five, or six times. The report throws no light, even by
comparison of tables, upon the number of persons cured. This is an imperfec-
tion which, as wc have heretofore remarked, pervades nearly all the American
statistics of insanity.
One further illustration, which we overlooked until the last preceding sen-
tence was written. Dr Butler states that the per centagc of deaths on the
whole number discharged since the opening of the institution is 10*82. This
is correct, if calculated upon the number of cases. But what is the result, if
otherwise regarded? Of 1798 persons admitted, 186 remained in the asylum.
Hence, 1612 have been discharged. Of 1612 persons discharged, 265 died,
equal to 16*43 per cent.
Of 1203 cases admitted since March 3 L, 1845, the age, at the time of first
attack, was between 20 and 30 years in 402; between 30 and 40 years in 240.
The excess of the former is equal to 66 per cent.
The causes of death in 196 cases, which have occurred since the 31st of
March, 1841, were as follows : Exhaustion 36, dysentery 21, general debility
19, phthisis 14, apoplexy 12, general paralysis 12, paralysis 10, erysipelas 10,
disease of the brain 9, old age 7, marasmus 7, suicide 7, " disease of lung " 5,
epilepsy 4, inflammation of bowels 4, fever 3, internal haemorrhage 3, chronic
diarrhoea 3, "injury" 2, disease of heart 2, psoas abscess ], inflammation of
liver 1, disease of uterus 1, acute diarrhoea 1, dropsy 1, cancer 1.
After stating that " neither order of court, certificate of physicians, nor
written application of friends or relatives " is required for getting a patient into
the Retreat, and that " the admission rests solely upon the judgment of the
superintendent," Dr Butler very properly appeals to the Board of Directors to
remove the responsibility from him, and place it upon the friends and the
attending physician of the patient. Where arc the Connecticut lawyers, judges,
and legislators, that such a weak point in the barriers of the rights and liber-
ties of the people has thus long remained unguarded ?
The remarks of Dr Butler upon the condition in which patients come to the
Retreat close with this passage, which we earnestly commend to the notice and
the memory of every physician in general practice: " Others, worse than all,
have been brought here by the ill-j udged and most pernicious means of decep-
tion, the effect of which has been, in every case that ever came under my
observation, both annoying to ourselves and detrimental to the poor sufferer.
cc
Dr Fuller. . 481
Dr Brigham . 246
Dr Butler . 1388
Whole number admitted .
Cured .
Died .
Men. "Women. Total.
1266 1369 2635
1331
265
566
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS TOR THE INSANE.
' How can I believe tou, sir,' said a gentleman to me, while trying to soothe
him, ' when these, my FRIENDS, have lied io me every mile of my icay here (" "
No apology is required for making the subjoined extract, albeit somewhat
longer than we arc wont.
" During the six months' vacation which was so kindly granted me by the
liberality of your Board, I had the pleasure of being able to visit many of the
most prominent lunatic hospitals in England and Scotland. I embrace this
opportunity to express my grateful sense of the cordiality and courtesy with
which, as the superintendent of one of the oldest lunatic hospitals in the United
States, I was everywhere received, and of the frankness auu promptitude with
which the details of the different institutions were shown. Every door was
opened, and every department freely exhibited, evidently giving me the crcdit
of coming to learn the advantages of their institutions, and not to seek for
demerits or matters of cavil.
" My reception at some of them was more like that due to an old friend than
to a stranger, and was a pleasant recognition of that kindly community of
feeling which springs up in every liberalized mind towards those who arc fellow-
labourers in the same great commonwealth of philanthropy.
" It is evident that, Irom a variety of causes, a spirit ot improvement is per-
vading these hospitals. A great impetus has of late years been given to this
department of human effort, and the most beneficial and gratifying results have
been attained.
" It is not expedient, in the narrow limits to which I desire to restrict this
report, to go into a consideration of these causcs. It is sufficient for my pur-
pose to say that, notwithstanding a few years sincc our leading institutions
were not surpassed by the best of theirs, it is very evident to me that we have
now none which will compare with some of those lately crcctcd there. In the
older hospitals, there was manifest improvement in the buildings where ori-
ginal defects could never be wholly remedied. In the new institutions, those
erected within a very few years, or just now going into operation, I found a
beauty of structure, witli a thoroughness and perfection of arrangement, which
I have never seen equalled elsewhere. Among these it will not, I hope, be
invidious to mention the asylums at Prcstwich and Chcadlc, near Manchester; at
Micklcovcr, near Derby; at Clifton, near York; and the new asylum at Stafford.
" It was evident that in these new asylums 110 pains nor needful expense
had been spared to obtain, in the first place, the most unexceptionable plans.
The highest authorities were consulted, and their conclusions referred to the
scrutiny of other practical men; the errors of prcccding structures were avoided,
and every improvement as readily adopted, with the single desire to obtain the
best. It is evident that, generally, each succeeding structure contains im-
provements upon its predecessors. Once adopted, the plans have been carried
out without that curtailment and distortion which sometimes, in this country,
has produced such unfortunate results. In sonic instances, it is evident that
undue expenditure has been incurred to produce external effect; but in the
internal arrangements, especially, it is clear that, while in county asylums
everything is plain and simple and unpretending, that is deemed in all the best
and wisest economy which, 111 the long run, shall best effect the desired object.
" The chief points of excellence arc extensive, well laid out, and carcfully-
planted airing-courts and pleasure-grounds, and sufficiency of cultivated land
for out-of-door employment; spacious, airy, and well ventilated apartments ;
the extensive application of steam to every available purpose, cooking, pump-
ing, heating, ventilating, &c., and open fire-places in every admissible room.
The most important of all arc the extensive arrangements made for the manual
employment of the inmates both within doors and without. There arc work-
shops lor the different trades, in some of which these trades had been success-
fully taught, and in many the amount of work performed showed that the shops
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
5G7
were sources of profit to the institution, as well as of beneficial employment to
the patients.
" Another feature which struck me most pleasantly was the construction, in
several hospitals, of a large and handsome room, especially for the social
gatherings and amusements of the patients. My attendance at some of these
festival occasions is among the most pleasant reminiscences of my visit. A
argc amount of profitable out-of-door labour is insisted upon in many, and the
amount accomplished in some instances is highly creditable. It is very evi-
dent that, if the American institutions are to maintain the comparatively high
rank to which they have justly heretofore had claim, a more liberal expendi-
ture than has been adopted in most, in regard to occupation both of body and
mind, amusement, &c., must be adopted."
4. The movement of the population of the Lunatic Asylum for the Poor of
New York City, for 1853, as given iu the report by Dr Ranney, was as follows
__ , - . t Men- Women. Total.
Number of patients, January 1st . . . 226 301 527
Admitted in course of the year . . . 226 261 437
Whole number    452 562 1014
Discharged, including deaths .... 220 252 472
Remaining, Dec. 31, 1853 .... 232 310 542
Of those discharged, there were cured  ... 271
Died   56 59 115
Of those cured 14 were cases of delirium tremens, 2 of febrile delirium, and
7 were discharged, " recovered," twice each, in course of the year. These
being subtracted, the number of cures is 218.
"The ratio of recoveries," remarks Dr Hanney, "is a little more than 50
per cent. The proportion must depend much upon the length of time the dis-
ease has existed previous to admission. Usually the indigent are placed in an
asylum earlier than the wealthy. For this, as well as other reasons, the per-
centage of recoveries in a hospital of this character should be larger than in
institutions devoted to the use of the higher classes, provided the means
for effective treatment be furnished."
Causes of death:—Consumption 45, chronic diarrhoea 14, paralysie generale
13 congestion of the brain 7, marasmus 6, typhus fever 4, typbo-mania 4.
' . P „ i o J i. o • i  ct —;i .1  •
ptysis
" It will be seen that consumption is the most common (cause of death).
The prominent symptoms of this disease are usually absent where insanity
exists. The patient will frequently walk until near the day of his death, and, if
there be any cough, it is often so slight as to escape observation." '
Of 3160 patients, who have been received since January, 1, 1847, no less
than 23S1 were foreigners, and but 779 native Americans. The largest number
of natives received in any year was 149, in 1847; the smallest number, 94, in
1853. Of foreigners, the number has increased from 280 in 1847, to 393 in
1853. This is accounted for by the increase of immigration. The leading-
numbers in the table of nativity for 1853 are as follows:—Ireland 241, Gei>
many 94, England 19, Scotland 10, Switzerland 5, Prance 4.
" Very few of the indigent insane of this city are sent to the State Asylum
at Utica, and none to Flushing, Hudson, or the Bloomingdale Asylum. Either
the ratio of insane is very much less among the natives, or they are kept at
their homes. Probably the first supposition is true, and this may arise in part
from peculiar causes incident to emigration, and in part from the shipment of
the insane from Europe during a lucid interval."
Dr Itanncy, as he intimates, has had uncommon advantages for studying
568 AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
chronic dementia, and he asserts his belief that "by constant training, very
many who, if left to themselves, fall into the most miserable condition, would
become valuable aids in the asylum, even if perfect recovery did not follow.
... If there were an important organic lesion of the brain, 110 great im-
provement could be expected; but, from my examination of this organ in a
great number of cases, the proportion in which important lesions were found has
not been large. The of emblement of the mind depends, in many cases, upon the
loss of tone, from inaction. . . . After some acute disease has existed, as
mania, this organ becomes exhausted, i. e., loses its tone, and can only be restored
by nourishment and the proper mental stimulus."
These remarks remind us of the case of a man of more than ordinary intel-
lectual capacity, who was more than fifteen years a patient at Bloomingdale,
a large part of the time demented. Attacked with typhoid fever, and removed
to the New York Hospital, lie died. The late Dr Swett made a post-mortem
examination, and found in the brain no lesion of importance — absolutely
nothing whereby to explain the patient's long-continued mental incapacity.
5. Iu their report for 1853, the Commissioners of the Indiana Hospital for the
Insane refer to the resignation of Dr 11. J. Paterson, who had held the officc
of superintendent from the opening of the institution, and remark that " in his
departure lie carried with him not only the high esteem of every other officer and
attendant of the hospital, but, we trust, of every friend of the unfortunate
lunatic in the State." He left 011 the 1st of June, 1853, and was succeeded by
Dr James S. Athon.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the hospital, October 31, 1S52 . 81 78 159
Admitted in course of the year . . .74 82 15 G
Whole number 155 1G0 315
Discharged, including deaths . . .77 75 152
Remaining, October 31, 1853 . . .78 85 1G3
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 47 39 86
Died 7 7 14
" While portions of our country have suffered from disease, the Hospital for
the Insane lias escaped everything like an epidemic. This immunity from in-
termittents, remittents, and dysenteries, may be attributed to the favourable
location of the institution, and to the prompt and rigid enforcement of the
sanitary laws for the government of the establishment."
" Already over two hundred insane arc knocking at the door of the hospital
for admission, and cannot be received for want of room. The institution is
crowded to its utmost capacity." The erection of an additional wing is in
prospcct.
Two suicides, the first which have occurred in the hospital, took place in the
course of the year.
From the remarks by Dr Athon upon the medical treatment of the insane,
we make the following extract:—
" Emetics and purgatives arc useful in expelling vitiated matters from the
stomach and bowels. Conjoined with proper diet and exercise, they may be
made subservient in restoring the natural secretions of the alimentary canal.
To attempt to make a lasting and beneficial impression 011 the system by re-
peating these remedies beyond their aperient or gently evacuant effect is irra-
tional aud highly injurious to the patient. There arc too many cases brought
to this hospital, exhausted to mere skeletons by the use of the lancet, blisters,
and purgatives, to deny, for one moment, this position. By the administration
of tonics, and the use of a nutritious diet, a large proportion are restored to
physical health. These remarks arc made with the hope that our professional
brethren who may have charge of patients before sent to the hospital, will keep
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
509
in view that tlie hi/percynosis system can very rarely, if at all, do good in cases
of insanity."
"We now come to the report for 1854:—
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the hospital, October 31, 1853 . 78 85 163
Admitted in the course of the year ' . 83 8G 1G9
Whole number ...... 1G1 171 332
Discharged, including deaths . . . 88 84 172
Remaining, October, 31, 1854 ... 73 87 100
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 59 55 111
Died 5 8 13
Causes of death.—Typho-mania 3, general paralysis 2, maniacal exhaustion 2,
pulmonary consumption 2, scrofula 2, tabes mesenterica 1, erysipelas 1.
" Scarcely any other disease," remarks Dr Athon, " than what is consequent
to insanity, has had a place in our wards, although the adjacent country has
suffered much from summer and autumnal afflictions."
It is stated in the report of the commissioners that the great per-centage of
cures " is, in part, attributable to the selection of patients, receiving those
whose insanity is of the most recent date—not filling up the hospital with
chronic cases that arc hopelessly incurable."
Two festivals were enjoyed by the patients in the course of the year. On
May-day " a banquet was given, and the day celebrated with as much parade
as is usually manifested upon such an occasion;' and "the second annual
celebration, at the hospital, of American independence, was attended, like the
first, with the happiest results. Above a hundred patients participated in the
festivities of the occasion."
Men. Women. Total.
Patients admitted from "Nov. 1, 1849, to Oct.
31, 1854   372 3G7 739
Discharged, recovered . . . . . . 192 178 370
Died . . . . • •   ... 03
Religious excitement and anxieties is alleged as the cause of the mental
alienation in G1 cases, Millerism in 2, and " spiritual rappings" in 29.
" Millerism, in its day," says Dr Athon, " startled the minds of men and
turned them into religious bigots, and thcnce the transition was easy, in many
instances, to insanity. But the spiritual rapping mania eclipses Millerism, or
any other ism, in its agency to produce aberration of mind. The spiritualists
profess to commune with departed spirits, and through their omniscience learn
the condition of the dead, look into the future, and do other ridiculous things.
This delusion prevails, in some parts of the country, to a most unaccountable
extent, and has been prolific, beyond any other one cause, of insanity."
G. The reports from the Illinois State Hospital for the Insane arc biennial,
that which is about to occupy our attention being for the fiscal years ending on
the 30th of November, 1853 and 1854.
The former superintendent having left the institution, he was succeeded, in
June, 1854, by Dr Andiieav McFarland, for some years favourably known to
our readers as the principal officer of the State Asylum of New Hampshire.
The Trustees remark of him that their high expectations in regard to his supe-
rior qualifications for the office "have been fully realized."
Patients in the asylum, Dec. 1, 1852 . . 82
Admitted in the two years .... 205
Whole number ...... 347
Discharged, including deaths . . • .181
Remaining, Dec. 1, 1854  1GG
570
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
" As the hospital affords accommodation for the two sexes equally, and the
whole has been occupied the most of the time recently, the number of males
and females lias been nearly the same."
Of the patients discharged, there were cured . 114
Died 21
" The bodily health of the inmates of the hospital has generally been good.
No epidemic lias at any time prevailed, although during the past summer
(1854) the danger seemed somewhat imminent from the frequency of cases of
cholera in the vicinity. The instances of mortality have mainly occurred
among those exhausted by long-continued mental disease. The fact cannot be
Juestioncd that most forms of mental disease shorten the period of human life,
n the exceptions to the rule, in all "eases of high excitement, it will lie found
that lucid intervals occur which allow nature to recover itself before the point
of exhaustion is reached.
" Epilepsy, palsy, and consumption will annually claim a class of victims in
whose temperament certain predispositions exist. But the natural termina-
tion of mania, as it usually occurs, is in a form of disease which has eluded the
nomenclature of medical writers. It consists in tile failure, seriatim, of those
physical functions whose healthy performance depends upon a normal inner-
vation. [What functions do not require normal innervation for normal per-
formance ?] The hesitating step and a difficulty of uttcrancc arc among the
earliest indications that the Drain is losing its supremacy. Calorification fails;
the extremities become cold, and the individual is found hovering about the
registers or other sources of artificial heat. Soon the circulation becomes en-
feebled ; the facc assumes a swollen and stolid appearance; the extremities
swell and become purple, especially if in a dependent position. Digestion be-
comes involved, and emaciation quickly follows. The legs break out witli
ulcers which soon become the nucleus of extensive sphacelation, and death is
welcomed to close the scene. The individual usually sinks before all the stages
in this succession of physical decay have been taken. Scicnce has given no
name to this disease, whose aspect is familiar to all who treat the associated
insane. It is neither palsy, dropsy, nor marasmus, and yet it combines some-
thing of each."
Of the 406 patients who have been received at the institution since it was
opened, on the 3rd of November, 1851, only fort;/-six were natives of Illinois.
The others, so far as known, were immigrants from various States and coun-
tries, in the following proportions : New York 47, Kentucky 30, Pennsylvania
35, Ohio 25, Indiana 10, Tennessee 15, N. Carolina 13, Virginia 11, Vermont 7,
N. Hampshire 7, N. Jersey 7, Massachusetts 5, Maryland 5, Connecticut 4,
Maine 3, Delaware 3, Missouri 2, It. Island 1, Wisconsin 1, Georgia 1. Ger-
many 30, Ireland 25, England 12, Scotland 4, Prance 3, Sweden 1, Russia 1,
Poland 1.
Dr McFarland thinks that, considering the great proportion of foreigners
among the inhabitants of the State, the number of them in the hospital is small.
" The Germans," lie observes, " arc the best, as they arc the most numerous
of our foreign patients. They possess a healthy and elastic mental constitu-
tion ; tlicy arc docile and affectionate under treatment, and grateful when tlicv
recover."
We know that for many years there has been some discrepancy of opinion
among the superintending physicians of our institutions for the insane, in re-
gard to the utility of a committee, such as is mentioned in the subjoined ex-
tract ; and we rejoice that Dr M. has found it to work so favourably
" Another feature in the experience of the hospital for the past year, too
interesting and too important to be passed without notice, is the formation, on
the part of the ladies of Jacksonville, of a benevolent association, having for its
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
571
express object a regular and stated visit to the institution on the Saturday of
eacli week, by a committee assigned in rotation. This socicty, appropriately
styled c The Dix Association,' we regard as a conception of the most happy
kind, and its operations have been peculiarly promotive of the welfare and
happiness of the unfortunate persons for whose benefit it was instituted. "We
earnestly hope that the zeal and faith of the society may be sustained, fidly
believing that its formation is an important era in the history of the institu-
tion."
The original plan of the buildings of the hospital at Jacksonville consisted
of a central building and four wings, with accommodations for about four
hundred patients. But two of the wings have been erected. These furnish
apartments for but 1GS patients, and the hospital is so much crowded that
parlours arc being converted into dormitories, undoubtedly to the detriment of
the establishment. The question now is, whether the primary design shall be
carried out, or a new hospital established in another portion ot* the State. The
Association of Physicians to American Institutions lor the Insane have depre-
cated hospitals intended for more than 250 patients, yet Dr McParland advo-
cates the enlargement of that at Jacksonville, by the addition of the formerly
contemplated wings, and alleges the reasons therefore, expressing his belief that
the special circumstances render this institution an exception to the general
rule.
7. The second biennial report of the Trustees and Superintendent of the
Missouri State Lunatic Asylum is the first which has reached us from that
institution. We have no information in regard to the precise time at which
the establishment was opened, nor any detailed description of it. It appears
t hat it contains seventy-two rooms, each designed for one patient; that it is
being enlarged, so as to accommodatc about seventy more; and that it is under,
the superintendence of Dr T. It. II. Smith. During most of flie period em-
braced by this report it has been over-crowded with patients, the " usual
average" number having been "about one hundred;" and over seventy
applications for admission have been rejected.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Asylum, Nov. 29, 1S52 , . 31 2S G2
Admitted in course of two years . . .OS 55 123
Whole number ...... 102 83 1S5
Discharged, including deaths.... 49 42 91
Remaining, Nov. 27, 1854 .... 53 41 94
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 20 23 43
Died ... .... 22 1G 38
Causes of Death.—Epilepsy, 11; consumption, G ; chronic diarrhoea, 4;
typhoid fever, 4; " ulceration of bowels," 3; paralysis, 2; " disease of heart,5'
2; inflammation of bowels, 2; ascites, 1; accidental burn, 1; " abscesscs and
gangrenous ulcers at time of admission," 1; exhaustion, 1.
The general health ot our household has been very good, excepting durin0,
the past season (1854). Ihc intensely warm weather winch continued durin0*
the summer months, in connexion with the unparalleled drought, produced an
unusual amount of sickness among our patients. The citizens of Pulton
whose healthfulness, heretofore, has been proverbial throughout the State also
suffered greatly from dysentery. The prevailing disease with us was diarrhoea,
with a few cases of dysentery and typhoid fever. The attacks were generally
very violent in their character, and all of a typhoid type. The fatality, the
number of cases considered, could not be regarded otherwise than small.39
Dr Smith, in explaining the apparently, the really large mortality, says
'■ The patients received into this institution, when first opened, and until filled
to its entire capacity, with a few exceptions, were those of long standing, who
NO. XXXII. P p
572
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR TIIE INSANE.
had been accumulating for many years iu consequence of the want of provision
for their proper treatment. A large number of these were also labouring under
incurable diseases associated with their insanity." Such, or similar, has been
the cxpcricnce at a very considerable number of our institutions, and Dr Smith
is not the first who, at the opening of an asylum, has seen a large number of his
patients succumb within the first few months.
Of the cpileptics, " the majority died during convulsions, and the remainder
gradually sunk under the exhausting influence of repeated attacks." The
death from " accidcntal bum," was that of Theodore McGrcady, " an idiotic boy,
admitted in accordance with a special act of the last Legislature. . .
A few weeks before the accident, the weather becoming cold, and in consequencc
of the unfinished condition of our sfeam heating apparatus, wc were forced to
take all our patients from the halls into the stove-rooms in the centre building, to
prevent them from suffering. . . . Early in the morning of the day of this
sad occurrence, the attendant took Theodore into the stove-rooin first, and re-
turned for other patients, expecting to be absent only a minute or two. After
reaching the hall, he heard him crying, ran immediately to the room, and, upon
entering, to his great astonishment, found his clothes on fire. He made every
effort to extinguish it, but before it could be done the burn was very severe,
extending over his abdomen, his sides, between the lower extremities, the fore-
arms and hands. . . . He received every attention in our power, through
the day and night, but the constitutional irritation was so great that he died
the next morning, about twenty hours after receiving the burn. . . .
The manner in which our building is now heated (by steam) precludes the
possibility of another such accident."
Whole number of patients since opening of Asylum . . 193
Married 81, single 100, widows 9, widowers 3 193
Insanity commcnccd between 20 and 30 years of age in 81; between 30 and
40 in 51. Among the assigned causcs of the insanity of the patients are:—
Miasmatic fevers, 25 ; spiritual rappings, 4.
The moral treatment pursued at this asylum is similar to that of other
American institutions of the kind, and is already so fully understood as to
require no further description in this place. A chapel has been constructed,
and a library of 500 volumes collected by gratuitous contribution.
In his discussion of the causcs of mental disorders, Dr Smith makes the
following observations:—
" It has been a source of astonishment to many that insanity should prevail
to so great an extent in this highly-favoured land of ours, and seems to be
increasing even in a greater ratio than our population, and is, perhaps, of more
frequent occurrence in this than in most other countries of the world. The
general impression is that our happy form of government . . . would be
incompatible with its prevalence, at least to any great extent. It is true, the
elements which enter into the composition of our government, in the abstract,
seem well calculated to contribute to man's highest and best interests; yet the
freedom of thought and action possessed by every individual connected with
this highly-favoured state of things, the high degree of excitement incident to
the different pursuits of life; the spirit of emulation; the hopes, the fears, the
joys, the sorrows brought into exercise in quick succession—all tend, in a
striking manner, to disturb the equilibrium so essential to the healthy action
of the mental faculties; and by a repetition of the same excesses of fccliug»
this governing and protecting principle is lost, disease developed, and the mind
in ruins one of the sad and tearful results. Is not the conclusion, therefore,
justifiable, that our form of government, with the habits of our people, is calcu-
lated to increase rather than diminish the frequency of insanity, especially
when we reflect that the causcs referred to arc acting upon ill-balanced minus
CEREBRAL FUNCTIONS.
573
and misproportioned characters, tlic cffects of inefficiency of the intellectual and
moral powers with those not favoured with good opportunities in early life, and
their misdirection with tliosc who enjoyed better advantages.
" The great practical question, then, is, What must be done in this, our
happy country, already the hope and admiration of the world, to prevent, in
the midst of so many exciting causes, the most terrible of all afflictions ? The
answer is, ample provision for, and a radical reform in, the early education of
the rising generation; or, in other words, the more careful and philosophical
cultivation of the intellectual and moral faculties and propensities of all, in
harmony with a correct physical education. Inefficient and misdirected early
education constitutes the great predisposing cause to crime as well as insanity;
sad combination truly. The statistics of all hospitals for the insane prove that
the great majority of the cases of insanity occur between the ages of lifteen and
thirty, and the statistics of crime give us nearly the same results."
We arc but little disposed to differ from our friend, Dr Smith, in the really
essential parts of this extract; but we must venture to propose some of the
thoughts suggested by the perusal of it. The island of Malta was, by nature,
a single mass, of rock, almost wholly destitute of vegetation and of soiL Yet
the Maltese boasts of his home as "The ilowcr of the world." The Neapolitan
exclaims, " See Naples and die!" (there being nothing more beautiful to be
seen.) They of the country of Confucius, who claim that theirs is the " Celes-
tial Empire," say " We have two eyes, the Europeans have one, and all the
other inhabitants of the world arc blind." We smile at the simplicity of the
Maltese, we do not esteem Naples so much of a paradise as to be willing to die
the moment we have seen it, and our people arc not so much enamoured with
the ocular advantages of the Chinese as to prevent a disposition to expel them
from the country. Now let the impartial statesman, or jurist, or philanthro-
pist, read the first of the two paragraphs quoted, and would he be so thoroughly
convinced of our happiness, as a people, that, in the fulness of his heart, he
woidd reiterate our expression to that effect, almost at the very beginning of
the second ? or would he rather pause to reflect whether, after all, we are so
truly happy as we claim to be ? Wc will not anticipate the decision of the
question; for, most certainly, if we are not a people among the happiest in the
world, it is not in default of as great a proportion of the means or elements of
happiness as has ever fallen to the lot of any nation. Do we employ those
means wisely ? Do wc combine those elements with tlic skill which is sug-
gested and produced by a profound and just philosophy ? Lord Morpeth, now
he Earl of Carlisle,after his tour through the United States, declared it as his
opinion that no other people on earth possess so many of the comforts of life as
the Americans, and among none is there so little happiness.—Dr.Pliny Earle.
Eroni the "American Journal of Medical Science" (July).
