The Materialism of Insanity
===========================

:Author: J. Hawkes, ESQ.,
House Surgeon, Infirmary, Holton-le-iloors.
"Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his brain."
Twelfth Night, Act IV.

Ik the " British and Foreign Medieo-Cliirnrgieal Review" for January of the
current year, appeared an admirable paper by Dr Bucknill on the Pathology of
Insanity. It is not without some hesitation that I can subscribe to the doc-
trines therein laid down, and it is not, moreover, without consideration and
some diffidence that I can presume to question their full force and truth.
The metaphysician, though never so good a theorist, the physician, however
sound a practitioner, must both give place to one who, sitting by the well of
knowledge, dispenses with grace and justice to his thirsting brethren. He
who, by opportunity and industry, can draw the deepest, to him we may look
for the best and clearest supply. The pathology of insanity is still in its
infancy; nothing is at present positively known, concerning the subtle change
which the vesicular neurine undergoes in its state of transition from health to
disease. We cannot investigate the secret and mysterious laws which govern
and control the organization, development, degeneration, and decay of the
great nervous centres, until we have arrived at some general understanding
and agreement as to the premises on which they are based, and the conditions
by which they are framed.

The scalpel and microscope will alike fail; the meditations of metaphysicians
will come to nought; the disease will remain in statu quo, a phantom and
a fear. To the pure doctrine of physiology, we must look for the first glimpse
of truth, and by the close application of its principles shall we soonest find the
path; while without its help in the study of cerebral disease we shall never
attain our end. "We must, then, at the outset, bear in mind those grand
fundamental laws of development and decay, such as are busy in their operation
throughout the entire system.

Cell growth, the first indication of vitality, is promoted and carried on by
the one universal fiat of creation. Disease, which mars and destroys the
fairest work of God, has, in this self-same law, its element and rise. We
speak of nutrition, and perverted nutrition, results proceeding from the same
source, but variably adapted and carried out under altered conditions. And,
without any positive or appreciable change in the circumstances under which
the rule is administered, there may be a peculiarity in the system, from the
existence of which the healthy working of the law will ultimately produce the
inevitable consequence of disease.

Insanity, by which term we understand a disordered state of the functions of
the brain, dependent upon alteration of structure, appreciable or otherwise, and
through which the phenomena of the immaterial mind are exhibited in a dis-
torted and abnormal condition irreconcileable to reason. The word stands
for a symptom of itself, it proves nothing, and though commonly employed
in reference to the mind, per se, as the fons et origo viali, yet the mind of a
madman may be sane, the fault resting on the medium through which its
existence is manifested. Supposing, for the sake of illustration, we liken the
mind, witli its many radiant points, to the sun whose bright beams penetrate
every transparent medium. We shall see that through such as are clear and
without blemish they pass in perfect purity, while through those that are dim
or opaque, their passage is retarded, if not prevented; or if we offer a coloured
medium, each pencil of light, as it passes, alters its character, borrowing one
from the medium traversed, and as such to be received. Applying the meta-
phor to the consideration of insanity, we may conceive that the mind, perfect
in all its parts, and itself of spotless purity, yet the medium through which
alone we can judge of its condition having become obscured or impaired, the
disease should be held essentially one of matter, tangible, appreciable,
comeatable, in short, if we only knew how. If, then, we start with this theory,
the materialism of disease, we shall have gained a step to its elucidation, if not
to its cure.

The materialism of insanity, is a theory which assigns the fundamental seat of
disease to the brain rather than to the mind, and to the brain-cells or cor-
puscular neurine in preference to the tubes or fibres which are the conductors,
not the foci, of volition. The disease, then, we must expect to find, if found at
all, situated in these cells, and consisting of some form of derangement
occurring among their constituent particles. Irrespective of active inflam-
mation, the traces of which can be discovered by diligent research, there is
a subtle and unknown change taking place in these cases which is hid from
mortal eye, and shall be so till the labours of science have placed in the
hands of her children more perfect instruments by which to bring to light the
mysteries of creation and decay. But how is this carried on, and when?
We need only remember how cell growth is maintained in other organs to
answer the first question; how readily this phenomenon is urged to its com-
pletion under the influence of a due supply of nourishing fluid, or how tenfold
it is increased by any vascular excitement in the part undergoing change. Of
this we see examples everywhere,—in the reflection of epithelial cells on the
lining of secreting glands, especially in the organs of digestion. The same
cause, increased vascular supply, obtains in the brain, with the like results, cell
growth and decay, as elsewhere. Increased nutrition, as we well know, leads
to increased activity, whereby the functions of the part are more ably performed,
and cell growth hastened to its completion; but here the law steps in and
fulfils its end, there must likewise be decay, the worn-out, used-up cell dis-
integrates. As in the blood, so in the brain, the analogy is perfect. But have
we any cause to suppose that the phenomena of repair and reproduction are
carried ou only during sleep, and that the reverse occurs when the brain is
more actively engaged; that, as our author says, "in sleep, the cell maybe
growing from the capillary walls, or filling itself, and emptying or decaying
during wakeful liours." TVe cannot come to any such conclusions without
denying the universality of nature's fundamental law; for how can we say that
the brain, apart from any other collection of cells, is not under obedience to
this rule, or, why should not development and growth be carried out at the
time when the supply of blood is increased, when the nerve-cells are more
thoroughly replenished by their oxygen carriers, the capillaries? Why, in
short, should decay be alone transacting at the chosen moment for growth to
abound ? But let us not forget that, in proportion to the supply of oxygen,
only another name for nourishment, so must the march of decay be advancing,
Thus do these twin phenomena, development and decay, go ever hand iu hand.
But the demand might, perchance, exceed the supply, though the reverse,
we may presume, usually obtains; however, in such case, the result is obvious,
inevitable decay. A decay, the exact nature of which we cannot at present
more than speculate upon, characterized, perhaps, by a deficiency in the phos-
phate of lime, in fact, a general want of earthy salts; it may be a redundancy
of fat or animal matter, or, by some error in the vital function of the cell,
through which it fails to eliminate from the matters presented to it, the sort of
ingredients proper for the healthy discharge of its functions ; or again, without
failing in the adaptation of its elementary particles, there might be a simple
waste of material; decay, in fact, outstrips repair, and derangement of the
faculties ensues. In this case the demand must be stopped, and time given for
bringing up supplies. Sleep is the grand panacea—"Want of sleep," says the
author whose paper we are considering, " I believe to be the true origin of
insanity, depending on moral causes." This is a most just observation. If, at
the onset of the malady, sleep can be obtained, sweet refreshing sleep, half the
cure is won.

Thus, on physiological grounds, we should proceed in the treatment of this
disorder, and till we can better trace from cell to cell the inroad of disease,
we cannot, with any propriety, wander from the path. By the simplest means,
the greatest ends are often obtained, and it may well be supposed, that, by
aiding Nature rather than preventing her, we shall ultimately win success.
