On the Condition of Lunatics and Idiots in Ireland
===================================================

Art. II.—

A yeet curious, valuable, and highly interesting Special Report
upon the "Number and Condition of Lunatics and Idiots in Ireland,"
as presented to Parliament in a General Report on the " Status of
Disease" in Ireland, at the period of taking the last census for that
country in March, 1851, is now before us.

Before proceeding to the more particular object of the Report, it
will be instructive to take a glance at the state of Ireland, in refer-
ence to any provision for the accommodation of the insane at an
early period in the history of that country. In 1701, a workhouse
was erected and opened for the relief of the poor of the city of Dublin,
under the control of the Corporation, which afterwards merged into a
Foundling Hospital. Sir William Fownes, Bart., who had been, in
1708, Lord Mayor of Dublin—writing to Dean Swift in the year 1732
—says, " When I was Lord Mayor, I saw some miserable lunatics
exposed to the hazard of others as well as themselves. I had six
strong cells made at the workhouse for the most outrageous, which
were soon filled; and by degrees, in a short time, these few drew upon
us the solicitation of many, till by the time the old Corporation ceased
(1728), we had in the house forty and upwards." And in addition
he states, " there is no public place for their (lunatics) reception, nor
private undertakers, as about London." In 1730, this building assumed
the name of the Foundling Hospital and Workhouse of the City of
Dublin, and is the first record of the erection of lunatic cells in
Ireland. In 1711, by order of the Lord-Lieutenant, who at that time
was the governor of Kilmainliam Hospital (opened in 1684 for dis-
charged invalid soldiers), and Sir Patrick Dun, physician of the same,
cells were constructed adjoining the infirmary of that institution for the
reception of such soldiers quartered in Ireland as might happen to be
afflicted with mental derangement. These original cells, which were
constructed in accordance with the cruel and unnecessary coercion
then in use, for the custody, but not the treatment, of the insane,
were thrown down in 1730, and others, more capacious and better
suited to the wants of their unfortunate inmates, were erected. Two
years afterwards, Sir William Fownes, in answer to a communication
from Dean Swift, drew up a Proposal to the effect, " That an Hospital
called Bedlam be built in the City of Dublin or Liberties, for the
Reception of Lunatics from any part of the kingdom;" and in allu-
sion thereto, wrote, " then I would have the cells at the Royal Hos-
pital Infirmary—lately made for mad people, &c.—examined, how con-
venient, and how in all points they are adapted to the purpose, with
the costs of those cells, which I take to be six or eight."
Next to the above, and the first of the existing institutions, both as
to time and magnitude, is St. Patrick's Hospital, erected in accord-
ance with the will of the celebrated Jonathan Swift, Dean of St.
Patrick's,

" In which he bequeathed the sum of about 12,000Z. to purchase lands,
with the profits of which to erect and endow' an hospital, large enough
for the reception of as many idiots and lunatics as the annual income
of the said lands, &c.," shall be sufficient to maintain. It is evident
from Swift's writings, that he conceived the idea of giving
the little wealth he had,
To build a house for fools and mad,
so early as 1731, when he wrote the celebrated and characteristic
verses on his own death. In the following year he communicated
with Sir William Fownes upon the subject, who thereon addressed to
him the proposal to which reference has been already made. In 1746,
the year after his death, the executors of Swift's will were incorporated
by charter into a body of governors, voluntary contributions to a large
amount were collected, which, with parliamentary grants and the
proceeds of the Dean's bequest, enabled the governors to erect the
present hospital in the vicinity of Kilmainliam, and to open it for the
reception of fifty patients upon the 9th September, 1757."

Those buildings wliich were subsequently erected, up to the present
time, are given in a very simple form in table No. 5, and page 60, of
the Report, and accompanied with much interesting and useful
information respecting the greatly increased accommodation for the
Insane, both in public and private asylums.

We will next direct the attention of our readers to the very im-
portant points which are more prominently brought before our notice
in this Report; and introductory thereto we cannot do better than
quote the words of the Commissioners :—

" We now approach a subject on which we possess some means of
comparison with previous times, as for a considerable period annual
Reports have been presented to Parliament by the inspectors of
lunatic asylums, and because it was one that was discussed at length
in the Report upon the Census of 1841. Moreover, from the number
of persons belonging to the class now under consideration, who are
confined in properly regulated asylums and other public institutions,
the information respecting lunacy and idiocy which has been afforded
is much more exact than could possibly be obtained at any previous time.
" In order to arrive at the number of lunatics and idiots in Ireland
at the time of taking the Census, a special return, ' Form I.,' Table I.,
requiring the names, or initials of names, the age, sex, marriage, rank,
profession, and the occupation of each person when in health ;—the
state of education, peculiar character of insanity, duration and pre-
sumed cause of disease, as well as the native place, were procured for
all the persons confined or under treatment in the different lunatic
asylums in Ireland, as well as the lunatics and idiots in gaols and
workhouses. It was also deemed advisable to make an effort to col-
lect, as far as possible, similar information concerning those lunatics
and idiots who were either at large or in the custody of their friends
at the time of taking the Census. ' Form D.' was constructed for this
purpose, and placed in the hands of the enumerators (chiefly consta-
bulary and police), who were informed in the 'Instructions' that
mendicants and vagrants of these classes should be described from the
best local information they could acquire ; and we added, ' where
lunatics or idiots are in the custody of their friends, the inquiry neces-
sary to fill this form should be made with the greatest delicacy.'
These Returns were subsequently verified by the enumerators.

" Although this is the first time that a similar inquiry has been
instituted in this country, we are happy to say that no difficulties were
thrown in the way of the enumerators, and that returns were made
upon these forms of 1073 lunatics and 3562 idiots. These have been
classified by counties and cities as lunatics and idiots ' at large ' in
Table I., pages 50, 51. In some cases the numbers specified in that
and other tables given in this Report differ somewhat from those
afforded by the inspectors of lunatic asylums in Ireland in their Fifth
Report, published in May, 1851. In the Census previous to the pre-
sent, no attempt was made to enumerate the lunatics and idiots at
large or in the custody of their friends, but in the Report already
referred to a return is given of the unaccommodated idiotic and insane
for the different unions in Ireland, by which it would appear that
3674 idiots and 931 lunatics, besides 4380 epileptic imbeciles, making
in all 8985 of this class were then at large or in the custody of their
friends. That return was made through the Poor Law Commissioners,
by the relieving officers of each electoral division, but the estimate
entirely rests on the authority of these officers, who merely stated the
numbers they believed existed in their districts without specifying the
names, ages, sexes, places of abode, or other circumstance of such
persons—all of great importance, if not indispensable, in arriving at
the numbers and condition of any class of the community."
In the Tables which accompany this Report, is comprised informa-
tion of an extremely valuable description, both for present use and for
future comparison, and of the general objects of which tables we will
give a short explanation.

Table 1 contains the number and distribution of the insane and
idiotic in Ireland, arranged according to the provinces—viz., Leinster,
Munster, Ulster, and Connaught, and each subdivided into its re-
spective counties.

Table 2 presents at one view—
1st. The Occupations of Lunatics ;
2nd. The presumed Causes of Insanity, which are placed under
these four general heads—viz., Moral Causes—Physical Causes—Here-
ditary Taint—Causes which are not specified.
Table 3 gives a classification of the Insane and Idiotic in re-
ference to the particular form of the Disease, and are arranged under
these heads :—Mania—Suicidal Mania—Monomania—Dementia—De-
mentia with Epilepsy—Dementia with Paralysis—Idiocy—Unspecified
Diseases.

And in further illustration of the preceding Tables, the Commis-
sioners have added a 4th Table, containing 1st, the Ages—2nd, Mar-
ried—3rd, Unmarried—4th, Educated—5th, Uneducated.
It appears by the tabular statement that there were "confined
in the Irish asylums, prisons, and workhouses," 9980 Lunatics
and Idiots, which are thus divided:—

and in addition thereto, under the head of " At Large, or in the
Custody of their Friends,"—are 1073 Lunatics, composed of 554
males and 519 females, thus making the whole number of insane,
To give our readers some idea of the very great pains taken in this
Report, we will offer in some detail a description of a portion of Table
Lunatics—Males . 2503
„ Females . 2571
Idiots—Males . .
„ Females .
| Total 5074
6147.
332

No. 2, in respect of the occupations of lunatics, as it comprises a very
elaborate classification, under ten principal classes, and which are
again very numerously subdivided.

The principal classes are thus described:—1st, Professional; 2nd,
Professional with Mercantile Pursuits ; 3rd, Literary and Educational;
4th, Shopkeepers and Traders; 5th, First-class Trades; 6th, Second-
class Trades ; 7th, Agricultural; 8th, Occupations producing Exposure ;
9th, Special Female Occupations; 10th, Unclassified.

And also as regards the presumed causes of insanity, under its first
specified division already mentioned—viz.," Moral or Mental Causes."
This is formed into the following fourteenth subdivision—viz., Grief—
Reverse of Fortune—Love and Jealousy—Terror—Religious Excite-
ment—Study—Anger—Ill-treatment—Anxiety—Pride and Ambition
—Political Excitement—Music—Joy—Remorse.

And to enable our readers the better to appreciate the information
contained in this very curious and valuable Table to which we have
just been alluding—we will place in a short tabular form an analysis
of the results obtained from the " Presumed Causes of Insanity."

Males. Females. Total.
1st. Moral or Mental Causes . . 370 477 847
2nd. Physical Causes .... 560 394 955
3rd. Hereditary Taint .... 169 194 363
4th. Unspecified Causes . . . 4070 3746 7816
Total of Insane . . . 9980
Adopting the same Tabular Form, we will also show at one view the
number of insane belonging to each division as above given, and com-
pared with the ten classes of occupations already spoken of.
OCCUPATIONS.
1st Class, Professional
2nd Class, Ditto, with Mer-
cantile Pursuits
3rd Class, Literary and Edu-
cational
4th Class, Shopkeepers and
Traders
5th Class, First-class Trades.
6th Class, Second-classTrades
7th Class, Agricultural
8th Class, Occupations pro-
ducing Exposure
9th Class, Special Female Oc-
cupations
10th Class, Unclassified
CAUSES.
Male & Fem. | Male & Fem
40
9
40
25
32
78
155
15
44
409
54
4
11
13
37
76
162
22
20
555
Male & Fem. Male & Fem.
31
HERE-
DITARY,
6
14
16
68
14
209
LUNATICS AND IDIOTS IN IRELAND.
333

To draw attention still more strongly to the general results from
these very valuable Tables, we cannot do so more effectually than by
giving at length the words of the Report.

" In enumerating the occupations of the deaf and dumb, we only
learn what amount of industrial education that afflicted class are
susceptible of. In instituting a similar investigation for the blind,
some information may be gleaned with respect to the influence of
occupation in the production of disease, but in studying the circum-
stances which tend to the propagation of lunacy or idiocy, it becomes
a matter of great importance to observe the influence which the various
occupations and modes of life have in inducing these affections. We
have therefore endeavoured to arrive at as much accuracy as was
possible with respect to the previous modes of life among lunatics and
non-congenital idiots. The results have been classified and arranged
in Table II., pages 54 to 57, in which have also been grouped the
various causes, both moral and physical, which, according to the
returns received, were believed to have been the immediate or exciting
cause of disease in this class. In that Table are included the entire
number of lunatics and idiots enumerated on Table I., but of these,
2161 only have had the causes of mental alienation assigned, the
remainder being either unspecified, or concerning whose previous con-
dition no accurate information could be procured—many of them being
wanderers and mendicants. In arranging a classification of such
occupations as might, in some measure, have conduced to the propa-
gation of mental disease, difficulties arise which do not occur in
drawing up a classification of the general occupations of the community
where several modes of life are grouped together, not as they affect the
physical or moral condition of the individual, but as they minister to
the general wants of the people.

" In the following Table, ten divisions have been made. The first
consists of the professional class, of whom 401 were affected with
insanity, a large amount, considering the proportion which this class
bears to the great bulk of the people, and exceeding by a considerable
number all the other specified classes, with the exception of the agri-
cultural. This preponderance of mental disease among the professional
and upper classes, shows how much more education and habits of
thought tend to produce aberration of intellect than ordinary manual
labour. In this class, disease was attributed to moral causes in 40
instances, and in 54 to physical. Among the former—grief, study,
and reverse of fortune were the causes to which it was chiefly assigned;
and in the latter intemperance prevailed to a great extent. In 31
instances the disease was attributed to hereditary taint, and in 279
cases no cause was assigned.

" Among the professions we find the following numbers affected
with mental disease :—clergy, 36 ; officers, including those of the army,
navy, and police, 34; lawyers and attorneys, 28; and medical men, 13.
Of the 404 persons in this first class, 151 were females, of whom 148
belonged to what is termed the middle and upper ranks of society,
specified in the Table as ' gentleman or lady.'

"In the second class are included those engaged with professional
and mercantile pursuits ; consisting of occupations which engage a
certain amount of mental labour, together with the employment of
capital, influenced by the ordinary fluctuations of trade and merchan-
dise. This division numbers but 22, being the smallest of the
entire.

" The third class we have termed the literary and educational, con-
sisting of those engaged in mental occupations, either of acquiring or
imparting knowledge. It includes students and teachers of different
descriptions, and numbers 100—of whom 65 were males and 35
females. The predominating morbid influence among this class is
believed to have been study, of which 16 cases are recorded among the
moral or mental causes.

" The fourth class, denominated shopkeepers and traders, embraces
all those persons engaged upon a minor scale in trade or merchandise,
together with petty dealers of different descriptions. It numbers 110
—of whom 86 were males and 21 females ; of the specified occupations,
71 were shopkeepers, and 27 provision dealers and huxters. Where
the causes have been assigned, reverse of fortune among the moral,
and intemperance among the physical, predominated.

"In the fifth class are included first class trades ; it numbers 161
persons, 158 males and 3 females. The most numerous occupations
were clerks, 73 ; and cabinet-makers and carpenters, 61 ; grief among
the mental, and intemperance in the physical causes prevailed.
" In the sixth class are enumerated second class trades, among whom
the most numerous were weavers, 96; boot and shoe makers, 76 ;
tailors, 48; and smiths, 29. Masons and bricklayers, painters,
butchers, and flax-dressers also afforded many instances of insanity. The
entire number in this division is 421 persons—391 males and 30
females, the latter consisting of confectioners, and persons employed
in weaving and the manufacture of flax and wool. In 78 instances
moral causes have been assigned ; and of these, grief, reverse of for-
tune, love and jealousy, terror, and religious excitement predominated ;
and in 76 cases the insanity was attributed to physical causes, among
which intemperance, fever, and injuries of the head were the most
numerous.

" The seventh class consists of all those persons more or less engaged
in employments contingent upon agriculture, general and out-door
labour, and other pastoral and rural pursuits. It is, as might be ex-
pected from the occupations of the great mass of the inhabitants of
this country, the largest division, numbering in it 1598 individuals—
1496 males and 102 females; the females consisting of landholders,
dairymaids, and farm servants, the latter being thus distinguished from
the female household servants enumerated in the tenth class, and who
number 635. Of those specified, 155 were attributed to mental causes,
such as grief, reverse of fortune, terror, love and jealousy, anger or
excess of passion, and religious excitement;—162 to physical influences
—and of these, intemperance, congenital malformation, epilepsy, fever,
the effects of climate, injuries of the head, and the deleterious effects
of mercury, have been recorded as the most frequent; and 68 were
assigned to hereditary predisposition.

" In the eighth class are included 82 persons, whose occupations
necessarily induce considerable exposure, such as seafaring men, coach
and car drivers, constabulary, &c. In this division, grief among the
moral causes, and intemperance among the physical, are said to have
produced mental disease in the greatest number of instances.
" The ninth class consists of special female occupations alone, and
numbers 220; among whom 44 are said to have become deranged
from moral causes, as grief, reverse of fortune, terror, love and jealousy,
and ill-treatment. The physical causes assigned amount to only 20,
of which intemperance, epilepsy, and fever were the chief.
" The tenth class includes such occupations as could not well be
classed under any of the foregoing heads, such as billiard markers,
lodging-house keepers, mendicants, &c., and also the unspecified. It
numbers 6S62 persons—2616 males and 4216 females—but of these
5675 were unspecified, chiefly idiots. Among the specified occupations
or employments, that of servants amounted to 698 — mendicants
numbered 347, soldiers 93, and factory workers 41. Of this class 409
became lunatic or idiotic from mental causes, of which grief, reverse of
fortune, love and jealousy, terror, religious excitement, anger, and ill-
treatment were the most numerous. In 555 cases the assigned
physical causes were chiefly congenital malformation of head, intem-
perance, epilepsy, fever, puerperal affections, the effects of climate,
paralysis, disease of brain, and uterine derangements. In 209 cases
the disease is said to have been hereditary.

" From an examination of the totals of Table II., we find that
a return has been made chiefly upon medical authority, or by the
governors of the various asylums, of 2164 cases in which the cause of
disease has been investigated, and an opinion offered thereon. The
total cases assigned to physical causes amount to 954, the sexes being
as 100 males to 70"36 females;—those to moral causes number 847, in
which class the reverse obtains as respects the sexes, for there we find
the females predominating as 128*92 to 100 males. Those instances
believed to result from hereditary predisposition are 363, the females
being in the proportion of 114'79 to 100 males.

" In both sections the causes have been arranged in numerical order;
thus among the moral or mental we find grief predominates, being
about one-tliird of the whole, and the sexes being 1957 females to
100 males; reverse of fortune, 170; the sexes being 100 males to 86*81
females; love and jealousy, 106, the sexes being 67 females to 39 males;
terror, 101, or 62 females and 39 males; religious excitement, 55, or
25 males and 30 females; study, 37, or 35 males and only 2 females;
anger or excessive passion, 32, the sexes being equal; ill-treatment, 28,
or 22 females to 6 males; anxiety, 24,or 14 males to 10 females; pride
and ambition, only 9, or 5 females to 4 males; political excitement, 6,
or 5 males and 1 female; music, 2 males; joy, 1 male ; and remorse,
1 female.

"Among the physical causes, we find 351 cases attributed to con-
genital disease, specified as malformation of head, and composed chiefly
of idiots, the great majority of whom might with justice be classed
with those set down under the head of hereditary taint; the sexes are
in the proportion of 100 males to 94 females. In 216 instances intem-
perance is said to have been the cause of insanity, the male sex pre-
dominating so largely as to present the proportion of 100 to 21*35
females. Epilepsy numbers 100, the sexes being 56 females to 44
males, but this disease is, in many instances, only a symptom, and both
it, disease of the brain, and paralysis, might all be classed together,
when they would amount to .148:—the numbers attributed to fever
are 81, or 42 males and 39 females; to injuries of head 39, or 33 males
and 6 females; puerperal mania 36; the effects of climate, including
sun-strokes, 33, chiefly males; disease of the brain (not produced by
accident, including paralysis, which is but a symptom of the cerebral
affection), 48, or 29 males and 19 females; the effects of mercury, 19,
or 16 males, and 3 females; uterine derangement, 11; venereal
excess, 7; dyspepsia, 7; cases attributed to rape and seduction, 4; and
to violent hysteria, 2.

" Cases attributed to hereditary taint or family predisposition have
been placed in a separate column, owing to the difficulty of determining
how far the inherited peculiarity partook of the moral natiire, or of the
physical character transmitted from one generation to another. They
number 363, or 194 females and 169 males. In 7816 instances the
causes were not specified in the returns."

Upon the subject of the Classification of Insane and Idiotic according
to the form of the Disease, the Ileport gives an analysis.
" In Table III. the form of disease, with the supposed cause, are
grouped together, and the latter arranged according to the frequency
of each description of excitement or physical disease. Collected from
such a variety of sources, and the returns filled by persons varying
much in intelligence and knowledge, these causes and descriptions of
disease can be but approximations to the truth, still they are of value,
not merely of themselves, but as a means of comparison for future
investigations. The idiotic amount to 4906, the great majority of
whom having been so born, no information could consequently be ob-
tained with respect to the causes which induced disease. In 382 idiots
wiiC became so after birth, the causes are specified. Among the
insane, mania was the form of disease manifested in about four-fifths of
the whole ; of these 669 instances were induced by moral, and 400 by
physical causes, while 222 were attributed to hereditary taint. In 44
cases the mania was of a suicidal character, grief and reverse of fortune
being the chief causes which conduced to this phase of disease.
Out of 417 persons affected with dementia, in 73 cases the disease
was attributed to moral, and in 69 to physical causes ; while in 32 it
was traced to hereditary predisposition—the remainder of each of these
classes being unspecified. In 277 cases of dementia, 169 males and
108 females were also affected with epilepsy; and 15 other cases, 10
males and 5 females, of the same form of mental aberration, were like-
wise paralytic."

Another point of very considerable importance has also attracted the
attention of the Commissioners, and they have placed in Table No. IV.
—under the heads already enumerated, describing the diseases in
general terms of the insane—the ages of them, whether married or not,
and also whether educated or not, and thereupon observe—
" Table IY. exhibits the ages of all the persons specified in the
previous Tables, together with their state of marriage and education.
From this we learn that of the entire 9980 persons, 1721 were
married—647 males and 1074 females. In some few instances the
particulars as to the state of marriage and education could not be
discovered.

" In 3705 instances 3143 insane, 562 idiotic, and 69 unspecified—
the sexes being 1996 males and 1709 females—the persons so affected
were educated according to their respective ranks in life; and from
this division of the Table we learn that, exclusive of the idiotic, the
proportions were 100 educated to 61 uneducated, which, compared
with the proportion which the educated bear to the ignorant through-
out the general mass of the community, confirms the opinion with
respect to the more educated class being more liable to mental affec-
tions than the unenlightened.

" It is only by a close examination of this and the foregoing Tables
that the result of this minute inquiry can be seen or appreciated. The
terms used for expressing the different forms of disease in these Tables
are those employed in the returns afforded by the several public insti-
tutions, and as such, whatever may be their value, we are compelled to
adopt them. We feel, however, that it is sufficient in this Report
to afford, in the most comprehensive arrangements, the information
returned in answer to our inquiries—leaving it for special writers upon
this class of disease to avail themselves of the facts stated in these
statistical returns as they think fit. We would, however, suggest to
those who have the care of the insane, a more careful inquiry into the
cause and form of disease under which patients labour, by which means,
upon the next inquiry of this nature being undertaken, so large a pro-
portion of the unspecified shall not appear. It is to be hoped that
many of those returned on ' Form D.' at their own homes, in the
custody of their friends, or who were wandering through the country,
shall, before an inquiry similar to the present is again undertaken, be
provided for in establishments suited to their wants."

In addition to this Return, the Commissioners have extracted the
following information, contained in a Return made by Wm, B. Drury,
Esq., Clerk of the Custodies in the matter of Idiots and Lunatics, in
the Irish Court of Chancery.

" That 108 persons of weak or unsound mind—viz., 76 males, and
32 females, were under the control of the Irish Court of Chancery, in
asylums, or under the care of friends or guardians, in March, 1851, and
of whom 13 were resident in England."

The Commissioners give, as a general conclusion from the evidence
contained in the Report, their opinion as follows:—
" Compared with the total numbers of the insane, mania prevailed
chiefly in the counties of Monaghan, Tipperary, Longford, King's,
Donegal, and Londonderry ; and the suicidal propensity seemed to be
developed most in the counties of Carlow, Wicklow, Kildare, Kerry,
Armagh, and the city of Limerick. Monomania was most prevalent
in the cities of Limerick, Kilkenny, and Dublin, the town of Drogheda,
and the counties of Kilkenny and Kildare; whereas, dementia pre-
vailed most in the cities and counties of Waterford and Dublin, the
city of Kilkenny, and the counties of Meath, Galway, Sligo, Roscom-
mon and Limerick. In making these calculations, the various persons
confined in the different asylums have been included according to their
county or native place."

We conclude our analysis of this important Report with the general
summary of the Commissioners.

" The total number of patients confined in all the lunatic asylums of
Ireland in March, 1851, numbered 3436; or 1739 males and 1697
females, being 227 more than were returned in similar institutions in
1841. There were 173 lunatics, idiots, and epileptics in the different
gaols and prisons, on the 6th June, 1841, and upon the 30th March,
1851, 286 of the same class were confined in similar establishments.
494 lunatics, and 1129 idiots were located in the different workhouses
on the 30th of March, 1851; but no comparison can be made as regards
the numbers of a similar class in 1841, as at the time of taking the
Census of that period only two or three workhouses were in operation.

" From the foregoing enumeration, we learn that 5345 of the lunatic
and idiotic class were under restraint in Ireland at the time of taking
the Census, and of these 3436 were in establishments specially erected
and intended for their treatment as well as their custody and
support."
