Influence On Ether And Chloroform On The Mind
===============================================

589 Dr Beale, a dentist in Philadelphia, was a short time ago accused and con-
victed of a gross outrage upon a young lady, upon whom he was performing
dental operations, while under the influence of chloroform. The only evidence
against him (says the " New York Daily Times") was that of the lady herself;
while, 011 his side, was the weight due to high character, long enjoyed, and
never before impeached, the most solemn and emphatic asseverations of inno-
cence, and the established fact, that persons under the influence of chloroform
are always out of their senses, and often subject to the strangest fancies and
delusions. The conviction is very strong that Dr Beale's guilt was not proved,
and that he is entirely innocent of the heavy charge brought against him. In
view of the"Circumstances attending this case, a meeting of eminent dentists of
New York was held, on the 4th inst., to give their experience of hallucinations
which had fallen under their observation, from the use of chloroform. Many
very remarkable instances were adduced.
Dr Allen had observed that the patient would frequently insist that the
tooth removed under the influence of ether was not out; and nothing but
feeling the cavity, or seeing the tooth, would convince them to the contrary.
Dr Burras related a case of a lady, who placed her brother's hat on her
head, put on his coat, and nursed the sofa pillows on her lap, completely for-
getting all she had done when she became rational and conscious. A gentle-
man, 011 whom lie had operated, became outrageously violent, bellowing
furiously, and exclaiming, " I've got you now, Bill Brookes." On the effect
of the ether passing away, the patient said that he had imagined that he was
at home at Portchester, that " Bill" was robbing his money drawer. A young
lady protested that the doctor had slapped her in the face; and though contra-
dicted, persisted in her statement, calling for a mirror to show the red
spot caused by the alleged blow.
Dr Barlow had known ladies (of course unconsciously, yet seemingly not so
at the moment) divulge their dearest and most delicate secrets, or relate things
they would not wish 011 any account published. He told an amusing story of
an Irishwoman, who maintained that during her forccd somnolency she had
been in Ireland, and saw there her father, mother, and friends. A woman under
such circumstances might be quite honest and iaithful in her statements; her
impressions have all the force of realities.
Dr Burdell corroborated the statements of the preceding speaker. He had
observed that almost invariably there is a strange misconstruction of passing
events. He related a very strong instance in point. A gentleman brought a
lady to have a tooth removed; he wished her to use ether. After the opera-
tion was over, she said, " George, what did you kiss me for ? you took advan-
tage of me."
Dr Burras referred to a case where a man changed the scene of a dentist's
surgery into a bedroom, maintained that there was a woman present, and
insisted on her being turned out, exclaiming, "What is that woman doing in
Ely bedroom p"
Pi'. Castle, of New York, had not used ether for the last three years ; was
quite convinccd of its injurious effects.
Dr Crowell stated that a young lady came to have her tooth extracted,
accompanied by her mother. No sooner was it removed than she angrily com-
plained that lie had very rudely kissed her, and 110 assurance of her mother
could convince her to the contrary. So strongly riveted is the impression that,
though nine years ago, 011 his asking her at Saratoga if she had got rid of that
foolish impression, she said, " Oh, that's nonsense; you know you did." In
another case, a female insisted that he threw her on the floor, and kneeled on
her while he removed a tooth. The doctor mentioned other similar illusions.
Q Q 2
590 INFLUENCE OF ETHER AND CHLOROFORM ON THE MIND.
Mr. Dillingham had always had the presence of the family physician, or a
note from him. He did this upon principle. There were always hallucinations,
some remembering partially wliat was passing.
Mr. Francis said, one lady, while under the influence of chloroform, used
language of the most ridiculous, profane, and even obscene description. When
recovered, she seemed perfectly unconscious of having uttered any improper
expression, and apparently not accustomed to its use.
Dr Hazlett stated, that a young married lady, of a religious disposition, as
she felt the influence of the ether, caught him round the neck in the most
endearing manner.
Mr. Kurd related a case where, in presence of her husband, a lady, under
the influence of ether, followed, or rather chascd himself, the operator, round
the room, affording most unmistakable signs of perverted feeling, so much so
that her mortified husband desired him not to give her any more. Dr Bennett
was also present.
Dr Parmeley said, one lady thought she had died, and been in hell. He
added, " I would not believe the testimony of my own wife as to anything she
might relate while she was under the influence of ether or chloroform."
Dr Puutam took out twenty-eight stumps and teeth from a female. She
said she had been much abused—that he had taken her to Jersey city and
abused her in the ferry-boat; but, after many attempts to console her, she said
she would try to believe what the lady told her who had been present during
the opciation.
Mr. Bobbins, of Jersey city, had seen more than five hundred instances of
the employment of ether. In one case a lady, while passing under its influence,
wept most bitterly, said he was ill-using her most shamefully, and even after
the extraction of the teeth she thought, and still thinks, that some one did
abuse her.
Dr Dressier stated that lie had seen several hundred cases ; in one of these
a young lady persisting he had given her a kiss, and but for the presence of her
mother he had no means of proving the contrary.
Several of the speakers (adds the "New York Times") uttered their earnest
convictions of the innocence of Dr Beale of Philadelphia; one of them had
known him intimately sixteen years, and was satisfied he was incapable of the
crime laid to his chargc. Many who did not know him uttered the same
opinion. One, who spoke in language as calm as it was energetic, asked
whether the indignant denial of a man whose life had been spotless was not of
equal, if not of more, value than testimony liable, as they had all seen, to so
many cases of unintentional fallacy ?
A further scientific discussion, of the same important subject, took place at
a second meeting of New York dentists held on the 8th instant. A large number
of dentists attended, and, while a good many coincided in their views and
experience with speakers at the previous meeting, some reported that they had
not found in their practice any instances of mental hallucination remaining
after the effects of the ether had passed away.
Dr Allen (the Chairman) said lie was unable to cite, from his own practice,
which had been limited, any case bearing for or against Dr Beale.
Dr Kingsley had never seen any hallucinations.
Dr Lord had witnessed various hallucinations, but never saw evidence of
amorous excitement.
Dr Boot never saw anything like indccorousncss, save slightly in one case.
Had seen cases of hallucination which, however, were dispelled by returning
consciousness. . . i
At the close of the meeting a petition for Dr Beale received many additional
signatures.
Dr Brown, chairman of the first meeting, expresses, in a letter to the " N^v
CASE OF A GENTLEMAN BORN DEAF AND DUMB. 501
York Daily Times," his theory respecting Miss Mudge's delusion, as follows :
—" My own opinion is, that in the case under consideration, the young lady
entered the abnormal state under the impression of a fear that the operator
might take advantage of her unconsciousness; that whilst under the influence
of ether, this fear was distorted into an actuality; and that this impression
was revived, thus distorted, sooner or later, after her perfect restoration to a
normal state of mind."
