Remarks on the Religious Persuasion, Degree of Education, And Employments of Persons Erected with Insanity
============================================================================================================

:Author: John Webster , M.D., F.R.S.,

Fellow of the Royal Colleye of Phyticiant, <J"e.
Twelve years ago, the managing committee of Bethlem Hospital adopted, at
my recommendation, a series of tables illustrating various important facts
respecting the lunatics admitted and placed under treatment in that institu-
tion. Since the period mentioned, these valuable and instructive records have
been regularly continued, and now constitute highly useful documents lor
reference. During the period embraced by the elaborate statistical returns
thus accumulated, 3599 insane patients have been admitted into the curable
wards of the above named establishment, all being only recently attacked with
mental disease. Of these, the largest proportion were females, the exact
number ot that sex being 2074; whereas only 1325 were male lunatics, the
ratio thus amounting to fifty-six per cent, more of the former than the latter
division; which statement conclusively demonstrates the greater prevalence
of insanity among women than men, throughout the general metropolitan
population.

Much interesting information may be derived from a carcful examination of
the above tables ; and if the aggregate facts arc properly arranged, some curious
practical deductions may be thereby likewise obtained. Believing a few cursor/
remarks in reference to the religious persuasion, degree of education, and dif-
ferent employments of the numerous lunatic persons of both sexes received at
Bet Idem Hospital, during the last twelve years, will not be considered uW111'
portant, or out of place in the Psychological Journal, I would therefore beg
leave to dircct its readers' attention to the subject now proposed for discussion.
Of course, it is impossible to deduce, from present data, any special intercnee
in regard to the comparative frequency of lunacy, amongst different religious
persuasions : its prevalence in ignorant contrasted with persons of education:
or the influence which particular kinds of employments may actually exert
upon individuals. Some general approximation to the truth can only be ex-
pected. Nevertheless, the large array of figures which have been thus brought
into juxtaposition, cannot prove otherwise than extremely useful to every
investigator.

Influenced by such motives, I will therefore proceed to examine the^ part
first proposed for inquiry; namely, the religious persuasion of lunatics admitted.
As might be expected, the largest number belonged to the Church of England,
nearly two-thirds, or seventy-three per cent, ot the whole admissions being
members of that religious community. More females than males were however
enumerated in this category, or 972 of the latter sex to 1559 of the former,
and so making a total of *2531 individuals belonging to the national religious
establishment. The next most numerous body were Independents, of whom 234
came under treatment, 81 being males, and nearly twice as many, or 153
females. Wcslcyans follow: the total of that persuasion being 141 persons,
comprising 57 of the male, and 87 of the other sex. Bantists appear next in
the scale: these comprise 129 persons, or 50 males anu 79 females. After-
wards Roman Catholics, of whom the total admissions reached 120, giving
50 male and 70 female lunatics. Then Presbyterians: 73 members of that
body having been received, the sexes being nearly equal, or 31 males to 39
females. rlhe Jews occupy the next position: 47 Israelites, of whom the sexes
were almost the same in number, or 23 male to 21 female lunatic patients
being included in the division. Dissenters supplied only 1! individuals, 10
being male, and only seven female patients; whilst the remainder, although com-
prising varied and even very opposite shades of religious opinions, weie, how-
ever, lew in number taken specifically. Thus, six were Unitarian; fi\e being
men, and only one woman. Plymouth Brethren also supplied six patients, of
w horn two were males and four females. Again, Lady Huntingdon likew ise
furnished six proselytes, two being male, and four iemale lunatics. Deists
and Atheists actually amounted to live persons, but all men. S\\ edenborgians
gave two males. Ranters, one patient of each sex. Quakers occupied a
similar position Moravians supplied one male. Sandemanians, Socialists,
and the Greek Church also one male patient each. And lastly, Antinomians,

Brownites, and. Irvingitcs, were respectively represented by one insane female
belonging to each of these so-called religious communities. The remaining
27 male and 43 female lunatic inmates treated at Bethlem Hospital, making a
total of 70 persons, being reported as "not ascertained" in respect of their
specific denomination.

The mental culture, or degree of education, which the large number of per-
sons comprised in the present inquiry had acquired, previous to becoming
insane, and so rendering them proper subjects for confinement, now comes
under review; and upon this interesting question some curious information
has been acquired. Of the total 3599 inmates received into this institution,
208 were lunatics who had previously obtained a superior education, and some
even were exceedingly accomplished; the sexes being nearly equal, or 102
males to 100 females. With reference to sex, the proportion of highly edu-
cated persons was greater amongst men than women, seeing the ratio was
one in every thirteen of the former, but only one in every twenty of the latter
division of inmates. Patients whose education was reported good, that is,
could both read and write, amounted altogether to 890 individuals, or one-
fourth of the entire number admitted. The figures representing each sex
being almost similar, or 425 males to 465 females, which however gives re-
spectively one in every three male lunatics admitted able to read and write,
whilst only two in every'nine women had even acquired that limited education.
Those who could only read, but were wholly incapable of writing, both sexes
included, amounted to the very large number of 1887 persons, making not less
than 52'40 per cent., or upwards of half the entire admissions. Here, again,
the females appeared even more ignorant than the male patients, 1181 of the
former being able only to read, whilst 70G males came within that category.
Lastly, 417 human beings, out of 3599 once endued with reason, but now de-
prived of that inestimable blessing, had never received any kind of mental
education whatever, being steeped, ever sincc birth, in the most crass ignorance,
and wholly incapable either of wielding a pen, or still less knowing the
alphabet.

So lamentable a circumstance, that nearly one-eighth of the aggregate patients
admitted into this charity, where parish paupers arc seldom received, and the
recipients of its bounty are, in a large proportion, connected with tradesmen
or the mechanical cfasses of society, should be found in such an abjcct condi-
tion as neither to know how to write nor even to read, speaks trumpet-tongued
against the negligence of parents, guardians, and parochial authorities ; whilst
it clearly shows much remains to be accomplished^ ere popular ignorance shall
be entirely dispelled. It is also remarkable that the number ot females who
were thus classified, or living hitherto, so to speak, in perfect Cimmerian dark-
ness, was much greater than amongst males, tlie amount being 325 females, or
15"G6 per cent, of the entire admissions; whereas, only 92 male lunatics
were similarly situated, being nearly seven per cent, or under half the ratio
recorded amongst the other sex. Such facts are exceedingly interesting; but
whether insanity is more liable to affect ignorant minds, and those never im-
proved by any mental culture, cannot be authoritatively asserted from the data
thus hitherto obtained, although the present statements tend, in some measure,
to prove such an inference; seeing so many persons, especially females, whose
intellectual faculties had never been cultivated, nor attempts made to enable
them to acquire knowledge in the usual manner, come within this category.
It seems, however, a generally received and well-founded opinion, that persons
of education, or individuals whose intellects have been properly trained, espe-
cially in the exact sciences, and embued with practical information, but not
weakened through inane absurd accomplishments, however fashionable, or their
feelings excited by meretricious systems of teaching, arc far likelier to continue
mentally sane, than parties belonging to the uncultivated and ignorant classcs.
Psychologists may therefore fairly infer, even from the facts now reported, that
ignorance promotes insanity; and the human mind, which has not been sub-
jected to any kind of discipline, is more apt to be afllictcd by mental disease,
than, comparatively speaking, where parties are differently constituted.

The remaining point to which I would now specially direct attention, is the
kind of occupation, or previous employment, ol the different insane patients
placed under treatment at Bethlem llospital. The list is both large and
curious; whilst it demonstrates, although several handicrafts give few victims,
nevertheless, amongst various occupations contained in this tabic, the sufferers
from mental alienation were more numerous in some employments than in
others, respecting which feature I shall afterwards append one or two general
observations, eliiefly based upon facts the subsequent document contains.
No. 1.—Occupations of Male Patients.

Accountants   2
Actor   1
Agents   6
Architects   7
Army Clothier  1
Artists   8
Attorneys  4
Auctioneer   1
Authors   3
Bakers   33
Barristers  2
Basket Makers ... 2
Billiard Marker ... 1
Boatbuilders   4
Boiler Maker   1
Blacksmiths   11
Blind Maker   *
Bookbinders   ~
Booksollers   ®
Brassfounders  £
Brokers   ^
Brewors   in
Bricklayers
It liumujrv<» ... _
Brush Makers
OF PERSONS AFFECTED WITH INSANITY.
475
Builders ..
Cane Maker
Carpenters
Carriers ... •••
Carvers and Gilders
Cabmen   —
Carmen
CeUarmen..
Chair Makers ...
Chemists ... ••• **"
Cheesemongers
Chinamen  •"
Clerks
Clergymen ••• •••
Clothier
Coach Makers ...
Coachmen
Coal Dealers ... •••
Collar Maker ... •••
Commercial Travellers
Confectioners ...
Contractor
Cooks
Coopers
Copperplate Printer
Cork Cutter
Corn Chandlers
Corn Dealer
Curriers
Cutler
Dairymen
Dealer in Hides . • •
Dentist
Drapers
Draughtsman
Drovers
Dyers
Egg Merchant
Engineers
Engravers
F armers
Fishermen
Fishmongers ... "...
Flower Makers
French Polishers ...
Fruiterer
Furriers
Gamekeeper
Gardeners
Gasfitter
Glass Cutter
Glover
Goldsmiths
Greengrocers
Grocers
Hair Dressers
Hatters
Hawkers
Hosiers
House Decorators ...
Ironfounder
Ironmongers
Japanners
Labourers
Land Surveyor
Last Maker
Lath Renders
Law Stationers
Law Writers
Leather Dressers
Lighthouse Keeper...
Lightermen
Livery Stablers
Mast Maker
Medical
Merchants
Miners
Millers
Millwrights
Musicians
News vender
Oilmen
Officers of Army
Officers of Customs,
&c
Officer of Navy
Old Clothes Dealers...
Omnibus Proprietor...
Opticians
Painters & Plumbers
Parish Clerks
Pattern Designers ...
Pianoforte Makers ...
Pilot
Pipe Maker
Plasterers
Pocket-book Maker...
Policemen
Porters
Postmen
Printers
Publicans
Railway Servants
Relieving Officer
Rope Maker
Saddlers
Sailcloth Maker
Sailors
Salesman
Sawyers
Schoolmasters ...
Servants
Shirt Cutters ...
Shoemakers
Shepherds
Shopmen
Silk Merchants
Slater
Soldiers
Spring Maker ...
Sugar Refiner ...
Surveyors
Stationers
Stokers
Stonemasons ...
Storekeeper
Students
Tailors
Tablecloth Maker
Tanner
Tidewaiters
Tinmen
Tobacconists ...
Truss Maker ...
Upholsterers ...
Watchmakers ...
Waiters
Weavers
Wheelwrights ...
"Whitesmiths ...
Wine Merchants
Wood Cutters ...
No profession ...
Not ascertained
Total
Annuitants
Artists
Raker
Barmaids
Book Folders
Bonnet Makers"
Lutton Coverer
Carrier
Charwomen
Cloth worker
NO. XXXIT.
JVo. 2.—Occupations of Female Patients.
Confectioner   1
Cooks   5
1 Corn Dealers   3
Dairywomen   6
Dressmakers  148
Eating-house Keeper. 1
Embroiderers   3
Envelope Maker ... 1
Flower Makers ... 3
FurnitureBrokeress... 1
I I
Fur Dresser
Glovers _
Governesses
Greengrocer
Hat Liners
House Agent ...
Housekeepers ...
Hawkers
Keeper of an Office
Lace Makers ...
476
REMARKS ON THE RELIGIOUS PERSUASION, ETC.,
2
14
31
1
25
1
1
64
26
1
5
2
1
296
4
17
Shopwomen
Silk Winders ...
Singer
Stay Makers ...
Stock Maker ...
Straw Plaiters ...
Tambour Worker
Toll-gate Keeper
Upholstresses ...
Umbrella Maker
Waistcoat Makers
Washerwoman ...
Water Gilder ...
Weaver
Wig Maker
Wives, Widows, and
Daughters of Pro
fessional Men, Offi-
cers, and Merchants
Wives, Widows, and
Daughters of Clerks
and Tradesmen ..
Wives, Widows, and
Daughters of La-
bourers, Servants,
and Mechanics
No occupation, or \
Not ascertained (
47
582
465
164
Total
...2074
Lady's Companions...
Lady's Maids
Laundresses
Linendraper
Lodging-house-keepers
Map Colourer
Midwife
Needlewomen
Nurses
Organist
Paper Makers
Pew Openers
Publican
Servants ...
Shoe Binders
Shopkeepers

Looking at the preceding table in the aggregate, clerks constitute the most
numerous body of male patients admitted, whilst labouring under insanity.
Next carpenters, labourers, and tailors; then turners, grocers, and school-
masters ; amongst the latter of whom there were twenty-seven instances. The
circumstance seems rather remarkable, that so many teachers of youth as the
number mentioned should have become insane, seeing schoolmasters are by
no means a numerous fraternity. This is proved by the fact of there being
only 1676 persons returned as so engaged by the census of 1S51, and resident
within the metropolis. Of course, it cannot hence be positively asserted that
those engaged in teaching arc more liable to become victims to mental disease
than in some other occupations: as, for instance, medical practitioners, of whom
twenty-two examples arc reported to have been received into Bethlem Hospital,
the total amount of physicians and surgeons being 3959 in London, or upwards
double the number of schoolmasters. Again, thirty-four turners were admitted :
and as this class is even less numerous than the latter, or only 1317 throughout
the metropolitan districts, it seems not overstraining the argument to assume
that individuals dedicated to this kind of employment becomc oftencr insane than
various other parties occupied in a different manner. For example, only
thirty-five tailors are stated to have been received into the insane wards of
Bethlem, notwithstanding that body of workmen is very numerous; there
being not less than 20,257 in London, or more than fifteen times the number
of turners ; nevertheless, the total cases were almost identical.
Much the same kind of reasoning may also apply to servants, of which
thirty-two cases of insanity are recorded; and as this class comprises 21,507
individuals, if those at inns are included, it becomes a circumstance worth
noting that so few lunatics were comprised in this division. At all events,
notwithstanding such inferences may appear rather more speculative than yet
proved, the previous table certainly demonstrates, mental disease oftencr super-
venes amongst certain classes of workmen, compared with others, whoso
occupations arc of a different description. In respect of turners, although a
very limited body of artisans, it is somewhat singular, the cases registered were
so numerous ; and the above fact would almost warrant the conclusion that
their particular kind of occupation apparently exerts an influence in producing
these attacks. But whether through the rapid rotatory motion of the machinery
used, and so exciting the brain, from the uniform attention required on t|ie
workman's part, or by the monotonous, but constantly changing aspect of the
articles they make, deserves further attention and much additional experience
before speaking upon the subject with confidence. . ,

Amongst the female patients, the most numerous division of partic
occupations is that of servants, of whom 296 cases attacked by insanity a
1 •/> 1 T-v 1   L.'.l. .V I
so specified,
that ol servants, oi wnom 2'Jb cases attacKcu oy uibw-v .

Dress-makers, which includes milliners and needlewomen, a
constitute a very numerous class; 212 examples being thus designated.
Needlewomen and young girls employed in the sedentary occupation of sew-
ing, and who arc often very inadequately remunerated, appear much to be
commiserated. That mental disease is by 110 means an uncommon occurrence
amongst this unfortunate section of the female community, would seem unde-
niably demonstrated by the circumstance now mentioned. Another class of single
women seems, however, even more predisposed to and afflicted by mental disease,
namely, governesses: of whom sixty-two instances are recorded in the table ;
making nearly one in every thirty-three female lunatics admitted. Like school-
masters, governesses are not a numerous body, speaking comparatively; and
therefore the coincidence appears more singular, that both these classes, who
are each engaged in training the rising generation, and also imparting know-
ledge to young minds, should respectively furnish so large a proportion of
inmates to Bethlem Hospital; but why this remarkably similar .result should
happen is difficult of explanation. The anomalous condition in which gover-
nesses are generally placed, being neither ranked with domestic servants, nor
usually allowed to associate with the masters or mistresses of the family where
they reside, and are seldom permitted to mix in the ordinary society visit-
ing the same domicile, whilst their own attention and time is constantly
occupied in the harassing duties of teaching frequently wayward youn" girls, or
noisy children, should be noted. Further, governesses being commonly women
of talent and accomplishments, often reared in a diffc rent sphere to the one they
then occupy, are.obliged, in many instances, through family misfortunes, or
poverty seldom occasioncd by their own conduct, in order to earn a pre-
carious livelihood, to accept appointments inferior in many respects ^ even to
lady's-maids or housekeepers. The latter are really servants, occupying their
proper sphere, who generally never had enjoyed better treatment or experienced
more prosperity, and are besides very rarely possessed of accomplishments
or received a good education, hence, have their feelings seldom wounded
from associating with individuals inferior to themselves ; whereas, this too often
happens in the case of parties under consideration. I scarcely know
any class of society more deserving of sympathy than governesses, whether
their anomalous social position be considered, or ^ the frequency^ with which
mental disease appears to supervene. Many afflicting cases of this desciiption
have been observed amongst the insane patients treated at Bethlem Hospital;
and as similar examples are by no means rare in other institutions for lunatics,
I have consequently been induced to enlarge upon such topics, in order to
bring the question now discussed before the profession, and thus arrive at more
correct deductions than the data here collected might yet seem to warrant.
Before bringing the present communication to a close, I would finally remark,
that another class of females amongst whom insanity seems to have prevailed
to some extent, considering their limited number as a distinct body, deserves a
passing notice, namely, lodging-house-keepers. Of this body twentv-five instances
are enumerated; and seeing the total loaging-house-keepers, male and female
included, comprise only 553 individuals, throughout the metropolis, such a fact
at least shows the ratio to be considerable. If, then, so many insane patients ot
that description come under treatment, the inference seems neither over-
gained nor devoid of foundation, that females embraced by this particular
division are oftener affected with mental disease than those enumerated
within other categories ; as, for example, midwives and washerwomen, only one
instance of persons einployed'in eacli of these occupations being iucluded in
the previous table, although both these classes of women comprise rather a
numerous body of individuals, throughout London and its immediate vicinity.
i i 2
