State of Lunatic Asylums and the Insane in Ireland
====================================================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
OCTOBER 1, 1855.
We have before us the seventh report of the Inspectors of Lunatic
Asylums in Ireland, embodying an elaborate account of the state of
the various institutions established in that country, private and public,
for the care and treatment of the insane. This public document ap-
pears to have been drawn up with great care, and redounds highly to
the credit of the Inspectors appointed by Government to protect the
interests of the insane, and to regulate and control the various insti-
tutions devoted to their care and treatment. According to the official
returns, which are made up to the 31st of March, 1S55, the number
of insane persons brought within the cognizance of the Inspectors,
was 13,493. They are thus distributed.
Males. Females. Total.
!• In District Lunatic Asylums . . 1720 1802 3522
2. In Central do. . . 84 42 12G
In Private do. . . 252 207 459
4. In Gaols, under 1 Vic., c. 27, and
8 & 9 Vic., c. 107   101 55 156
5. In Poorhouses  734 12GG 2000
Total number of Lunatics under
Official Supervision on 31st
March, 1855   2891 3372 62G3
6. At large, unprovided with asylum
accommodation, on 31st March, 1855 4035 3195 /-30
Total number of insane of every
denomination in Ireland . . G92G
G5G7
13,493
* "Seventh Report on the District Criminal, and Private Lunatic Asylums in
Ireland." Dublin. 1855.
*o. xxxii. n ii
\
\
4GO STATE OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS
There appears to have been, since the Report of 1851, a decrease in
the number of the insane, to the extent of 1G05. This is attributable
to the decrease of insane in poorhouses and in gaols. In 1851 there
were confined in poorhouses 2393 lunatics; in 1855 the number was
reduced td 2000. In 1851 there were upwards of 500 lunatics in the
Irish gaols, whilst in 1855 there were only 15G in custody. This
number will be still further reduced, in proportion to the extension
of additional accommodation for the insane in public institutions,
especially erected for their treatment. The Inspectors have always
entertained strong objections to the residence of insane persons in
such places, where they must of necessity, considerably interfere with
the discipline and order which it is desirable to maintain amongst
prisoners. Of the lunatics in poorhouses, nearly two-thirds are of the.
female sex. The Inspectors entertain grave objections to the residence
of the insane in poorhouses, justly observing, that
" It is obvious, for many reasons, that the most suitable place for
every demented person, lunatic or idiot, harmless or otherwise, is an
institution specially devoted to the care of the insane, under the
superintendence and management of experienced officers and atten-
dants, who are practically acquainted with the treatment of mental
disease in every form, and directed and controlled by that department
of the public service to which the supervision of all matters relating
to such establishments properly belongs ; and we regard the question
as deserving the consideration of the executive, namely, whether the
time may not have arrived for making provision for the complete
separation of the insane poor of every class, from the sane portion of
the community; and which, whilst elfecting a moral duty towards the
latter, would insure for the insane poor, idiotic or imbecile, more care
.and comfort than they can possibly have in ordinary workhouses,
where they cannot at all times be secured against annoyance from
the ignorant or thoughtless paupers by whom they are surrounded.
We feel that objections to a change may be advanced on financial
grounds, and that it may be argued, considering the extremely
low position which, particularly the idiotic, inmates of poorhouses
occupy in the human family, both socially and mentally, that they
are comfortably circumstanced and sulliciently well cared lor a"
present.
" It is evident, however, that the attention and care necessary f°^
the relief of these distressed classes cannot be efficaciously extended
to them whilst they are placed in institutions of a very different nature
from asylums; and further, it would be falling into a great mistake to
imagine that even the most miserable objects of mental incapability
are beyond the reach of being relieved; for there is no species o
disease or affection, from the highest state of maniacal excitement ^
the very lowest grade of imbecility, that does not admit ol cure o^
alleviation under judicious treatment, such alone as can be obtaine 1
establishments exclusively devoted to the object."
AND THE INSANE IN IRELAND.
401
To meet such a contingency the Inspectors propose enlarging some
of the existing district asylums, by the erection, at a small expendi-
ture, of suitable auxiliary buildings, with large dormitories on the
ground-floor. We consider this suggestion practicable, and entitled to
serious consideration. The expenditure of Asylums has, as might be
naturally supposed, from the high price of provisions, greatly exceeded
that of former years. The subjoined extract from the report places
this matter in a clear light:—
" The average cost of maintenance, including every expense, was
therefore, as above, 17I. 9s. 4d. for the year ending 31st March, 1854,
and 19Z. 15s. 10d. for the year ending 31st March, 1855, showing a
difference of 21. (is. (id. per head in favour of the former year.
" As a general rule, the Asylums containing most inmates exhibit
the lowest averages, as Ballinasloe, Belfast, Cork, and Limerick, which
show for the first year, conjointly, an average of 15I. 16s. 11^., and
for the second, 18/. 10s. 5^7. Richmond Asylum, however, the largest
institution of the kind in Ireland, is an exception to the rule, the
averages for the two years, respectively, being 17I. 4s. Wd. and
2lf 17s. 4d.; but the highest prices at which the necessary commo-
dities of life generally range in the metropolis, will sufficiently account
for this difference.
" The length of time the Asylums have been established appears
also to exercise a beneficial influence upon the expenditure, the Armagh
and Waterford (the two smallest District Asylums in Ireland, and
which have been in operation—the former for thirty, and the latter
for twenty years) showing, comparatively, very low averages, while
those lately occupied, as Kilkenny, lvillarney, and Omagh, give the
highest averages of all, owing, in a great measure, to incidental ex-
penses attendant on their opening. . i i
" The Asylum at Cork is the only one in which no material change
has occurred, the increase during the year ending 31st March, 1855,
being but 3s. id. per head per annum on the outlay of the preceding
year, while the increase in the other establishments varies from 1Z. to
4^., Londonderry alone excepted, where a diminution has taken place
in 1855. This diminution is, however, accounted for by the fact
that the Omagh patients were taken away in 1854, thus leaving the
expenditure for that year to be distributed over a reduced number of
inmates.
" Looking to Ballinasloe, Belfast, Cork, Limerick, Londonderry, and
Richmond Asylums, which taken together afford an average of 325
inmates each, for the year ending 31st March, 1855, the annual out-
lay in salaries and wages is but 3/. lis. per head, while in the remain-
ing eight Asylums, which only give an average of 150 patients, we
have it raised to 51. 13s. G</. The advantage which the larger insti-
tutions thus obtain in an economical point of view, is, as regards the
S^a<!^r' Very imPortant. _
" fhe several averages on Diet alone range in 1854 from about ol.
to 7l.t and in 1855 from about 71. to 97.; but in the clothing there is
li 11 2
4G2
STATE OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS
very little difference between the two years, in 1854 it was 11. 4s. 8d'
and in 1855, it was 11. 2s. 9d. per head."
In reference to the number of admissions, it appears that the inmates
of the several district asylums on the 31st March, 1855, amounted to
3,299 ; the number being at the corresponding period of our last Re-
port, 2870; or, 1447 males, and 1423 females; thus showing an
increase of 429 within two years, namely, 205 males, and 224 females;
and it is satisfactory to find that as facilities for early admission have
been extended by means of the new district asylums which have lately
come into operation, proportionate advantages have been obtained both
in a curative and sanitary point of view, as will appear from the
following summary, in which the admissions, discharges, and deaths,
that have occurred during the years 1853-4, and 1854-5, are contrasted
with those of the two previous years. With regard to the admissions,
it should be borne in mind that two new asylums, viz., Kilkenny and
Killarney, were opened in the year 1852-3, which circumstance, by
adding to the admissions for the last two years ending 31st March,
1853, to an unusual extent, renders the contrast in favour of the
period of which we are treating less remarkable than it otherwise
would be.
Admitted
Discharged during the twoyears—Cured. .
„ Relieved.
„ Not cured
„ Incurable
Total Discharged
Died during the two years .
Number of Inmates on 31st March, exclu-
sive of Island-bridge
Two Yenrs ending 31st
of March, 1853.
Males.
IOC 4
409
99
100
34
C12
1447
Fo-
males.
1039
40C
11G
85
78
C45
Total.
2103
815
215
185
32
1287
1423 2870
Two Years ending 31st
of March, 1855.
Males.
1197
458
147
79
40
724
2C8
1C52
i ,C,;UlrrT' ,oCr°r g the foreSoing, during the two years
ended 31st March, 18oo, exceeded the admissions of the two former
years by 208, namely, 133 male*, and 75 females. The excess of
recoveries was 64; or, 49 males and 15 females. The number dis-
charged cured being 879, and relieved, 253, which, taken together,
give a per centage of 49 on the admissions; while the mortality, not-
withstanding the increase of inmates, is less by 5 than in the two
AND THE INSANE IN IRELAND.
463
former years; being a little more than 10 per cent, on the total
number under treatment.
Great attention appears to have been paid to providing suitable
occupations for the insane, and that with the best results. There
were employed on a given day, which we have taken as affording a
comprehensive view of tho state of the asylums in this respect, 1S91
persons, of whom 9G2 were males and 929 females. Of the males, 411
were engaged in gardening and agricultural labour; 83 in various
trades, as weaving, shoemaking, tailoring, &c.; and 438 in a variety
of miscellaneous employments. Of the females, 537 were occupied
in needlework, spinning, knitting, quilting, and fancy work; 134
in the laundries; 172 in house cleaning; and S9 in miscellaneous
employments.
The proportion of employed to the whole number under treatment
ls 57 per cent.; a very favourable proportion, when it is remembered
that of the 3282 patients, 2072 were probably incurable, and 3GG
epileptics and idiots.
The Inspectors speak highly of the benefits which have resulted to
the insane from bringing them within the sphere of religious instruc-
tion. A. large majority of the patients continue to attend the chapels
°f the asylums on each Sunday, and by their calm and collected
demeanour during Divine service, evince a sense of the purpose foi which
they are assembled; and it is not alone on the Sundays but during the
week many of them look forward to the visits of the chaplains with
the greatest anxiety.
On this point the Inspectors observe, that,
' In the treatment of mental disease, our continued experience bears
ns out in the opinion ' that a very large proportion of the inmates of
an hospital for the insane, are capable of deriving advantages from
that form of religious observance in which they have been brought up;
and that hence it becomes an obvious duty toprovide the necessary means
°f public worship in every lunatic asylum.' No doubt, in his geneial
ministrations, and still more in his private communications, the
chaplain of an asylum should not lose sight of the characters of his
hearers, nor of the great judgment and delicacy called tor in their
Regard. But it is not the patients alone who feel the important advan-
ces of the services of ministers of religion in these establishments ;
lor it should be recollected that the instruction imparted by them, and
he performance of divine service, cannot fail to produce a marked moral
benefit on the attendants also, who may be considered, from the nature
of their duties, as in general debarred from a due and regular attend-
ance at their respective places of worship on Sundays and other da} s
oi devotion."
We are gratified to observe that the Central Asylum erccted at
404
STATE OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS
Dundrum for the safe custody of insane persons charged with offences
in Ireland, has from its opening proved eminently successful. The
number of patients confined in the Asylum amounts to 12G. The ad-
missions are restricted to cases of a grave character, or to those where,
though the offences might not be very serious in themselves, the
offenders had evinced particularly dangerous symptoms or inveterate
propensities of a criminal nature.
In reference to the general state of the criminal inmates of the
Central Lunatic Asylum, it appears that 28, or nearly one-fourth of
the whole number of patients, are pronounced recovered or con-
valescent, 15 of whom have become so within the last two years.
" Had these twenty-eight been ordinary inmates of an asylum, they
would have been set free, each after a probation of about six weeks ;
but in the Dundrum Asylum their sojourn is much more lengthened
and indefinite, as even under the most favourable circumstances we
would not submit the proposition of a discharge without an unbroken
restoration of mind, coupled with exemplary good conduct, for a
twelvemonth, as the very shortest period."
We have in previous numbers of this Journal contrasted the
state of the law with regard to the confinement and liberation of
criminal lunatics in this country to that liberal, enlightened, and philo-
sophic mode of procedure adopted so successfully in the sister country.
In England, in criminal cases, an acquittal on the ground of insanity is
tantamount to perpetual imprisonment, and imprisonment too under
the most degrading, humiliating, and painful circumstances. Whilst
under the aflliction of dire disease, destroying all power of rational
thought and healthy self-control, and that, too, when the mind is
often tortured by wild and terrible phantasies, an overt act of crime
is committed. Insanity is urged as an extenuating plea,—the jury
fully recognising the irresponsibility of the prisoner, acquit him of
the charge, and a verdict of " not guilty, on the ground of insanity,
is properly recorded. The unhappy lunatic, who is no more account-
able for his criminal act than a man would be lor the wanderings of
his intellect whilst under the influence of a disturbed dream, instead
of being transferred, after acquittal, to the kind care of his relations
and friends, is, like a common felon, handed over to a public officer,
and forthwith sent to the criminal department of one of our public
Asylums, there to spend the remainder of his wretched days as the
miserable companion of idiots, and as the associate of the worst class
of insane criminals, llis attack of insanity, provocative of the offence
for which he was tried, may have been temporary and transient in its
character, similar, for illustration, to that of puerperal mental derange-
ment. The law, however, in its profound wisdom, recognises among*
AND THE INSANE IN IRELAND.
4G5
criminal lunatics, no distinction of classes. A man once criminally
insane, continues so for the term of his natural life. A recovery is
viewed as an impossibility, and liberation from restraint highly dan-
gerous to the safety and welfare of society. The law, owing to its
harshness in this particular, often stultifies itself. Consider, for in-
stance, a case of recent occurrence, which has, unhappily for all parties
concerned, obtained a painful notoriety. An amiable and intellectual
lady, much beloved and highly respected in private life, the wife of a
distinguished physician, in a paroxysm of obvious and unmistakeable
monomaniacal delirium, abstracts from a shop an article of insignifi-
cant value. The facts connected with the offence, as well as the pre-
vious history of the mental condition of the party, clearly and conclu-
sively demonstrated, beyond the possibility of doubt, the existence of
a morbid state of the mind at the time of the commission of the
alleged criminal act. This was apparent to all the medical men who
were consulted, as well as to the eminent counsel employed to conduct
her defence. No rational or right-thinking person at all cognisant of
the facts that could have been deposed to at the trial, entertained
the shadow of a doubt as to the absence of all criminality, or as to
the certainty of her acquittal at the hands of a 13ritish jury. "W hv,
then, it will be asked, was not medical evidence forthcoming at this
iady's trial, and the plea of insanity urged in extenuation of her
offence ? We will briefly answer the interrogatory. It was apparent
to the able legal advisers engaged in the case, that if this unhappy
lady, who, in a moment of delirious excitement, and consequent loss
°f self control, had brought herself within the jurisdiction of the law,
were to escape on the plea of legal irresponsibility caused by mental
derangement, she would inevitably pass lrom the Central Ciiminal
Court to the dreary and desolate wards of 13ethlehem Hospital, and
that no efforts that might be subsequently made to effect her libera-
tion would lead to any satisfactory result. The husband of the lady,
as well as his legal advisers, had a clear perception of this painful
alternative, and it was thought better to lay before the jury a clear
and succint statement of the facts of the case, leaving it to their
sense of justice and humanity to decide the issue. Had the state of
the law not have been so manifestly defective, another course would
have been pursued, but it was thought safer to run the risk of a con-
viction, with its accompanying obloquy and punishment, than urge as
an excuse the plea of insanity, and thus incur the danger of perpetual
imprisonment among the insane.* The law pretends to acquit, on the
* We copy the subjoined particulars from the police reports of the Times of
September 5th. We are reluctant to make any observations offensive to the
magistrate whose duty it was to adjudicate in the painful case referred to in the
4G6
STATE OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS
ground of irresponsibility, induced by diseased brain and disordered
mind, and yet punishes those so acquitted with the severest penalty
short of actual death upon the scaffold! This anomalous state of the
law is a disgrace to a Christian and civilized community. We freely
admit that great caution should be exercised in the liberation of per-
above remarks. He was at the time exposed to severe animadversion for his
alleged harsh and somewhat Spartan mode of dealing with the case. Influenced,
we have no doubt, by a nervous anxiety to administer equal justice to rich and poor,
he somewhat strained his judicial functions, and instead of adopting the humane
view of the lamentable position in which the lady had placed herself, and at once
viewing the matter before him in its proper light, he, by taking the extreme course,
and sending the case to trial, inflicted an amount of mental anguish upon the
numerous members of a much repected family beyond the reach of all remedy. Let
our readers contrast this proceeding with the benevolent and enlightened course
pursued by Mr. Jardine in the case that came judicially before him.
"Bow-street.—Jane Moseley, a young lady residing at 10, Morninglon-plact1,
Hampstead-road, was charged before Mr. Jardine with stealing a papier machd
portfolio, worth 5s., the property of Lavinia Price, of 18, Hart-street, Bloomsbury-
square.
" Ellen Woodward stated that she was a housemaid in the service of the prose-
cutrix. On Monday evening the prisoner called at the residence of her mistress,
and requested to see the first-floor apartments, which were to be let furnished.
Witness showed her up into the drawing-room, upon which the prisoner requested
her to fetch a glass of water. Witness ran down stairs for this purpose, and while
she was returning with it saw the prisoner in the act of leaving the house. The
circumstance having excited her suspicion, she hastened back to the drawing-room
to see if anything had been removed, and, missing the portfolio from the table, fol-
lowed the prisoner into the street, and accused her of stealing it. The prisoner
denied the charge, but witness insisted on bringing her back to the house. The
prisoner then produced the portfolio from under her shawl, and offered witness 5s.
not to say anything about it. A policeman was called, however, and she was
given into custody.
" The prisoner sobbed bitterly during the examination of the witness, and
declined to say anything to the charge.
"The mother of the prisoner, who appeared equally distressed, stated that she
was a widow. She had two daughters, both of them suffering from affliction, the
prisoner's sister being at the present moment in the last stage of consumption, 'Jl'0
prisoner was eighteen years of age, and, from causes peculiar to her time of li^e>
was subject to tits of mental aberration. At such times she could not be regarded
as a responsible being.
"Mr. Jardine inquired if any medical evidence to this effect could be produced.
"The mother having replied in the affirmative, the case was put back till a later
period of the day, to enable her to do so.
" A gentleman, whose name did not reach us, but who stated that he was a pro*
fessional gentleman residing in Caroline-street, lied ford-square, waited subsequently
upon the magistrate, and informed his worship that he had known the prisoners
family for many years. They were of the highest respectability. The prisoner, h®
was aware, was an occasional sufferer from illness of a peculiar kind, and at such
times he had known her mind to be slightly affected.
" Mr. Jardine. —Do you speak as a friend, or have you attended her I>r0"
fessionally ?
"Witness.—I have attended her professionally.
"Mr. Jardine.—You are prepared to assure me, then, from your own personal
knowledge, that her mind has been so affected at times as to make her unconscious
of what she is doing?
" Witness.—Yes, at short intervals. .
"Mr. Jardine.—I think this is a case, then, in which I ought to restore tl.®
prisoner to her friends. She may bo given up to her mother.
"The prisoner was accordingly discharged."
AND THE INSANE IN IRELAND.
4G7
sons tried for capital offences, but is there not, we ask, a large
number of persons at this moment confined in the criminal wards of
our public Lunatic Asylums for the commission of trivial offences
against the law, who might be either safely liberated from all restraint
or be subjected to a modified and less offensive kind of surveillance ?
But to return to the Report. When speaking of the liberation of
homicidal cases, the Inspectors observe, that,
" One patient alone, a respectable married female, who destroyed her
infant whist labouring under puerperal mania, has been liberated since
the date of our last Report. We shall have occasion, however, in the
course of the present year, to lay before his Excellency the Lord Lieu-
tenant, for his consideration, seven or eight cases as fit subjects for
freedom. Of these cases, three were acquitted of homicide ; but being
n°w for over four years under our immediate supervision, and certified
oy the attendant physicians to be free of every symptom of mental
derangement, at the same time that they have been uniformly quiet,
industrious, and well conducted, we feel justified in the course we pro-
pose—the more so as they undertake to emigrate; two having already
received money for the passage out to join their lamilies.
Independent of the exercise of clemency itself, in a moral point of
view, the very fact of opening the gates of an asylum such as the Dun-
drum, and affording egress to objects deemed worthy of it, produces a
beneficial and tranquillizing influence over those who remain behind,
and who, if finding no prospective hope of freedom on recovery, but
obliged to regard their future doom as the companions of madmen,
might, from their very numbers, become most dangerous and difficult to
control. There are two individuals, both respectably connected,acquitted
of very aggravated assaults, and who being now, and indeed since their
transference to the asylum, quite well, might be liberated; but as the
parties on whom the assaults were committed (one the father, the other
a solicitor) object to their enlargement, in deference to stiong personal
apprehensions, and aware of the responsibility we might incur if any
thing untoward subsequently took place, we are unwilling to inteifeie.
In the course of time, however, should those justifiable feiiis subside,^ or
ff some arrangement can be effected by us between the various parties,
We trust they may then participate in the same consideration extended
by Government to others.
In alluding to the importance of inquiring into the antecedents of
criminal lunatics, and suggesting modifications of the law with
regard to them, the Inspectors observe:—
" It would be very desirable in all important cases, as when a party
is acquitted, on the plea of lunacy, of murder, or of a serious attempt
on the life of another, that the antecedents to the act should at the
time be judicially investigated. Once insanity is established and
it generally happens to be the first point urged in defence the case
closes; and those exciting causes, or incidental circumstances, likely to
4G8
STATE OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS
modify the judgment of the court in regard to a prisoner thoroughly
responsible for his conduct, are left unquestioned. Thus the lunatic
labours under a disadvantage in one respect; for though acquitted of a
moral crime, he may still become the penal sufferer by a more length-
ened confinement. Amongst other instances under our cognizance, as
illustrative of this view, we shall refer to three: the first, that of a
man in the Central Asylum, who it was proved, whilst labouring under
maniacal excitement from jealousy towards his wife in consequence of
her supposed freedom of conduct, committed homicide. On recovery
from his insanity he was brought to trial, when the fact was proved.
This person is now quite sane, and lias been so for some years. The
second instance we may adduce in the person of a man, who, in a scuflle,
inflicted a wound which ultimately caused death; he was acquitted on
the plea of being deranged at the time of the occurrence. The third
is one of a peculiar character, for the individual in question, acquitted
also on the plea of insanity, complains that he has thereby been most
unfairly and harshly treated ; that he never was deranged; that the
offence he committed was the result of the hardship and injustice
he suffered at the hands of another, and of his consequent anger and
excitement; and that had he been tried regularly, and found guilty,
he would have escaped with a comparatively short imprisonment.
" The records alone of the fact of trial, and the cause of acquittal,
exist in these and similar cases ; but it would be most satisfactory if
such records were coupled with the official information of attendant
circumstances, in order that, when submitting them to the considera-
tion of the Lord Lieutenant, we might be enabled to furnish ample
materials for his Excellency's decision; and to satisfy ourselves we
were justified in stating them. So long as an asylum—no matter
under what denomination, be it even that of criminal—is made the
receptacle of our unfortunate fellow creatures, who, in the hour of
grievous mental derangement, have committed offences in themselves
the most appalling, or of those who, subsequent to sentence, may lose
their reason altogether, so long its inmates have a claim on our kind-
liest sympathies; it ceases, however, to fulfil its object if, through a
mistaken benevolence, or from want of a scrutiny into the particulars
of each case, it should become the residence of parties for whom it was
not legitimately intended, or should an immunity for the undeserving
be secured within its precincts."
Reverting to the statistics in the Report, it appears, that of the
twenty-eight criminal lunatics returned as cured, twelve were homi-
cidal cases, nine being males and three females. Up to the time of
making the report the total number of homicidal cases admitted into
the Dundrum Asylum, were thirty-five males and nineteen females.
The most frequent kind of homicide among the men is wife murder.
No less than eight committed this offence, independent of those who
attempted it, but fortunately without effect. This fact, at first sig 1 >
might seem to argue less constancy, fidelity, and tenderness with^ ^
male sex ; but there are strong causes to explain away, or at e' b
AND THE INSANE IN IRELAND.
409
reduce the force of the conclusion; for it is well known that, occa-
sionally, among the first and most marked symptoms of the disease
with lunatics, may be reckoned a mistrust and aversion to members of
their own family, and to those particularly with whom they had been
united by the strongest ties of affection, and who, if physically weaker,
in case any control is attempted, are most exposed to suffer from their
violence. On the other hand, there is no record of a female killing her
husband, the most common mode of destruction among women being
infanticide, of which there was lately a very melancholy instance in
the Dundrum Asylum. Great commiseration is, no doubt, due to
111 any who come within this category ; for we can fully imagine how
shame and anguish must weigh on an unfortunate and betrayed female,
with enfeebled system, what strong temptations induce her to evade
the censure of the world in the destruction of the evidence of her guilt,
hy a crime that outrages her most powerful instinct, maternal love of
offspring. The thought of such a fearful exposure no doubt may lead
to some sudden and impulsive act, for which, as generally happens, she
is judged with the utmost leniency ; but still, unless the deed is ac-
companied with, and followed by distinct symptoms of insanity, the
difficult question presents itself: Is such a person sane imme-
diately after the act, sane at trial, and sane on admission to remain
for life—or if not for life, for what period—the inmate of an asylum,
and the associate of lunatics ?
The subjoined remarks, with reference to the particular tendencies
of the insane, homicidal and suicidal, their fixity of delusion, respon-
sibility, and peculiarities, will be read with great interest.
" With regard to the existence of particular fixed tendencies among
the insane, we are sure it will be both agreeable and interesting to
your Excellency to be informed, that although the Dundrum Asylum
is specially erected for criminal lunatics, and contains so many who
have deprived their fellow creatures of existence, our experience of its
inmates would almost ignore propensities of a decidedly homicidal
character, although there are some patients in it with marked suicidal
inclinations. We are aware of three only who have evinced this de-
structive propensity—a convict from Spike Island, sentenced to trans-
portation for burglary, and two men who committed murder; one
of them, however, cannot be considered as innately malevolent, for he
labours under a double delusion, inasmuch as he thinks if he can
succeed in killing some person, he will thereby obtain his freedom here,
and secure heaven hereafter. We would, therefore, in a spirit of
humanity, be disposed to infer that some of the most serious offenders
in the Asylum have become so more from accidental causes than from
an original malignity of disposition.
" lievolving on the whole class of homicides and those who have com-
470
STATE OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS
mitted dangerous assaults on the person, it is difficult to assign how
far responsibility may or may not be occasionally attached to certain
individual acts. When persons are thoroughly insane, it is clear they
are accountable for no crime, however frightful in itself; practically,
however, from experience we would conclude that lunacy has not
always been so developed as to destroy every idea of right and wrong,
and a consequent feeling of responsibility ; whilst it may have happened
in a case or two within our cognizance that insanity was assumed to
escape the ends of justice.
" The difficulties thrown in the way of liberating lunatics from the
Central Asylum after recovery, and the length of their subsequent
detention—for it is only by warrant of the Lord Lieutenant, based
upon the certificate of the physicians and the final report of the
Inspectors, that they are set free—has afforded some precise informa-
tion on a point which is not so satisfactorily arrived at in ordinary in-
stitutions, from which patients are promptly discharged—viz., the
permanency of cure. We have several cases where the parties seemed
to have recovered their reason perfectly, and relapsed. One man (a
homicide) who was steady and rational for nearly three years, became,
without apparent cause, suddenly and boisterously insane; and now
again, at an interval of four months, is tranquil and quite collected.
Another, who came in highly excited, continued so, with little varia-
tion, for two years, when he rapidly got well to all appearance, re-
mained so about eighteen months, and is now again as bad as ever.
Some continue well fur months, and then relapse ; and while under all
the favourable circumstances which comfort, regularity, and a healthy
residence can produce. A peculiarity has hitherto marked these re-
current attacks—with one exception, they have been confined to the
male sex.
" Occasionally, too, it has come within our observation that a
perfect restoration of the mental powers takes place, so far as can
be judged by an undeviating reasonableness of conduct and conversa-
tion, although the original delusion, which led to acts the most insane,
continues in full force. We gave, in a former lleport, the details of a
case where the captain of a ship killed seven of his crew at a short
distance oil' Cork harbour. For twelve consecutive years, this ma*1
had periodical attacks of violent madness ; within the last four, how-
ever, he has shown no symptom whatever of disease ; his time is prin-
cipally devoted to pious reading; though never spoken to 011 the
subject of his offence (according to an established rule in the Asylum)>
still, of his own accord, he has lately expressed his conviction that the
crew actually mutinied with intent to murder him. The delusion is
thus as fixed as ever, and, did a second opportunity present itself, the
consequences, as far as depended on him, might, under similar circum-
stances, be alike unfortunate.
" As may be supposed, in an institution such as the Pundruin
Asylum, many of the patients are at times highly excited and intract-
able j others morose and reserved, as if, in the sort of twilight intclli*
AND THE INSANE IN IRELAND.
471
gence tliey retained, their minds were engrossed with one train of
ideas, or some painful remembrance of the past.
" Among others we have a remarkable case of this character in a
homicide, who for five years, with only three exceptions, where he
suddenly made some short and angry observations, has maintained an
unbroken silence ; he smiles occasionally, if he hears anything amusing,
but never condescends to laugh. This man will stand with his head
bent to his chest for four or five hours together in the same exact
position, and resist being moved simply by the vis inertise; yet he
goes, when called, to his meals, and behaves most correctly at table.
At the female side too, there is an infanticide, very taciturn and re-
served, with a strong predisposition to self-destruction; her attempts
are always with broken glass, which she endeavours to secrete; scissors
and knives may be safely entrusted to her. A gloom hangs over this
woman; her conversation is most rational—in the one object alone, and
hy the one mode of attaining it, is her insanity displayed. We men-
tion these individual cases as characteristic of many, and thus illus-
trating to your Excellency, on subjects more or less professional, that
general information which we would desire to convey.
" With the exception of two attempts at life, but neither fatal, we
have had no serious cases to refer to officially since the date of our last
Report. In the first instance, a lunatic inflicted a deep wound on his
own neck with a razor; in the second, a convict from Spike Island, at
the time deemed quite harmless (but who has since evinced a cold,
malignant disposition), stealthily getting behind one of his companions,
whose verses and sarcasms give occasional annoyance, struck him on
the head with a piece of iron he had secreted for the purpose, causing
a large compound fracture, through which a considerable quantity of
brain was discharged. Dr. Harrison, the Visiting Physician, was in
immediate attendance, and removed several pieces of depressed bone;
after remaining comatose for four days, the man recovered rapidly,
without an unfavourable symptom, and without the slightest^ change
or remission of his insanity. By a strange coincidence this patient was
^oted for his memory, and the accuracy with which he repeated a long
string of words the most incongruous. The wound, with a consider-
able loss of brain, was (phrenologically speaking) exactly in the region
of the organ of memory; his recollection, however, continues quite
unimpaired."
The remarks of the Inspector with regard to private asylums in
■Ireland we publish in another part of our Journal.
The following is a Return of Patients in Private Lunatic Asylums on
31st December, 1854, classified as to Professions, &c.
Males. Females.
Married 48 57
Single or Widowed   . 204 150
Total  459
472
REMARKS ON THE RELIGIOUS PERSUASION, ETC.,
Previous Professions or Occupations :
Army 35
Navy  3
Church . . 19
Law 18
Medicine  0
Students   15
In Trade 30
Other occupations 49
Farmers 1G
No occupation 272
Total in Asylums . . 459
Males. Females.
Found Lunatic by Inquisition ... 19 7
Sent by Authority of Friends .... 233 200
r ^
Total  459
The appendix contains a vast body of interesting and important
statistical and tabular statements, apparently drawn up with great care.
