Cerebral Pathology Based Upon the Examination of 411 Cases. Specific Gravity of the Brain in Cases of Insanity
================================================================================================================


BY DAYID SKAEj M.D.,
Physician to the Royal Edinburgh Asylum for the Insane, £(e., 4fc.
We are glad of an opportunity of transferring to our pages the fol-
lowing valuable communication of Dr Skae, published in the Annual
Report of the Royal Edinburgh Asylum for 1851. It refers to a subject
p v 2
574
CEREBRAL FUNCTIONS.
of deep and increasing interest. We regret that want of space compels
us to omit the tables illustrative of Dr Skae's experiments in con-
nexion with the comparative weights of the brain in the various forms
of mental disease, as well as other tabular matter, showing the specific
gravity of the grey aud white substance of the brain in the sane and
the insane. We, however, give all the results at which he has arrived
in relation to both branches of inquiry.
Post-mortem examinations were permitted in 41 cases. They were made
with much care, and the following are the results :—
Of those examined, 3 had been cases of acute mania, 15 of dementia, 5 of
dementia with epilepsy, 3 of melancholia, 9 of monomania, and G of general
paralysis.
Calvarium teas of unusual thickness in G cases; 1 of acute dementia, 1 of
dementia, 3 of dementia with epilepsy,"and 1 of melancholia.
Calvarium teas thinner than usual in 9 cases; 2 of melancholia, 1 of dementia,
4 of monomania, and 2 of general paralysis.
Diploe was absent in 2 cases of monomania.
Abnormal adhesion of dura mater to calvarium existed in 4 cases; 1 of
dementia with epilepsy, 2 of monomania, and 1 of general paralysis.
Pus in the cranial sinuses was found in 2 eases; 1 of dementia with
epilepsy, and 1 of acute dementia; in the latter case, pus was also found in
the internal ear, and sero-purulent effusion beneath the arachnoid, and in the
lateral ventricles.
Increased thickness of dura mater was found in 3 eases ; 1 of acute mania,
1 of acute dementia, and 1 of dementia with epilepsy.
Thinness of dura mater was noticed in five cases; 2 of dementia, and 3 of
monomania.
Ossific deposit infalx cerebri existed in 1 case of monomania.
Abnormal adhesion of arachnoid to dura mater was found in 4 cases ; 1 of
acute dementia, 1 of dementia with epilepsy, 1 of monomania, and 1 of
general paralysis.
Serous effusion into sac of arachnoid existed in 22 cases; 1 of acute
dementia, S of dementia, 2 oi' dementia with epilepsy, 5 of monomania, and G
of general paralysis.
Extravasation of blood into sac of arachnoid was found in 2 cases of
general paralysis.
Organised lymph in sac of arachnoid was found in 1 case of general
paralysis.
Opacity and thickening of arachnoid was found in 2G eases; 1 of acute
manih, 2 of acute dementia, 7 of dementia, G of dementia with epilepsy, 2 of
melancholia, 4 of monomania, and 4 of general paralysis.
Granular deposit in arachnoid over general surface was noticed in 2 cases of
general paralysis.
Congestion of membranes was noticed in 12 eases; 1 of acute mania, 3 of
dementia, 1 of acute dementia, 2 of dementia with epilepsy, 1 of monomania,
and 4 of general paralysis.
Sub-arachnoid serous effusion was found in 22 cases; 1 of acute mania, 1
of acute dementia, G of (Icmcntia, 2 of dementia with epilepsy, G of monomania,
and G of general paralysis.
Sub-arachnoid sero-sanguinolent effusion occurrcd in 1 case of dementia
with epilepsy.
Adhesion of membranes to cortical substance was found in 3 cases of general
paralysis. .
CEREBRAL FUNCTIONS.
575
Paleness of the grey matter was noticed in 17 cases; 2 of melancholia,
C of dementia, 1 of acutc dementia, G of monomania, and 2 of general
paralysis.
Grey matter was of a dark tint in 3 cases; 1 of dementia with epilepsy, 1 of
dementia, and 1 of mclancliolia.
Grey matter had a violaceous tinge in 5 eases; 1 of acute mania, 1 of
dementia with epilepsy, 1 of monomania, and 2 of general paralysis.
Grey matter had a yellow tint in 2 cases; 1 of acute mania, and 1 of
general paralysis.
Grey matter teas softened in 2 cases; 1 of dementia, and 1 of general
paralysis.
Grey matter presented limited yellow softening in 3 cases; 2 of dementia with
epilepsy, and 1 of general paralysis.
While matter teas softened in 2 cases: 1 of dementia, and 1 of general
paralysis.
Punctos vasculoscc were very numerous in 15 cases ; 1 of acute dementia, 2
of dementia, 5 of dementia with epilepsy, 1 of melancholia, 2 of monomania,
and 4 of general paralysis.
Apoplectic effusion was found in 1 case of monomania.
Serous effusion into lateral ventricles was found in 1G cases; 2 of acutc
mania, 1 of melancholia, 5 of dementia, 2 of dementia with epilepsy, 2 of
monomania, and 4 of general paralysis.
Scro-sanguinolcnl effusion into lateral ventricles occurred in 1 case of acute
dementia.
Granular deposit in membrane of lateral ventricles was found in 3 cases;
1 of dementia with epilepsy, and 2 of general paralysis.
Cystic bodies in choroid plexuses occurred in 9 cases; 1 of acutc mania, 1
of dementia with epilepsy, 4 of monomania, and 3 of general paralysis.
Pineal body was unusually large in 4 cases of dementia.
Veins of Galen were much dilated and clogged with decolorized clots in 1 case
of dementia with epilepsy.
The brain was carefully weighed in every case, and the weights, with those
of other viscera, together with the specific gravity of the grey and white matter
of the brain arc recorded.
The general conclusions to be derived from the preceding abstract are, that,
in a large proportion of the deaths, well-marked appearances were found indicat-
ing increased vascular action, or slow inflammatory processes affecting the
membranes of the brain, and producing thickening and serous effusions. These
appearances were most constant and most distinct in the deaths from general
paralysis, where there was also found a peculiar kind of softening of the grey
substance of the brain, and on examining this part of the brain under the
microscope, the cells of which it is principally composed appeared to be en-
larged and altered in form. In these eases, adhesion of the membranes to the
surface of the convolutions was present in all instances where there was not
such a quantity of serous effusion interposed as to prevent it; in stripping off
the membranes, small layers of grev matter were stripped off' with them, par-
ticularly on the lateral surfaces of the hemispheres.
With the exception of the morbid changes last mentioned, which are limited
o cases o general paralysis, all the other morbid appearances are found very
ficqucnthm the brains oi persons who have died of other diseases, and without
anj mental affection. And, on the other hand, eases arc not unfrequently to be
met with in the dead-liousc of the Asylum, of patients who had exhibited,
during lite- lor many months or even years—all the symptoms of raving mad-
ness, and m whose brains the morbid appearances described are altogether
wautmg, and m which the brain could not be distinguished from that of one
who had died in all the vigour of a sound mind.
57 G
CEREBRAL FUNCTIONS.
From these facts it must be inferred that the morbid appearances described,
although the very frequent concomitants of insanity, do not constitute the
pathological conditions by which the symptoms of mental derangement are
Sroduccd; and that we arc, in fact, ignorant of the true pathology of this
isease.
There are many considerations which may well lead us to doubt whether any
other morbid changes in the structure of the brain may ever be discoverable in
insanity. The analogy of the symptoms to those produced by poisons which
are known to enter the blood, the suddenness of the invasion in some cases,
and the suddenness of the cure in others, even occasionally of long standing,
the remarkable remissions, and at times the temporary restoration for a few
hours or moments, to perfect sanity in persons long plunged in profound
dementia, or labouring under a chronic and protracted mania, arc facts which
lead to the reflection that insanity may be a disease of the blood, or may
depend upon a peculiar orgasm of the nervous centres,—upon conditions not
to be discovered in the brain after death.
Pathological investigations, however, for changes in the nervous substance
itself, are not to be abandoned until wc have exhausted all our means of obser-
vation ; and it occurred to mc, accordingly, some years ago, to commence a
series of experiments by collccting the weights of the brain, cerebrum and cere-
bellum,—by measuring the breadths of tlic grey matter,—by endeavouring to
determine the degree of hardness or softness of the ccrcbral substance, by ascer-
taining by what length of a column of water it could be broken up,—and, more
lately, by taking the specific gravity of the grey and white substance of different
parts of the brain.
In an hospital for the insane, where the deaths are much fewer than in a
large general hospital, it takes some years before a sufficient number of data
can be accumulated to warrant any general inferences; and I feel that the data
which I possess, although the accumulation of some years, arc still rather
meagre. I am induced, however, to record them, as offering a few very inte-
resting suggestions, which may lead others to follow similar methods of obser-
vation, and thus facilitate the collection of a larger number of facts.
My measurements of the grey matter, and experiments on the hardness and
softness of the ccrcbral substance, I do not propose to detail at present, as I
have 110 similar observations on the brains of persons dying sane with which to
compare them. I shall contine myself, therefore, to the weight and specific
gravity of the brain, and to such general deductions only from those observa-
tions as the number of facts seem to warrant. I shall leave for another
opportunity several comparisons and inquiries which might be instituted
through these methods, inasmuch as the data sccni to me too few to justify
speculations which relate to more spccial questions.
I have compared my observations on the weights of the brain with those
collected in the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh by the late Dr John Reid and
Dr Peacock, and the experiments on its specific gravity with those published
by Dr Sankcy in the "British and Foreign Mcclico-Chirurgical Review," for
January, 1S53 (vol. xi., p. 210), and made in the Royal London Fever Hospital.
The weights used were avoirdupois.
The observations made of the weights of the brain comprise 109 cases, of
which 98 were males and 101 females. The tables exhibit the weights of the
heaviest and lightest cnccphalon, ccrcbrum, and cerebellum (with the pons
and medulla), and their average weights at different periods of life. The
figures arc arranged in parallel columns with those of the corresponding results
from the tables of Drs. Kcid and Peacock. ,
On comparing the columns showing the heaviest brains in the sane and insane
males,it will be seen that in only one instance did the cnccphalon exceed CO ounces
in the insane, while in several of the sane it amounted to 02 ounccs and up-
CEREBRAL FUNCTIONS. 577
■wards, the heaviest brain in the one series being GO oz. 8 dr., and the heaviest
in the other being G2 oz. 12 dr. It will also be seen that, with two excep-
tions, the superiority in weight was among the brains of the sane in each of the
quinquennial or decennial periods into which they are classified. Whether tins
justilics the inference that persons having large brains are less frequently the
subject of mental derangement than others, I shall not venture to say; but
the fact is a striking one when contrasted with the results derived from a com-
parison of the average weight ot the entire number of cases, 'where it appears
that the average weight is increased in persons dying insane. The average
weight in the insane from fifteen to ninety years ol age being 50 oz. 2 dr., and
in the sane 49 oz. 14 dr.
Different results arc derived from a comparison of the weights of the
brains of the females; here, in one exceptional case, the brain weighed 61^
ounces in a female who died insane, but in a majority of eases the greatest
weight was on the side of the sane. On taking the average of all the
cases, the weight of the brain in the insane was 44 oz. only, anu in the sane
44 oz. 5 dr.
The comparison, however, establishes, I think, a strong presumption that the
absolute weight of the brain is increased in the insane, when we reflect that in
many cases of insanity, the absolute size of the brain must be materially dimi-
nished by the large quantity of serous effusion found in the ventricles, arach-
noid sac, and sub-arachnoid tissue.
This increase in weight, however, appears to depend chiefly upon an increase
in the weight of the cerebellum ; for, oil comparing the weight of the ccrebra in
the two series of cases, it will be found that the difference is inconsiderable,
and indeed in the ease of the females that it is in favour of the sane. On
comparing, however, the columns showing the weight of the cerebcllum (with
the pons and medulla) in the two classes, it will be found that there is almost
a uniform preponderance in the weights of those of the insane. The average
weight in all the eases of the insane males excceds that of the sane by 4
drachms, and in the females by 5 draclnns.
In a Table the ratio between the cerebellum (with the pons and me-
dulla) and the cerebrum is given at the different ages distinguished. Here the
same fact is very clcarly brought out; in almost every instance the cerebellum
in the insane being heavier in relation to the cerebrum than it is in the sane.
From the average of the entire number, the cerebellum was found in the
males to be as 1 to 6*748 in the insane, and as 1 to 7'0G in the sane ; and in
the females as 1 to 6"64 in the insane, and only 1 to 7 in the sane. The
cerebcllum therefore is considerably heavier in relation to the cerebrum in the
insane.
This mode of estimating the results appears to me to be free from the source
of fallacy arising from the small number of eases compared; when we compare
the absolute weights together, as here, on examining all the cases separately
wc lind, in almost every instance, the cerebcllum of each brain heavier in rela-
tion to its own cerebrum in the insane than in the sane.
but U1 :ult^ a number °f data, may modify these results;
highly nrobahWi l +T0 ^ } e thus collected, it may be regarded as
sons dymg insane & C18 u" 1ncrea*e i* the weight of the cerebellum in per'
monomania' ^o^li^dr^^J °f cnccl)lialon in males was 53 oz. 13} dr.; in
4G oz 61-2 dr • tliowo- ;» \n dementia, 49 oz. 11JL dr.; and in general paralysis
lvsis rfmmrL ^ grC.at cst in lcast il1 Seneral Pa™"
samc series while thov'^i aVfraSe, weights of the ccrcbclla, &c., however, in the
SXTffiSaSZ ■ Tiito folw thc san,c decrease from mania> the
12 dr G oz II 0 dr 3? ^mentis, the weights being respectively 6 oz.
U dr., 0 oz. 11TV dr., and 6 oz. 9^ dr.; thc cases of general paralysis present
578
CEREBRAL FUNCTIONS.
the highest average, the average weight being G oz. 13^ dr. From the fact
that in general paralysis the morbid appearances arc most constant and most
distinctly marked, this result might perhaps be anticipated, if we assume what
I have endeavoured to show, that the relative weight of the ccrcbcllum to the
cerebrum is increased by insanity, and that the ccrcbcllnm is the organ prin-
cipally affected. This increase, too, would appear from a review of the history
of the ease to bear a constant relation to the form of the disease, and to be
greatest in more protracted and gravest eases. On comparing the average
weight of the cerebellum to that of the cerebrum in the cases classified as
above, it was found in males to be as 1 to G*9735, G*7549, G*5G25, and G*2511,
in mania, monomania, dementia, and general paralysis respectively. Excepting
mania, the same gradual increase in the relative weight of the cerebellum was
found to obtain in the females, the cerebellum being to the cerebrum in
them as 1 to G*5338, G*412, G*5943, and G'0135 in same class of cases
respectively.
It appears, therefore, that in cases of comparatively short duration, there is
the smallest amount of increase in the relative weight of the ccrcbcllum, and
that in general paralysis the greatest increase takes place.
In reflecting upon these results, the impaired control over the voluntary
movements, which forms so marked a feature of general paralysis, and the
very constant increase of the relative weight of the cerebellum in this dis-
ease, must at once be viewed as very interesting and important facts in con-
nexion with the functions ascribcd to the ccrcbcllum by Fleurcns and other
physiologists.
May it not be asked—supposing it to be established by an extended scries of
observations, that there is uniformly an increase in the relative weight (and
specific gravity, as we shall presently sec,) of the cerebellum as compared with
the cerebrum in all forms of insanity—whether it may not be inferred that the
ccrcbcllum is the organ through which we cxcrcisc self-control,—control over
the volitions and successions of our thoughts, as well as over the voluntary
muscular movements;—a perturbed volition or a loss of self-control, being of
all other symptoms the most essential characteristic and pathognomonic feature
of insanity ?
The specific gravity of the grey and while substance of the brain was taken in
SO eases, of which 39 were males and II females.
The specific gravity in the eases of insanity was almost uniformly higher,
and this observation applies to both the grey and white matter.
In Dr Sankcy's cases, the lowest spccilic gravity of the grey matter was
102S, in the Asylum ones the lowest was 1030; the highest in Dr Sankcy's
cases was 101G, in mine 1019; while the average specific gravity in all the
cases of both sexes was in the former 1034, and m the latter 1038, showing an
increase in the specific gravity in the eases of insanity.
I he lowest specific gravity of the medullary substance in the healt hy brains
was 1032, in the diseased 1032 ; the highest in the healthy was 1018, in
the diseased 1053 ; the mean of all the cases was 1*0411 in the sane, and 1*0429
in the insane, showing an increase in the specific gravity of the white matter of
the brain in eases of insanity.
These results arc corroborative of those obtained by Dr Sankcy in his
observations at the London Fever Hospital, where in all the cases complicated
with cerebral symptoms of a grave charactcr preceding death, such as convul-
sions, strabismus, paralysis, and utter unconsciousncss, the specific gravity was
high, averaging both in thcy/vy and white matter 1011. He makes two exception
in regard to the white matter, in both of which the specific gravity was below
the mean; these were both cases of children of eight and ten years of age, aim
both of tubercular meningitis. Deducting these cases, the average specilie
CEREBRAL FUNCTIONS. 579
gravity of tlie -\vlritc matter in his series of cases, complicated with cerebral
symptoms, was 1043.
On examining my cases in detail, I find that in most of those cases where the
specific gravity of the grey matter was considerably below the mean, the
patients had died of phthisis, and in other instances of exhaustion occurring at
an advanced age. Where exceptions to this general inference wen met with,
it was found that cither the symptoms immediately preceding death were of a
grave character, or that the morbid appearance found in the membrane indicated
chronic inflammatory action.
I have also taken the specific gravity of the grey and white matter of the
cerebellum in forty-three cases. I have placed on the table the averages at
different ages. The number of observations is too few to warrant more than a
presumption that the specific gravity of the cerebellum is higher than that of
the cerebrum. The difference is much more apparent when, instead of coin-
paring averages, the specific gravity of the cerebellum is compared with that
of the cerebrum to winch it belonged.
I have not been able as yet to obtain a sufficient number of data showing
the specific gravity of the cerebellum in the sane to furnish comparisons with
the ob servations 1 have made. Dr Sankey has kindly furnished me with a
number of observations made by him; but as he has not separated the grey
from the white matter, but has taken his specific gravity from a portion of
brain containing both, 1 cannot compare my observations with his directly. I
may state, however, that tlicy tend to the same general conclusion, that the
specific gravity of the cerebellum is higher than that of the cerebrum, and
that it is so in healthy brains as well as in diseased ones, although probably in
a smaller ratio.
Through the kindness of Dr Haldane, I have been enabled to make a few
observations on the specific gravity of the grey and white matter of the cere-
bellum in persons dying in the ltoyal Infirmary. The number of cases suitable
for a comparison of this kind of cases dying without any cerebral symptoms,
has as yet been rather too small to merit a special record. I may, however,
state that in a scries of five cases of males dying without cerebral symptoms,
the average specific gravity of the grey substances of the ccrebellum was 10i2,
that of the cerebrum being 1011. In the eases of the insane examined by me,
the average was 1040 for the ccrcbelluni, and 1035 only for the cerebrum,
showing a much greater increase in the ratio in the insane than in the sane,
although the absolute specific gravity was less in these particular cases.
The white substance of the cerebellum in the five cases referred to, had an
average specific gravity of 1-0143, while that of the cerebrum was 10430. In
the cases examined in the Asylum, the average specific gravity of the white
substance of the cerebellum was 1014, while that of the white substancc of
the cerebrum in the same cases was T039 only—thus showing a small increase
in the absolute specific gravity of the white substance of the cerebellum in the
uisane in the eases compared, and a very considerable increase in the relative
specific gravity to that of the cerebrum in the case of the insane.
cernhoi11 ^9se. data, although limited, I infer that the specific gravity of the
that of iiio nS n!crcuscd m insanity, and attains a greater increase in relation to
In comLw d°Cs.iu Prsons W *™c-
and taking the averaSJTfnlfif?Vlty m UlC lli""crcut forms of mental disease,
gravity of the otpvnK 7 lC ca?cs of cach kind» 1 find thc lowcst sl)ccific
still 0 003 above tho * oc.cur lu cases of dementia, where, however, it is
occurs in®caSrf Sd«S3M ^ ^ ?C specific gravity
next in mania, and the tllC "CXt m ^ P^alysis, thc
Of the white substance, the lowest average of specific gravity occurrcd in
580
PRIVATE LUNATIC ASYLUMS IN IRELAND.
cases of mania, 1010; the next in dementia, 1011 ; the next highest in
general paralysis, the next in monomania, 1011; and the highest also in epi-
lepsy, being 1*0158.
The results of the preceding observations arc curious and interesting. They
are inferences certainly from a comparatively limited number of data; out they
arc, I think, sufficient to prove that more extended observations of a similar
kind may probably lead to some satisfactory and important deductions regarding
the pathology of insanity and the functions of the brain.
In conclusion, I think it right to state, that the specific gravity of the
central substance was taken exactly in the same manner as that followed by
Dr Sankey. A number of jars were prepared with solutions of common salt,
the density of which was determined by the urinomctcr. A scries was prepared,
ranging from 1*030 up to 1*050. Small portions of ccrebral matter were
dropped into these solutions, until a jar was found in which the portion so
dropped floated midway, at the point of which it sank. This fluid gave the
specific gravity, and to insure accuracy, and avoid fallacies arising from the
spontaneous evaporation of the fluid, the specific of the fluid was in every ex-
periment tested afresh by the urinometer at the time of the observation. The
temperature of the room was G0° E. It is right to repeat the precaution
pointed out by Dr Sankey, namely, to take the first effect of the experiment,
and that only; as by allowing the portion of brain to remain a few minutes
oidy in the solution, its specific gravity rapidly alters by endosmose, and it
will soon sink even in the strongest solutions. From not attending to this
{>rccaution, it is, I presume, to be explained why, in the pathological report
atcly published of a Metropolitan Asylum, the brain is stated in many cases to
have had a specific gravity of 1 090 and upwards !
