Art. YL—FRENCH PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE #
Ik a late number of this journal, we had occasion to show, that what-
ever merit there may be in having introduced to the notice of British
medical practitioners the so-called "Non-restraint" system of treat-
ment in mental disease, is undoubtedly due to Dr Charlesworth, and
not to Mr. Gardiner Hill, by whom the honour has been vociferously
claimed. We, at the same time, endeavoured to name the true
originator of the humane views which, at the present day, govern our
management of lunatics. We claimed for Pinel all the glory of the
revolution that has since his clay transformed the lunatic asylum from
a cage or a dungeon, to a drawing-room 01* library—a revolution that
has opened the doors of the cells of incurables, and let in the mes-
sengers of mercy carrying health and sanity in their hands—a revo-
lution that has, within less than half a century, left nought but
historic trace of the horrors and cruelties which were the ordinary fate
of the inmates of asylums. And we thought we had but done
honour to whom honour was due; the article, however, before us,
informs us that we were not correct in our adjudication. M. Brierre
de Boismont attributes the origination of this reform movement to a
physician named Daquin, who forty years ago died at Chambery; and
what Brierre de Boismont asserts is not to be lightly disregarded.
"The question of priority," remarks M. Brierre de Boismont, "is
one of great importance in the interests of humanity, but instead of
disputing thereon, the first thing to be done is to collate and compare
the writings of both. Daquin published, in 1791, a work entitled,
(i A Medico-philosophical Treatise upon Insanity." In 1801, Pinel
* Annales Medico-Psychologiques. Janvier, 1854.
TREATMENT OF THE INSANE.
73
published his Medico-philosophical Treatise on JSIania—an interval
of ten years thus separating these authors.
Daquin asserted that it was possible to treat this disease by moral,
rather than by physical agencies. One of the first reforms demanded
by him, was the abolition of the dungeons in which the insane were
then incarcerated. "Rare and strange animals," he observes, " are
carefully tended in their cages, and supplied with all they require;
the unfortunate lunatic is left in culpable neglect." He never ceased
to insist upon the abandonment of chains, cells, &c., &c. He in-
cessantly urged that the continued imprisonment in ill-ventilated cells,
perpetuated or irrevocably fixed the mental disorder of those who had
otherwise, by better treatment, been restored to reason. Daquin not
only preached these reforms, but so far as lay in his power, he put
them into practice; but unaided, he could in his day effect little, and
that little again vanished after his death, until Pinel's benevolent and
energetic mind carried on towards ultimate success the mighty change,
with which his name must ever be associated.
Coercion, Daquin maintained, was only useful in the milder cases.
" What is the use," he observes, " of having recourse to mechanical
restraint when so celebrated a physician as Cullen avowed that he
knew of no means of coercion that were at once easy and salutary."
Daquin further urged improvemnt in diet, fresh air, exercise, occupa-
tion, as remedial measures of the first importance ; and he enforced
the advantages of mild behaviour and gentleness, mingled with firm-
ness of deportment, towards the insane. Moral, rational treatment
was the principle he never ceased to enforce. In all the points here
referred to, are to be found the germs of the great reforms sub-
sequently accomplished by Pinel, Esquirol, and others in this country.
Although the character of Pinel is granted by M. Brierre de Bois-
mont to place him above suspicion of plagiarism, it seems improbable
that Pinel should not have been aware of the writings of Daquin.
At the same time, there is little doubt that similar views had origi-
nated in the mind of each, independently of any suggestions or infor-
mation derived from the other. Daquin was the first to call attention
to existing atrocities, and to attempt the reform required; he was
the author of a method which has finally triumphed, but unaided,
without hospital, pupils, without a press, or other auxiliary, he could
do no more than enunciate doctrines which Pinel developed, by the
help of all the advantages of one of the largest hospitals in Europe,
with all the authority of the chief of a great school, with the advan-
tages of intelligent aid, and at a time when the strongest disposition
for a change of all established institutions affected the public mind.
With all these favourable conditions, Pinel accurately interpreted and
74
THE REFORMATION TN THE
elaborated the noble sentiments of Daquin. The priority as to date
rests indisputably with Daquin, but the more philosophic mind, the
more energetic will, in a more propitious age, seized and improved
opportunities which had not been granted by Providence to Daquin.
It is not credible, M. Brierre de Boismont urges, that such a work
as that of Daquin could have been published in France, and have
remained unknown to Pinel, who quotes so many other authors,
ancient and contemporary. It is still further matter of astonishment
that the same silence should have been maintained in his edition of
1809, in the Cliniqiie de Salpetriere, 1807, and in the six editions of
the Nosographie, of which the last was published in 1818, although
Daquin had dedicated his second edition to Pinel in 1804, five years
before the publication of the second edition of Pinel's Traite medico-
philosophique sur Valienation.
" Can it be true," most pointedly asks M. Brierre de Boismont,
" that there is in the heart of the most illustrious men a secret corner
in which they hide the weaknesses of our nature; and must we pro-
nounce, among these weaknesses, the impossibility of pronouncing
the name of a rival, or, as it has been justly denominated by a modern
author, la conspiration du silence? We withhold reply, but refer to
the facts now related."
Researches on Cretinism, by M. Baillarger.—The author, in the first
place, examines the definitions of Cretinism given by various writers,
and compares these with the recorded descriptions, by different
observers, of the condition to which the name Cretinism is applied.
Two principal opinions have been enunciated; the one consisting
in the assimilation of this state with that of idiotcy, from which it
is alleged to be separated only by certain accessory and unimportant
characters; the second opinion regards Cretinism as a distinct malady.
M. Baillarger, in order to arrive at satisfactory conclusions on this
question, has visited, during several months, the districts in which
the malady prevails. The result of these researches, carried on in
the Pyrenees and Alps, is, that Cretinism is to be defined as an " in-
complete, irregular, and, most frequently, very tardy development of
the organization;" and is, therefore, essentially different from endemic
idiotcy.
The Consequences of Epilepsy.—The observations here referred to are
extracted from a work in the press on Epilepsy, by M. Delasiauve.
The consequences treated of, in this place, are those dependent on the
general course of the disease, or its complications. These are enume-
rated, and described with reference to the primary malady, at the
same time illustrated cases of the several complications are given.
Among those which are noticed, are, apoplectic and inflammatory
TREATMENT OF THE INSANE.
75
congestion, mania, stupidity, delirium, paralytic dementia, and
idiotcy.
We quote parts of the author's observations on stupidity as a conse-
quence or complication of epilepsy. It may be superfluous to state,
tliat this is a mental condition frequently met with independently of
epilepsy, presenting simply a constitutional dulness and slowness of
ideas, weakness of memory, confusion in reasoning, and indecision of
character.
In its higher degree, epileptic stupidity has all these defects in an exag-
gerated form approaching to the state of idiotcy. The intellects impaired,
conversation impossible, from want of clearness of thought, and from
inability of utterance. The patient obviously comprehending what is
addressed to him, his countenance expresses all the intermediate grada-
tions from dulness to stupefaction. This expression, observes M. Delasi-
auve, does not ordinarily indicate feelings of depression, but simply of
suspension of cerebral action. It is intelligible how, under such cir-
cumstances, violence may occasionally be manifested, according as the
patient is under the influence of sinister or automatic impulses. The
intensity of this stupidity will vary with the progress of the original
malady. With its subsidence, the intellectual powers may clear up and
regain their former activity. This form of mental malady is more
persistent than mania which results from epilepsy.
The following instance is given by the author:—
A youth was admitted into the Bicetre, presenting the characters
here described. He was a miller, had arrived from the provinces to
be present at the festival of the 15th August in Paris. He was a
mere automaton, could not tell whence he came, whither he was going,
what his country was, where he then was, nor could he express any
ailment. His countenance was inexpressive, as his mind was without
thought, and although exhibiting a slight tinge of melancholy, he
manifested no sentiment of chagrin or fear. In about eight days this
chaos of the intellect seemed to clear up a little, after a succession of
epileptic seizures.
M. Baillarger regards delirium tremens as connected with this form
of stupidity, from its resemblance to the state of inebriety; the reaction
giving rise to automatic impulses, which take their direction from sen-
sorial illusions regarding surrounding objects. The hallucinations are
generally of a sinister aspect, such as the supposed presence of assassins,
robbers, spectres, &c.
M. Delasiauve further enters into a full consideration of the allied
forms of mental derangement; as well as the other consequences of
epilepsy above enumerated.
Monomania, in relation to the Criminal Law.—M. Victor Molinier
76
THE REFORMATION IN THE
has attempted in some degree to reconcile the discrepancy which so
often occurs between legal and medical opinion upon the state of mind
in criminals; a difference arising, according to M. Molinier, from the
inquiry not having been made with a due regard to the respective
domains of law and medicine; the latter, he urges, has merely to
determine the fact of the existence of insanity—the former has to
determine whether, at the time of the commission of a crime, the
offender was, from his knowledge of right and wrong, responsible for
his actions.
Herein, however, is the point of difficulty which M. Molinier has
not quite cleared away.
Monomaniacs, M. Molinier urges, are aware when they commit a
crime; they can make their election between the observance of the
laws and the punishment of their violation; between the risk of the
latter and the indulgence of an impulse originating in unrestrained
passion or ill-regulated affections. The difference between the mono-
maniac and the culprit is only one of degree of moral depravity. To
hold any other view, the author holds, is to destroy the free will and
responsibility of man, and abolish the bulwarks and protection of
society.
The doctrine here enunciated betrays rather the strong arm than
the strong argument.
Legal Medicine.—In this department of the journal, M. Morel
relates a case of feigned insanity, which was detected, and afterwards
confessed by the culprit. Also, the history of a man who had violently
torn out his wife's eyes, and concerning whose mental condition the
opinion of M. Morel was required. This man had for many years
been a good husband and a good father, industrious as a workman, and
of excellent general character. Under the influence of derangement
of his health he bad become hypochondriacal, suspicious, and jealous
of his wife; his delusions had been aggravated by illusions of the
senses of sight and hearing—and actuated by these erroneous im-
pression he had committed the violence already mentioned, with the
intent at the moment to have committed actual murder.
In the Therapeutic Report, or extracts from other journals, we find
statements of the beneficial effects of belladonna in neuralgic affections,
by M. Sandras; of the successful employment of manganese in
chlorotic affections, by M. Stoeber; of the serviceable administration
of the fumes of nitrate of potash in asthma, by M. Trousseau; the
mode of administration of the last-named remedy consisting in the
saturation of paper in solution of the salt, and its ignition beneath the
nostrils of the patient.
M. Recamier gives his statement of the success attending the use
of cold affusion in puerperal convulsions. M. Aussaguel is here cited
TREATMENT OF THE INSANE.
77
as disapproving of venesection in apoplexy. The advantages of the
inhalation of chloroform in delirium tremens is quoted from Dr.
Pratt's paper in the American Journal. A case of general paralysis,
presenting intermittent characters, is reported as cured by sulphate of
quinine.
The Report of Proceedings of Learned Societies is occupied with
the discussion on monomania, at the Societe JbLedico-Psychologique,
May 30th, June 27th, July 25th, and October 30th.
In the Review department we find notices of the following works :—
" On Spirits, and their Fluid Manifestation," by M. le Marquis Eudes
de M ; of which work the reviewer says—" I have read this book
through from one end to the other, and my curiosity has not flagged
for one instant. Its strange title is not a mere catch, as is too often
seen on the covers of books. The text is as strange as the title. Not
a shade of an artifice throughout. Here is naivete, not wanting learn-
ing : moreover, here is a rare courage, the courage of self-opinion,
which, bestowing a sort of heroic attitude upon an eccentric thought,
elicits from the most hostile reader sympathy and respect. Not in
our own age, beyond the strife of party, have we met with a writer
who attacks with such aggressive serenity, or with a stronger faith in
sarcasms, the scorn of what is called common sense. As if by a single
blow to set at defiance all sneers and shrugs, the author has presented
what he modestly terms his memoir to the Academy of Moral and
Political Science, being the most competent tribunal, as, from the
nature of its pursuits, it is less averse to separate the supernatural
from sciences of observation."
The object which the Marquis has in view is, it appears, to demon-
strate the presence and material intervention of spirits in the affairs of
this world; and that their office is to worry poor humanity, and to
augment its already numerous tribulations. These spirits, says the
Marquis, will interfere either spontaneously, or by voluntary or in-
voluntary invocation; spontaneously in certain mental or nervous
affections, or, in the language of the author, "in hallucination and
mysterious perceptions, in possession and prophetic voices, in mysterious
neuropathies;" by voluntary invocation, in sorcery, magic, &c.; by
involuntary invocation, in mesmerism, animal magnetism, spirit
rappings, table-turning, &c.
The precise nature and characters of these fluidified spirits are not
here recorded.
We need scarcely further to occupy our space with such specula-
tions, which, indeed, to our common sense, would have been deemed to
have been the production of the inmate of some asylum.
Sauvons le Genre Hit/main ! such is the title of a work by M. Victor
Hennequin ; another exposition of Fourierism ! !
78 THE HISTOLOGY OT THE BLOOD IN THE INSANE.
The next publication brought under consideration is that of Dr.
Hubert Yalleroux, Upon the Actual Condition of the Deaf Mute and
the Blind. Upon the nearest calculation, the author informs his readers,
there are in France 27,2S6 deaf and dumb persons, or 1 in every 1356
inhabitants. This estimate M. Hubert believes to be below the truth.
The various modes of instructing these, as well also the blind, are
examined by M. Hubert, who proposes an entire new organization of
the present system of education for these unfortunates. The most
important feature of the scheme is that it proposes to educate the
deaf and dumb and blind to agricultural pursuits, and, therefore, re-
quires that the institutions for their benefit should be established in
the country.
The Hygiene of Body and Soul.—M. Mar. Simon, known to us as
the author of Deontologie Medicale, has published a work upon tem-
perance, under the above title, and which, it appears, according to the
reviewer, enforces religious motives also for the avoidance of the vice
of drunkenness.
Notices of the Reports of Asylums, French and Foreign, conclude
this portion of the journal.
