On Medico-Legal Evidence in Cases of Insanity
==============================================

LETTSOMIAN LECTURES.'
No. IV.
(conclusion.)
Delivered before the Medical Society of London.
:Author: FORBES WINSLOW, M.D., D.C.L.

I purposely decline entering at any length into the considera-
tion of the law of lunacy relating to dispositions of property, and
the performance of the marriage contract. In the former case
the proof of insanity invalidates all testamentary documents; but
the courts are extremely jealous in interfering with the apparent
wishes of the testator, unless clear and positive lunacy be esta-
blished. The character of the testamentary document itself is
generally viewed as the most important evidence of the capacity
of the attesting party. Persons actually in confinement, and so
violent as occasionally to require the application of mechanical
restraint, have executed wills, and such wills have been declared
valid and operative in the Prerogative Court; the principle of law
being, that the testament itself exhibited, jprimd facie, no evi-
dence of mental derangement. If the will should be such a
will that a sane and rational man would make—the property
descending in the right and legitimate channel—the court will
not easily be induced to set it aside, even if a considerable
amount of eccentricity, oddity, and even insanity, have existed.
The proof of eccentricity to an extreme degree, even if accom-
panied by a testamentary disposition contrary to the usual order
of succession, is not sufficient to induce the Ecclesiastical Court
to pronounce a will invalid. The following remarkable case of
Morgan v. Boys is one in point:—

The testator in this instance died, leaving by his will a large
fortune to his housekeeper. The will was disputed by his rela-
tives on the ground that it bore intrinsic evidence of his not
having been in a sane state of mind. After having bequeathed
his property, the deceased directed that his executors should
cause some part of his bowels to be converted into fiddle-strings,
that others should be sublimed into smelling salts, and that the
remainder of his body should be vitrified into lenses for optical
purposes ! He further added in a letter, " the world may think
this done in a spirit of singularity or a whimbut he expressed
himself as having a moral aversion to funeral pomp, and he
wished his body to be converted to purposes useful to mankind.
Sir Herbert Jenner Fust, in giving judgment, held that insanity
was not proved; the fact merely amounted to eccentricity, and on
this ground he pronounced in favour of the will. It was proved
that the testator had conducted his affairs with great shrewdness
and ability; that he not only did not labour under imbecility of
mind, but that he was treated as a person of indisputable capacity
by those with whom he had to deal.

The medical man has occasionally to give evidence as to the
existence of what, in legal phraseology, is termed a " lucid
interval" Without entering into a psychological or pathological
consideration of this vexata qucustio, I will only observe> that all
who have had opportunities of studying insanity, must readily
admit, that during attacks of mental derangement, the mind does
occasionally become exempt from the influence of diseased im-
pressions—at least, from all obvious and appreciable delusions,
and is quite competent at these periods of intermission, to the
exercise of a right judgment in relation to the disposal of property.
"With regard to the legal bearing of this subject upon the
question of marriage, it must be obvious that insanity must
invalidate the most important contract of life, the very essence of
which is consent. The spiritual court has the sole and exclusive
cognizance of questioning and deciding directly the legality of
marriage, and of enforcing specifically the right and obligations
respecting persons depending upon it. But the temporal courts
have the sole cognizance of examining and deciding upon all
temporal rights of property; and so far as such rights are con-
cerned, they have the inherent privilege of determining inci-
dentally either upon the fact or legality of marriage.*
In cases of disputed wills, on the ground of mental incom-
petency, the evidence of the medical witness is generally recorded
(privately) before a proctor or his representative. The witness
has to reply to a series of written interrogatories relating to the
testator's state of mind, and his replies are written at length by a
person specially deputed to examine him, and take his evidence.
The cross-examination is also conducted upon the same principle,
and the evidence thus recorded, after being attested upon oath,
is adduced in court during the trial. In attempts to invalidate
the marriage contract upon the ground of insanity, the inquiry
is in some cases of the nature of an ordinary commission of lunacy.
Should the insanity be thus established, the subsequent question
of divorce must of necessity come before the Ecclesiastical Court.
It is not, however, indispensable that in these cases a writ De
Lunatico Inquirendo should issue.

I now proceed to consider another division of the subject,—
viz., that relating to the question of capacity to manage both the
person and property, and to submit to you an outline of the
character of the evidence adduced during the prosecution of a
writ jDe Lunatico Inquirendo. It is at these important inquiries
that the legal and medical signification of the terms " soundness"
and " unsoundness" of mind come legitimately under considera-
tion. Let me briefly refer to the legal import of these obscure
and much-vexed phrases, as defined in one of the recognised
text-books upon the " Law of Lunacy."

"A sound mind," says Shelford, "is one wholly free from
delusion, all the intellectual faculties existing in a certain degree
of vigour and harmony, the propensities, affections, and passions
being under the subordination of the judgment and the will, the
former being the controlling power, with a just perception of the
natural connexion or repugnancy of ideas. Weak minds, again,
differ from strong in the extent and power of their faculties; but
unless they betray symptoms of a total loss of understanding, and
of idiocy, or of delusions, they cannot be considered unsound.
" An unsound mind, on the contrary, is marked by delusions,
mingles ideas of imagination with those of reality, those of re-
flection with those of sensation, and mistakes the one for the
other; and such delusion is often accompanied with an apparent
insensibility to, or perversion of, those feelings which are pecu-
liarly characteristic of our nature. Some lunatics, for instance,
are callous to a just sense of affection, decency, or honour; they
hate those without cause who were formerly most dear to them;
others take delight in cruelty; many are more or less affected at
not receiving that attention to which their delusions persuade
them they are entitled. Ketention of memory, display of talents
enjoyment in amusing games, and an appearance of rationality
on various subjects, are not inconsistent with unsoundness of
mind; hence sometimes arises the difficulty of distinguishing
between sanity and insanity. The man of insane mind from
disease, having been once compos mentis, pertinaciously adheres
to some delusive idea, in opposition to the plainest evidence of
its falsity, and endeavours by the most ingenious arguments,
however fallacious they may be, to support his opinions."

Previously to the time of Lord Eldon, the term unsoundness
of mind, and its equivalent, " unsound memory," were used indis-
criminately in several of the old statutes, not only synonymously
with the word lunatic, which in its strict legal signification means
a disease of the mind with lucid intervals, but with the phrase
idiocy, or permanent insanity. It was reserved for Lord Eldon
to give importance and significance to this phrase. Lord Chan-
cellor Hardwicke maintained, that the term implied, not mere
weakness of understanding, but a total deprivation of sense
Lord Eldon says : " Of late, the question has not been, whether
the party be insane, but the court has thought itself authorized
to issue a commission I)e Lunatico Inquirendo, provided it is
made out, that the party is unable to act with any proper and
provident management—liable to be robbed by any one—under
imbecility of mind not strictly insanity, but, as to the mischief,
calling for as much protection as actual insanity." Again, his
lordship observes, " that unsoundness in some such state of mind
undistinguished from idiocy and from lunacy, and yet such as
makes him a proper subject for a commission." The legal
acceptation of the term unsoundness is, as Mr. Amos observes,
"not very easy to define, for it is neither lunacy, idiocy, imbe-
cility, or incompetency to manage a person's own affairs; and
yet, we have seen, an inquisition finding a person unfit to manage
his own affairs, and therefore not of sound mind, has been found
bad." Mr. Amos concludes his remarks by stating that "un-
soundness of mind is a legal term, the definition of which has
varied, and cannot, even in the present day, be stated with any-
thing like scientific precision." Mr. Slielford regrets that Lord
Eldon should have departed from the original signification of
* Law of Lunacy, by Leonard Slielford, Esq. 1847.

the term unsoundness of mind, and that so much uncertainty
and latitude should have been given to the phrase. In a subse-
quent case, Lord Eldon appears to have laid down a clearer view
-of his meaning in relation to this important matter. He says :
<f Whatever may be the degree of weakness or imbecility of the
party to manage his affairs, if the finding of the jury is only that
he was of an extreme imbecility of mind, that he has an imbe-
cility to manage his own affairs, if they will not proceed to infer
from that, in thus finding upon oath, that he is of unsound mind,
they have not established, by the result of their inquiry, a case
in which the chancellor can make a grant, constituting a com-
mittee, either of the person or estate. All the cases decide that
mere imbecility will not do, unless that imbecility, and that
incapacity to manage his affairs, amount to evidence that he is
of unsound mind, and he must be found to be so." The dicta of
Lord Chancellor Eldon have, however, been often disregarded by
liis eminent judicial successors; and in a statute of William IV.,
relative to trustees and mortgages, a power is given to the Lord
Chancellor to issue a commission "Be Lunatico Inquirendo" in
all cases in which an inability to "manage affairs can be esta-
blished, apart altogether from the existence of idiocy, lunacy
or insanity. So much for the glorious uncertainty of the law,
and the civil security of the subject !* It would appear that the
term " unsoundness of mind," although a recognised and adopted
phrase, is to be considered as a legal phantom—an ignis fatuus
—a condition of mind amenable to no philosophical or judicial
analysis, incapable of being submitted to any psychological test—
like a Will-o'-the-wisp, for ever eluding our grasp, and placing
at defiance every standard of comparison—a phase of diseased
understanding—a form of lunacy suspended upon, or hovering
Dr Hay, when referring to tlie facility with which commissions of
lunacy are granted in tliis country, remarks: " One finds it difficult to
believe on what slight grounds interdiction is there (in Great Britain)
every day procured—a measure that, with tlie ostensible purpose of pro-
tecting the interests of the insane party, is too often, in reality, designed
to promote the selfish views of relatives and friends. A kind and degree
of mental impairment that has never obscured the patient's knowledge of
his relative situation, never altered his disposition to be kind and useful to
those around him, never weakened his enjoyment of social pleasures, and
never affected his capacity to manage his concerns with his usual prudence,
has been repeatedly deemed a sufficient reason for depriving him of the
use and enjoyment of his own property, and subjecting him to all the dis-
abilities which the law can impose."

between, the confines of positive mental alienation and complete
idiocy—an intermediate state of existence—a kind of tertium
quid, to which modern jurists appear incapable of attaching any-
precise, definite, or philosophical meaning. Nevertheless, in our
courts of law it is no fiction—it assumes a palpable form—it is
an accepted term—an admitted phrase; and, as medical wit-
nesses, we must be prepared to be asked the question, whether
we are of opinion that the case in reference to which we are
examined is one of unsoundness of mind, and whether that un-
soundness of mind is or is not associated with an incapacity to
manage the person and property? It is our duty, however, to
recognise 110 form of mental unsoundness which is not 'positively
the product of disease. The judges of the land may affix their
own interpretation to the phrase, "unsoundness of mind.;" but,
as medical psychologists, we must never forget what is due to
our position as witnesses, as well as what we owe to the profes-
sion, and to the cause of truth, and resolutely repudiate any
other definition of the term than that justified by a strict psycho-
logical analysis.

Unsoundness of mind is either a "diseased" or "healthy"
condition of the intellect. If the term implies only natural
mental decay (unassociated with any well-marked, symptoms of
disease of the brain, the excitement of insanity, or delusive im-
pressions), a condition of mind occasionally exhibited by persons
of healthy intellect, the mental infirmity often contemporanous
with old age; if it refers to an incapacity and inaptitude
for the performance of the ordinary business affairs of life, and
which may exist apart altogether from connate idiocy or acquired
imbecility, insanity, or lunacy; then WE have no authority to
take, cognizance of the condition—it does not legitimately come
within our medical jurisdiction. If we accept the phrase "un-
soundness of mind," we can attach, medically, no other signi-
fication to it than that of a mind in an unhealthy condition.
Admitting this to be a rational view of the matter, it will be our
duty to consider the term as synonymous with insanity, aberration
of mind, or lunacy. We cannot admit the existence of a legal,
apart from a psychological, unsoundness.

In making this distinction, I do not wish to prejudge the
important question, as to whether there are not states of the in-
tellect clearly accompanied by an incapacity to manage both the
person and property, tlie result of a premature and natural decay
of the mental faculties, independently of any physical alteration
in the nervous matter which would justify us in bringing the
person so affected within the wise and protective influence of the
law ? It is quite possible that in some conditions of the mind,
"interdiction" and "protection" may be desirable for the pur-
pose of guarding the person and property of the individual, who
could not, without an act of great injustice, and a monstrous and
cruel perversion of the law and of science, be pronounced to be,
in the right acceptation of the term, either insane, imbecile, or a
lunatic. Should such a class of cases be recognised by statute,
and made the subject of legal inquiry and protection, it will be
necessary for us to adopt proceedings very dissimilar to an ordi-
nary commission Be Lunatico Inquireiido ; neither should we be
justified in applying to those so brought within the jurisdiction
and control of the law, the terms usually adopted in writs of
this description: such as lunatic, imbecile, idiot, or unsoundness
of mind.

There are upon record cases of this kind, which have been
made the subject of judicial inquiry. In the case of Ridgway v.
Darwin, a commission of lunacy was supported against a person
who, when sober, was a very sensible man, but being in a constant
state of intoxication, he was pronounced incapable of managing
his property. This liberality of courts of justice is clearly at
variance with the dicta of Lord Coke, who pronounced the
drunkard to be " a voluntaries daemon." By the Roman law,
if a man by notorious prodigality was in danger of wasting his
estate, he was considered as non compos, and committed to the
care of curators or tutors, by the praetor. By the laws of Solon
such prodigals were branded with perpetual infamy. Blackstone
questions the propriety of the Roman and Grecian law with
regard to drunkards and spendthrifts. He says, it was doubtless
an excellent method of benefiting the families, but it hardly
seems calculated for the genius of a free nation, who claim and
exercise the liberty of using their own property as they please.
" Sic utere tuo ut alienum non Icedas," is the only restriction
our laws have given with regard to economical prudence.

The medical witness deputed to ascertain the state of mind
of a party, prior to the presentation of a petition to the Court
of Chancery for the issuing of a commission De Lunatico In-
uirendo, is required to prepare for the consideration of tlie
jord Chancellor, an affidavit embodying the facts, and his
opinion of the case. I would advise the witness not to remain
•satisfied with one examination of the alleged lunatic, even if the
insanity should be very apparent and obvious. The court is
better satisfied if the affidavit of the medical expert is based
upon several interviews. The opinion of the witness assumes a
legal form whilst in the hands of the solicitor, and the party
giving it, is required to appear at the affidavit office, or before
one of the commissioners appointed by the Lord Chancellor, to
administer oaths in Chancery, to swear to the accuracy of the
document. It is very important that the medical witness should,
at the moment of the examination or immediately afterwards
take full notes and accurate dates of every conversation with
the person whose state of mind is likely to be the subject of
investigation. If called upon to give viva voce evidence, he
will be permitted to refer to these memoranda, if made at the
time of examination. It should also be borne in mind, that the
opposing counsel and judge (if the commission be contested)
have a right to see and examine, in open court, the notes
of the medical witness. Before being called upon to give
evidence at a commission of inquiry, he is generally expected,
by repeated interviews with, and examinations of, the alleged
lunatic, to have made himself fully acquainted with all the pecu-
liar and characteristic features of the case, and to have satisfied
his mind as to the existence, not only of mental derangement,
but of insanity associated with an inability, from disease, of
managing both the person and property. In our examina-
tion of the alleged lunatic, we must not take for granted every
statement alleged against him; but it is our duty to investigate
for ourselves into the truth of the representations made for the
purpose of establishing a case of insanity against the person
whose capacity and sanity of mind we are deputed to examine.

In the generality of instances, the delusions of the party are
apparent, and we have little or no difficulty in detecting the
mental derangement. In many cases, the intellect is reduced to
a sad state of imbecility; and in this type of insanity we have no
obstacles to interfere with our arriving at a right conclusion; but
doubtful instances occasionally are brought under our notice,
giving rise to considerable anxiety, and requiring for their scu-
eessful exposition great caution, much time, and patience. Delu
sions are sometimes cunningly concealed for a length of time
and notwithstanding we are certain that they exist, no amouni
of ingenuity will induce the patient to disclose them, particularly
if made aware of the object of our visit. I had recently to see a
lady whose insanity was manifested in a remarkable degree in
her every action; but after paying her several visits, I found it
impossible to induce her to exhibit any one delusive impression
or insane idea; but 110 sooner had I left the room, than her
conversation and conduct became outrageously insane. Many
insane persons are able to talk with apparent rationality, but
cannot write without exhibiting their insanity. I have ex-
amined recently one very remarkable case of this kind, in a
clever, well-read, and intellectual woman, whom I had occasion-
ally to visit. I never could detect the slightest aberration of
mind in her conversation, and yet almost invariably upon my
leaving, she placed in my hands a letter (which had been written
previously to my calling), full of the most absurd extravagancies
and fancies; accusing strangers, myself, and the members of her
family, of being engaged in a deeply-concocted conspiracy against
her property and life. Several of these peculiar and interesting
cases are recorded, and the medical man has been- advised,
with the view of obtaining an insight into the true condition of
the mind, to open a correspondence with the alleged lunatic,
upon the principle that few persons positively insane can, for any
length of time, write, without exhibiting their delusions, whatever
amount of self-control they are able to exercise over their thoughts
and morbid ideas, during protracted conversations. It is essential
for us to ascertain the degree of knowledge possessed of the
ordinary and every-day occurrences of life. Upon one occasion
I was conversing with a person whose state of mind was the
subject of investigation, and finding him rational, and apparently
sane upon all points, I questioned him as to who was the reigning
sovereign, without knowing he had any delusion upon the point.
The person immediately started from his chair, exclaiming, in an
excited tone of voice, " I am the sovereign.

It is a usual practice to test the alleged lunatic's knowledge
of the elements of arithmetic, and to ascertain whether he has
any idea of the ordinary rate of interest obtainable for money
in the funds, or other modes of investment. It would also be
desirable to place before him a simple sum of addition and mul-
tiplication. The medical witness may be asked whether he has
pursued this mode of examination, particularly in cases of im-
pairment of mind and imbecility occurring early ir life. On
this account I bring these apparently trivial and unimportant
matters before you.

Upon one occasion the mental incapacity of a party was clearly
exhibited, by his being easily induced, in the presence of his
solicitor, to write the physician who examined him a check for
£500, in payment for some imaginary service that had been
rendered him. It was palpable that a man who could thus
commit himself with a stranger, would be the willing dupe of
any designing person who might be disposed to take advantage
of his mental infirmity, and therefore was quite unfit for the
management of his person or property. The " arithmetical test/'
as it is termed, is, in cases of doubtful insanity, of no value per sq.
It is only when conjoined with other evidences of mental im-
pairment and admitted incapacity, that any importance should
be attached to it. The position in life of the party, the amount
of education he has received, his age, and the opportunities which
have been afforded him of acquiring information respecting the
ordinary commercial or business affairs of life, should invariably
be considered whilst testing the capacity.

In commissions of lunacy, the witness must not only be pre-
pared to give an opinion as to the then state of mind of the
party, and competency to take care of his person and manage
his affairs, but he must be prepared, occasionally, to pronounce
judgment as to a prior questionable condition of brain and mind.
The alleged lunatic may, under the exercise of undue influence,
have previously alienated his property by will, or been induced
to execute other important documents. The witness will be called
upon to depose as to the probable state of the brain at the time,
and as to the length of the alleged existing attack of insanity.
Well-marked symptoms of organic cerebral disease may be pre-
sent; and it will, in some cases, be an important point to decide,
whether such a condition of physical ill-health has not been of
some years duration, impairing the mental vigour, destroying all
power of rational conduct and healthy continuity of thought,
and thus interfering with a right exercise of the judgment and
affections, in the legitimate disposal, of property.

The witness, in giving evidence, must abstain from the use of
pedantic terms, and technical phraseology. The more simple,
unaffected, and unadorned his statement, the greater will be its
moral weight. He should carefully and scrupulously avoid all
■positiveness and dogmatism, and his testimony ought to be
accompanied with judicious qualifications, when relating to cases
of difficulty, doubt, and obscurity, respecting which there may,
even among eminent scientific men, be great discrepancy of
opinion. Dr W. Hunter, when speaking of the confidence
placed in the evidence of men of science, observes, "Some of
us are a little disposed to grasp at an authority in a public
examination, by giving a quick and decided opinion, which
should have been guarded with doubt; a character which no man
should be ambitious to acquire, who, in his profession, is presumed
every day to be deciding nice questions, upon which the life of
a patient may depend/'* The evidence of the medical expert
should impress the court with the conviction that his opinion
has not been hastily, crudely, indiscreetly, or rashly formed. It
should appear as the result of a full, careful, deliberative, and
scientific consideration of the case. Having a lucid conception
of the nature of the evidence he is prepared to give, the witness
should quietly, but manfully and firmly, maintain his position,
and not permit himself to be confused or driven from his point
by the cunning artifice of counsel, or thrown off his guard by the
disingenuous remarks of the judge. A medical witness, whilst
under examination respecting the grounds upon which he had
signed a medical certificate of lunacy, after having stated very
fairly his reasons for so doing, was subjected to a close examina-
tion. He replied to the interrogatories to the best of his ability,
rigidly adhering to the simple facts of the case. The answers
to the questions did not appear to satisfy the counsel, and he
exclaimed, in a pet, " That (referring to a particular reply) is not
the answer I wish." The proper and immediate rejoinder was,
"1 know not what reply you ivish, but it is the only one I have
the power of giving, and the only one I can give, consistently
with my view of the facts of the case." In the celebrated Bain-
brigge Will Case, tried at the Stafford Assizes, a physician, whilst
under examination, was asked a question respecting monomania.
* On the Uncertainty of the Signs of Murder. By Dr W. Hunter.

He replied to the interrogatory, coupling with, his answer an
observation, that he was of opinion that cases of pure monomania
did not exist. The judge immediately interposed, and stopped
the witness, observing, rather sharply, that he (the physician) was
well acquainted with the legal and generally received definition
of monomania, and he must adhere to that, for the court could
not listen to any metaphysical or psychological discussion about
the term. "Monomania," said the judge, "implies a delusion
upon one point, the mind being apparently sound and sane
upon all others." It would be well for the witness to avoid
such altercations, and never permit himself to be involved in
a metaphysical disputation. No good can result to our own
character, or to the party in favour of whom we appear, by
thus entangling ourselves in a philological dispute with the
judge, or by attempting any precise medical or psychological
definition of terms. Whilst strongly recommending the witness
to maintain a firm and manly bearing, I would at the same time
caution him against the attempts, if such should be made, to
involve him in personal altercations with counsel. It will often
be his duty, when under examination, to exercise great self-
command, amidst extreme irritation. He should never lose his
temper, or indulge in witticisms or retorts upon counsel, even if
a happy occasion should present itself for a display of such repar-
tees or pleasantries. An apothecary, who had previously acted as
clerk to a barrister, was, whilst under examination in one of the
courts in Westminster Hall, asked to inform the court, how
long lie had changed his position in life ? The witness replied,
I began the study of medicine at a much earlier period of life
than the late Lord Erskine did that of law, and he attained to
far greater eminence in his profession than ever you will The
judge did not forget this piece of impertinence; for, when alluding
to the evidence of the apothecary, he observed, "that whatever
knowledge that witness had obtained in studying his two pro-
iessions, it must be clear to every one, that he had not acquired a
knowledge of manners." These injudicious attempts to " trim
the lawyer," to " set him down," and to " fight him with his own
weapons," almost always recoil upon the witness. A carpenter
was under examination in reference to a serious affray of which
he had been cognisant. He was asked, how far he was from the*
spot at the time of the occurrence ? The witness stated the
106 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
distance witli minute exactness, even to the fractional part of all
inch. Being then asked, what induced him to qualify himself to
give so singularly minute and precise an answer, he replied,
"that, thinking some fool might ask him the question, he had
taken the precaution of accurately measuring the ground." This
was viewed at the time as a happy hit but it would seriously
damage the weight of scientific evidence, and interfere with the
legitimate course of justice, if witnesses were allowed, even under
admitted provocation, to thus unseemly conduct themselves whilst
assisting in the solemn administration of the law.*

Should counsel be disposed, not for the purpose of eliciting
the truth, but with the evident object of puzzling and confusing
the witness, unconsciously impaling him upon the horns of
a metaphysical dilemma, designedly subject him to an unfair
examination upon abstract points, thus purposely placing him in
a ridiculous position, and damaging his testimony, I would advise
the witness respectfully to refuse to reply to the questions, inti-
mating to the court that he was of opinion that they had no
direct reference to the point at issue, and could not, in his
opinion, throw any light upon the nature of the case under con-
sideration. I will, with the view of conveying an idea of the
kind of metaphysical disputation to which a medical witness has
occasionally to submit, cite a portion of the examination of a
psychological expert in a case of disputed insanity.
Q. What would you call insanity ? A. Some derangement of
the intellectual faculties, or of the passions, either general or
partial.—Q. What do you call a derangement ? A. An altera-
tion from a natural or healthy state.—Q. What do you call the
intellectual faculties ? A. The faculties by which we reason,
compare, and judge.—Q. What do you call the affections and
" Dr Bankhead, the private pliysician to the late Lord Castlereagli,
when giving evidence in a case of great importance, was subjected by the
counsel, tlien Mr. Brougham, to a severe cross-examination. The Doctor,
in reply to a question, gave an answer which was not deemed at all satis-
factory. Mr. Brougham, looking steadfastly at the witness, held up his
finger, and pointing it significantly at him, repeated in a measured tone of
voice the interrogatory. Dr Bankhead appeared much irritated at Mr.
Brougham's mode of elevating his finger, and manner of repeating the
question, and he immediately clenched his fist and shook it at the counsel.

Mr. Brougham requested that the witness should inform the court why
he assumed so menacing an attitude. He replied, that " it was his practice,
'whenever a gentleman pointed his finger at him, to shake his fist in return."
passions ? A. They are called the motive powers or faculties.—
Q. What are the intellectual faculties ? A. Comparison, judg-
ment, reflection.—Q. What is comparison ? A. By comparison
we compare two or more things with each other.—Q. What is
judgment? A. Judgment enables us to choose between two or
more things after comparison has done its work.—Q. What is
reflection ? A. The comparison and judgment bestowed upon a
subject.—Q. Where do you find the faculty of judgment de-
scribed ? A. I have not given it from any author whom I can
name.—Q. Is there any such faculty as the will ? A. I don't
know that the will could hardly be called a faculty.—Q. What
is it ? A. The will is a power—a determination of the mind to
do something. I wish to avoid going into a metaphysical dis-
cussion.—Q. What kind of a power is the will—physical or
mental ? A. It belongs to the mental powers.—Q. What is the
difference between the mental powers and the intellectual facul-
ties? A. I don't make any difference.—Q. Then do you call
the will an intellectual faculty ? A. It does belong to the facul-
ties of the mind. I do not think it is very properly called a
faculty : a good many things go to make up the will.—Q. Where
does it operate from ? A. I should be glad to avoid any meta-
physical discussion about the will. I am not now prepared to
go into it. The will is an operation of the mind. If the pas-
sions and affections are in action, they determine the individual
to do something, and that is called the will.—Q. Is the will
passive, then ? A. I cannot say that it is passive ; I should call
it active. The intellect directs the determination to do some-
thing, and that determination is the will.—Q. But what part do
the passions perform ? A. The will is an operation of the mind;
the passions and affections determine the act. The will is the
result.—Q. What has judgment to do with the will? A. It
directs the will. It takes both judgment and the will to choose.—
Q. What is reason ? A. Reason is an exercise of the intellectual
faculties.—Q. Is reason a faculty of the mind ? A. I should not
call it a faculty ; it embraces several faculties—memory, compa-
rison, judgment, and some others, all form the reason.—Q. Have
you any experience in the treatment of the insane ? A. I have
not, I have seen many in the almshouses at Philadelphia.—Q-
Have you seen persons that you would not know to be insane
from observation ? A. Yes; and I have seen those that I should
not know to be insane without being told.*

Many witnesses seriously commit themselves by an undue
loquacity. This fault — and it is a prevalent and a very
serious one—cannot be too rigidly guarded against. Keep to
the text; answer the questions tersely, and epigrammatically;
and if you should be called upon for a further explanation,
let it be brief, and to the point. "I have heard/' says Dr.
Gordon Smith, " a very eminent lawyer, after putting a peremp-
tory interrogation to a witness, add, with much energy, 'Now,
sir, that is my question, and I will have an answer yea or
nay !' It is not very likely that such an overbearing manner
will often be observed towards us; but something allied to it
might be shown by an advocate, who, having framed a question
especially to suit a particular purpose, might not be inclined to
trust the discretion of the witness, or disposed to risk any other
answer than that he has baited his question for. Our business
must be to inform the court and the jury of the truth of the
matter, and to disregard the tenour of the question, when it is
apparent that it is not intended to elicit the truth, still more so
if its obvious bent is to disguise it."

The witness should carefully divest himself of all ap-
pearance of partisanship. A quiet, calm, respectful demeanour
—and a cautious and modest expression of opinion, even in
cases which admit of no doubt—always convey a favour-
able impression to the court, and give additional weight and
influence, to medico-legal evidence. He should remember that
in all probability the course of examination is carefully pre-
pared, it being the object of the advocate to obtain from
him a reply to a consecutive series of questions, thus gra-
dually unfolding and eliciting the truth. Should he, in his
eagerness and anxiety to make a favourable impression upon
the court, anticipate the interrogatories, he might seriously
interfere with the conduct of the case, and injure the cause he
is most anxious to uphold.

It occasionally occurs that a medical witness may be fully
competent to give sound and satisfactory evidence in relation to
the presence of insanity, without having the power of clearly

* Tlie trial of W. Freeman, for the murder- of John G. Van Nest, i-
Auburn. 1848.
stating tlie grounds for his opinion. A medical gentleman, upon
being asked, whether he considered a certain person of un-
sound mind, replied that such was his belief. He was then
requested to state his reasons. He said he had formed his
conclusion from the "general manner," and "deportment of
the patient/' The witness was then asked, to describe the
"manner," and "deportment," to which he referred. He replied
that the patient was " odd in his manner, and had an insane and
peculiar appearance about his eye and countenance;" but upon
being closely pressed by counsel to describe these symptoms
more minutely to the jury, the witness was at once nonplussed,
became embarrassed, and broke down. He had a lucid and a
right opinion of the matter of fact, but had no power of de-
scribing the symptoms from which he had formed his conclu-
sions. Many men are fully able to give testimony as to results,
but are totally incompetent to explain the process of reasoning,
or succession of thought, by which they have been led to the
deduction. A man of practical good sense, who, upon being
appointed governor of a colony, had to preside in its court of
justice without previous judicial practice or legal education,,
received the following advice from Lord Mansfield : " Give your
decisions boldly, for they will probably be right; but never ven-
ture on assigning reasons, for they will almost invariably
be wrong." Lord Mansfield knew, says Mr. Mill, who relates the
story, that if any reasons were assigned, they would necessarily,
be an after-thought, the judge being in fact guided by impres-
sions from past experience, without the circuitous process of
framing general principles from them ; and that if he attempted
to frame any such, he would assuredly fail.* • It would not be
difficult to account, psychologically, for a defect of this kind.
Are we not daily in the habit of meeting men who have, in rela-
tion to matters of art, &c., an intuitive perception of the true
and beautiful, but who have no power of describing or analysing
their sensations and perceptions ?

A favourite manoeuvre of counsel is to ingeniously construct a
number of hypothetical cases, apparently illustrative of the point
at issue, and to place them seriatim before the witness, with the
view of obtaining his opinion of each individual symptom of the
alleged mental condition. The replies to such interrogatories, if
* System of Logic, by J. Stuart Mill, vol. i. p. 254.

unguardedly expressed, are often subsequently referred to, for
tlie purpose of damaging his evidence. We should pro-
tect ourselves from these legal onslaughts, by carefully consi-
dering, before we commit ourselves to an answer, the precise
bearing of every interrogatory; it must be rapidly viewed in all
its relations, and if we are not thoroughly satisfied as to its
character, it is our duty to request the counsel to repeat the
question. If we do not clearly perceive its tendency, we must
protect ourselves, by carefully qualifying our answer. In a case
where the validity of a will was contested, 011 the ground of the
insanity of one of the subscribing witnesses, it appeared in evi-
dence that he had at one time entertained some absurd delu-
sions, and had attempted suicide; but that for a few months
prior to the execution of the will he had repudiated the delu-
sions, quietly pursued his studies, had written a book, and in
fact was apparently well, with the exception of his being unusu-
ally shy, with a desire for solitude. To one of the witnesses,
who had spoken in favour of the sanity of the party, the follow-
ing question was put:—" Supposing he had committed murder
about the time he had witnessed the will, would you have con-
sidered him as morally responsible for the act ?" This question is
said to have been artfully founded upon the imputed disposition
of the witness to admit too readily the plea of insanity in criminal
cases. The court would not allow the question to be answered, but
the reply would not have promoted the object of the counsel.*
In giving evidence, it is necessary to remember that the
counsel is not permitted to ask the witness to form an opinion
of the condition of mind from the testimony of others. As
far back as 1760," Lord Hardwicke, then sitting as Lord High
Steward at the trial of Earl Ferrers, decided that such evi-
dence was not legally admissible. A witness, he declared,
could not be asked whether the facts sworn to by other
witnesses preceding him amounted to insanity; he may
be asked if such and such symptoms were, in his opinion,
indications of insanity, but the witness cannot be removed
from the witness into the jury-box. Evidence of this cha-
racter is admitted in American courts of law. In the case
of Hawthorn v. King,f the question of the sanity of a tes-
* American Journal of Insanity.

f Massachusetts Reports, vol. viii. p. 371.
tator was tried, and the counsel for tlie appellant moved that
the attending physicians should be allowed to state whether,
in their opinion, the deceased, at the time of executing his
will, was of sound and disposing intellect. This was objected
to, on the ground that the sanity of the party must be deter-
mined by his conversations and actions. These were said to
be the only standard. It was alleged that if such a question
were put to the physicians, it would be placing them in the
position of the jury. The court, however, took a more liberal
view of the matter; and considering very properly that the
truth was the great and ostensible object in view, overruled the
legal objection, and allowed the question to be asked, stating
that the medical witnesses would be permitted to give their
reasons for any opinion they might entertain.
All attempts at a definition of insanity should be avoided.
"For to define true madness,
"VYliat is't? but to be nothing else but mad !" *
The legal profession is too disposed to regard all judicial investi-
gations involving the question of mental capacity, as they do
proceedings at nisi prius ; and under, I have no doubt, a con-
scientious appreciation of their functions as advocates, often
strive their utmost to destroy, if possible, the opposing medical
testimony. Knowing the obscurity of the subject, and the diffi-
culties with which the medical witness has to contend, in giving
an accurate definition of insanity, the counsel most unfairly
endeavours to pin him down to one; and then, by demonstrating
its fallacy, overthrow the whole moral effect of his testimony.
If asked to define insanity, it will be more judicious at once to
candidly acknowledge "our utter incapacity to comply with the
request, than, by a vain and ostentatious display of metaphy-
sical lore, to peril the life and interest of a fellow-creature.
There are two principal modes of establishing the existence
of insanity during investigations under a writ De Lunatico
Inquirendo; first, by proving the existence of a specific delu-
sion ; and, secondly, by showing that the party was guilty of
a series of acts of extravagance, in opinion and conduct, origi-
nating in unsoundness of mind. The first is the most satis-
factory and conclusive kind of evidence; and, when clearly
established, carries conviction to the judgment of the court.
When the proof depends upon the existence of a series of ex-
travagancies, the witness must protect himself against a common
mode of legal procedure. A number of acts of eccentricity and
oddity, both in ideas and conduct, are detailed by him, from
which he very rightly, and justly, infers the existence of un-
soundness of mind. Viewed collectively, these afford irre-
fragable evidence of a certain questionable mental condition;
but in the cross-examination, counsel, by a well-known mode
of legal analysis, skilfully separates the whole conduct of the
supposed lunatic into detached portions or sectional divisions;
and putting each extravagance, eccentricity, and oddity (al-
leged to be symptomatic of insanity) seriatim, to the wit-
ness, inquires, whilst specifying such individual character-
istic symptoms, whether each one, considered independently
of the others, is, in his estimation, a proof of incapacity, insanity,
or unsoundness of mind; and thus, unless conscious of the de-
signs of the advocate, the witness may be reduced, by his replies,
to the necessity of renouncing his previously expressed opinions ;
or of absurdly maintaining them after all the facts upon which
they are based are knocked from under him by the cleverness
and ingenuity of counsel!

Refusing to involve himself in a metaphysical disputation, by
declining to give a definition of insanity, the witness will, in all
probability, be asked, what is insanity, and by what process of
reasoning he has arrived at the conclusion that the party respect-
ing whom he is giving evidence is incompetent for the govern-
ment of himself and his affairs, or is of sound, or unsound mind ?
In reply to such interrogatories, it is sufficient for him to say,
generally, that he has formed his judgment of the condition of
mind by the conduct, conversation, and ideas of the person;
by considering the symptoms of the case in the aggregate,
specifying, of course, the morbid peculiarities of conduct, and the
character of the delusive impressions. By this general mode of
recording his opinions, the witness will protect himself from a
legal snare often laid to entrap and embarrass him.
But whilst suggesting the avoidance of all definitions of insanity,
I consider it necessary to recommend the witness to be prepared
to answer satisfactorily any questions that may have reference to
the scientific import of the terms ordinarily referred to in these
ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY. 113
judicial inquiries, to designate recognised legal forms of insanity—
viz. delusion, idiocy, dementia, and imbecility, &c. I have often
been amazed at the answers received by counsel to questions of
this character, and given, too, by witnesses of known experience
and established reputation. A medical gentleman of some posi-
tion, whilst giving his evidence very recently in a disputed com-
mission of lunacy, in answer to the question of counsel, defined
idiocy to be " inertness of mind." The acute lawyer made the
most of this unfortunate definition; and feeling that he had
within his grasp a witness who used terms without having any
clear idea of their signification, tortured him to his heart's con-
tent, much to the annoyance of the medical gentlemen and the
amusement of the court.

It is important that we should remember, that in all contested
cases of lunacy, relating to the administration of property, it is a
matter of moment for counsel, supporting the commission, if he
cannot exact an admission of insanity, to induce the witness to
acknowledge the existence of an incapacity (apart from the pre-
sence of actual lunacy) to manage both the person and property.
If the question is: " Do you consider the party of unsound
mind ?" and the answer should be either negatively, affirmatively,
or of a doubtful character, the witness, in all probability, will be
immediately asked, " Do you consider the party capable of taking
care of himself, and of managing his property ?" Upon one
occasion, a question of this character was put to. myself. " Yes,
legally competent." " Legally competent !" echoed Sir F.
Thesiger; "pray, sir, leave us (the lawyers, of course) to decide
that point." He was most anxious to force from me an admis-
sion, that, in the ordinary acceptation of the term, the party was
not m a condition to take care of herself, or to manage her pro-
perty ; but drawing what I conceived to be a psychological dis-
tinction between natural and healthy incapacity, and the inca-
pacity the effect of insanity, I refused to make the admission he
was anxious to obtain, and which, if procured, would, I have no
doubt, have been turned adroitly against me. Itwas upon thesame
occasion, and during the same inquiry, that I was asked, whether,
it / thought the party were competent to manage herself and her
affairs, the world would be of the same opinion ? I replied, " that,
upon intricate and disputed questions of science, I did not think
the opinion of ' the world' a safe guide." Upon which Sir F.

Thesiger rejoined, " Then, I presume, you look doivn upon the
opinions of the world V'* If I had been permitted, I might have
quoted in justification of my remark, the sentiments of a modern
philosopher of no mean repute : " The general voice of mankind,
which may often serve as a guide, because it rarely errs widely or
permanently in its estimate of those who are prominent in public
life, is of little value when it speaks of things belonging to the
region of exact science."f The opinion of the majority upon
questions within the comprehension and grasp of men of ordi-
nary intelligence and natural sagacity, is entitled to our profound
respect. It may be, and often is right. But does not history
satisfactorily establish, that what in common parlance is desig-
nated as the " generally-received opinion" is occasionally very
remote from the truth ?

" Interdum valgus rectum viclet, est ubi peccat."—IIob.'
There is a legal incapacity, and, according to law, it is the con-
sequence of diseased, or unsound mind. There is also ordinary
and natural incapacity, which may co-exist with a healthy and a
sound understanding. This important and essential distinction,
the medical witness should never overlook, when giving his
evidence.

Having offered some advice to the witness relative to his
general deportment whilst recording his evidence, and endea-
voured to convey to him some conception of the legal and psycho-
logical import of the term " unsoundness of mind," I would take
this opportunity of making some remarks upon the importance
of avoiding a vague and indefinite application of this phrase.
We should enter the court with a clear, precise, and scientific
appreciation of the medical import of the term. This is most
essential to our credit. An indiscriminate and lax use of the
word is invariably used to our disadvantage and discomfiture.
I have seen the most able medical witnesses break down, in con-
sequence of neglecting to be cautious in this particular.
It was at the commission of lunacy instituted with the view of
* I should regret if any of my readers for one moment imagined tliat I
in tlie slightest degree complain of tlie course of examination pursued by
this able, honourable, and justly distinguished advocate. The conduct of
Sir F. Thesiger during the painful and protracted inquiry into the sanity
of Mrs. Cumming, is beyond all praise. In his zeal for the interests of
his client, he never deviated from the deportment of the gentleman.
f History of the Inductive Sciences, by Dr Whewell.

annulling Miss Bagster's marriage with. Mr. Newton, on the
ground of imbecility, that Dr Haslam made his celebrated decla-
ration as to his belief in the universality of unsoundness of mind.*
Whilst being examined by the present Lord Chief Baron, then
Sir F. Pollock, Dr Haslam was asked the following questions :—
Q. Is she (Miss Bagster) of sound mind ? A. I never saw any
human being who was of sound mind.—Q. That is no answer to
my question. A. I presume the Deity is of sound mind, and He
alone.—Q. Is that your answer ? A. I presume the Deity alone of
sound mind.—Q. How many years have you been a mad-doctor ?
A. About forty.—Q. When did you learn that the Deity was
of sound mind ? A. From my own reflections during the last
fourteen years, and from repeated conversations with the best
divines in the country.—Q. Is Miss Bagster of sound mind ? A.
Competently sound.—Q. Is she capable of managing herself and
her affairs ? A. I do not know what affairs she has to manage.
—Q. How often have you given evidence before commissions of
lunacy and before a jury? A. I cannot tell. I dont know.—
Q. Have you any notion ? A. Notion is very much like know-
ledge.—Q. Have you any idea ? A. An idea is a visible percep-
tion and a direct recollection.—Q. Have you any belief ? A. I
cannot say that I have any belief, for that is a direct recollec-
tion.

To say nothing of the impropriety and bad taste of the witness
involving himself in a contest about words, and thus fencing with
counsel, I would observe, that had Dr Haslam recognised the prin-
* Sir W. Follett observed, when commenting npon this declaration,
" that Dr Haslam had only followed in the wake of Lord Ellenborougli,
who, during the trial of Mr. Perry, of the Morning Chronicle, for a libel
in ascribing mental imbecility to the late King George III., remarked that
it was no libel to ascribe to any man unsoundness of mind, for none, save
the Deity, was of perfectly sound mind'

t During a debate in 1843, in the House of Lords, on the subject of
" Insanity and Crime," Lord Campbell, in course of his speech, said, " I
know a very distinguished medical practitioner, Dr Haslam, who main-
tained, not that there were many who ivere more or less insane, or that all
°f us had been insane at one period of our lives, but that ice all were
actually insane."

Lord Brougham.—"I have heard him say it."
Lord Campbell.—"I, too, have heard him say it repeatedly, and Dr.
H^jlam would have been ready to prove it."—Hansard's Parliamentary
Debates for 1843, vol. lxvii. p. 741.

Need we, after such a declaration, feel any surprise at the attempts
made to repudiate medical testimony in cases of insanity ?
ciple to which I have given exposition, and, in reply to the inter-
rogatories, refused to allow the existence of any unsoundness of
mind that was not the direct result or offspring of disease, an
unfortunate admission, like that to which I have referred, and
with which medical witnesses, in cases of insanity, have so often
been twitted, never would have been made. If this physician
had qualified his opinion by stating that, according to his obser-
vation and judgment, there were few minds in a perfect state of
development, well-balanced, and disciplined, without some natural
eccentricity, or weakness, or in which some one or two ideas had
not obtained a predominance, and exercised an influence incom-
mensurate with their value, he would only have given expression
to sentiments in conformity with the general experience of all
thinking men ; but having been appealed to' by the court, as an
expert, and a man of science, to decide the solemn questions of
sanity and moral responsibility, it was imperative upon him to
have been more guarded and precise in the use of terms having
a recognised, popular, legal, and medical import. Dr Haslam's
absurd dogma may be in harmony with the " melancholy mad-
ness of poetry/'* and in unison with the fanciful creations of the
novelist, but it is certainly not in accordance with the calm specu-
lations of the philosopher.

" 'All men arc mad,' the raging poet cries ;
Each frantic reader, ' not quite all,' replies ;
Lifting his jaundiced eye, 'not all, sir, sure,'
Cries ricli Avaro, ' mad beyond all cure ;'
'Kot all,' coy Cliloe adds, by wine made bolder;
' Not all,' repeats tlie parrot, from lier shoulder;
The pensioned peer affirms, ' it is not so;'
The mitred politician echoes, ' no !'
Each for himself and friends, the charge denies,
And Bedlam joins to curse poetic lies."

" Disorders of the intellect," says Dr Johnson, "happen much
more often than superficial observers will easily believe. Perhaps,
if we speak with rigorous exactness, no human mind is in its right
state. There is no man whose imagination does not sometimes
predominate over his reason, who can regulate his attention
wholly by his will, and whose ideas will come and go at his com-
mand. No man will be found in whose mind airy notions do not
sometimes tyrannize, and force him to hope or fear beyond the
limits of sober probability. All power of fancy over reason is
a degree of insanity; but whilst the power is such as we can con-
trol and repress, it is not visible to others, nor considered as any
deprivation of the mental faculties; it is not pronounced madness,
but when it becomes ungovernable, and apparently influences
speech and action."*

In this passage the celebrated moralist uses the terms "insanity"
and " madness" in their popular and vulgar signification, irre-
spectively of any attempt at psychological accuracy, or exactness.
But the medical witness is not, in the slightest degree, justified in
adopting the dicta of Dr Johnson, or any other writer, however
elevated liis status in literature, science, and philosophy, who thus
unscientifically, vaguely, and indiscriminately uses these important
medico-legal terms. But medical men are not alone censurable
for attaching to this phrase a general and an unphilosophical
acceptation. Eminent legal writers—distinguished members of
the bar—celebrated statesmen—following the example of the
great lexicographer, have talked of insanity and unsoundness
of mind without any regard to the right acceptation of the
words. In the eloquent speech of the Solicitor-General during
the trial of the Earl Ferrers for the murder of his steward, the
following observations occur :—" Every violation of duty proceeds
from insanity. All cruelty, all brutality, all revenge, all injustice,
is insanity; there were philosopers in ancient times who held
this opinion as a strict maxim of their sect, and I consider the
opinion right in philosophy, but dangerous in judicature. It may
have a useful and a noble influence in regulating the conduct of
men, in inducing them to control their impotent passions—in
teaching them that virtue is the perfection of reason, or reason is
itself the perfection of human nature—but not to extenuate
crimes, nor to excuse those punishments which the law adjudges
to be their due." Here again we perceive the error into
which the most distinguished men in the legal as well as in our
own profession have fallen, by refusing to recognise the great
psychological fact, that no mind can properly be considered to
be " unsound" or " insane" which is not subject to actual disease,
the " insanity" and " unsoundness" being invariably the products
—the effects—the consequences, of some deviation from the
healthy condition of the brain, its vessels or investments, disor-
dering the mental manifestations.

Having previously explained wliat I conceive to be a right
definition of the term delusion,—if a definition of the word be
practicable, and within the genius of our language,—and having,
I hope, clearly and conclusively established, that the non-
existence of a delusion is no proof of the absence of insanity,
unsoundness of mind, and legal irresponsibility, I would, with
submission to those who may be called upon in our courts of
justice to give evidence in these important cases, offer a few
suggestions respecting the legitimate medical interpretation of
this disputed phrase. Much of the conflicting character—
much of the discredit which has, alas! attached to medico-legal
evidence—much of the odium and obloquy thrown upon the
examinations of medical men in disputed cases of insanity—may,
undoubtedly, be traced to a want of a right and philosophical
appreciation of the terms we employ whilst recording our testi-
mony. The word delusion has been exposed to much abuse.
No two witnesses appear to have the same conception of the
phrase, and consequently advantage is taken of this discrepancy
of opinion, and evidence which ought to be considered as extremely
valuable, has, in reality, little weight with the court.*
The word delusion is often improperly used to express an erro-
neous conception, a wrong deduction, an illogical conclusion, a
false inference, a palpable fallacy, an unpliilosopliical result. It
is unnecessary for me to remark, that no mind, however well-
organized, whatever may have been its degree of training, or the
extent of its knowledge, is free from such healthy and normal
aberrations. The philosophical opinions of one era are suc-
ceeded by those of the following epoch ; one sect of philosophers
triumphantly overturning the brilliant theories and speculations
of those that preceded it. Fashion, peculiarity of education,
caprice, social, moral, and political conditions, all may greatly
influence, and often do operate, not only in modifying the pre-
* Mucli lias been, said of tlie want of unanimity of opinion among
medical men of admitted science and experience in reference to ques^
tions of insanity. Is it possible, or even desirable, to have uniformity
of sentiment? "I have beard," says Lord Campbell, in bis "Life
of tbe Earl of Eldon," " bis lordship cite witb great glee a saying of Lord
Thurlow, tliat tbe decrees of tbe Scotch judges were least to be respected
wben they were unanimous, as in that case they, probably without
thought, had followed the first of their number who had expressed an
opinion, whereas, when they were divided, they might be expected to have
paid some attention to the subject."

vailing opinions and ideas of individuals, but of large sections of
society, as well as of nations themselves; thus inducing trains of
thought, and mental sequences, apparently inconsistent with our
modern ideas of healthy regularity or even sanity of mind. The
superstitious notions and practices of the Brahmins, and of the
inhabitants of many portions of the uncivilized world, may
appear to us to indicate insanity and unsoundness of mind. But
are we justified in this opinion? The general belief, once enter-
tained, of the possibility of curing, by means of the royal touch,
a most loathsome disease; the credence attached to the trial by
" ordeal of touch/' and to witchcraft, even by men of great
intellect and learning, holding the highest judicial positions in
the country,—were compatible with healthy and rational under-
standings. Even in our own time, men, whose sanity of mind
cannot for a moment be questioned, arrive, by what they con-
ceive to be a cautious and philosophical process of induction, at
the most absurd conclusions, paradoxes, and fallacies, in open
violation of all the elementary rules of logic, right principles of
ratiocination, and obviously at variance with the views generally
entertained by truly philosophic, thinking, and reflecting men.
But are we justified in designating these false inferences, de-
fective reasoning, illogical conclusions, arrogance, conceit, and
folly, as delusive, and therefore as indicative of insanity? A
man, in a healthy state of mind, may believe himself capable, in
certain exalted conditions of the nerves of sense, of seeing
through the epigastric region, or a nine-inch brick-wall! He
may also consider it possible under the influence of the phe-
nomena of mesmerism, to transfer his spirit into another state of
existence,—and, after placing the party to be operated upon under
mesmeric influence, to substitute his own volition for the will
of another. If I were asked in a court of justice whether I con-
sidered chimeras and monstrosities like these to be delusions, I
should unhesitatingly reply, that they ivere not so, in the right
acceptation of the term. In common parlance they are vulgarly
so denominated, but speaking, as we ought always to speak when
in the witness-box, with a proper appreciation of the science of
psychology, and the philosophic and philological import of terms,
1 would suggest, that no notion of the mind, however ridiculous,
illogiccl, fallacious, and absurd, should be admitted to be a
delusion, or evidence of unsound mind, unless it be obviously
and unmistakably the product of a diseased intellect. It is
the object of counsel to confound the medical witness; to obtain
from liim an admission that certain extravagant opinions and
anomalous articles of belief are delusions and symptoms of
insanity; and selecting, perhaps, the most unphilosophical results
at which men have arrived, the witness is requested to say, whether,
in his estimation, they are not morbid exaggerations of the fancy,
delusions, and evidences of mental derangement? A physician
was asked, during a judicial inquiry as to the sanity of a party,
whether he believed in the so-called phenomena of mesmerism ?'
He replied in the negative. He was then interrogated whether
he did not consider a man to be under a delusion who could
bring his mind to believe that, whilst in a mesmeric trance, he
could see through a nine-inch brick-wall? The physician imme-
diately answered, that such would be his impression. Having
obtained this unfortunate admission, the counsel proceeded to
prosecute his examination, and the following questions were
then put:—Q. Are you not aware of the existence of a section
of educated and scientific men who firmly believe in the truth
of mesmeric phenomena? A. Yes.—Q. Do the}^ not consider it
possible to see without the aid of ordinary vision? A. Yes.-—
Q. Are there not a few medical men of repute who have given
in their adherence to this opinion? A. Yes.— Q. Do you know
Dr ? (mentioning the name of a physician of great repute).

A. Yes.—Q. Are you not aware that he has publicly professed
his belief in the existence of what you term a delusion? A. Yes.
—Q. Then it is your opinion that Dr is of unsound mind ?

The witness at once perceived the dilemma in which he was
placed, by not recognising the distinction between a false con-
clusion, an illogical and unphilosophical deduction, and those
conceptions or delusions of the diseased mind, the products of
insanity, and was unable to escape from the grasp of the acute
lawyer, without materially damaging his evidence. The counsel,,
in his address to the jury, was not forgetful of this admission,
and with indignant eloquence asked, what credit they could
attach to the opinion of a witness who pronounced men of esta-
blished repute, in consequence of their belief in mesmerism, to
be under the influence of a delusion—in fact, to be of unsound
mind ?

If this gentleman had entered the witness-box with a philoso-
pliic appreciation of tlie import of the word, no ingenuity or spe-
cial pleading of counsel, however exalted his reputation for legal
subtlety, his expertness in the cross-examination of witnesses, and
adroitness in obscuring the truth, would have induced him to fall
so readily into his power. I again advise the medical witness
never to admit any idea to be delusive, unless it be obviously and
palpably the offspring, the product, not of a mind unevenly
balanced, with a natural disposition to distort facts, believe in
bad logic, or in any gross absurdity of the day, but of an under-
standing perverted by disease. Healthy minds, sane under-
standings, vigorous intellects have been known to imbibe the
most extravagantly false notions, and to arrive at the most out-
rageous results, and to be subject to the most extraordinary
idiosyncrasies of thought and feeling. These must be denounced
and exposed as absurd, dangerous, and unphilosopliical deductions •
or principles of belief; but let us not pervert the use of language
by designating them as delusions, and adduce them as proof of
insanity! The term " healthy delusion/' which has been occa-
sionally used by men of scientific eminence, when discussing
these questions, is equivalent to the phrase " healthy unsound-
ness of mind," and " normal insanity."*

There are other occasions requiring the evidence of the
members of our profession before we are warranted in inter-
fering with the liberty of the subject. By various Acts of Par-
liament enacted for the purpose of regulating the confinement
of persons on the ground of insanity, it is wisely provided that no
step of this nature is legal unless under the sanction of two
medical certificates. The power so invested in the hands of two
legally qualified practitioners has been made the subject of
much comment and animadversion. It has been said, that
the legislature is not justified in thus placing the freedom of
the citizen at the mercy of two professional gentlemen, who may
either be incompetent from ignorance to decide the question of
insanity, or may be agents in the hands of unprincipled relations
or designing friends, who may, from sinister motives, be desirous
of depriving him of his free agency, and the control of his
In the celebrated Commission of Lunacy upon Mr. Davies, Dr Haslam
Avas much laughed at for talking of the alleged lunatic having a " delusion
ot manner!" Lord Brougham was extremely happy in his comments
upon this unfortunate expression.

property. With the view of meeting this popular objection,
various modifications of the law have been suggested. It has
been proposed that, previously to the actual confinement of
the alleged lunatic he should be taken before a magistrate or a
judge of an inferior court, and that the case should be submitted
to the consideration of a jury prior to the certificates of the
medical men being acted upon! Again, others who feel more
strongly upon this question, and who denounce all confinement,
except in cases of acute insanity, accompanied by acts of great
violence, as monstrous and unjustifiable outrages, propose that,
in every case, a commission of lunacy should issue, for the pur-
pose of considering, whether the party represented to be insane be
sufficiently so to justify his being placed in duresse. With
deference to those who have originated these suggestions, I aui
bound to declare them to be totally impracticable. There are
many cases of insanity requiring to be placed under temporary
surveillance and proper medical and moral treatment which
could not be exposed to any of these preliminary ordeals without
imminent danger to life, or without seriously interfering with
the safety of the patient, and perhaps altogether retarding his
recovery. In many incipient forms of insanity, where the
symptoms are acute and associated with much physical dis-
turbance, a speedy re-establishment of health may generally
be expected if the patient be removed, temporarily, from the
morbid associations of home, and immediately brought within
the sphere of systematic medical treatment. In cases of this de-
scription, a non-medical jury or judge, ignorant of the character
of these affections, and unable to detect the nice shades of inci-
pient insanity, or to recognise the immense importance of prompt
and energetic treatment in the early stages of this disease, would,
in all probability, from a sense of justice, refuse to sanction con-
finement of any description, unless in cases of glaring, violent,
palpable, mental derangement. No judge and jury, however
upright in character, and honest in intention, can be con-
sidered qualified, unassisted by medical evidence, to adjudicate
in these important and delicate cases, unless they have ac-
quired, by patient study and long-continued practical observa-
tion, an intimate knowledge of the varied phases and subtle
phenomena of mental disease. When referring to the charge
of an anonymous slanderer, that some medical men, from their
poverty, might be bought over to sign the fatal document by
the bribes of avaricious relatives, it has been justly observed
that, "Although abuses have taken place, we do not believe
there ever existed any ground for such an imputation as this;
and we are quite satisfied that, in the present day, if no other
principle restrained a man from granting a certificate impro-
perly, the certainty of detection would deter him. If the case
were to be considered by a jury or county judge, as a preliminary
step to confinement, there would be no end to litigation and
expense. One half of the alleged lunatic's estate would go to
settle whether he should be confined, and the other half under a
commission to determine whether or no he was a fit subject for
interdiction I"

But let me ask, whether the power so invested in us by the
statute law is abused, and whether any necessity exists for
legislative interference? Judging from my own experience of
documents of this character, I can truthfully affirm that I
have never seen an instance—a solitary example—in which
the practitioner was not fully justified in certifying, not only
to the existence of insanity, but to insanity of such a kind and
degree as to justify immediate surveillance. To the honour
of our much-slandered profession, I would add, that I firmly
believe, as a body of men constituting an important section in
the community, we are scrupulously, conscientiously, cautious
and exact in the exercise of this power, and that the instances of
abuse are so rare, that it would be an act of great injustice to
throw, by any alteration of the law, any doubt upon the honesty
and integrity of our profession. I trust the day may never
arrive when legal will be substituted for medical authority in
these cases, and a non-professional judge or a jury be empowered
to interfere with the legitimate functions of the medical prac-
titioner ! Surely we are, by education, habits of thought, know-
ledge, and experience, peculiarly fitted to solve the intricate and
knotty point involved in the elucidation of doubtful cases of
insanity. Sad will be the day for our science when the medical,
moral, or judicial care of the insane is transferred from the hands
of the medical profession to those of the barrister, highly as I
respect his honourable vocation.

Having made these preliminary observations relative to an
important part of the subject, I now proceed to refer more spe-
cifically to the duties devolving upon the profession when called
upon to certify in cases of alleged mental incapacity, prior to the
removal of the patient to a place of confinement. The law wisely
requires the production of two medical certificates, not only of
insanity, but of insanity to such an extent as to justify restraint,
either in private lodgings or in public or private asylums. The
Act of Parliament makes the preliminary step imperative under
all conditions of moral restraint, on the ground of insanity,
excepting when the person is confined in his own house, or
is placed under the care of one who receives no payment for
his support. No insane person can be legally controlled in a
private house or lodgings without an order for his detention is
filled up and signed, or without two medical certificates. The
Act of Parliament also requires that every person receiving and
taking charge of an idiot, lunatic, or party of unsound mind,
should make an official return of the fact to the Commissioners
in Lunacy.

Great caution is necessary before, under such circumstances,
certifying to insanity. In the majority of cases in which we are
called upon to testify to the existence of lunacy, the derangement
of mind is generally so obvious, and is accompanied by such vio-
lence, extraordinary delusions, and excitement, that the medical
man has little or no hesitation in complying with the provisions
of the statute, and of immediately signing the necessary legal
document. But cases do occasionally occur in which much pru-
dence, judgment, and great caution are requisite. Statements
may be made to the medical practitioner by the relatives of the
alleged lunatic* which, if true, clearly indicate the necessity for
prompt interference; but it is our duty to avail ourselves of
every reasonable opportunity of ascertaining, not only whether
certain facts have not been exaggerated, but whether there is
any truth in the evidence adduced to us as proof of the presence
of mental derangement. In signing a certificate of lunacy, it
should never be forgotten that we may, even at a distant period,
be called upon to defend the act in a court of law. This renders
imperative, great caution and careful inquiry, in every case pre-
sented to our notice.

If it should be alleged that the patient has been guilty of
acts of violence, ascertain under what circumstances they were
committed. Also inquire whether there has been any reason-
able provocation, and if lie has acted under tlie influence of a
delusion, natural violence and impetuosity of temper, or has been
justified by actual circumstances, in so committing himself. If
insane, he may be guilty of an outrage quite disproportionate to
the exciting cause. Under the impression that a person supposed
to be insane, was inclined recklessly to squander his property, a
member of the family or friend might feel himself justified in
secreting the patient's cheque-book—in placing his private papers
in a position of security. A knowledge of these facts may,
in a person of irritable temper, and perfectly sound condition
of mind, induce great irritation and provocation, and probably
lead to acts of violence and resentment; but if, influenced by
such a cause, the patient were to procure a pistol or a knife, with
the object of revenging himself for such an apparent insult and
interference with his private property, we could not consider this,
coupled with other symptoms, otherwise than suspicious evidence
of insanity, justifying protection. Insanity often exhibits itself
in an unhealthy exaggeration of actual circumstances, conditions,
or facts. Should the person accuse others of robbing him, ascer-
tain, as far as is consistent with the respect due to those about
the patient, whether there is any foundation for the statement.
In some cases, it is difficult to arrive at the truth ; but it is our
bounden duty, our solemn obligation, to fully inquire into every
particular likely to throw light upon the case before interfering
with the liberty of a fellow-creature by certifying to his insanity.
In some instances, the alleged lunatic, fully sensible of the
object of the professional mans visit, and knowing what ulterior
measures are to be adopted, will set the medical examiner at
complete defiance, and resolutely deny all the representations of
those about him.

I had to examine a remarkable case of this nature. I was
requested to see a gentleman who was said to be suicidally
msane. Upon inquiry, I ascertained, from good authority,"that
under the influence of most distressing hallucinations he had
attempted to hang himself. The patient firmly, earnestly, and
apparently with great truthfulness, resolutely and repeatedly
denied the fact. He declared that it was an invention—a pure
creation of the imagination, originating with his family; that he
was happy, subject to no depression, had a strong wish to live,
and great fear of death. I examined him, in conjunction with
126 ON MEDICO-LEGAL EVIDENCE IN CASES OF INSANITY.
another physician, and neither of us could seize hold of the
salient point, or satisfy himself that the man was actually
insane. But we asked ourselves, what motives could his family
have for thus misrepresenting the facts of the case ? We felt
quite assured, from the character of the evidence presented, that
an attempt at suicide had been made; but the patient, with
an ingenuity which would have reflected credit upon a nisi
prius lawyer, parried, with great skill, all the questions, and
gave such prompt and happy replies to our anxious interroga-
tories, that we were compelled to admit ourselves, for a time,
perfectly defeated. By a course of conversation, I drew the
gentleman's thoughts into a different channel; and whilst my
attention was apparently directed elsewhere, I kept a close watch
upon all his movements. I perceived, as I imagined, some kind
of instrument projecting from his pocket. He perceived that my
eyes were directed to this, and he immediately expressed an
earnest wish to leave the apartment. I at once said, " I cannot
permit you to do so, until I know what you have concealed in
your trowsers' pocket," He at once manifested signs of embarrass-
ment and excitement, and rising rapidly from his seat, endea-
voured to rush out of the door. He was immediately prevented
from doing so, and his pockets emptied, and a razor discovered.
In his pocket-book a letter was found, which he had written the
same day, and addressed to the coroner, intimating to him that
he was pursued by an evil spirit, and this impression had driven
him to commit an act of self-destruction ! Fortunately for our
own reputation, and for the patient's life, this providential dis-
covery was made.

It may be necessary to see and examine the patient 011 more
than one occasion before the physician is satisfied as to the actual
state of his mind. In cases of doubtful character, I would
suggest that this course should invariably be adopted, taking the
neceSsary precaution to recommend close vigilance during the
interregnum. I suggest this course, in consequence of my being
acquainted with the case of a lady, whose removal from home
was for a few days temporarily postponed, in compliance with
the cautious and judicious advice of the medical man, who ad-
mitted that he could not detect, according to his apprehension,
sufficient evidence of insanity to justify him in signing the cer-
tificate. During the interim, she succeeded in destroying
herself! In a few instances we are justified in partially acting
upon the representations of the family and friends of the alleged
lunatic. If a delusion be detected, it must be referred to; and
if the patient has committed any overt acts of violence, or mani-
fested a suicidal disposition, it is our duty to refer to these facts,
guarding ourselves by stating, that we have derived such infor-
mation from parties immediately about the patient. It is
important, in all cases, to specify the character of the existing
delusion. The expression of a belief in the fact of delusive ideas,
and of the presence of abstract insanity, without a specification
of facts, renders a medical certificate invalid. I have often seen
certificates worded to this effect: " I have formed my opinions
from the fact of the party being insane"—"being under de-
lusions"—" being excited"—" being violent." These generaliza-
tions should be carefully avoided : the more concise the account
of the patient's condition, the closer will it be in unison with the
expressed wish of the Commissioners in Lunacy. The record of
one clear and unmistakable delusion is quite sufficient for all
legal purposes. But cases do occur where no delusion can be
detected, and yet confinement may be absolutely necessary.
Under such circumstances, it is the duty of the medical man to
enter more into detail as to the facts of the case. Perhaps I may
be excused for suggesting, that in every instance of this kind, the
parties should keep copies of their certificates.

Having, I think, conclusively established that we have no
uniform legal or medical test of insanity to which we can safely
appeal in criminal cases, you will ask, have I any psychological
criteria to suggest for the safe guidance of the profession?—
can I propound any principles which will assist the medico-legal
witness in arriving at a satisfactory result? In reply to these
interrogatories, I allojv that we have no infallible standard, no
certain principles which would admit of general and indiscriminate
application. The only safe rule upon which we can act, is that
of comparing the mind of the alleged lunatic, at the period of
his suspected insanity, with its prior, natural, and healthy mani-
festations ; to consider the intellect in relation to itself, and to
no artificial a priori test. Dr Haslam suggests that the mind
of the physician should be the standard by which the sanity
should be determined; but this is presuming the mind of the
physician to be healthy and sound. In the language of Dr.
Combe, "the true and philosophical standard in all cases is the
patient's own natural character, and not that of the physician or
the philosopher. It is the prolonged departure, without an
adequate external cause, from the state of feeling and modes of
thinking usual to the individual when in health, that constitutes
insanity in the true medical acceptation of the term." This
portion of my subject is, however, too comprehensive in its cha-
racter to admit of elucidation in this lecture.

I have endeavoured in the preceding observations to place
before you a sketch—a mere outline—of the character of the
evidence admissible in our civil, criminal, and ecclesiastical
courts, in cases of disputed lunacy, and I have, to the best of my
ability, but still I fear very imperfectly, delineated the duties—
the anxious functions—specially devolving upon us, when, in the
exercise of one of our responsible vocations, we are called upon
for our opinion as medico-legal witnesses in cases of alleged
insanity. There is, unhappily, a prevailing prejudice—an illiberal
feeling—manifested towards those whose province, and, I may
add, whose happiness and privilege it is to stand prominently for-
ward, upon these occasions, to aid by their evidence the admi-
nistration of justice, under circumstances peculiarly solemn and
affecting. These sentiments are not restricted to persons ignorant
of the great truths of psychology, and of the characteristics of
deranged mind, but they are, to some extent, participated in by
a few narrow-minded men among ourselves, who, from motives
difficult to divine, evince a disposition to disparage the benevolent
and Christian efforts of those who, in the discharge of an impe-
rative professional duty, are ever ready to interpose between the
insane criminal and the dreadful and terrible punishment of the
laAV. It may be argued, that this feeling, both in and out of the
profession, lias been the result of a disposition on the part
of the medico-legal psychologist to sanction by his evidence an
unphilosophical, dangerous, and a lax use of this plea. If such
a tendency has been exhibited, may it not have been the effect
of the most benevolent motives—the offspring of truly noble
aspirations?—have originated in feelings that do honour to
human nature?—have arisen from a conviction that it is our
duty to temper justice with mercy, and from a strong con-
viction that, in obedience to one of the great principles of
British Jurisprudence, we are bound, upon all occasions, to
give to the unhappy culprit the benefit of any doubt that
may arise respecting his sanity and legal responsibility ? In
considering this question, we should never forget in many
criminal cases the alliance to insanity is close — the line
of demarcation between the two conditions indistinct, vague,
and shadowy—the boundary separating crime from insanity
obscure—the one state often, almost imperceptibly, blending
with the other, and that the facts associated with the crimi-
nal act so analogous to the recognised phenomena of mental
disease, that the medical witness, feeling that in his hands is
deposited the life of a fellow-creature—that upon his evidence
depends the decision, whether the extreme penalty of the law
is to be carried into effect—he, under the conflicting and pain-
ful emotions which such a position is calculated to call into
active exercise, hesitates in consigning a fellow-creature to an
ignominious death, if he can, without doing violence to his
judgment and conscience, record his opinion in favour of the
prisoner's insanity.

We have only to glance the eye over the tabular statement
suspended near me, in order to form a correct idea of the rela-
tionship between the criminal and the insane mind.* The
table to which I now refer was not drawn up designedly to
establish this position; but does it not clearly prove—forcibly
establish—the painful fact, that there is in existence a large
amount of crime closely connected by hereditary predisposition
and descent with diseased mind ? Does not a recognition of
this truth establish to us, as Christian philosophers, the ne-
cessity of cultivating more benevolent feelings, a more en-
larged and expansive philanthropy, towards those who, if not
morbidly impelled to the commission of crime by an originally
malformed cerebral organization, inherit from their parents a
marked predisposition to irregularity of thought and action,
which ought to appeal—powerfully appeal—to us when estimat-
ing the degree of moral guilt attached to any deviation from our
a priori notions of healthy intellect, or strict moral rectitude ?
I maintain, and facts—an overwhelming mass of facts—clearly,
irresistibly, and conclusively demonstrate my position,—that
there is a vast amount of crime committed by persons, who, if
* Vide Table, at tlie end of the lecture, showing, in numerous cases*
tlie close alliance between crime and insanity.

not "legally" or "medically" insane, occupy a kind of neutral
ground between positive derangement and mental sanity. I
do not broach this idea with the view of supporting the absurd,
unphilosophical, and dangerous opinion, that all crime is more
or less referable to aberration of mind; but I do affirm, that in
estimating the AMOUNT OF punishment to be awarded, it is the
solemn duty of the judge, not only to look at the act itself, but
to consider the physical condition of the culprit—his education
—moral advantages—prior social position—his early training—
the temptations to which he has been exposed—and above all,
WHETHER HE HAS NOT SPRUNG FROM INTEMPERATE, INSANE,
IDIOTIC, AND CRIMINAL PARENTS.

" The little I have seen of the world," says an able writer,
with a capacious heart, overflowing with love for his fellow-
creatures—" the little I have seen of the world and know of the
history of mankind teaches me to look upon the errors of others
in sorrow, not in anger. When I take the history of one poor
heart that has sinned and suffered, and represent to myself the
struggles and temptations it has passed—the brief pulsations of
joy—the feverish inquietude of hope and fear—the tears of regret
—the feebleness of purpose—the pressure of want—the desertion
of friends—the scorn of the world, that has little charity—the
desolation of the soul's sanctuary, and threatening voices from
within—health gone—happiness gone—even hope, that stays
longest with us, gone,—I have little heart for aught else than
thankfulness that it is not so with me, and would fain leave the
erring soul of my fellow-man with Him from whose hands it
came. *

In venturing, with great submission, to make these observa-
tions, after offering my grateful thanks to the President, Council,
and Fellows of this learned Society, for the courtesy, kindness,
and generous indulgence which have been manifested towards me
during my period of office, I would, in conclusion, protect
myself from the imputation of giving utterance to—of breathing
the faintest semblance of—an expression that would justify a
doubt as to the existence in my mind, of a feeling of deep
reverence, and profound respect, for those great and illustrious
men, whose unrivalled erudition—brilliant attainments—fervid,
* Hyperion, by Longfellow.

glowing, and impassioned eloquence—world-wide reputation—
whose universally acknowledged 'public and private worth, must,
as long as the mind retains its appreciation of virtue, its love of
liberty, and admiration of genius, be closely identified, and indis-
solubly associated, with the brightest and most hallowed periods
of the constitutional, parliamentary, and legal history of our
country. But may I not ask, whether, since the times of Lord
Coke, Sir Matthew Hale, Judge Blackstone, Lord Hard wick,
Lord Mansfield, and Lord Chancellor Erskine, we have made
no progress in the important truths of medical-psychology—have
obtained no clearer insight into the phenomena of the human
mind—are not more intimately acquainted with its diseases—
and do not entertain more benevolent, just, philosophical, and
enlightened views of the great subject of crime, and of the
principles of civil and constitutional law ?

Can we set bounds — prescribe limits — easily appreciable,
well-defined limits — to the progress of knowledge ? Have
we not, within the last half century, made giant and colossal
strides in all departments of art, philosophy, and science? Does
not the genius of man indignantly repudiate all attempts to
fetter its onward advance, and tie it down to the crude, exploded,
and obsolete dogmas of past ages ? If such be the fact in rela-
tion to the mathematical and physical sciences—to chemistry,
medicine, physiology, mechanics, political and social economy,
why, I ask, should the great subject now under consideration be
the only exception to the general law regulating human pro-
gression ? Whilst referring to the great intellects and master-
minds of former epochs, as well as to the illustrious men of a
more recent period, may I not exclaim,—
" Great men were living before Agamemnon,
And since, exceeding valorous and brave P"
k 2
132
CRIME AND INSANITY*
(A Tabular Statement referred to in page 129.)
Verbatim Extracts
from
Letter of Referee.
Observations on
Degree of
Intellect, &c., by
the Chaplain
when first seen.
Schoolmaster's Report
on
leaving the Prison.
State on leaving
the Prison,
as noted by
Chaplain.
Mother touched with
symptoms of insanity.
Grandmother insane ...
Sister rather weak in
mind.
He and mostof his family
evinced symptoms of
insanity.
Two sisters insane
Ilis mother subject to
nervous fits.
One of his family (his
mother, as I have every
reason to believe), la-
bouring with insanity.
Of a simple turn of mind.
Uncle in an asylum.
Skull fractured three
years ago.
Sister considered rather
silly.
Had become dejected and
absent after failure in
business, and showed
symptoms of insanity.
Considered rather as an
idiot.
Almost irresponsible ...
Weakness of mind:
made sport of byfellow-
servants.
Uncle died in an asylum:
another committed sui-
cide. Fatherand sisters
considered weak.
Mother's brother is re-
ported to be imbecile;
harmless if let alone.
Not considered quite
correct in his mind.
Aunt mad for a long
time.
Considered a simpleton
Uncle killed himself in
a fit of insanity.
Eldest brother exhibited
symptoms of insanity.
Whole family eccentric;
and very weak in intel-
lect.
Uncle's intellect affected
at times.
Eead imper-
fectly.
Only knew the
alphabet
Of the lowest
kind.
Of the lowest in-
tellect : did not
know A, B, C.
Of lowest intel-
lect : did not
know tho al-
phabet.
Very low in spi-
rits.
Very low degree
of intellect.
Of very weak
intellect
Low in spirits
andin intellect.
Low in spirits;
over - active
mind; disliked
his trade.
Of a low degree
of intellect.
Peculiar turn of
mind.
Low intellect...
Low in spirits
and intellect.
Good intellect
Weak intellect
Low intellect;
only knew the
alphabet.
Improved in reading and
writing.
Eead well; write imper-
fectly; 4 rules of arithmetic.
Eead and write well; Eule
of Three.
Eead very imperfectly; write
a little; learned a little
arithmetic.
Eead well; write tolerably;
4 rules.
Eead and write well; Eule
of Three.
Eead and write well; 4 rules.
Improved considerably
Improved in reading and
writing; Eule of Three.
Eead and write imperfectly;
4 rules.
Eead and write well; Eule
of Three.
Eead and write well; Eule
of Three.
Well educated previously ...
Eead and write well; Rule
of Three.
Very well educated
Read and write well; Rule
of Three.
Read well; write imperfectly;
4 rules.
Read well; write tolerably:
Rule of Three.
Well educated
Read and write well:
of Three.
Rule
Read well; write imperfectly;
4 rules.
Improved gene-
rally.
Very cheerful;
improved in
general know-
ledge.
Sent away incor-
rigible.
Somewhat im-
proved in gene-
ral.
Ment ally, not mo-
rally, improved.
Improved, in re-
ligious know-
ledge; very
cheerful.
In Scriptural
knowledge also.
Improved in
Scriptural
knowledge.
Cheerful.
Much improved
inspirits; found
comfort in reli-
gion.
Improved in ge-
neral know-
ledge.
Ratherimproved
mentally.
Mentally im-
proved.
Morally im-
proved.
Improved in ge-
neral ; was re-
commended to
be master tailor
on board ship.
Greatly improv-
ed, especially
in Scriptural
knowledge.
Improved gene-
rally.
Much improved.
Improved gene-
rally.
Improved gene-
rally.
Improved gene-
rally.
* From No. 163 of the " Quarterly Review."
CRIME AND INSANITY.
133
Initials
of
Criminal
Verbatim Extracts
from
Letter of Referee.
Father died a lunatic ...
Ihavethought, andmore,
I am sure, that at times
he was not altogether
right in his head.
The prisoner's conduct,
more especially his wan-
deringpropensities, are
irreconcilable with per-
fect sanity.
He was not quite sound
in mind, and sometimes
not conscious of what
he was about. His own
sister destroyedherself.
His mother has evinced
symptoms of insanity
within the last three
years.
His father was subiect
to fits. J
One member of the
family has exhibited
symptoms of insanity.
I have known the pri-
soner to have fits when
over-fatigued.
He received an injury in
his head, from which
time he became flighty
and unsteady. His fa-
ther was in some mea-
sure imbecile in both
body and mind.
Has found him a little
insane at times; he was
kicked by a horse in
the head.
I knew him to labour
under a severe nervous
fev er for several months,
whi eh I always observed
afterwards to cause a
lowness of spirits. It
was about 8 years since.
Has not his senses per-
fect.
I fully believe him to be
at times insane. His
maternal grandfather
died insane.
Very soft in many things
His grandmother is in a
lunatic asylum.
Observations on
Degree of
Intellect, &c., by
the Chaplain
when first seen.
Ordinary intel-
lect.
More than ordi-
narilyreserved
and very dull.
intel-
A good
lect; appa-
rently much
compunction
for sin.
A very low-spi-
rited man.
Nothing at all
peculiar.
Very low spirited
Ordinary...
Ordinary
A very active
mind,butmost
perverse.
Ordinary...
Good, but his
constitution
apparently
weakened by-
intemperance.
Half-witted
Clever; good,
but perverted
and abused.
Low intellect...
Ordinary, but
very dull.

Schoolmaster's Report
on
leaving the Prison.
Beads and writes well: Rule
of Three.
Read tolerably; wrote imper-
fectly : improvement very
little.
Could read and write well;
considerably advanced in
the higher rules of arithme-
tic. Improvement tolerably
fair.
Could read and write very
well; considerably advanced
in the higher rules of arith-
metic; intelligent. Made
fair improvement.
Read well; wrote tolerably;
higher rules of arithmetic.
Improvement tolerable.
Could read and write well;
mensuration. Improvement
tolerable.
Read well; wrote tolerably;
knew the common rules of
arithmetic. Very much im-
proved.
Read well; wrote tolerably;
common rulesof arithmetic.
Improvement tolerable.
Could read and write well;
higher rules of arithmetic.
Improvement tolerable.
Could read well; write toler-
ably ; knew the first 4 rules
in arithmetic. Improve-
ment little.
Read and write well; ad-
vanced in higher rules of
arithmetic. Tolerably im-
proved.
Could read well. Made
scarcely any improvement.
Was well educated on admis-
sion. Was excused from
school; improved himself
tolerably by reading and
private study.
Could scarcely read any.
Very little improved.
Read well; write tolerably;
first 4s rules of arithmetic.
Improved a little.
State on leaving
the Prison,
as noted by
Chaplain.
Very much im-
proved in ge-
neral.
On the whole ra-
ther improved.
Improved very
much. Found
peace and com-
fort in the Gos-
pel.
Improved in spi-
rits. Found
comfort in re-
ligion also, I
think.
Improved very
much,especially
in the memory.
Gave himself to
learning hymns,
chapters, &c.
Very down -
hearted; would
have sunk here,
I think, but for
some religious
hope.
Improved.
Very cheerful.
Cultivated his
mind assidu-
ously, but was
very perverse
to the last.
Ratherimproved.
Very cheerful;
much improv-
ed, I think, in
every way.
Gave great at-
tention to reli-
gion.
Rather worse.
Not improved.
Rather worse.
Improved rather
in spirits.
