The Asylum Journal
===================

Art. Y.
Tnis journal was projected at a meeting of the " Association of
Medical Officers of Hospitals and Asylums for the Insane," held at
Oxford in the month of July, 1852. Some gentlemen connected
with the management of public asylums thought it desirable to
publish an occasional fly-sheet or "Asylum Journal," to circulate
principally among the resident medical superintendents of these estab-
lishments, in order to afford to these gentlemen a vehicle in which
they could compare notes respecting points of practical interest con-
nected with the conduct of such institutions, and the treatment of the
insane confided to their professional care. The originators of this
publication never contemplated establishing a journal in rivalship with
our own. This idea was fairly repudiated at the meeting. It cer-
tainly occurred to us when the proposals for the establishment of this
new journal were submitted to the consideration of the Oxford meeting,
that if any of the medical men connected officially with public asylums
had been anxious to bring any point of practical interest before their fel-
low-labourers or the profession generally, our pages would at all times
have been open to them; but as they had not thought proper to send
their communications to the Psychological Journal, we were at the time
doubtful whether a periodical of less pretensions would receive such an
amount of literary support as to render it at all useful to those for
whose special perusal it was intended.
Dr Bucknill, the well-known and intelligent physician of the Devon
County Asylum, was unanimously selected to conduct the journal for
the Association. It is now our pleasing duty to direct the attention
of our readers to the result of his editorial labours. Dr Bucknill has,
we have no doubt, found, ere this, that in editing a periodical of this
kind, he must, in the main, rely upon his own exertions. He has un-
* The Asylum Journal. (Thirteen Numbers published.) Edited by Dr.
Bucknill, Resident Physician of the Devon County Lunatic Asylum. Highley,
Fleet-street. Monthly, price 6d.
70
• THE ASYLUM JOURNAL.
doubtedly had afforded him some degree of literary assistance, but not,
we dare say, to the extent he anticipated when he consented to
mount the editorial chair. Having been a few years in advance of
Dr Bucknill in wielding the editorial baton, we can speak practi-
cally of the difficulties that have beset our path in the conduct of a
periodical like our own, devoted to the discussion of medico-psyclio-
logical literature. We do not complain of the obstacles that have
occasionally interfered with our successful onward march, or
look back upon the past with any feelings of pain or regret. Our
labours have been those of love. We were disposed at one time to
entertain the opinion that some of the "veterans" connected with the
department of the science of medicine we were engaged in cultivating,
might have extended to us some degree of literary assistance, and occa-
sionally have held out to us a helping-hand; but they, with a few bril-
liant exceptions, neither did one nor the other, from motives best
known to themselves. Dr Bucknill has, we have no doubt, experienced,
in the editorship of his unassuming journal, difficulties somewhat
analogous to those which, in a slight degree, somewhat damped our
ambition during the earlier periods of the history of the Psychological
Journal; but, like ourselves, he has triumphed over them, and has
fairly launched his fragile bark upon those stormy seas, said to be—
"Bankrupt of life and prodigal of care."
The numbers of the journal before us contain papers of deep in-
terest and great practical importance. The editor has, of course,
contributed largely to the pages of the Asylum Journal. We refer
particularly to a valuable, well-written and practical article on " Bed
sores in the Insane," and on the " Head-dress of Pauper Lunatic
Men," and to various leading introductory papers that have appeared,
from time to time, on subjects of immediate interest. Dr Arlidge
has published in the journal a series of papers " On the Examination
of the Brain after Death," well worthy of the student's attentive
reading. We all know how loosely, slovenly and carelessly the brain
is often examined after death. It therefore behoves all occupied in
these delicate and important investigations, to consider well the rules
laid down by this physician for the guidance of those engaged in the
study of cerebral pathology.
Dr Boyd's communication on "Cholera" is valuable; but is it not
too elaborate for a special periodical of this character ? The essay
occupies the greater part of one number of the journal. Would it not
be better for the future to avoid publishing papers of such length,
unless directly bearing upon some point of practical value relative to
the organization of asylums or treatment of insanity ? The short
notices of new publications are characterized by a liberal spirit of
THE ASYLUM JOURNAL.
71
criticism, and the works selected for review are, with one exception,
chosen with judgment and good taste. The exception to which we
refer is a work on " Nervous Diseases," with the name of Dr Maddock
on its title-page. An ad captandum publication like this is unworthy
of notice in the columns of a scientific journal. The hook is evidently
written for commercial purposes, and does not contain one point that
should redeem it from the hands of the butter-merchant or trunk-
maker. When we have so much to commend in Dr Bucknill's
editorial management we regret to be obliged, from a sense of duty
and justice, to view any matter in a light different to that in which
he has himself discussed it. In Nos. 6 and 7 of the journal Dr.
Bucknill has considered it necessary to animadvert strongly on Dr.
Simpson's management of the Lunatic Asylum for the North and
East Riding of Yorkshire, in reference to the use of the milder forms
of mechanical restraint under special and pressing circumstances.
The Commissioners in Lunacy, in their official entry made after a
careful inspection of this public asylum on the 18th of March, 1854,
refer to four cases, in the treatment of which Dr Simpson conceived
it to be his duty to apply, temporarily, mechanical restraint. In a sub-
sequent part of their report they observe—
"No material alteration has taken place in the general arrangement
of the institution since the visit of the Commissioners in June last;
but the whole establishment is now on so steady and satisfactory a
footing, that the details of its daily management are carried on with
great ease and regularity, and we did not observe anything as to which
we could suggest any change likely to be useful."
Now, Dr Bucknill takes grave exception to this laudatory para-
graph, and cannot conceive how the Commissioners can say, that they
" did not observe anything as to which we can suggest any change
likely to be useful," when one of the female patients had, at the
time of their visitation, in consequence of her extreme violence,
" her hands tied behind her by means of a pocket-handkerchief,
and, in three other cases, the spencer had been occasionally em-
ployed to prevent acts of violence and destruction." It is not our
intention to go in detail into the merits of the matter in dispute
between Dr Simpson and Dr Bucknill. Dr B. does not think
this establishment can justly be held up as a "pattern institution,"
or be entitled to the eulogy of the Commissioners, as long as the
patients are subjected to any amount of mechanical restraint. Dr.
Simpson's very temperate reply to Dr Bucknill's editorial criticism
is published in No. 7 of the Asylum Journal, and is well worthy
of perusal. Ranking, as we do, among the moderate advocates of a
partial use of mechanical restraint, Dr Bucknill cannot expect that
72
THE REFORMATION JN THE
we should take his view of the matter in dispute. We can conceive
an institution for the treatment of the insane to be a "pattern one,"
and fully entitled to eulogia similar to that bestowed upon Dr Simpson
by the Commissioners, in which mechanical restraint and seclusion
are "occasionally" used for the treatment, safety, and care of its un-
happy inmates.
With the exceptions previously referred to, it affords us, personally,
much gratification to speak in the warmest terms in praise of Dr.
Bucknill's editorial exertions. We can appreciate the difficulties with
which he has had to contend, and are ready to make great and liberal
allowances for any slight deviations from what we conceive to be the
boundaries of legitimate criticism. We propose, from time to time, to
bring this journal under the notice of our readers, and when we have
more space at command, to quote extensively from its columns.
