The Responsibility of the Insane
==================================

Art. II.—
What is the condition that releases a man from responsibility to tlie
laws of society?

Notwithstanding many conflicting arguments and decisions, medical
and legal, we may affirm that this question is practically solved, both
according to the practice of the law and the dictates of common
justice, when insanity is established. Although not convertible terms,
insanity and irresponsibility are inseparably associated. Irresponsi-
bility follows upon insanity as a logical necessity. We should, there-
fore, hold that the difficulty would be overcome could we expound
clear and definite rules by which insanity might be known. But, in
discussing this question, so momentous to society and to individuals,
with the authors the titles of whose works are quoted below, we shall
be compelled to consider it under another and still more complicated
aspect. Dr Mayo and Dr Bucknill, in express terms, contend that
there are certain states in which responsibility is only modified, and
not annulled. They would break down the old barrier which has
hitherto been deemed the natural, and served as a recognizable boun-
dary between responsibility and irresponsibility. That barrier re-
moved, we shall have to call upon Dr Mayo and Dr Bucknill to show
us how far we are to travel along the road beyond the confines where
sanity ends and insanity begins before we arrive at the vanishing
point of responsibility. We shall have to ask them to define at what
degree of madness they would interfere to stay the infliction of punish-
ment. We greatly fear that, the only intelligible landmark removed,
* 1. Medical Testimony and Evidence in Cases of Lunacy. By Thomas
Mayo, M.D., F.R.S. London: John W. Parker and Son, 1854.

2. Unsoundness of Mind in relation to Criminal Acts ; being the Sugden Prize
"Essay for 1854. By John Charles Bucknill, M.D., Physician to the Devon County
Lunatic Asylum. London: Samuel Highley, 1854. _ ;
3. Unsoundness of Mind in its Medical and Legal Considerations. j. W.
Williams, M.D. Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medical Science, Nos. XXX .,
XXXVI., XXXVII. 1854-5.
2s O. XXX.

we shall, like benighted travellers, have to grope our way in a dreary
wilderness of speculation,—no point of departure, no guiding star, no
compass, no resting-place, no progress, and no goal! Can the search
for the conditions of responsibility be hopeful or profitable if thus un-
dertaken ? We fear not; but, nevertheless, we cannot shrink from
the task of examining the proposition as presented to us by the authors
we have named. Nor do we desire to shrink from it. The doctrine
maintained by them is fraught with consequences to society too
mighty, and, we think, perilous, to permit us, in conscience or in incli-
nation, to evade it, or to pass it by without ample investigation.
We would not call down upon these authors the penalties invoked
by the ancients against those who removed the Terminal Gods. We
venerate the principle of liberty of thought; but we cannot, reflecting
upon the subversive tendency of the doctrine we are about to discuss,
avoid uttering our deep conviction that it is one that ought not to be
promulgated unless supported by very cogent arguments.

In entering upon the task as presented to us, we are still, however,
not freed from the necessity of seeking to determine the essential con-
ditions of insanity as the first step in the inquiry. Even the authors
we have named, although contending that responsibility passes into
the cloudy regions of insanity, and unable, as may well be imagined,
to indicate at what precise step of insanity responsibility ends, cannot
escape from this elementary necessity. We could not, indeed, appre-
ciate their reasons, or do justice to their arguments, unless we began
by inquiring what it is that they understand by the term, insanity.

Both have, with a fatal courage, dared to enunciate definitions.

Every man who throws down a definition challenges criticism. But
first, we think it our duty to cite the passages in which they explain
their doctrine of responsible madness. Dr Mayo is precise, and even
dogmatic. There is none of the diffidence of doubt; he lays down his
doctrine with all the assurance of a man who has established it on the
basis of scientific demonstration, with all the confidence of a Columbus
who has made a discovery in advance of the intelligence of the age in
which he lives. In his preface, Dr Mayo tells us—" In the course of
my inquiries I have been led to certain conclusions, for which I cannot
expect a cordial or immediate reception." "The second (of these
conclusions) arises out of the question whether some offences of the
insane ought not to be visited with some form of secondary punish-
ment." " The law will remain a dead letter, or be continually ignored
by the sympathies of judges, juries, and, I may add, of medical wit-
nesses, unless some practical distinction can be arranged which may
enable the responsible insane to undergo some lower degree of punish-
ment than that inflicted on similar delinquents being of sound mind,"

(p. 51.) Dr Buclmill says—" It is the system of the English law to
allow no degrees of responsibility. A criminal is either responsible,
or he is irresponsible. ... We are extremely happy to observe that
in Ireland the administration of the law, practised with such inflexi-
bility in England, is occasionally departed from ; and, in such cases as
those of William Quinlaw, L. Grady, and others, mentioned in the
Inspector's reports, the Lord Lieutenant has sometimes commuted the
sentence of death into transportation, on the ground of imperfect re-
sponsibility." He proceeds to quote, with approbation, the following
extraordinary doctrine of Drs. White and Nugent:—" If there are
extenuating circumstances connected with the psychological condi-
tion" (meaning, if they are insane) " of the accused, they are legiti-
mate subjects, to be considered in meting out the after-punishment,
but certainly not, in the first instance, for an unqualified acquittal."
Hence Drs. White and Nugent—and Dr Bucknill approves—see no
inconsistency, nothing revolting to common sense or justice in putting
an admitted lunatic upon a solemn trial for his life. Both Dr Mayo
and Dr Bucknill lay some stress upon the French custom of making
gradations of punishment by admitting " extenuating circumstances,"
and seek to force a kind of analogical argument in favour of their
position out of this practice. But is it not a palpable non sequitur
to apply a rule, that is not without reason when sane people are con-
cerned, to cases of undoubted insanity ? It is surely a singular sole-
cism in jurisprudence to admit insanity as an " extenuating circum-
stance." The instance of Henriette Cornier, cited by Dr Mayo, is
not, as he supposes, a proof that insanity has been admitted by the
French law as an extenuating circumstance in the light of a principle
of law, but simply one of those compromises between the uninformed
judgment of juries whose insufficient faith in the decision of medical
science is sometimes unable to credit testimony as to the existence of
insanity, and their natural sense of justice, which forbids them to visit
the full penalties for crime on the heads of wretches whose responsi-
bility is a matter of dispute.

But there is one passage in Dr Williams' essay—an essay which
for sound and original argument we cannot too highly commend—
which would seem to imply that he also is disposed to admit a limited
responsibility as attaching to the insane : " Where does the ability to
determine on a particular act cease or commence ? For accordingly must
be tbe responsibility or irresponsibility of the offender. Experience and
observation prove that this mental regulation is, to a certain extent,
under a man's own control; it therefore follows that those illegal
acts resulting from unsoundness of mind within the individual regu-
lations of the will are justly regarded as crimes, while similar acts,
originating from mental conditions in which the will has no part,
cannot he esteemed as other than so many evidences of insanity."

(Dublin Quarterly Journal, p. 267, Nov. 1854.) But this seems to
he put theoretically rather than as a practical law, and is not carried
out by the general argument of Dr Williams' excellent treatise.
The doctrine of responsible insanity, then, as upheld by Dr Mayo
and Dr Bucknill, is now before our readers. We proceed to state
their definitions of insanity; and then we shall endeavour to trace, as
well as we can, what kinds and degrees of insanity, according to these
authors, involve responsibility.

Dr Mayo thus explains his views :—" Now, in looking for a term
which may contain the essential mental elements of insanity, and,
therefore, contain a criterion of its presence, I adopt delirium, as
used by M. Pinel and Dr Cullen" (p. 13). " The second phase of
delirium consists in the presence of certain delusions, or false percep-
tions, of which there are two principal forms." The first, in which
the delusion may simulate a perception of the special senses, is called
by Dr Mayo "objective delusion." This is the hallucination of
French authors. Secondly, " the delusion or false perception may have
no direct reference to objects of sense, but may, apparently, turn on
perceptions of the understanding alone, thus embracing a large, and, I
regret to say, indefinite category, which contains preposterous notions
respecting power, station, conduct, moral motives, future prospects,"
&c. Delusions of this nature Dr Mayo calls " notional,"—a not very
felicitous term.

We postpone, for the present, criticism upon this position, and place
by the side of it the definition of Dr Bucknill. According to this
acute and experienced psychopathist disease is a necessary condition of
insanity. " A change, therefore, with impairment or perturbation of
function, is the chief test of centro-mental disease," (p. 33.) " In-
sanity may be intellectual, emotional, or volitional, and though in the
concrete it is not easy to find pure and unmixed cases under either of
these heads, such cases do occasionally subject themselves to observa-
tion. . . . Insanity, therefore, may be defined as a condition of the
mind in which a false action of conception or judgment, a defective
power of the will, or an uncontrollable violence of the emotions or in-
stincts have, separately or conjointly, been produced by disease," (p.
28.) We do not consider it important to adduce Dr Bucknill's defi-
nition of delusion, since, according to the above definition of insanity,
delusion per se does not imply insanity : disease must be coexistent.
But since disease can, in many cases, only be presumed to exist on the
evidence of intellectual alienation, we think it useful to quote the
characteristic features of insane delusions as laid down by Dr Buck-
nill. " 1st. The delusions of the insane are generally independent of
the opinions of others; they isolate the person who entertains them
from his kind : whereas the sane portion of mankind are gregarious in
their absurdities. . . , 2nd. The faith of the insane in their delusive
opinions is stedfast and unflinching. . . . 3rd. They come on after
some physical or moral shock, and often'present strange contrasts to the
previous habits of thought, or have no relation thereto 4th. In
many cases they have relation to the patient alone, and are often of a
kind which renders their nature apparent." He properly states that
these characteristics are not constant. But we believe that it will be
found of great service to bear in mind this excellent analysis of insane
thought in investigating doubtful cases of insanity.

This is also the place to introduce Dr Williams' views of what con-
stitutes insanity. This author, perhaps warned by the Icarian fate of
those whose too venturous wings had carried them into the deceitful sun
of definition, gives us no precise exposition. Taking a less ambitious
course, and keeping nearer to the every-day world of human thought,
he seeks for no general expression that shall include all the insane and
exclude all the sane. Looking at the question merely in a practical
light, he adopts the invaluable test of Gooch, who, declining all gene-
ralities, makes the peculiarities of the individual the great object of
investigation. " A particular act, or succession of acts, to acquire
value as a symptom of insanity, must do so through the fact of its
denoting a departure from the natural and healthy character, temper,
or habits. It is not, therefore, sufficient that the medical man who
would determine the question of soundness or unsoundness of mind be
informed of special acts which he contrasts with what he may regard
as an approved standard of natural health; but it is requisite that his
standard be the admitted mental health of the individual, that the acts
specified may have their value determined accordingly; since, to quote
the words of Dr Combe, 1 it is the prolonged departure, without ade-
quate external cause, from the state of feeling and modes of thinking
usual to the individual in health, that is the true feature of disorder
in mind.' " We have only to object to this that the words, or, more
properly speaking, the opinion attributed to Dr Combe, belong to Dr.
Gooch, who had developed and enforced the method of testing the
individuality by itself, with remarkable felicity, in his celebrated article
on the case of Mr. Davies, in the Quarterly Review.

We have always thought the following anecdote of Charles V. to be
an admirable illustration of the futility of general definitions of in-
sanity, and of the necessity of judging of every individual by his own
standard. In his retirement from the world this celebrated man was
accustomed to employ his leisure in forming curious works of
mechanism; and he was said to have been particularly curious with
regard to the construction of clocks and watches. He found, after
repeated trials, that he could not bring any two of them to go exactly
alike, and hence was led to reflect, with a mixture of surprise and re-
gret, on his own folly in having bestowed so much time and labour on
the more vain attempt of bringing mankind to a precise conformity of
sentiment concerning the intricate and mysterious doctrines of religion.
" Tot hominum, tot sententiarumand " tot hominum, tot mentium."

The whole treatise of Dr Williams is a most able, searching, and
philosophical analysis of the question of what constitutes insanity.
So able, indeed, is it, and so consecutive in its reasoning, that we find
the utmost difficulty in making extracts in such a manner as to ex-
hibit a fair and adequate idea of the character and scope of his argu-
ment. "YVe have, however, stated in this place his leading principle as
bearing upon the argument we have taken up, and hope to find other
opportunities of developing his views as we proceed.

What we have to object to Dr Mayo's test of insanity is, that it
is not a medical test at all: it is metaphysical and legal. And, to
describe it more closely still, it is a purely intellectual test. We do
not call to mind any physician of repute in psychology, who main-
tains the validity of such a test in the absolute form in which Dr.
Mayo states it. Perhaps the nearest approach to it is the definition
of Dr Conolly, who places the fundamental criterion of insanity in
the " comparing faculty." That he has legal authority, we will not
deny. He may cite, for example, the dictum of Baron Alderson, who,
in the case of Robert Pate, said, " In the first place they must clearly
understand that it was not because a man was insane that he was
unpunishable ; and he must say that, upon this point, there was a very
grievous delusion in the minds of medical men. The only insanity
which excused a man for his acts was that species of delusion which
conduced to, and drove him to commit, the act alleged against him.
They ought to have proof of a formed disease of the mind—a disease
existing before the act was committed, and which made the accused
incapable of knowing, at the time he did the act, that it was a wrong
act for him to do." Here we have judicial authority for Dr Mayo's
favourite doctrine of insane responsibility, and for the sufficiency of
the test of delusion. But we conceive, whilst expressing and enter-
taining a just and great reverence for the learning and integrity of the
men who so worthily fill the seats of judgment in this country, that
we are under no necessity, at this time, of refuting maxims and
assumed rules of practice which the judges themselves had hardly
uttered before they were found acting in irreconcilable contradiction
-with respect to them. We are amply justified in saying that the judges who gave their exposition of the law on this subject in a de-
liberate Report to the House of Lords, have themselves, in practice,
abandoned their own exposition; and have, in many remarkable in-
stances, been content to accept the skilled testimony of medical wit-
nesses, in arriving at their decisions as to the essential conditions of
insanity. We will not, therefore, stop to exhibit the impracticable
fallacies of legal definitions. They have been often exposed in these
pages, and by many medical writers; but by none better or more
conclusively than by Drs. Bucknill and "Williams in the works before
us. We decline, therefore, to accept from Dr Mayo the testimony of
lawyers upon this matter. As a physician, we look to him for medical
reasoning ; unless, indeed, what seems not very remote from the drift
of his argument, he is prepared to give up the insane altogether to the
law.

It is scarcely necessary now, to prove that delusion is alto-
gether untrustworthy as a test of insanity. In fact, it is as difficult
to define insane delusion as it is to define insanity. Obscurum per
obscurius. That admirable physician, Leuret, has well said he never-
met with an idea in a lunatic asylum, howsoever preposterous, extra-
vagant, and unnatural, which he had not seen matched in the world.
Insanity, then, cannot consist in the idea. To centre all insanity in
the intellect, is to keep out of sight that inseparable part of the human
'<./) mind, the moral element, which is so often the source, quoad the mind,
of intellectual disorder. Dr Mayo first discards disease as a necessary
condition in insanity; at another part of his work he even contends
that the mind may be diseased in the abstract. But he goes further:
not content with loosening the body from the mind, he next amputates,
if we may use the expression, one part of the mind from the rest; he
cuts off the moral element from the intellectual, and thus reduces man
to a being without emotions, without passions, or at least, without
any right to have them. Such a man has clearly no business to become
insane; and, certainly, since he cannot attribute his intellectual
aberration to disease, nor to disorder of the moral element, he has no
right to plead insanity in bar of punishment for any act that he may
commit. It is unfortunate, however, that the human intellect is
cemented with earthly dross; and that the faculty of rendering the
mind independent of the actions of the body, is one after which the
philosopher may sigh, but which the frailty of man cannot reach.
Dr Bucknill has dwelt ten years in an asylum. He has conducted,
with more than common skill and minuteness, necroscopie researches
upon the bodies of the insane. He has brought an acute and philo-
sophical mind to work upon his observations of the wanderings of the
insane mind, and of the abnormalities of the physical structures. 

It would be strange if he were to believe in the independency of the
mind upon the body. He speaks from an authoritative experience,
when he declares his conviction that insanity invariably implies disease
of the brain. And we avail ourselves of this opportunity of recording
our opinion that he has rendered an eminent service to general patho-
logy and to psychology, by his admirable investigations of cerebral
disease, by observing the variations of the specific gravity of the brain
in the insane. His results confirm in a conclusive manner the observa-
tions of Ferrus and Guislain, that atrophy of the brain is a frequent
condition in many forms of insanity.

But, although Dr.Bucknill avoids the flagrant heterodoxy of Dr Mayo,
we are unable to accept even his definition without reservation or com-
ment. " A false action of conception or judgment (intellect), a defective
power of the will, or an uncontrollable violence of the emotions and
instincts (moral), have separately or conjointly been produced by
disease." He thus admits disease, and does not exclude any one of
the integral parts of the mind. But, if it be fair to use an author's
own arguments against himself, we will point to Dr Bucknill's theory
of the emotional origin of insanity (p. 83),—a theory forcibly ex-
pressed by Guislain—and ask how this theory can be reconciled with
the above definition, and with the explanation of it, in which he says
that pure and unmixed cases of Intellectual, Emotional, or Volitional
insanity may be found p Is not this to say, insanity may be not only
emotional, but intellectual or volitional in its origin ? But, in another
place (p. 85), he says, " The will is a faculty so simple and undecom-
posable that it may well be doubted if it can ever lapse into a diseased
Condition." Shall we, then, exclude volitional cases of insanity ? If
we do so, Dr Bucknill's definition will be condensed to intellectual or
emotional impairment produced by disease. Now, is it true in nature,
that pure cases of either intellectual or emotional disease exist? Is it
true that the intellect and the emotions can be isolated from each
other in disease any more than in health ? Is it not, rather, true that
there are cases of insanity in which the prominent or most obtrusive
character is aberration of the intellect, or delirium, and others in which
the most obtrusive character is abnormality of the moral part ? But
does it follow that, because one of the integral parts constituting the
human mind is strikingly deranged, the other is altogether sound ?
We, for our own part, demur to this conclusion; and beg to refer to
a passage in which we have on a former occasion embodied our ideas
upon this subject :* " that as the mind can be only occupied with one
idea at a time, it is, as a whole, affected when under the influence of
* Psychological Journal, vol, v., p. 466.

any specific lesion." We may say, further, without losing sight
of the fact that the mind, although so constituted as to present
different phases, which appear to be distinct parts, that it is in reality one
and indivisible. We are disposed to regard the intellect as the highest
mode of mind, rather than as a distinct component. Lower modes of
mind are evinced in the active and moral powers, including the
appetites, desires, affections, emotions, and the moral faculty. It is
out of these last that spring all the great motions of thought and
action. The intellect takes its form and direction from these. In
the mens sana in corpore sano, a strong intellect may control every
inordinate impulse, although it cannot extinguish them. In the mens
insana in corpore insano, the primum mobile, that part from which
actions take their spring and the intellect its bent, dominates over the
intellectual faculties, which often struggle long but ineffectually against
the morbid suggestion. It is possible, then, to imagine a diseased
mind—using the term as meaning a mind alienated through disease of
the physical structure—in which the intellectual aberration shall be with
difficulty or not at all recognised, in which there shall be no delirium,
but which shall, nevertheless, be under the dominion of abnormal moral
powers. That such is indeed the case, the records of science and the
experience of psychopathists abundantly prove. And, since the abnor-
mality or disease of the moral powers, in many cases, only finds its
exponent symptoms in the phases of the intellect, we can understand
how difficult it often is to detect some forms of moral insanity. In
the most perplexing cases of all, the expert has little open to him
beyond the ordeal of interrogation. But, every articulate speech
implies exercise of the intellectual faculties. These, aroused by the
necessity of replying to questions, often come to the aid of the mono-
maniac, who, driven to use them under the controlling influence of
observation, keeps his moral part in subjection for a time, and makes
no sign that reveals his disorder. Again, as in many bodily diseases,
as in ague and epilepsy, for example, although we cannot doubt in
these a persistent morbid action, the frame is not at all times fevered or
convulsed, so in mental diseases, the persistent moral lesion may not
always be in the ascendant to such an extent as to overpower the
intellect and lay itself bare to the world.

But these difficulties are difficulties of diagnosis; and ought not in
reason to be interpreted as proof against theessential existence of disease.
We recognise, then, a form of monomania, not in the pure etymo-
logical signification of the word, but in that practical sense which is
understood to represent what we actually find.

The moral part diseased, and the intellectual part sound and intact,
is a condition that the human mind perhaps never presents. In such
a sense we should deny that moral insanity, as a disease, exists. Show
us a man whose moral you say is diseased, but whose intellect is
always clear and uninfluenced by his moral abnormity: and we will
answer that since it is the function of our intellect to weigh what is
wrong against society, and to direct aright the actions prompted by
the moral, that man is responsible for his conduct to his fellow men;
but we deny that such a man is insane; we deny that he is diseased.
We have thus largely expressed our ideas upon this question of the
nature of insanity, because it is applicable in order to show upon what our
objections to the definitions of Dr Mayo and Dr Bucknill rest. It is,
at the same time, anticipative of what we might otherwise have to say
upon monomania and moral insanity, in commenting upon the views
of our authors upon these subjects. When we arrive at this point of
our task, we shall be able to refer our readers back for some of the
reasons we have to urge against the views of Dr Mayo and Dr Buck-
nill, to what we have just written.

The views of Dr Mayo and Dr Bucknill on the much-disputed sub-
jects of monomania and moral insanity, may be, to some extent, inferred
from their general expositions of insanity. The first conclusion which
Dr Mayo refers to in his preface as one of his " adventurous specu-
lations,"—an epithet the correctness of which it is not for us to dispute
—" concerns the ambiguous, and, as I think, mischievous nature of some
doctrines, suggested by the term ' moral insanity,' or certain synony-
mous expressions." He who contends that delirium, the evidence of dis-
ordered intellect, is the essential test of insanity, necessarily, as we
have seen, denies the existence of moral insanity. In the absolute
sense, we have ourselves already said that moral insanity does not
exist; but Dr Mayo's commentary—in some places not without force
—upon the cases and arguments of Pinel and Pritchard, goes much
farther than this. -

" I have," says Dr Mayo (p. 53), " now to consider a peculiar state,
under which the leading and important subject for judicial considera-
tion is an orgasm, or an intense and sometimes sudden desire, which
leads the sufferer to perform some criminal act; this orgasm not
always susceptible of being construed into delirium, as not being obvi-
ously attended either by a morbid delusion or by a state of inconsecu-
tive thought. In regard to this condition of the case a question in-
stantly arises, whether in the absence of direct, it may admit of con-
stractive proof of delirium,—that is, of a morbid state of intellect;
or must be removed into the category of vice." He admits that there
are some " cases of the above orgasm in which it seems to suggest to
its victim an objective false perception, leading him to some criminal
act to which till his feelings and moral sentiments are opposed." Thus,
when delirium is made out, Dr Mayo would not deny a form of insanity
which is usually designated as moral. But this evidence he must
have, or he will allow no insanity. We must place an illustration
before our readers (p. 59) : " With respect to the misapplication of
the plea of insanity to hysteria, we have a case of a nursery-maid, placed
in Bethlem Hospital in 1846. A trifling disappointment relative to
an article of dress had produced in her a wayward state of mind. She
laboured at the time under diminished catamenia. An object to
which she was generally much attached came in her way,—namely,
the infant whom she nursed; and she destroyed it, as a fanciful child
breaks, in its moodiness, a favourite doll. No fact more nearly ap-
proaching to delirium than the above was stated in exculpation or
excuse at the trial. But Dr Prichard's work was published in 1842,
and by 1846, juries had learned to convert the uncontrolled influences
of temper into what he terms instinctive insanity."

In reference to such a case as this we will remark that those who,
like ourselves, have studied with care the influences which ovarian and
uterine disorders exert upon the nervous system will easily call to
mind cases without number in which such disorders, more especially
those in which hysterical convulsions recur at the menstrual epochs,
clearly affect the mind, both in its moral and intellectual phases, in a
degree that borders upon, and not seldom amounts to, temporary in-
sanity. We wish particularly to observe, that the mental alienation
in these cases is, like the bodily disorder, of a paroxysmal and period-
ical character. In the intervals between the accessions an ordinary
observer, or even the physician, would not detect in the conduct or
speech of such a patient any aberration. He would scout the idea of
insanity. Very often, also, the true and perilous condition of the
patient will not be revealed by word or deed, even at the acme of the
physical and mental disorder. Consciousness of her danger, and of her
want of control at these seasons, will sometimes warn her to take certain
precautions, and place a guard over her utterance and actions, when
the period of danger is imminent. But, nevertheless, the danger is
really and terribly present. Prom what we have observed in some
patients of this kind, who, on common occasions and under the con-
trolling influence of the observation of strangers, would pass for persons
endowed with the healthiest mental organization, we should be sur-
prised at no act which they might commit under the circumstances
described, But these circumstances of abnormal ovarian and uterine
function or their bearing upon her mental health, might be unknown
to, and withheld from, the physician who may be consulted as to the
nature of an apparently criminal act she may have committed. When
brought under his observation, the insane fit,, the " orgasm," may have
passed over: the ovarian excitement has subsided; the nervous com-
motion is subdued; no delirium remains. Judged by her actual con-
dition she will be pronounced of sound mind; but a fatal error may
have been committed, through ignorance. Taken at this time, and
upon the evidence alone which this supplies, she would, if Dr Mayo
were consulted, be condemned to expiate a deed committed when in-
sane by undergoing the full rigour of the law. But Dr Mayo asks, if
there may not be "constructive" evidence of delirium at the time of
the act. We will, therefore, go back to the period of the fit. How
shall we arrive at constructive evidence ? Will Dr Mayo accept the
constructive evidence derived from the presumed criminal act, or from
other acts that took place at about the same time F We fear not;
and yet there may be no other evidence. We think we do not impute
to him what is not the natural conclusion from his reasoning, when
we assume that he would repudiate all construction of this kind derived
from the alleged criminal act itself. And if he reject this—presumably,
at least, the most irrational, the culminating act—he must needs
reject those lesser acts that were committed about the same time.
Besides, we do not know that Dr Mayo would admit that action alone
may indicate delirium. And yet it is impossible to forget that action
may be as much an expression of the human intelligence as speech. The
deaf and dumb may be insane, nay, brute animals may be insane, and not
unfrequently are so. The probability of such cases Dr Mayo would
probably not deny, but we do not see in what manner, following his
principles, he would obtain evidence of delirium. We will, then, seek
for this evidence in speech. The typical patient we have supposed
may, although possessed of the faculty of speech, have been placed in
the position of the dumb madman. During the transitory paroxysm,
no one may have been nigh to hear her, or the alienation itself may
have been of a nature to explode in action and not in words. There
may then have been no evidence, direct or constructive, of delirium
such as, if we may judge by the case we have quoted from him, would
satisfy Dr Mayo. But this unhappy girl may, nevertheless, as we
have shown, have been insane; there were persons of skill and judg-
ment who believed that she was. Can Dr Mayo, who feels so much
repugnance to admit that she was insane, prove that she was not ?

What is the alternative in such a case F If we adopt the opinion of
those who affirm insanity, detention in an asylum is the result; if we
adopt Dr Mayo's denial of insanity—the actual insanity, we have a
right to assume, remaining the same—the gallows would cut short the
dispute. According to the first position, society would, in the event
of error, receive no detriment; according to the second, humanity
would be outraged. We acknowledge the difficulty—the sometimes
insuperable difficulty—of arriving at conclusive evidence in cases of
this nature* But difficulty of diagnosis, we say again, is no argument
against the possibility of the existence of a disease. It is enough for
us that such disease as we have described may and does exist. This
admitted, in cases of extreme doubt, not humanity only, but science
and justice, demand that our decision turn to the side of mercy.
And if we pursue the argument of Dr Mayo, we shall find that
even he supplies the materials for his own refutation. At p. 63 he
quotes the case of Mendic from Georget:—" Hypolite Mendic, a non-
commissioned officer in the French service, had gradually become
morose, capricious, and brutal in his conduct, so as to excite the dis-
gust of all his companions. This ends in disobedience of orders, and
such violence towards his commanding officer as to render him liable
on trial to the sentence of death. The trial proceeds with, the
customary anxiety of the medical witnesses to make out a plea of in-
sanity, but in the course of the trial one weighty fact was made out,—
namely, that before his outbreaks he was subject to an epileptiform
seizure, out of which he emerged into the wayward state above noticed.
This might fairly justify an hypothesis of delirium, as present at those
paroxysms."

Now, we submit that if the hypothesis of delirium—if nothing less
than that will satisfy Dr Mayo—or of absolute insanity be fairly
justified on proof of epileptiform seizures, then by parity of reasoning
a similar hypothesis is justified in the case of the girl who was affected
with hysteria and disordered menstruation.

On this subject we are happy to find both Dr Bucknill and Dr.
Williams agreeing with us on the leading points. Dr Bucknill says
with much truth:—" The doctrine (p. 82) has, to some extent, suffered
both from bad terminology and from bad logic on the part of its advo-
cates, and especially from its having been considered separately from the
necessary and essential requisite of irresponsibility, a state of disease."
"VYe are very much inclined to recognise the justness of Dr Bucknill's
objections to the terms "uncontrollable" and "impulse," reserving
always our opinion that the insane condition usually understood when
Ave use those terms has a real existence. " The term impulse," lie
says (p. 84), " conveys the idea of force communicated instantaneously,
a rapid motion ; whereas the morbid desires under consideration are
not of instantaneous production or of rapid growth. They arise from
a chronic disease, and are resisted up to a certain point."—"The ad-
jective (p. 85) uncontrollable is also liable to serious objection."—" The
real question is not whether the emotions occasioning the overt act are
beyond the power of the individual to control, but whether they are
the result of disease." We have only to add to this the qualification
that the form of insanity commented upon is not always of slow growth,
or dependent upon chronic disease ; or if it be, that the duration of the
antecedent disease is in some cases to all evidence short; a reservation
must also he made for those cases depending upon morbid ovarian
irritation to which we have alluded.

Dr Bucknill suggests the following modification of Esquirol and
Marc's classification of homicides by the insane :—■" 1st. Those wherein
the crime has been occasioned by delusion, and no reasonable person
can doubt or object to the irresponsibility of the offender. 2nd.
Wherein the offender, through suffering from mental disease, has
committed the crime under the influence of some motive not of a
delusive character. Such are the cases of Lawrence, Touchet, Had-
field, Grreensmith, Staniought, Burton, and others. In these cases,
the responsibility may be diminished or modified, but the most ex-
tended sympathy for the insane could scarcely claim for them that it
should be altogether abrogated. 3rd. Where with general symptoms
of cerebro-mental disease, neither delusion nor motive for the crime
are discoverable. These latter are the cases which with a most un-
lucky phraseology have been attributed to moral insanity, insane im-
pulse, uncontrollable impulse, homicidal impulse, &c."

Dr Bucknill does not then appear to deny the actuality of those
forms of mental disease commonly, although perhaps erroneously,
called moral insanity ; but he doubts whether, whilst admitting them
to arise from disease, they ought to confer complete irresponsibility.
Indeed, looking back to his definition of insanity, it is clear he is pre-
cluded from denying the existence of moral insanity. Upon the ques-
tion of gradations of responsibility we shall presently have to offer
some remarks.

The great question of moral insanity is investigated by Dr Williams
in the most masterly manner. A tone of thoughtful and unprejudiced
reasoning pervades his elaborate and logical analysis. We again
express our regret that we cannot, even by means of long quotations,
convey to our readers such a digest as would not break the chain and
mar the force of his argument. It is our duty, however, to place his
leading conclusions upon this subject side by side with those of Dr.
Mayo and Dr Bucknill. He thus clearly lays down the problem to be
solved, (p. 80., Dublin Quarterly Journal, No. XXXVII.) :—" If then,
in the commission of crime, neither the moral nor intellectual principle
appears to act independent of the other, let us inquire how far they
are identified, and to what extent their unity is involved, when resulting
in the exercise of acts open to the charge of criminality." He thus
contends against pure moral insanity:—" If we go to the full extent
of some writers, and allow the moral intelligence to be, per se} diseased,
or 1 Minnie instinctive sans delire* to be present, while the reasoning
powers are wholly unaffected, what else can we suppose but that every
case of confirmed viciousness is an example of such a form of disease P "
At p. 279, No. XXXYI, he describes or defines monomania "as a
disease in which the mind appears to suffer from a paralysis of its
powers of conception, and is inadequate to appreciate the general or
partial relations which the subject-matter of the monomaniacal con-
ceptions involves." This view coincides closely with that of Guislain
and Renaudin. He says:—" All examples of moral insanity which
the records of criminal jurisprudence supply, may be ranged under one
of the following heads: I. Cases in which the development of the
moral feelings or affections appears as originally deficient. II. Cases
in which the perversion of the moral feelings or affective faculties
appears to occur incidentally. III. Cases in which the moral feelings
appear to become universally disordered. IV. Cases in which the
moral feelings appear as partially diseased." Dr Williams thus sums
up his conclusions:—"I. By the term moral insanity, we express
mental unsoundness, chiefly evidenced through the moral or affective
faculty. II. Though the moral and intellectual perceptions are
capable of independent exercises (?), yet in their effective operations
they mutually blend together and co-operate. III. Analogous
differences are observable in the development of the morals of the in-
tellectual faculties. IY. Those differences are such as seem to impart
a special character or disposition to each. Y. The intelligence is, in
the healthy, properly regulated mind, capable of controlling and
directing the moral exercises. YI. The moral or affective faculty
being closely associated with the sensational, is, therefore, in nearer
relation to the personality. YII. Disease, affecting the personality,
may occasion morbid changes in the moral disposition without imme-
diately involving the intelligence. YIII. From the ultimate blending,
intricate co-operation, and mutual dependency, of the separate mental
faculties, causes producing abnormal action in the one, unusually,
(usually ?) eventuate in causing derangement of the other. IX. Though
in derangements of the mind the moral faculty appears primarily and
solely involved in many instances, the non-development of intellectual
unsoundness, through other manifestations, cannot be received as proof
of its non-existence. X. The sense of moral perception is found to
vary according to the nature and extent of the guidance it may have
received. XI. The moral faculty, although incapable of determining
positive duties, is adequate to oppose intellectual suggestions in such
exercises as now immediately involve the moral perceptions. XII. A
want of accordance between the moral and intellectual faculties, may
proceed from either undue excitement of the moral or inefficient exercise
of the mental powers. XIII. Those causes adequate to affect either
faculty must be carefully sought for, previous to offering an opinion.
XIV. That as those causes involve questions of a physiological, patho-
logical, and strictly medical nature, irrespective of their ethical, logical,
or legal relations, their proper estimation requires such a combination
of knowledge as none other than a psychological physician could be
reasonably expected to possess." We commend these propositions,
which embrace the elementary principles whence the existence and
nature of moral insanity may be deduced, to the careful consideration
of our readers.

We pass on to the weighty practical question before us, the
conditions of responsibility, as applying to insanity in general, in-
cluding the forms distinguished as moral insanity. And, first, let
us state how our authors would respectively define those conditions.
Dr Mayo says: " No abnormal state of mind confers irresponsibility
(an attribute which the inventors of the term ' moral insanity' con-
ceive it to possess), unless such abnormal state of mind involve in-
tellectual as well as moral perversion." We have already seen that,
to constitute intellectual perversion, Dr Mayo requires proof of in-
consecutiveness or of delirium. From the headings of his third lecture
we gather the following:—" That idiocy (!) and unsoundness of mind
(a condition Dr Mayo endeavours to discriminate from insanity) each
involves some responsibility in reference to crime." He does not
state or give any rules for estimating the degrees of responsibility
these states involve ; his definition of insanity even, being made to turn
entirely on delirium, utterly failing in enabling us to determine who
is sane and who is not; even if we could determine, by his test, who
were insane, we should still have to seek for new evidence to determine
the degree of responsibility (for the insane are not irresponsible), and
yet, leaving the question thus vague, Ave are told by Dr Mayo (p. 87),
" Meanwhile we cannot urge that a scale of secondary punishments is
involved in any insurmountable difficulties of application" !

Are Dr Bucknill's statements more precise and satisfactory ? He
thus lays down his limitation (p. 15) : " Insanity being a condition of
partial change, it is difficult for the psychopathic physician to deduce
from it the result of total irresponsibility. Logically, the loss of re-
sponsibility must be held to be co-extensive with the amount of
disease." But how is this amount to be ascertained ? At p. 59 he
says : " Responsibility depends upon power not upon knowledge, still less
upon feeling." We find nothing much more precise than this. It is
often difficult, as we too well know, to prove actual insanity; but what
is this difficulty compared with that proposed to us of constructing a
graduated scale of disease and responsibility, which, to be just or appli-
cable, ought to be as nicely divided as the scale of a thermometer!
Until we are supplied with the necessary psycho-pathometer we fear
we must be content to adhere to the old-fashioned and intelligible rule,
that insanity confers irresponsibility.

We gather from Dr Williams' treatise that he also would consider
a modified responsibility of the insane proper, but we are unable to
extract any clear or precise expression of his views upon this question.
We have, probably, already said enough to show the fundamental
error and impracticability of this doctrine of the responsibility of the
insane, but, before proceeding to another branch of our critique, we
think it desirable to add a few more considerations. We cannot forbear
quoting the just and humane reflections of Dr.Pritchard: "In the instance
of instinctive insanity, or insane impulse to commit acts of violence
and atrocity, to play the incendiary, or to violate the good order and
decency of social life, it is obvious that the only thing requiring
much consideration is the real existence of disease, and its distinction
from ordinary and real criminality. . . . Whether he ought (disease
being proved), in any case, to undergo other punishment (than se-
clusion) is a question which I do not feel disposed to discuss. As
we have seen that a struggle has often taken place between the desire
to commit any violent act and the conscientious feelings of the un-
fortunate person who is thus tempted, it is probable that some have
yielded to the temptation, though convinced that they ought to have
resisted it. Such persons must be admitted to be morally guilty,
and to deserve to suffer. But the calamity with which we know-
them to be afflicted is already so great, that humanity forbids our
entertaining the thought of adding to it. Perhaps all that we ought
to aim at in such a case is, to secure the community against the evils
to which it may be exposed."

Dr Bucknill argues that the degrees of responsibility and of in-
sanity stand in an inverse ratio to each other. What is this but to
say—since no man is wholly insane or demented—that no madman
is wholly irresponsible ? To carry this proposition out to its logical
conclusion, as it ought to be if the principle has a foundation in
truth, would, therefore, be to bring every insane person under the
penalties of the law. The plea of insanity would no longer be ad-
mitted, as it is now admitted, to exempt a person from trial. According
to Judge Hale all criminals were insane : Dr Mayo and Dr Bucknill
reverse the proposition, and say, all insane are criminal. According
to them insanity ought not to be pleaded as a ground of exemption
from trial. They would have the jury first determine whether the
crime imputed has been committed, when the rational idea of crime
is an absurdity, a self-evident contradiction, and then to investigate
the question of insanity ; and then—is'not tliat enough ? No ! the
jury must then make out the degree of insanity! They must apply
the yet-to-he-discovered psycho-pathometer to determine the exact
measure of responsibility, and then — climax of contradictions, the
judge must adjust his scale of secondary punishments, admitting the
insanity as an " extenuating circumstance !"

Is it necessary to observe that this doctrine involves an entire
subversion of the relations and duties of medical and legal prac-
titioners in cases of insanity ? Prisons must be substituted, to a
great extent at least, for hospitals; or psychopathic physicians must
become gaolers. Dr Buclmill and Dr Mayo would consign one of
their "responsible" lunatics, if there is any meaning in this argument
of secondary punishment—we presume they would not hang the very
worst of them—to incarceration, as a punishment. "Who, we ask
them, is to be his custodian ? Is he to be sent to an ordinary gaol ?
But they admit he is diseased; and who shall heal the sick but the
physician ? Dr Mayo, who holds the eccentric idea that the " mincl
may be diseased in the abstract,"—a notion we shall presently discuss
—would probably send him to gaol to be lectured to by the chaplain,
and disciplined by the turnkey! But Dr Bucknill would, as we inter-
pret his views, send him to a special asylum for " criminal lunatics."
He would, therefore, place them under the care of a physician; but
the profession and duties of a physician forbid him to be an officer
for executing the final sentences of the law. Dr Bucknill is a physician,
and an able one, not a gaoler: his "responsible lunatic" would, there-
fore, come under his care as & patient, not as a prisoner; as one re-
quiring medical not penal treatment. And if this be so, is not the
whole case conceded, namely, that no insane person who is a fit subject
—as we presume all insane persons are—for medical treatment can,
with propriety, be made the subject of criminal punishment ?
Shall we point to yet another subversion of all intelligible princi-
ples of sanity and insanity necessarily involved in this doctrine ?
Shall we ask what it is that constitutes insanity; is it the disease,
the antecedent morbid lesion of the body entailing disorders of the
mind, or is it the overt act of violence or wrong that makes the
madman ? Dr Bucknill expressly contends that, even in the most
difficult cases, namely, those of moral insanity, the terms "uncon-
trollable impulse" are improper, because the act was owing to " chronic
disease." What, then, is the overt act, but the accidental culmi-
nating point of disease, of insanity ? Now, being diseased, the patient
ought to be, and would have been, had his malady been detected in
time, placed under medical care before the perpetration of the overt
act. Is society to take advantage of its own laches and punish a
sick man for that act which emanated from his sickness, and which
ought to have been anticipated ? Who can estimate the number of
deeds of violence which are annually prevented through the medical
treatment of insane patients ? Are they insane whilst under control
and protected from committing deeds of violence; and do they only
become criminal and responsible when left to themselves, with free
scope for their disease to declare itself by deeds of violence ?
But we have surely said enough upon this subject to leave it with
confidence to the decision of every man who is willing to reason from
facts, the constitution of the human mind, the first principles of justice,
and to every physician who has not a theory to maintain, and who
is not given to indulge in " adventurous speculations."

But we have now to exhibit another doctrine of Dr Mayo's, which,
as it is not classed with his three " adventurous speculations," we pre-
sume, so commends itself to his judgment as not to require any par-
ticular apology in introducing it to his readers. At p. 24, we find the
following passage:—" That there should be a disease of the mind 'in
the abstract, that such disease should work changes in us, viewed in
this light, analogous to the physical changes of our bodily organs, is
neither unnatural nor inconceivable (?) A parasitical growth—if for
want of a proper term I may borrow this epithet from physical specu-
lation—may take place under such disease, itself possessing vital func-
tions and energies (!) but having no other relation to matter than the
obvious one on which the tenure of our present life is based,—namely,
that we have an immaterial and a material being indissolubly bound
together for the duration of that life, while, for anything we know,
the immaterial element may be just as subject to its proper affections
as the material one is The above remarks may at least have a
wholesome tendency to keep before us in our speculations the immense
fund of mental disease that may exist, inappreciable through any
knowledge that we at present possess of phenomena so little capable
of being made the subject of experiment, or even observation, as those
which I am supposing." (!)

And this is not an "adventurous speculation!" It is "neither un-
natural nor inconceivable that there should be disease of the mind in
the abstract!" Nay, more; it is " neither unnatural nor inconceivable"
that a new immaterial entity, " a parasitical growth, itself possessing
vital functions and energies," may take place under this abstract
disease! He borrows this image, this "parasitical growth," from
"physical speculation," and it does not check his "adventurous specu-
lations" to find himself unable even to conceive of mind at all without
having recourse to physical ideas ! But having thus set up this ideal
" parasitical growth," Dr Mayo straightway applies his discovery, as if
it were an established fact in psychology, to the practice of medicine, the
administration of the law, and the relations of society ! It was said by
Locke, and its truth is generally recognised, that we arrive at our know-
ledge of the human mind in general by reflecting upon the operations
of our own. But it is clear from this mental experience of Dr Mayo's
that we must receive the speculations even of the greatest abstract
philosophers with considerable caution. Dr Mayo, we may presume,
discovered this "parasitical growth" in his own mind; at least there
is room for reasonable doubt that it exists anywhere else; and we
should be slow to admit this speculation, although not " adventur-
ous," nor " unnatural," nor " inconceivable," so long as it remains
the undivided and characteristic property of Dr Mayo, as a general
fact in the constitution of the human mind.

But we should think this speculative abstract insanity unworthy
of a moment's serious attention, but for the light it throws upon
the author's conclusions about insane responsibility and the altera-
tion of our mode of criminal procedure. We must therefore exa-
mine it a little more closely, and we take leave to ask Dr Mayo
how it was that, taking no account of the "parasitical growth," he
became possessed of evidence that the mind can be " diseased in the
abstract" ? Has he enjoyed the singular privilege of observing the
mind in the abstract in any condition, healthy or diseased ? Many
superstitious persons are still found who believe that disembodied
ghosts exhibit themselves upon earth, — and some are said to play
strange freaks, — but has any one yet seen or described an insane
ghost? Certainly no one, unless it be Dr Mayo. But there is
another condition of mingled superstition and imposture under which
it has been held that the mind can be separated from the body. Is
Dr Mayo a mesmeric philosopher ? Does he possess the faculty of
" projecting his mind" from his body, and so of studying it in the
abstract ? If it be in this manner that he has arrived at his conclu-
sion, we must imagine that he was operated upon by a neophyte in the
art, and that under unskilful "passes" poor Dr Mayo's forsaken body
did not succeed in getting its mind back again entire after its tem-
porary divorce. If this speculation be correct—and it appears to
account for the looseness of Dr Mayo's theory—we should urge him
to place himself under the hands of a more expert performer, to
"project his mind" again in search of the part that was lost, and to
take the opportunity of dropping that "parasitical growth" which it
was so unfortunate as to pick up in its first expedition.

We are really anxious to know how Dr Mayo has penetrated beyond
the boundary of the material world, and so we will ask him another
question. Is he a secret disciple or adept in the doctrine of Veda,
who, although not like Berkeley, denying the existence of matter, yet
claimed for his followers the power of excluding all ideas derived from
the external world, and the capacity of arriving at a purely spiritual
existence ? If Dr Mayo believes in ghosts, mesmerism, or the doc-
trines of Yeda, we trust he will exhibit the courage of his opinions, and
declare himself; or if he believes in none of these, we submit that he
is bound to inform the scientific world by what other means he has
acquired the conviction that mind may be diseased in the abstract.
Were the questions we are now considering such as interested phy-
sicians only, it would be impertinent on our part to point out by a
single serious argument the necessary dependence of mind upon body.
But they have an immediate bearing upon legislation, and are there-
fore discussed with eagerness by lawyers and all persons of education.
We think it, therefore, useful to state that it is a matter of chemical
and medical observation and inference that no exercise of the mind can
be carried on but at the direct expense of physical matter. Let a man
endeavour as he will to lose sight of his body, and to indulge in the
purest spiritual reveries that he can, the result of his spiritual abstrac-
tions will be felt in the waste of corporeal tissues ; brain-matter has
been used, and will have to be repaired. So impossible is it even to
conceive at all without the participation of the body, so idle is it to
talk of insanity in the abstract!

But, however arrived at, Dr Mayo enunciates this hypothesis.

Having adopted it, some of his medico-legal conclusions will appear the
less extraordinary. For example, he who argues that the mind exists
as a separate entity from the body, or that it can be investigated in
any other way than through physical manifestations, and that it is
liable to become diseased per se, without respect to the body, is of
course at liberty to contend that an insane person is responsible to
the law, although we find it difficult, even from this extravagant pre-
mise, to deduce this equally extravagant conclusion. For whether the
mind originate disease in itself, or acquire it from the body, is there
not still disease that destroys power and responsibility ? But Dr.
Mayo, with stoic sternness, ever eager to bring the lunatic within the
gripe of the law, advocates another doctrine which also hangs upon
the theory of abstract mind-disease. He contends, of course, for re-
sponsibility under so-called " lucid intervals." We are told (pp. 49, 50)
by Dr Mayo, in combating the able argument of Kay—who with un-
accountable illiberality is not permitted to retain his name as it came
to him from his father, and is given on his title-page, but who is
always styled by Dr Mayo, Dr Bae—" Esquirol found that out of
2814 recoveries of the insane, 292 have recurrences of the disease^

These persons, then, had obtained temporary cures, and I know not
how Dr Mae could refuse to any criminal outbreak of which they may
hereafter be guilty, the same immunities from punishment, and 011 the
same grounds, which he confers upon persons presumed to labour
under the temporary recovery afforded by a lucid interval."
From this passage it is clear that Dr Mayo does not know the
difference between a "lucid interval," the very expression implying
a continuance of disease, and a recovery, otherwise he could not apply
the same reasoning to both conditions.- Things opposite in their
nature are not the subjects of analogical reasoning. It is necessary
for us then to point out that all the most distinguished patholo-
gists of the present day maintain that a "lucid interval" in the
sense of absolute temporary recovery, the sense in which lawyers
and Dr Mayo understand it, does not exist. The supposed " lucid
intervals" can only be regarded as remissions of the disease, the
disease, like ague or epilepsy, subsisting nevertheless. Is a man free
from ague, or healthy, during the intervals between the fit ? Is a man
liable to periodic attacks of mania, separated by intervals of compara-
tive quiet, a healthy man P Such a notion can only be maintained by
metaphysical speculatists, who dream of mental disease in the abstract.
It is contrary to all sound pathology, and no less subversive of
justice and humanity.

* It is beyond our text on this occasion to discuss the treatment of
insanity, but we cannot help asking, what hope of successful treatment
is held out if we adopt Dr Mayo's abstract speculations ? Few will share
his expectation that the dread of the rigour of the law, or the exhorta-
tions of ministers of religion, would exert either a curative or a preven-
tive agency, and still fewer will look with favour upon a theory which,
carried to its natural conclusion, would discredit altogether the inter-
vention of the physician in the cure of the insane, lead to the demoli-
tion of the county lunatic asylums, and the substitution of the turnkey,
the gaol, and the hulks, and even the scaffold.

Is it necessary to pursue absurdity further ? Shall we ask Dr.
Mayo how he reconciles it with even his sense of justice, that the body
which in a case of abstract mind-disease with " parasitical growth,"
must be presumed to be innocent of crime, should be condemned to
suffer the penalties of the law for offences for which it could no more
be answerable than the inanimate weapon which the maniac or the
criminal employs ? It is possible that the feeling and the judg-
ment of the age are both erroneous ; it is possible that Dr Mayo, who
we are to believe has seen much more than is dreamed of in our phi-
losophy, is right. But we cannot regret that a decision based alike
upon sound principles of philanthropy and sound observation of the
phenomena of the human mind, is not likely to be overturned or dis-
turbed by the baseless conjectures of men who substitute visionary
and " adventurous speculations" for philosophical induction.

"We pass on to the last question raised in the works before us. After
divorcing' mind from body during earthly life, Dr Mayo proceeds to
what, according to his own expression, is a more " adventurous specu-
lation." His last step is to overturn the principles upon which the
administration of justice is conducted in this country. Dr Buclcnill
does not advocate the same measures as Dr Mayo, but as we shall
presently see, his propositions are scarcely more tenable or less
dangerous. Dr Mayo proposes to extend "to criminal cases that
practice which actually prevails in analogous civil cases, as in com-
missions De Lunatico Inquirendo, of the examination of the
party whose mental state is in question, in presence of the jury and
the Court."

We scarcely think it necessary to dwell at any length upon the ob-
vious objections to this proposal. What we have already said on the
subject of secondary punishments for the insane, applies in great
measure to this proposal to examine the persons pleading insanity
before the court and jury. We will not stop to point out what must
be obvious to every physician skilled in the observation of the insane,
that such a plan is the very worst that could possibly be devised for
the purpose of arriving at a just conclusion as to the sanity or insanity
of a prisoner. We shudder at the thought of the horrors that might
result from such a course. It often requires long observation under a
variety of circumstances, of which privacy is the most essential, in
order to form a satisfactory opinion as to the mental state of a person
alleged to be insane. The force of the analogy from the practice in
commissions de lunatico is more apparent than real. In many of
these cases, the alleged lunatic is only present before the jury by a
fiction; the inquiry in essential points does not differ from that in
criminal courts; in both cases the jury see the alleged lunatic 5 they
may hear him answer a few questions; but their decision turns upon the
evidence of the medical witnesses who have seen and examined the
person under proper conditions for forming their opinion. To examine
in open court an alleged lunatic, who is really of sound mind, and who
is accused of a criminal offence, would be in some cases to run immi-
nent danger of discovering insanity where none existed; to examine in
the same way a person really insane, would be a cruel and revolting
proceeding.

Dr Bucknill says (p. 120), " Of not less importance than some
modification of the inflexibility of English law in relation to entire
responsibility or irresponsibility, is the necessity of discovering some
more fitting tribunal to decide upon the delicate question of insanity,
than that rough instrument of justice, a common jury." He pro-
poses " experts," who he says, quoting from Ray, " are persons ap-
pointed in the course of judicial proceedings, either by the court or by
the agreement of the parties, to make inquiry under oath in re-
ference to certain facts, and to report thereon to the court. They
are not examined as witnesses, nor have they any power of de-
ciding the cause like arbitrators; their functions are more analo-
gous to those of a Master in Chancery. In reference to doubtful
cases of insanity, their duties would perhaps approximate more
closely to those fulfilled in our own Admiralty Courts by the
masters of the Trinity Company. In intricate questions of col-
lision, salvage, and cases of that nature, these experienced mariners
are summoned to aid the court, as amici curia." Dr Bucknill forti-
fies his opinion by citing the following passage from the last Report
of the Commissioners in Lunacy :—•" If, upon the occasion of the trial
of an indictment, the plea of insanity be set up, we are disposed to
think that the question should be tried and determined by the court
after taking medical and other evidence, and not by the common jury
empanelled to try the facts."

In opposition to these suggestions, we might be content with stating
the clear, common-sense opinions of Dr Williams :—" Although we
believe it to be essential that the physician have his mind thoroughly
impressed with the true association between ethics and law, in order
that he be the better enabled to estimate the question of mental
soundness in its relation to crime; it is above all things important
that in his professional opinions he abstain from outstepping the bounds
of medicine, which freely consigns to juries the appreciation of the
first, while equally denying their capability of adjudicating on the
second."

"We have italicised a sentiment in which we entirely concur, being
convinced that nothing can tend more to lower the influence of medi-
cine in the presence of the law than the practice advocated by Dr.
Mayo and Dr Bucknill, of trenching on the domain of either judge or
jury.

" The ethico-legal considerations belong to the jury; the psycho-
ethical to the physician."

" Society is fully warranted in being jealous of her rights, and
equally justified in seeking to prevent any body of professional men
from assuming an authority in reference to matters affecting her in-
terests, those matters being within her own control. Both the bar
and the public are, however, deceived when they presume the general
not the particular application of medical opinions. The question to be
determined in psychological investigations is not whether certain
phenomena indicate the soundness of the mind or morals of all men,
but how far they may enable us to estimate their relative condition in
a particular individual."

Dr Williams grapples directly with the question of medical juries :
" If it be contended that medical men are so pre-eminently adapted for
such intricate investigations, and it be conceded that cases may arise
in which the physical estimate of crime involves many abstruse and
difficult considerations, it may be asked, ' Why are other than medical
juries empanelled to adjudicate on such matters ?' To this we reply :
There are many grave and fitting reasons that the existing state of
the law should be maintained. Were medical men required to prima-
rily decide on the soundness or unsoundness of mind of an individual
accused of crime, unless their opinions embraced the act originating the
accusation, their adjudication ivould be altogether unjust; for that act
might be the hinge on which their estimate of his sanity should turn.
If, on the other hand, they include this act, the onus of proof respect-
ing the guilt or innocence of the party accused is thereby placed in
their hands ; and we have no grounds for inferring that, under such
circumstances, greater unanimity would prevail than is seen in ordi-
nary tribunals. Were they to assume the act as committed, they
would thereby identify the question of the accused's sanity with that
of his criminality. These, and many other reasons we might adduce,
have fully satisfied us that determining guilt or innocence by the voice
of the jury, the soundness or unsoundness of mind by the judgment
(i. e., according to the evidence) of the physician, is the course best
calculated to maintain public confidence and insure public safety."

We believe that the argument so well put by Dr Williams
will commend itself to the judgment of men of all professions, at
least of all who do not give way to the irrational impulse to seek
for a new and especial intervention of the legislature, in order to
obviate every special difficulty that may occasionally arise in practice.
We doubt very much, with Dr Williams, whether the substitution
of medical courts, medical amici curiae, or medical juries, would im-
prove the administration of the law in cases complicated with in-
sanity. And of this we are firmly convinced, that no sufficient case
has been made out to induce the legislature to entertain so vital a
question as that of breaking down the fundamental laws of the
country. Let it be borne in mind by those who are ever ready to
point a jest or a sarcasm against the ignorance of juries, that ignorance
is sometimes less dangerous than imperfect or distempered knowledge.
And juries are not always ignorant. Let Englishmen consider whether
they had not better trust their liberties to the honest plain sense of
twelve of their countrymen than to a medical judge imbued with the
abstract crotchets about "parasitical mental growths" and indefi-
nable scales of secondary punishments of Dr Mayo. But Englishmen
are not likely to forget that a jury is the shield interposed between
the governing power and the citizen, in order to protect him from
arbitrary and illegal assaults upon his liberty. May not a man's
liberty be assailed by the false imputation of insanity ? The thing
has been done ; it may be done again : and no greater facility for the
perpetration of similar outrages could be given than that of with-
drawing a man from the cognizance of the jury by setting up the im-
putation of insanity. But if juries are sometimes " rough instruments
of justice," has not the institution borne, during many centuries, a
fair comparison with other modes of administering justice ? The
Ecclesiastical Courts, in which skilled persons preside and adjudicate
without the presence of juries, have not worked so well as to have
found much favour with the public. Abroad, there is an universal
tendency to introduce and extend the jury-system of England.

But why should juries be disqualified on the ground of their
ignorance of psychology? They are not called upon to judge of psy-
chology, but of evidence. To contend that juries are not competent to
deal with questions of insanity, because they are not psychopathic
physicians, is to contend that juries are not competent to deal with
questions of engineering, because they are not engineers ; with ques-
tions of law, because they are not lawyers ; with questions of science,
because they are not scientific; and so on, to the extinction of juries
altogether, and the establishment of as many different courts, on the
model of the Admiralty or of Ecclesiastical Courts, as there are pro-
fessions and sciences. Heaven save us from such reforms! We enter-
tain, however, a comforting assurance that the reflecting portion of the
public will wait for stronger reasons than have yet been adduced before
adopting maxims so revolutionary and so visionary, and that, in the mean-
time, they will stand by the motto, " Nolumus leges Anglise mutari."

We have now arrived at the conclusion of our task. We have
examined the three great questions raised in the works before us with
care, and have expressed our opinions upon them with freedom and
with candour. The psychological doctrines of Dr Mayo are so peculiar
in their nature, and so dangerous in the applications proposed, that we
have felt it as an imperative duty to expose their fallacy with all the
more freedom, because the professional position of their author might
obtain for them an extrinsic authority. The psychological doctrines
of Dr Bucknill are more in accordance with the researches of the most
trustworthy of modern physicians. The principal objections we have had
to urge against Dr Bucknill's work are not directed against his views
of mental pathology. Few physicians of the present day have given.

more solid contributions to the science of cerebro-mental disease. His
labours in tbis department have been too well directed and too zealously
pursued not to have guarded him against gross psychological errors.
We have been compelled, however, to criticize, with an appearance of
severity, the formidable innovations which he has, upon inadequate
grounds, proposed in the administration of the law in cases where the
question of insanity is raised. But these medico-legal opinions of
Dr Bucknill bear no necessary relation to his psychological tenets ;
with the exception of the doctrine of insane responsibility, they are
not absolutely incompatible with the soundest principles of medicine.
They only betray a mind too eager to contrive artificial reforms, too
ready to seek in legislative enactments the remedy for difficulties in
practice which arise, not so much from error in the principles of our
criminal legislation, as in the differences of opinion about their appli-
cation in individual cases. This too hasty and meddlesome spirit of
change, time and reflection will correct; and we venture to cherish
the hope that, one day, Dr Bucknill will abandon his now favourite
doctrines of instituting medical juries; he will admit that it is, on
the whole, best that the physician should not travel out of the legiti-
mate paths of medicine, and that he should not seek to be invested
with the incompatible attributes of judge, jury, and witness.

Of Dr Williams's thoughtful, logical, and able essay we have had
occasion to speak with almost unqualified praise. His views upon the
mooted questions between law and medicine regarding insanity are
not less sound and temperate than his fundamental psychological doc-
trines. Such an essay, so well calculated to spread a just appreciation
of the medico-legal relations of insanity throughout the professions of
medicine and the law, should not be suffered to remain in its present
inaccessible position, scattered over three numbers of a quarterly
magazine. We strongly urge upon its author the duty of publishing it
in a separate and more convenient form.
