Cerebral Pathology
===================

Du. Semple read a paper on the subject of The Pathology and Diagnosis of
Cerebral Diseases, before the Mcdical Society of London, Nov. 14, 1853. He
commenced by observing, that the present paper might be considered as a con- j
tinuation of a former communication to the Society on the same subject. He
did not intend to present an elaborate essay on cerebral pathology, nor to avail
himself of the opinions of authors who had written upon the subject, but merely
to present the results of his own experience and observations; particularly
selecting those points which were the most obscure, or on which a difference of
opinion still existed. It was often a matter almost of impossibility to connect
the symptoms of cerebral disease observed during life with the appearances
found after death; but, as the term "pathology" included the morbid pheno-
mena of the living structure, as well as the lesions traced after death dv the
CEREBRAL PATHOLOGY.
101
scalpel, it -was necessary to consider tlicm in their relations to cacli oilier, how-
ever obscure the relationship might appear. In some cases, the relation of
cause and effect was sufficiently manifest; and Dr Semple drew attention, iu
the first place, to diseases of the osseous structure as causes of cerebral disorders.
In one case which had come under his notice, and which he had observed for about
ten years, the patient had been subject to continual attacks of epilepsy, which,
had resisted all treatment, and which had at last proved fatal. On a
mortem examination, it was found that the internal table of the skull was
thickened, and all the prominent bony processes in the interior of the cranium
were much increased in thickness and asperity, as the cristi galli, the clinoid
processes, the ridges on the petrous portion of the temporal bone, and on the
occipital bone. In another case, he attended a patient who suffered from con-
stant pain and heaviness at the anterior and inferior part of the forehead, and
who had occasionally had epileptic fits. These inconveniences became so
troublesome by their long continuance, that tile sufferer was obliged to abandon
his business, and life became a burden to him. Acting upon the supposition
that this was a case of thickening of the internal table of the skull, mercury was
given to salivation, and the iodide of potassium was administered in large and
repeated doses for a vers' long period, and under this treatment the patient
eventually recovered, and is now inactive occupation. In a third case, a man pre-
sented a manifest thickening of the root of the nasal bones; and notwithstand-
ing the vigorous employment of the means pursued in the last case, lie became
comatose and died; and on a post-mortem examination, there was found to be
thickcning of the bones in the region indicated, and an abscess in the brain cor-
responding in situation to the osseous lesion. Another circumstance which Dr.
Semple had occasionally observed in ccrcbral diseases, was a want of symmetry
in the two sides of the cranium; and although lie was not yet prepared to prove
that this was a common cause of cerebral disease, yet he thought it worthy of
attention, and believed that other eases might be found in which similar devia-
tions from symmetry might prove to be associated with disordered cerebral manifes-
tations. Tlie morbid anatomy of the cerebral membranes is a subject involved in
great obscurity, because the most violent symptoms during life often leave very
few traces observable after death; and, on the other hand, appearances usually
described as morbid are sometimes wholly unconnected with any cerebral symp-
toms during life. In order to arrive at correct views on this subject, however
negative the results might be, the author was in the habit of examining the
brains of all cases, whenever it was practicable, whether there had been symp-
toms of cerebral disorder during life or not, and the conclusion at which lie had
arrived by these investigations was, that much error and misapprehension existed
among authors on tins branch of pathology. Such terms as "more or less
opacity of the arachnoid," " effusions on its surface," " effusions beneath its
surface," and other similar vague expressions, were by all means to be depre-
cated, because it was doubtful whether these appearances were really morbid at
all in many instances, inasmuch as they are often found in cases where no
cerebral disease has existed. The disease called acute hydrocephalus in children,
was a well-marked instance of meningeal inflammation; and the results of such
disease were apparent in the effusion of coagulable lymph between the opposed
layers of/the arachnoid, and of copious serous deposit upon the surface and in
the cavities of the brain; but in adults, the effusion of coagulable lymph was
comparatively rare, and the only appearances observed were vascularity of the
membranes and effusion of lymph beneath the arachnoid. Dr Semple inclined
to the view of Rokitansky, that inflammation of the pia mater is the usual form
of meningeal disease, the apparent vascularity of the arachnoid membrane being
due to the injection of the vessels of the pia mater seen through the transparent
serous structure lyin<* above it. Four cases were then related, in two of which
the author considered that meningeal inflammation undoubtedly existed; and yet
yo. xxix.
102
CEREBRAL PATHOLOGY.
after death nothing was found beyond a slight effusion of lymph beneath the
arachnoid, and in the two others no cerebral disease had existed during life, and
yet the post-mortem examinations revealed thickening and vascularity of the
arachnoid, accompanied by copious effusion. The diagnosis of cerebral diseases
is a point of great difficulty, but of immense importance, and upon a correct
judgment in this particular the life or death of a patient often depends. Insen-
sibility and coma depend on various causes,—such as hysteria, poisoning,
drunkenness, apoplexy; and all these conditions require very different and often
opposite treatment. Again, delirium is produced by opposite states of the
brain—by congestion and inflammation, on the one hand; by exhaustion of ner-
vous energy on the other; and some well-marked cerebral disorders are produced
by diseases in remote organs, and without any disease of the brain whatever,
'two cases of what might be called pseudo-cephalic disease were then related, in
one of which the most violent and long-continued convulsions were caused by
the eccentric irritation of teething and intestinal derangement; in the other, an
infant a fortnight old, the convulsions were apparently due to previous intra-
uterine influences, and to the weak and nervous condition of the mother. In
such cases, it was exceedingly important that a correct diagnosis should be
made; for, although convulsions in infants were always dangerous, and a pro-
gnosis must be given with great caution, yet the gravity of the issue was most
materially influenced by the nature of the existing disease. The convulsions
springing from cerebral inflammation must be promptly treated by leeching,
calomel, purgatives, cold to the head, warmth to the extremities; but all these
remedies are utterly improper in those forms of convidsive attacks which ori-
ginate from teething, intestinal derangement, renal obstructions, and other
forms of eccentric disease.
The chief point in the discussion was the degree of difficulty attending the
diagnosis of cerebral diseases.
Dr Puller was of opinion that in true meningitis there is always great con-
gestion, with effusion of lymph, pus, or serum; and that in the absence of these
products, we could not infer the existence of the disease from the symptoms.
In poisoned blood from disease of the kidney, or from the presence of a narco-
tic poison, as belladonna, as also in certain rheumatic affcctions, he had ob-
served great cerebral excitement, with injection of the conjunctiva—that is, all
the mere symptoms of meningitis—but these were not true cases of inflamma-
tion. Moreover, the opacity of the arachnoid, which arises from an effusion
underneath the membrane, is not an evidence of inflammation. He then re-
ferred to the probable cause of the greater violence of the cerebral irritation in
meningitis than in cerebritis, and believed it to be the rapidity with which the
various disturbances take place in meningitis. He had observed eases in which
very great injury had been done to the substance of the brain, without any
violent symptoms having been induced, and this he attributed to the slowness
with which the injury had proceeded. Thus, in the ease of a medical friend,
whe for many years had suffered oidv from symptoms resembling tic, and from
slight cpilcptic attacks, lie had found a pint of serum effused within the skull,
with the circulation through the right vertebral artery impeded by the pressure
of a scrofulous tumour, and the left vertebral artery nearly obliterated. He
agreed with the author in his remarks upon disease of the calvarium, and in-
stanced the case of a young lady who had suffered for many years from intense
headache and cpilcptic fits, and who could not bear any jolting exercise, in
whom a spiculum of bone, two inches in length, was found projecting into the
brain.
Dr Theophilus Thompson considered that thickening of the calvarium was
not a likely cause of meningitis, for lie had observed that thick-skulled people
were dull, and not prone to inflammation; but if it were a cause, lie did not
think that iodide of potassium would remove it. He believed that affections
CEREBRAL PATHOLOGY.
163
of the dura mater arc among the most obscure of cerebral diseases, while in-
flammation of the other membranes of the brain is at present well understood.
He thought that Mr. Rainey's statement as to the ganglionic character of the
arachnoid, would clearly account for the great violence of the symptoms met
with in arachnitis, and that it is the locality affected, and not the slowness of
the progress, which renders the symptoms of cerebritis less prominent.
Dr Druitt inquired if the author had been accustomcd to connect rheu-
matism with disease of the skull. He (Dr Druitt) bad given colchicum and
calomel with great advantage in such cases, and believed those remedies to be
more beneficial than iodide of potassium. He considered that thickening of the
skull is rarely, if ever, a primary disease; as also meningitis, when not pre-
ceded by external injury. If in any case he should observe great cerebral
excitement, with congestion of the eye, he should consider the case to be one
of poisoned blood, and not of true idiopathic meningitis.
Dr Sibson believed it to be impossible to arrange the diagnostic symptoms
of each cerebral disease in clearly-defined categories, for lie had learned from
practicc and an analysis of almost all the recorded cases, that every kind of
symptom has been found in every variety of cerebral disease. A few cases of
epilepsy have thickening of the calvarium, but it is only a small minority; and
in general, he believed it to be impossible to guess even at the existence of such
an obscure morbid condition. He also considered that inflammations of the
arachnoid and of the pia mater could not be separated, just as it is im-
possible to state that the sub-pleural cellular tissue is not involved in a
case of plcuritis. Farther, in such cases, the surface of the brain is always
implicated, and it is from this cause alone that the symptoms become more
energetic. He regarded the effusion of lymph in a fatal case of meningitis as
essential to the disease, and had seen cases in which this effusion had extended
greatly, and yet only a slight stupor had indicated the presence of inflamma-
tion.—Nov. 16, 1853.
Simple Ventricular Meningitis. By W. Hughes Willshire, M.D.—Simple
acute meningitis is, under any of its forms, an unfrcquent disease in child-
hood. At this period, the meningeal inflammation is usually of the granular
or tuberculous character, or, at any rate, is subservient to the sway of the im-
portant diathetic disorder, scrofula. But if simple acute meningitis of the
periphery alone, or combined with that of the base or of the ventricles is uncom-
mon, that limited to the lining membrane of the latter is excessively rare. So
rare, indeed, is it, that MM. llilliet and Barthez have been unable to meet with
a single case on record. The former, however, has been witness to one, termi-
nating in ventricular effusion, loss of intelligence, idiotcv, and death. The
fatal event did not occur till the end of the fourth month, the disease assuming
somewhat of a chronic character. The case seems more particularly interest-
ing, as tending to support the views of those who believe chronic internal
hydrocephalus to be due to inflammation of the ventricular living membrane.
The following instance occurring to ourselves, differs in some important points
from M. Billict's, and appears more fully to demand the qualification of acute
to the terms ventricular meningitis.
C. W., a boy five years old, was brought to the infirmary in the month of
January. His parents live near the institution. The child was said to have
been ill for more than a week, and to have been an out-patient at the Charms-
Cross Hospital. The prescription-paper of the latter showed that antimonials
and salines had been given. The patient was very thin, pale, and weak, lying
in his mother's lap, scarcely able to speak, though complaining somewhat of
his head. There was thirst, loss of appetite, coated and rather dry tongue, but
no costivencss. On a review of the whole symptoms, and being impressed by
the recollection of an epidemic then prevalent in the locality, I came to the
conclusion that the child was suffering from chronic remittent fever of a low
M 2
164
CEREBRAL PATHOLOGY.
type. Still, I was not quite satisfied with, the diagnosis, as there appeared
something not easily to be described in the case, different from the patients I was
then attending. The epidemic then prevalent absolutely demanded bark and
ammonia for its satisfactory treatment, and these agents were here given.
Under their employment, a great change for the better appeared to ensue, and
progressed for an entire week. I watched the case with much interest, being
suspicious about my diagnosis, but at the end of the week I entered in my note-
book that I thought my patient would do well, and that " my diagnosis is
right." The next day a change appeared. The patient became worse, and
complained bitterly of his head. There was no costiveness, rather the reverse,
but there was some vomiting. The ammonia and bark were stopped, leeches
applied to the temples, and blisters behind the cars, antimonials, salines, &c.,
given. No relief from any treatment was obtained, the child became still
worse, semi-conscious, the pupils were dilated, the head thrown back, and the
limbs became slightly stiffened. With slight alternations, these symptoms
continued for four days, when the limbs became more relaxed, and every now
and then affectcd with a sort of slow shaking or trembling movement. The
remission called the "lightening before death" appeared, then, as was ex-
pected, the symptoms became worse, the limbs stiffer, the head thrown back,
the hands clcnchcd, and the patient died at the end of the second week since
he was first seen at the infirmary.
The case had been very obscure to us ; there had been no definite convul-
sions, no screaming, no " cerebral respiration," though the latter was frequent,
110 constipation, and but little vomiting. The constant dorsal decubitus, the
peculiar opisthotonic symptoms, and the pyrexial prodromi were the more
marked positive phenomena—of course the lesion was cerebral, but that was
saying little; there was probably effusion, that was not saying much more. It
might be the base, or the hemispheres, or the ventricles, which were more par-
ticularly involved, or it might be the meninges alone which were affected, or
they might be intact, and true tubercle exist of the cerebellum medulla, or
brain proper. Farther, the inflammatory element, if present, might be either
of the simple or granular character, the fever might be symptomatic of the
cerebral mischief, or rcactional, or be the primary disorder, and the affcction
of the nervous ccntre be secondary to it.
P. J!I.—Skull well ossified, convolutions of brain closc-presscd, the mem-
branes intensely congested. No milky effusion along the course of the vessels,
no exudation of any kind beneath the arachnoid or upon the hemispheres.
No granules along the edges of the latter. Cerebral matter showing numerous
red points and stria; on section, but no continuous blush. Ycntriclcs greatly
dilated, extending the whole length of the hemispheres, and full of serum.
In each posterior cornu floated a thick continuous flock or flake of grecn-
coloured purulent matter. The ventricular lining membrane was thickened
and vascular in parts, and rough and broken down elsewhere. No central
softening existed. A small quantity of green purulent matter was found at
the base. _ The cerebellum was rather softer than natural. No tubercular
deposit existed within the cranium, nor within the thorax.
The absence of the ordinary characters of simple hemispheric acute menin-
gitis, of those of the tuberculous meningeal affection, the slight evidence,
comparatively, of lesion at the base, and the very positive signs of the
ventricular changes, together with the peculiar symptoms, authorize me,
I believe, in considering the above case as one of simple acute ventricular
meningitis.
Abscess of Brain—Disease of the Bar. By W. Hugiies Willsiiibe, M.D.—
Disease of the central organs of the nervous system, from more primitive mis-
chief going on in the bony structures adjacent, is of no unfrequent occurrence.
This connexion between scrofulous disease of the internal ear and the
CEHEBRAL PATHOLOGY.
1G5
destruction of the brain, is occasionally illustrated by such an example as the
following:—J. P., a boy eleven years of age, and living at Southwark, came
under my care in the month of July, 1852. His mother stated that, three
weeks before, he went into the country, but returned home ill. He then
"had some lits," and soon began to complain of his head. A discharge of
matter which had been wont to How from both ears now stopped, and the pain
of the head then became so intense that the boy scrcamed out from the agony.
He then had another fit, and I was now requested to see him. On cross-
examination, it appeared that, when two years of age, he had " brain fever,"
then "inflammation of the ears," and discharge from them, which had troubled
him very severely oil" and on until now. He was of a very scrofulous family.
He was quite conscious, lying with his hand placed against the right side of
his head, complaining of the pain there. The tongue was coated, the bowels
not costive, and there was some fever. Leeches were applied to the temples,
blisters behind the cars, and afterwards poultices to the latter organs. Pur-
gatives and full doses of nitre were also given. For four or five days great
improvement seemed to follow; so much so, that I began to think the cerebral
disturbance had no intimate connexion with the disease of the organs of audi-
tion. Suddenly, the patient became worse. I found him moaning from the
severity of the pain, and sorely complaining of his head. In answer to my
inquiries, I was informed that he had squinted, and " made months and strange
faces." He constantly cried out for some one to press his head hard; conse-
quently, his mother or some relatives sat at his bed-side for hours together,
pressing with their hands upon his head. In this state he remained for two
days, not unconscious, but in what might be called rather a stupid condition,
and evidently suffering intense pain in the head. Convulsions supervened,
and death followed ten days after he began last to complain ot the cerebral
symptoms. On examination of the body, a large abscess was found in the left
cerebral hemisphere, communicating with the ventricle, and filled with green
fetid pus. On the other side, its walls approached at one point just close
enough to touch the cranial bone connected with the left car. The bones of
the latter were diseased; but not to the extent of causing a communication
between the external meatus and the interior of the cranium. Such, however,
would apparently soon have occurred, as the bone was becoming carious at the
point where, when we were removing the brain, the abscess burst, emitting
much of its horribly fetid contents. The rest of the brain generally was
anaemic; but the vessels of the meninges were greatly congested. Unfor-
tunately, the exact character of the walls of the abscess was not carefully
noted down at the time; but from recollection it is believed it was of a thin
cystic description. In this case, it may be asked, how long the abscess had
been forming, and why it was the pain so sorely complained of was felt on the
right side, whilst the collection of purulent matter existed on the left.—Ibid.
Prognosis and Treatment of Epilepsy.—The Union Medicate for May 17th and
19th, contains an article by Dr Herpin, of Geneva, on the above subject, of
which we now give an abstract.
^ In the Union Medicate for December 1, 2, and 7, 1852, M. Moreau, of
Tours, relates nine cases of epilepsy, in which oxide of zinc had failed to
arrest the disease, a remedy stated by Dr Herpin to be of considerable
efficacy. Seven of the cases were of the class stated by Dr Herpin to be
most amenable to treatment, and the medicine was administered according to
the rides laid down by him in his essay, " Du Prognostic et du Traitement
curatif de l'Epilepsie," published last year at Paris. Dr Herpin points out the
causes of M. Morcau's want of success, in the following manner:—
1. The first remarkable point, which may account in a great measure for the
different results obtained by M. Moreau and Dr Herpin, was, that eight or
M. Moreau's cases were hospital patients, while Dr Herpin's were private
1G6
CEREBRAL PATHOLOGY.
patients. Dr Herpin observes, that physicians who have the charge of
cpileptic wards in hospitals regard the disease as almost always incurable;
while those who see the patients at home, as far as can be judged from their
writings, form a very different prognosis. Tissot, Odier, De la Hive, and
C. Vieusseux, all believe in the curability of a fair proportion of cpileptic
cases. A principal cause of the difference between the opinions of the two
classes of practitioners is, that those in private practice generally see the
disease from its commencement, while hospital physicians almost always have
to treat severe or obstinate cases.
2. M. Moreau had only male patients ; Dr Herpin had more females than
males. Prom an analysis of his cases, Dr Herpin arrives at the following
results:—
Of twenty-six female epileptic patients, sixteen were cured, six were im-
proved, and four were incurable.
Of twenty-four male epileptic patients, twelve were cured, four were im-
proved, and eight were incurable.
There were thus twice as many incurable cases among males as among
females.
3. With regard to age, Dr Herpin has obtained the following results :—
Of thirty-five patients under 20 years, eighteen were cured, nine improved,
and eight were incurable.
Of nine patients aged from 20 to 50, five were cured, one was improved, and
three were incurable.
Of six patients aged from 50 to 80, five were cured, and one was incurable.
The period of life from 30 to 50 furnishes a third of incurable cases; while
the other two do not together supply a fourth. All M. Morcau's cases were
from 19 to 50 years of age, the most unfavourable period.
4. With regard to the previous duration of the disease, Dr Herpin finds
that—
Of twenty-three cases, which had existed less than a year, fifteen were cured,
five were improved, and three were incurable.
Of twenty-seven cases from one to twenty years' duration, thirteen were
cured, five were improved, and nine were incurable.
While nearly one-half of Dr Herpin's cases were of less than a year's dura-
tion, three of M. Moreau's patients had been ill from fourteen to twenty
months, one for two years at least, three for six years, and one for about twenty
years; the ninth had recent attacks of vertigo, but had probably had an
cpileptic attack six months before.
5. With regard to the number of attacks previous to treatment:—
Thirty epileptic patients, who had had less than twelve attacks, furnished
only three incurable cases.
Twenty-two patients who had had at least from thirty to a hundred attacks,
furnished twelve completely obstinate cases, being at least five times as many
as in the preceding category.
Of M. Moreau's nine cases, one, who was seized with vertigo, had perhaps
had a fit; one patient had had only four attacks; one had had about fifty;
four from seventy to eighty; one more than a hundred, and one more than
five hundred. Besides this, one of the patients had, before the commence-
ment of treatment, paralysis, denoting organic lesion of the brain, which was
proved by the autopsy; and another had been twice insane. This latter
circumstance was met with in one of Dr Herpin's cases, in whom, though
the conditions for treatment were otherwise favourable, the disease remained
incurable.
Besides these causes of failure in M. Moreau's eases, Dr Herpin points out
that the want of sufficient judgment in the choice of treatment is perhaps a
more powerful obstacle. He observes that as long as we are unacquainted
CEREBRAL PATHOLOGY.
1G7
with the indications of each remedy for epilepsy, we must begin by giving that
which experience has shown to have succeeded in the greatest number of cases;
then, in case of failure, we must have recourse in succession to other remedies
of efficacy. By employing only one, especially in a number of patients placed
in the same conditions as to age, sex, &c., we render ourselves liable to fall on
the medicine which is not indicated. This is precisely what, it seems, has
accidentally happened to M. Moreau.
Oxide of zinc is believed by Dr Herpin to fail generally in epileptic
patients in the vigour of their age, especially in men. Taking the whole of
the cases placed in favourable conditions as regarded the number of previous
attacks, and which were treated by oxide of zinc, he finds that there were
twenty-six cures and five failures—all the latter being in patients between the
ages of seventeen and fifty-nine years. On examining into the results of the
treatment by oxide of zinc in men of between twenty and fifty years, in order
that the conditions of sex and age might be the same as in M. Moreau's
patients, Dr Herpin finds six patients Avho were almost all in the most
favourable conditions for treatment. In one, venesection appeared to have
more influence than the zinc, in producing improvement. Of the remaining
five cases, there were—one cure without relapse, in a patient who had had only
three attacks; two cures followed by relapse—in one of these the oxide of
zinc failed on the subsequent trial; one in whom improvement was produced
at the age of fifteen, but in whom the same remedy failed ten years later; and
lastly, one in whom the disease altogether resisted treatment, although it
had been commenced five days after the first attack. Thus, while the total
number of favourable cases treated by zinc are in the proportion of five to six,
adults furnish only three cases out of five, and in only one of these was the
cure permanent.
In adult age, it is necessary to give zinc in large doses and for a considerable
time ; in childhood and old age, the same result is obtained from smaller doses,
and, in some cases, from almost insignificant quantities.
The preceding observations appear to Dr Herpin to afford sufficient reason
for arriving at the following conclusions :—
1. Oxide of zinc seems to be indicated as an anti-epileptic in children and
old persons.
2. It often fails in persons of middle age, especially in men.
3. If it be employed in females, it must be given in large doses and for a
long time.
Whatever, Dr Herpin observes, may be the remedies employed, it is of
the highest importance that the disease be treated at as early a period as
possible. He is convinced that, by perseveringly treating epilepsy from its
earliest manifestation, there is a certainty of curc in a large majority of cases.
At present, some mistake the first symptoms of the disease; others treat it
for a tune by means almost always inefficacious, such as bleeding, anthelmin-
tics, &c.; others again try useful remedies, but timidly, and without effect.
A small number, chiefly hospital physicians, form a tolerably accuratc notion
of the choice of a medicine and of the results obtained; but they are placcd in
the worst conditions for acting at the most favourable moment.
Dr Herpin promises, at a future period, to publish in the Union Medicale
the details of some cases in the private practice of himself and others, giving
both the successful and the unsuccessful cases in the proportions in which they
have been met with.
