On the Connexion Between Morbid Physical and Religious Phenomena
==================================================================

148
No. II. of a Series.
BY THE EEV. J. E. DENHAM, M.A., F.K.S., &c.
In the last paper on this subject it was attempted to show this connexion in
regard of those religions phenomena which are of a gloomy or distressing
nature : it will now be endeavoured to trace it in reference to those which are
of a more pleasing and elated kind. The distinction of both these classes of
religious phenomena is, that they exist separately from any definite perceptions
of the understanding, and consist wholly of unintelligent feelings and emotions.
It is thus stated by two eminent divines of the Church of England:—" If you
desire to know the differences between the heaviness of a melancholy humour
and affliction of conscience for sin, take notice of such as these :—the melan-
choly man is extremely sad, and knows not ichy. He is full of fear, doubts,
distrust, and heaviness, without any true or just ground, arising only from the
darkness and disorder of the imagination—the grisly fumes of "that black
humour in the brain. But a broken heart, in almost every case, can readily tell
you the particular sins that made it bleed. Ilis trouble is ever upon cause
clear and evident. A melancholy man will ride many miles, walk many hours,
and at length be able to give you no account of the exercise and discourse of
his mind, or what his thoughts have been all the while."* Archbishop Sharp
thus states the same distinction in regard of elated emotions :—" How shall
we be able to know when the joy and satisfaction we feel in the exercise of
religion doth arise from the Holy Spirit, and when from our own tempers ?
This is a material question, and thus I answer it. All those joys that we can
give no good account of, that arise in our minds we know not how or wherefore;
and likewise all those joys which do not more incline us to love God and our
neighbour, do not dispose us to hate vice and impurity, and especially the
more spiritual impurities of pride and self-love, which we may labour under;—
I say, all these joys and consolations, how high and rapturous soever they be,
are justly to be suspcctcd by us, as the pure results of our own heated temper,
the ebullition of our own animal spirits. The peace and joy of the Holy Ghost
is always rational, there is some good ground, some solid foundation for it in
the mind of the man that feels it; which foundation is a good consciencc, a
being able to satisfy ourselves, from the testimony of our hearts and lives,
that we are sincere and unfeigned in our desires and endeavours to approve
ourselves to God as his faithful servants. It is never a barren, ineffectual joy,
a joy that only amuses and pleases us without making us better; and if that
joy which we sometimes feel in the exercise of devotion be not of this nature,
and have not these qualities, let it be otherwise never so affecting and trans-
porting, we cannot be assured that it is from God; nay, rather we have reason
to conclude that it is the natural effect of our own temper and natural powers.
It is past dispute that these overflowing joys and comforts that are sometimes
felt upon the application of our minds to spiritual things, are the mere effects
of a heated brain and a raised imagination, for it is certain that in some persons
these effects, even in thc highest degree of them, owe their production to 110
higher a cause. "W itness the transports of joy and the pleasures—even to
ecstasy—which many enthusiastical persons have felt, or at least have given out
that they have, in the exercise of the grossest superstition (of a false religion),
* Bolton's Treatise on Affliction of Conscience. Written 1620. Edited, with
Introduction and Memoir of the Author, by Rev. J. F. Denham. London. 1831.
page 142, &c.
MORBID PHYSICAL AND RELIGIOUS PHENOMENA.
149
and which many of the same complexion have experienced likewise in the true
religion; who yet have been persons of none of the best morals, but in truth
wholly devoid of the spiritual life. Now, I say, to attribute these raptures
and ecstasies of joy in such persons to the Holy Spirit of God, will be very
hard, at least now-a-davs, when miraculous powers have ceased. No; certainly,
all spiritual joy is not the joy of the Holy Ghost; a man may be sometimes so
fidl of joy that his soul is even ready to break its prison, and yet, for all that,
be not a whit the more acted by a divine spirit."*
This characteristic, then, of morbid religious feelings, both melancholy and
elated, that neither of them are rational, being assumed, it seems to follow as
a just conclusion that both kinds of them arc symptomatic of disease; and this
conclusion in regard of the latter kind of them seems strengthened by the
following considerations; they are always accompanied by similar morbid
feelings and emotions in regard of other objects and subjects, and with unac-
countable sympathies and antipathies ; are chiefly incidental to persons of weak
or uncultivated minds, of a highly excitable temperament naturally, or in con-
sequence of debilitation, to the-subjects of constitutional indolence aggravated
by the absence of regular and active employment; to females and to effeminate
males of sedentary avocations; to miners and others living and labouring in a
vitiated atmosphere, and amid cheerless or unvarying scenes. Such feelings
are often combined with hysteric, &c., affections, and with evident indications
of functional or organic diseases, especially of the organs of circulation, and of
the arterial system connected with the stomach and its region. They are fre-
quently found along with a debility of moral principle in regard of truthfulness,
honesty, temperance, or with an insensibility to relative duties. Such persons
have generally imbibed the notion that their peculiar feelings and emotions are
the infallible index of piety and indubitable marks of divine favour. To use
the words of an eminent prelate,—" They seem to think themselves bound to
feel all they read in the Scriptures, without regard to the difference between
the present and past economy of things ;"f and possess, for a time at least, the
power of raisingin themselves these ecstatic emotions by an effort of their own will.
They often exhibit a tendency to malingenj, andin other respectspossess the simula-
tive sensibilities of actors and actresses in remarkable perfection. I am em-
boldened by theological and medical authorities to express my conviction that
the generality of those persons in whom what are called the religious emotions
are peculiarly developed, are the subjects of physical disease; and that an im-
mense number of religious books, sermons, &c., are indebted for their popu-
larity to the diseased susceptibilities of their readers and hearers. Such morbid
states are often peculiarly manifested in regard of prayer and psalmody, the
former being in many cases a merely self-mesmerizing process of unintelligent
emotions, and the iattcr a mere physical hilarity irrespective of words and
ideas. There is not a town, or perhaps a village, in the empire in which such
instances of morbid religious phenomena are not to be found; and it is impos-
sible to set a limit to the delusions which the subjects of them may undergo.
The great evil of them, next to their fallacy, consists in their tendency to
destroy the true religious capacity, and in their powerful conduciveness, in
common with all other kinds of excitement, to those vices and crimcs to which
the temperament, whether of mind 01* body, may be liable, or to which the cir-
cumstances of individuals may peculiarly expose them: nor should their too-
possible termination in insanity or suicide be forgotten.
The difficulty, if not impossibility, of effectually ministering to confirmed
cases of this nature, arises from the fixed belief by the patient (with which they
are commonly attended) of the sacred origin of such feelings, and from the
* Casuistical Sermon, III., vol. 3. London. 1716.
+ Bishop Warburton on Grace, page 112.
150 ON THE CONNEXION BETWEEN MORBID PHYSICAL
gratification which they so readily and largely afford to his perverted mind.
Our prospect of success is limited to the incipient stages of his disease, when,
perhaps, an occasional scepticism intrudes itself respecting the supernatural
origin of his emotions. The proximate cause of the malady would seem to be
what has been called "reflective consciousness, or internal observation."
Positive consciousness, as in the case of mauvaise honte, disturbs and perverts
the operation of all our mental and moral powers, as also of our physical.
Introspection produces that emotion to which the state of the physical consti-
tution is at the time inclined, especially if the desirableness of that emotion be
also previously believed. When this examination of the consciousness is re-
garded as a duty, in consequence, perhaps, of a misapprehension of certahi
passages of Scripture, a morbid state of the feelings is promoted with every act
of it. The means of cure or prevention, as indicated by the nature of the
disease, are to substitute religious acts and moral duties, as these are dictated
by reason, conscience, and the Scriptures, for all attention to the phenomena of
consciousness, reveries, or abstract contemplations. The perusal of religious
publications of a sentimental or romantic character should be strictly pro-
hibited, as well as all attendance upon those services, sermons, orations, &c.,
which appeal rather to the imagination than to the judgment and reason.
Change of scene and cheerful society, scientific lectures and active occupation,
both of the mind and body, upon external objects, seem fittedto divert the mind's
attention from itself, and to break the chain of its diseased associations. Nor
is the use of sarcasm utterly unavailing, especially that kind of it generally too
applicable to such cases, which is derived from the inferior moral conduct of
those who make pretensions to the most spiritual emotions. But no applica-
tions to the mere mental constitution of the patient will be effectual nnless
aided by an alleviation of that physical malady which is the real root of the
disorder. This can only be treated according to its particular nature. As a
general rule, however, the entire abstinence from all physical stimulants, to
some of which such patients often show a marked propensity, may be safely
recommended. All direct tonics, as well as all opiates, generally augment the
disease. Tea is frequently injurious. The late eminent clergyman, Mr. Cecil,
speaks of "females sitting over a fire all day, and drinking tea, and then mis-
taking their morbid feelings for divine influences."*
I beg to add the application of the foregoing principles, &c., to the subject
of life's closing scene, in which a large portion of the community expect that
the religions sincerity of the sufferer will become apparent, the power of
religion will, by divine favour, be peculiarly evinced, and an antepast will be
afforded of future bliss, which will even leave its last gleam upon the very
countenance of the departed. This expectation is nourished by obituaries and
memoirs, and in direct opposition to numerous well-known instances of persons
of undoubted worth and piety, in regard of whose last feelings and post-mortem
aspect " the King of Terrors" plainly showed that he is no respecter of persons.
I will merely advert to some circumstances and considerations which may lead
to a distrust of all the appearances of the death-bed, and of all inferences from
them. These considerations are partly derived from the nature of the disease
and the correspondent alterations it produces of the blood, &c., and conse-
quently of the action of the brain, and thereby of the mental feelings and per-
ceptions, whether as hyper-oxygenated or super-carbonized: of whichformer state
every regular case of phthisis of the lungs affords an illustration, as does also
every case of obstructed liver, of the latter. I have rarely seen the former
case, and its characteristic exhilaration of spirits and exaltation of ideas, even
to the last moment of life, without being reminded of the remark I once heard
made by an eminent medical attendant, that " consumption is a poetical
* Cecil's Remains.
AND RELIGIOUS PHENOMENA.
151
diseasenor of the latter, without remembering the effects on the mind
attributed to blach-bile by the ancients. To these causes of cerebral and
mental disturbance must be added the solitude and sameness of the sick-room
and its sickly atmosphere, the medicines administered, the peculiar food pre-
scribed, the stimulants ordered and often administered in additional quantities
by friends and attendants, and the natural tendency of debility itself to produce
delirium; and we have only need to consider the inevitable consequences on
the mind, perhaps of a long course of such treatment, in order to feel convinced
that but little reliance is to be placed upon the dying man's expressions or
feelings, either as being, when "triumphant," a prelude to the bliss of
Paradise; or as being, when despondent, the dark indication of " a monstrous
life."
This reliance becomes still further diminished by the well-known quality of
strongly-excited feelings to represent themselves to the mind as ideas, and
even as actual impressions on the senses, and of any violent alternations of the
feelings to assume the form of a dialogue to the imagination. I subjoin a few
published and well-attested incidents illustrative of the foregoing observa-
tions, &c. The first is of the effects of delirium.
" Samuel Kitchens, a smith by trade, was taken ill, and caught a malignant
fever, in which he cries out, ' I have not the least doubt of my salvation.' lie
cries out aloud, ' Open the heaven, 0 my God, and come down into my soul.
Come, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and plunge me into God!''"
The following seems an instance of false perception:—
" A man fell ill of a high fever; addressing himself to the people around
him, he says, ' Can't you see Jesus Christ coming, with an innumerable
company of angels, and the golden banner displayed ? They are coming to
carry me to the bosom of my God. Open their eyes, O God, that they may see
them. I am whiter than snow,—1 am washed in the blood of my Re-
deemer. Why, I am all God."—"Bishop Lavingdon's Enthusiasm," &c.,
Part III., p. 93.
I subjoin the following valuable remarks upon the feelings in death:—
" I would not alter my opinion of a man's spiritual state, whom I had
thoroughly known before, for the manner of his death. The end of a holy life
and unblamable conversation may not appear in the eye of man so calm and
comfortable as was expected. Some sucli men may end their days in ravings,
impatiencies, and other strange behaviours. The nery distempers of their hot
disease may sometimes, even in the saints of God, produce furious conduct,
fearful distractions, and despairful speeches, these being the natural effects
and issues of melancholy excesses, frenzies, and burning fevers."* The following
observation of Lord Bacon may confirm the view already taken of the delusi-
bility of human feelings, and induce us to rely on the more solid ground of
conduct and duty:—
" ' The mind, darkened by its covering, the body, is far from being a flat,
equal, and clcar mirror, that receives and reflects the rays without mixture, but
rather a magical glass, full of superstitions and apparitions.' "f
* Bolton, p. 152, &c. f Works, vol. I., p. 132. Shaw's edition.
