Critical Remarks on the "Plea of Insanity"
===========================================

BY RICHARD POOLE, M.D.,
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh, formerly Superintendent
of the lloyal Lunatic Asylum, Montrose.
(Continued from page 281.)
Hoke recent in date (1831) is that of George Waters, reckoned "similar" by
Alison, who thus relates it. "The panncl, in a rude and strange manner, had
taken his son bv the hand, who was playing near the Water of Leith, at Bon-
hington, and had a fork in his possession. As he got nearer the place where the
iatal deed was perpetrated, his look appeared, to the witnesses who saw linn,
wilder and more frantic. He was seen looking into the water, where the body
Was thrown after it was committed, in a raised and insane manner. He was
seen near the spot, in a subsequent part of the same day, moving about like a
deranged person, and declared lie was Sir William Wallace, and an honour to
his country. When apprehended, lie admitted having killed jus s°n, made no
resistance, spoke incoliercntly, and prayed aloud. 1 lie evening before he had
i ver,Y insanely about having been at Inchkeith on a raft. In ^November,
^29, he had been committed for disturbing his neighbours; he had then t e
appearance of delirium tremens, and was confined in a strait-waistcoat ; and his
relations had subsequently written to the Leith Police to look after the pannel,
as he could not take care of himself. In these circumstances, the insanity was
clearly proved, and so the jury held, with the approbation ol the court; and lie
}yas confined for lifeThe circumstances, beyond all doubt, demonstrated
insanity, as understood by medical men, but, by no means, absolute alienation
reason, sought for by some lawyers. The former, we shall immediately
see, may err, like the latter, in regard to the existence of the disease.
-It is by hq means unusual," says Alison in contiuuancc, "to find instances ol
persons committing crime under the inlluence of insanity, who yet give no in-
dication of it when conversing in jail with a medical man." Every one will be
prepared for such a remark who understands the well-known lact that the
malady, though ever so intense, admits of intervals or remissions of manifesta-
• aild, generally speaking, requires peculiar excitement in order to display
A|S<in ]1Ulie(lll'vocally. Alison gives an example of the kind, in the ease ol Janet
,Vc.' SeI>tcmbcr, 1829.
She was charged with having stolen a child belonging to her mistress, as
^ ell as a quantity of clot lies from her house. Insanity was pleaded m bar o
rial; but, alter the examination of a single witness, who said he saw nothing
insane about her, it was withdrawn, and she pleaded guilty. 'Ihe case, how-
ever, was certified to the high court (from the circuit at Stirling, it appears),
0 give time to investigate the state of the woman's mind, which was very
suspicious from the style of her declaration, and from most of the stolen
^rticles having been found torn to pieces in the wood near her mas er s louse,
•tt ultimately turned out that she had been insane, and cscapcd some months
422 CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " PLEA OF, INSANITY."
before from a lunatic asylum near Greenock, and had been considered insane
all her life. Still, the medical men who examined her in Edinburgh declared
they did not regard her as ' void of reasonbut, as the crime had evidently
been committed in a state of mental alienation, the prosecutor did not move for
sentence, and she was confined till her sanity was restored." The case was
given on Sheriff Alison's own report, and, probably, is one in which he was
counsel. I could wish for more information respecting it, and, especially,
touching the grounds on which the medical men in Edinburgh declared the
woman not " void of reason." The same thing, I may remark, might be pre-
dicated of nearly all the patients (amounting to hundreds) who ever came under
my care, though, most assuredly, insane and certified to be so by competent
members of the medical profession ; and, 1 verily believe, a like testimony will
be given by the majority—possibly all—of those individuals who have held, or
now hold, superintendence in lunatic asylums. Of course, idiotic and purely
demented persons must be excluded from the list.
" Somewhat of the same description," according to Alison, " was the case of
James Cummings, 12th January, 1810, charged with murder" (reported, I
presume, in a subsequent edition of Hume's work). Some years before, it
seems, he "had met with a severe injury on the head, but hail recovered, en-
listed, and was not considered by his fellow-soldiers as insane; but he was
silent, solitary, and quarrelsome when in liquor. One morning, when on guard
as a sentinel, being teased by a fellow-soldier, he became suddenly outrageous,
and pursued him into the barracks. Having arrived there, he pushed at a
woman with his bayonet, and missed her, but immediately after struck at a
fellow-soldier coming out of a door, and killed him on the spot. The jury, by
a plurality of voices, found the pannel insane at the time of committing the
murder; but there seems good ground for Baron Hume's opinion, that it would
have been more agreeable to law to have found him guilty, but recommended
him, on account of a constitutional irritability, arising from his wound, over
which he had no control, to the ltoyal mercy." More agreeable to law—very
possibly, I would say; but neither to common sense nor to justice, if, as was
admitted in the preceding case, " the crime had evidently been committed in a
state of mental alienation." Surely, "a constitutional irritability, arising from
a wound, over which (meaning, 1 take for granted the former) the man had no
control," was as valid a pica as the condition of the woman against whom "the
prosecutor did not move for sentence. I confess myself unable to discover any
fixed, not to say, rational, rubric, by which both Hume and Alison arc guided
in deciding on such matters. But to procced.
" Insanity was clearly proved," says the latter, " in the case of William
Douglas, May 28, 1827, who had set tire to the furniture of the lodgings which
he occupied at Peebles, and nearly burned the house. He was convicted ot at-
tempt at fire-raising, but, in conscqucnce of his state of mind, ordered to be
confined for life." This needs no comment.
" The law of England," we are now told by Sheriff Alison, " is founded on
the same principles;" and lie gives us, in illustration, the well known case ot
Hadfield, indicted for shooting at the king in Drury-Lane Theatre (1800). I'1.0
details are unnecessary here. "It was quite clear," says Alison, "that this
man was mad, and his ease was eloquently pleaded by Lord Erskine. Eoru
Kenyon held that, as the prisoner was insane immediately before the offence
was committed, it was probable that he had not recovered his senses at the time
he fired, and that, as there was no reason to believe that he had recovered in
sanity in the interval between the two events, he was entitled to an .ac)(,luli>llt'
which he accordingly received, and was ordered to be confined for life." & ^
how, I ask, does this tally with the opinion of Baron Hume, above appr°v^ ' j
favour of a verdict of guilty, accompanied by a recommendation to the 1 ^
mercy ? Farther, too, I would ask, if, in his conduct throughout, lladfie
CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " TLEA OF INSANITY." 42-3
not exhibit a good deal of method and design—evidently the product of reason—
therefore showing its existence, though, undoubtedly, struggling against or
labouring under delusion ?
Hitherto we have had under review the first general rule, or position laid
down by Alison—that, namely, which insists on insanity being " of such a kind
as entirely deprived the person of the use of reason as applied to the act in
question, and the knowledge that he was doing wrong in committing it," in
order to "a complete bar to punishment." AVe have now to consider the
second, announced in these words, " If it appear from the evidence that the
pannel, though partially deranged, was not so much so as to relieve him en-
tirely from punishment, the proper course is to find him guilty; but, on account
of the period of infirmity of mind, which he could not control, recommend
him to the royal mercy"—a suggestion, it will be observed, very similar to
what has already been given on the authority of Baron Hume.
We arc told, in exposition, that "cases frequently occur in the highest
dcgree perplexing both to the court and jury, which can only be justly re-
solved by an application of the principle and mode of proceeding above set
orth. They are those in which the accused was to a great degree to blame,
.. would not probably have committed the fatal act but for some constitu-
/!? or supervening derangement which rendered him not so far responsible
v *us marked in italics by Alison) as those who, by enjoying their reason un-
°uued, have 110 defence whatever against atrocious actions. In such cases
JCre is a mixture of guilt and misfortune; for the former he should be
severely punished, for the latter the extreme penalty of the law should be
emitted. This can only be elfcctcd by adopting the course above pointed out."
'Will be speedily seen, however, that this course has not always been success-
ul ln issue, and, indeed, one might have anticipated a difficulty in reconciling
severe punishment, supposing it just, with a remission of penalty. Possibly,
owever, Alison means only condemnation on one hand, and pardon 011 the
ot'ier. If SOj f]lc ccrtainty of the alliance, it would seem, cannot be reckoned
11: and, consequently, juries may become of opinion that, when they really
esire to show mcrcv, tlicy must provide for it by their verdict. Can they ever
'esitate to do so in the face of evidence which satisfies them of the existence
v SUch infirmity of mind as could not be controlled? How shall they draw a
!ue °f distinction between that state and the condition of one who, though un-
\v°il aUding rM?bt and wrong, is yet unable to use reason in a special act ? And
1 not a " constitutional or supervening derangement," sufficient to exempt
°m some responsibility, because, in its absence, the accused would probably
ot nave committed a certain deed, appear to be a very good ground for sus-
sl n" ^le wh°le evil depended on it, and, therefore, that 110 punishment
few f , ow '• course, some exceptions must be made, as, possibly, in a
21 t°T» cases to which I now hasten. "Thus, in the ease of William Gates,
Dec., 1811,
who was tried for shooting his wife with a musket, insanity
Whi if j d i'1 bar of trial, but failed. O11 the evidence, it appeared that
tha*S ^ a consequent irritability of temper, had a large share in the deed, but
men' CVt}1 V^1CU so',cr, he was of a melancholic temperament, and not like other
liarti 11 tl.iat the act was committed 111 a state of insanity. But
Viet ''l , ,nc's opinion is obviously well-founded, that they should have con-
ablv ',ul. rccointended to the royal mercy." But why so, one might reason-
evfM«aS.i ^'lcy were satisfied by evidence of insanity at the time, and that,
cc T n'1 so^er> the pannel " was not like other men" ?
2;. 1 ** manner," continues Alison, " in the case of Pierce Hoskins,
old • !. 1812, who was tried for the murder of his own child, of four years
,v ' 111 11 "t °f drunken insanity, it appeared that the pannel, when intoxicated,
d(i ¥ Perh?etly mad for days together, and in that state he committed the fatal
He was acquitted by the jury; but Baron Hume declares that it is
424 CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " PLEA OF INSANITY."
questionable whether an assize do right when they sustain the plea of this
lower degree of infirmity of mind, exasperated only into a short fit of outrage
and fury by excess of liquor; or where they receive as evidence the atrocity
or brutality of the act itself that has been done, though there have been 110
previous symptom of the disease." A lower degree of infirmity of mind!
Why, it appears, he was "perfectly mad for days together, and in that state
committed the fatal deed." In the absence of details, probably well known to
Hume, I can say nothing on the last point in his remarks.
" The latter course," says Alison, meaning what Hume advised, " was fol-
lowed in the case of Alexander Campbell, 18th December, ISO!), who was found
guilty of robbery, but recommended to mercy, ' on account of a certain degree
of weakness of intellect, to which he appears to be subject,' and received, in
couscquence, a transportation-pardon"—no doubt, it may be imagined, better
than hanging, as in days of yore, but still a severe punishment, and, one would
think, very unsuitable for a man of weak intellect.
"In like manner, in the cas p ° MV" 11x1 ^"arch, 1810, a more
physicians and a surgeon, who had visited the pannel in jail, that she was
ot a weak mind, laboured under religious dreams, spoke of her interviews with
the devil, said he had tempted her to burn the barn, and that God had reproved
her by scorching her hands on the occasion. On other subjects, however, she
reasoned correctly, and knew the distinction between right and wrong. She
was convicted, but recommended to mercy, and received in consequence a
pardon from the Crown." So lar well and happily, I would say; but her mani-
fest insanity, as judged by medical men, would have warranted a different ver-
dict, and[secured what might not have been granted; for though, as Alison says,_
" the same course was followed at Jedburgh, autumn, 1831, in the case ot
Samuel Rogers, he was not quite so fortunate. "He was accused of murdering
an Irish reaper, in the coursc of harvest, whom he pursued into the river Tweed;
and a considerable degree of insanity was proved at the trial. The jury found
the pannel guilty, 'but, in respect of the alleged insanity, recommend him to
mercy.'" VVc shall be somewhat enlightened here by Alison, who himself re-
ports the ease. "This way of wording the verdict was incorrect ; but their
meaning evidently was that a certain degree of insanity only was proved, insuf-
ficient to liberate the pannel from punishment altogether, but sufficient to ex-
cuse him from the extreme penalty of the law." It may be so; but they had
better have expressed themselves »y leaving out a word liable to misinterpreta-
tion ; and, still more, in my humble opinion, by an acquittal, if satisfied as to
" a considerable degree of insanity." My reason appears in what follows
" The case was not so viewed in the proper quarter, for he was executed J11
pursuance of his sentence"—guilt, doubtless, being deemed to preponderate
over misfortune. But, pray, even admitting the excess, was not something due
to the less weighty element, according to the coursc approved ? Perhaps bu
we are not told so—the poor man had the comfort of a silken halter! . ,
Sherifl Alison generalizes from such examples in relation to a special point
thus—"This seems the proper way of resolving those cases, unhappily too
numcious, in which a fatal act has heen committed in the coursc of a tcnip^
rary fit of insanity, arising from excessive drinking. In all such cases there is
room for a distinction. If the pannel, naturally sane, has been rendered n\aa
solely by drink, and this infirmity was known to him, he seems to have no d0*
fence whatever against the legal punishment of his actions; for it is the duty
of every man to abstain from indulgences which lead to perilous consequences,
and as intoxication is no dcfencc, so the insanity consequent upon its excessiv
and criminal indulgence seems to be as little, jiut, on the other hand, if cl}\en
the insanity has supervened from drinking, without the paunei's having
aware that such an indulgence, in his case, leads to such a consequence, oi 1
rational verdict was returned.
testimony of two
CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " PLEA OF INSANITY." 425
has arisen from the combination of drinking with a half crazy or infirm state of
mind, or a previous wound, or illness, which rendered spirits fatal to his intel-
lect, to a degree nnusual in other men, or which could not have been antici-
pated, it seems inhuman to visit him with the extreme punishment which was
suitable in the other case. In such a case, the proper course is to convict,
but, in consideration of the degree of infirmity proved, recommend to the royal
mercy."
I reckon it unnecessary to dwell on these various considerations—liberal,
generally speaking, as they are—farther than to say that, while wilful drunken-
ness is unquestionably immoral in itself, and perhaps, therefore, with propriety
deemed by the law rather an aggravation than an alleviation of a criminal
charge, as Alison afterwards mentions, the habit of drinking to excess is, iu
many instances, the consequence of or an attendant on real mental disorder,
arising from other and very diifercnt circumstances. The whole subject, in
truth,' is beset with difficulties, to which I can only point in this most super-
ficial manner.
Alison's third general proposition is in these terms :—" If thepanncl, though
somewhat, deranged, is yet able to distinguish right from wrong, in his own
case, and to know he was doing wrong in the act which he committed, he is
liable to the full punishment of his criminal acts." This is nearly to the same
Purport as that of a former statement, or may be deduced from it; and, ac-
cordingly, says our author, " It has been already noticed that the true test of
insanity is to be found, not in the ability to distinguish between right and
Wrong in the general case, but with reference to the particular case of the
pannel; and that he is amenable to the same punishment^ as other men, when
his conscience tells him, or is in a situation to have told liini, that what he did
Was wrong. But anything short of this complete alienation of reason will be
110 defence; and mere oddity of manner, or half crazincss of disposition, it un-
accompanied by such an obscuring of the conscicncc, will not avail the prisoner.
This is proved by a multitude of cases, both in the Scottish and English
piactice." Simply remarking, what might be shown by analysis, that Alison
does not here express himself throughout with perfect accuracy, I go on to the
cases considered in point. They arc those of Thomas Gray and Robert Bon-
thron (for which sec my notes on Hume), then we have that of Sir Archibald
-kinloch, introduced by tlic explanatory observation. It is not indispensable
that the madness should be continued 111 respect of time, so as it be clearly es-
tablished at the date of the crime." Following Hume again, Alison tells us
that c< the plea of insanity must be received with much more difficulty in cases
proceeding from the desire of gain, as theft, swindling, or forgery, and which
generally require some art and skill for their completion, and argue a sense of
the advantage of acquiring other people's property"—details being added of the
cases of Thomas Henderson (as in Ilumc), John Smith, spring, 1827, and Alex-
ander Duff, spring, 1829, which latter two claim attention. They are preceded
!}.y a remark to tiic effect that " such a defence, as was made in the former, has
oecn very frequently attempted in subsequent eases, but hardly ever with suc-
cess," for a reason stated—"it is difficult to figure that state of mental aliena-
tion which leads pannels to lay their hands 011 other people's property, or, if
they labour under such an illusion as made them mistake it for their own, which
induces them to adopt the art, skill, and concealment nccessary for its effectual
perpetration. Such cases, however, do somctiines occur," as, for example, in
Smith, charged with horse-stealing, but evidently insane, and treated as such;
then, as to Duff, similarly charged, having stolen a horse out of a stable in the
night, "and, with some art, having untied the door, which was fastened with a
string, but he had afterwards abandoned it on the roadside, where it was found
next morning among some corn, at the distance of five miles from the place of
theft." " The whole circumstances," continues Alison, " cviuced a disordered
42G CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " PLEA OF INSANITY."
mind, and the charge, in consequence, was not insisted on by the prosecutor
adding, as a general principle, " In all cases where such a defence is pleaded,
the great thing to attend to is the subsequent conduct of the pannel, and whe-
ther he evinced any symptoms of conscious guilt, or a desire to conceal what
had been done subsequent to its commission; for, if he did, it is diflicult to see
how the plea can be well-founded, that he knew not the criminal nature of his
actions." I shall offer only two short remarks on the whole of this deliverance,
for, against such authority, "established, moreover," as Alison notices, "in the
English practice," it would be vain to argue. The first is, that no one accus-
tomed to see maniacs can have the least difficulty in figuring to himself the very
state of mental alienation referred to as a sort of improbability, more especially
if he take into account, as lie ought and will, the existence of various pro-
pensities—moving powers—whatever they may be, and however denominated,
totally distinct from reason or judgment. And, secondly, I have to say, as
also matter of experience, that " the great thing," on which Alison relies as
conclusive, is in truth quite fallacious, worthy of 110 confidence in determining
the sanity of an individual at the time of committing any deed, however
criminal and atrocious. In other words, subsequent conduct, <0 the amount
of entire rationality, is perfectly compatible with previous derangement; and,
in point of fact, which Alison seems to have overlooked when making 011c of
the above statements, some of the cases recorded give 110 small support to the
position now maintained. I shall allude to one only, because what he says of
it is peculiarly cogent in the matter. It is that of Sir A. Kinloch, in which the
jury found insanity proved, " though he regained his senses completely a short
time after the melancholy event."
Among the English instances decided 011 the same principles which have ruled
in Scotland, we have, first, that of Lord Ferrers, tried for murder before the
House of Peers. "It was proved that he was occasionally insane, and in-
capable of knowing what lie was doing (one might have expected this to be held
sufficient excuse); but the murder was deliberate, and, when he committed the
crime, he had capacity sufficient to form a design and know its consequences.
He was found guilty, and executed."
2. Arnold, charged with shooting at Lord Onslow. " It clearly appeared
that the prisoner was, to a certain extent, deranged, and that lie had greatly
misconceived Lord Onslow's conduct, but formed a regular design, and pre-
pared the proper means for carrying it into effect. He was convicted, but, at
Lord Onslow's intercession, reprieved, and confined for life." In this rase,
Mr. Justice Tracy laid it down to the jury, " that the defence of insanity pleaded
against a great offence must be clearlv established; that it is not every idle
and frantic humour of a man which will exempt him from being accountable for
his actions, but such a deprivation of reason as renders him as an infant, a brute,
or a wild beast, incapable of knowing what he was doing—a condition, I nn*
hesitatingly affirm, such as is not exemplified in one out of a hundred persons
requiring and actually receiving humane treatment, with the kindliest sympathy}
in our large asylums for lunatics. At the time of writing this sentence, ninety-
four patients were under my own care; a few of them—three or four—-were
altogether or almost entirely fatuous; but, even comprehending these—because
still indicating a portion of intellect—I might have safely said that u°uC
realized the character of an irresponsible maniac, such as Mr. Justice Tracy
describes. , ..
3. Parker, indicted for entering the service of France, then at war with t in
country. His defence was insanity. He had been weak from infancy, and
had been thought surprising that he was received into the army. But he an
deliberately entered the foreign services, and knew what he was doing, jj
as a reason, that it was "more agreeable to be at liberty and have |)lel',^eC.
money, than be at want in a dungeon." lie was convicted, " under the 1
CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " FLEA OF INSANITY." • 427
tion of the court, that insanity was not established." Alison makes no com-
ment on the case. I will do so, but it shall be short. The man's reasoning
was precisely that of a madman; indeed, quite like the process adopted by
a clergyman, recorded by Dr. Abercrombic, and to which I may advert here-
after.
4. "Bowler's case, 2nd July, 1812, accused of shooting Mr. Burrowes, was
one of considerable difficulty," according to Alison. " Insanity, occasioned by
epilepsy, was the defence pleaded. He had an epileptic fit in July, 1811, and
since that time had been very strange in his demeanour,' eating his meat almost •
raw, and lying on the grass exposed to the rain, and so dejected that it was
necessary to watch him lest he should destroy himself." All this, it might be
hoped, would have been reckoned potent enough. But there was more. " A
commission of lunacy was produced, dated 17th June, 1812, on which the
prisoner was found insane from 30th March last. Mr. Warburton, the keeper
of a lunatic asylum, had no doubt of the insanity of the prisoner, and stated
that persons subject to that specics of madness often took strong antipathies,
founded on illusions totally destitute of foundation." Not a douot of it—Mr.
W. was quite correct. But notwithstanding, " the jury, after much delibera-
tion, found the prisoner guilty." In this case, it seems, " Mr. Justice Le Blanc
laid it down to the jury, that they had to determine whether the prisoner, when
he committed the oil'ence, was incapable of distinguishing right from wrong, or
under the influence of an illusion, in respect to the prosccutor, which rendered
his mind at the moment insensible to the nature of the act he was about to
commit, since in that case he would not be legally responsible for his actions;
but that, if lie was not under such an illusion, or not incapable of understand-
ing the distinction between right and wrong, lie was amenable to punishment.
Alison adds—"This appears the true view of the subject. One would like
to know how the "much deliberation" of the jury depended on this charge.
5- The noted case of Bcllingham, who shot Mr. Percival in 1S12. Insanity
Mas pleaded to the jury, and many strong facts brought out in support of the
pJea, tending to show that the prisoner falsely imagined himself subject to a
]ong series of injuries from that minister." His fate is well known. In his
case, Lord Chief-Justice Mansfield laid it down to the jury, that, "in cases of
murder, it must be proved beyond all doubt that the prisoner, at the time of
committing the act, did not consider that murder was a sin by the laws of God
and nature; that lunatics, as long as they can distinguish right from wrong,
arc answerable for their conduct; and that the mere fancying of a series of
injuries which did not exist, was no defence against the charge of murder, if
the prisoner were in other respects capable of distinguishing right from wrong."
Let us see what Sheriif Alison says on these sentiments, with which, almost
evidently, he is not quite satisfied. "On this case it may be observed, that
Unquestionably the.mere fancying a scries of injuries to have been received will
not serve as an excuse for murder, for this plain reason, that, supposing it true
that such injuries had been received, they would have furnished no excuse for
the shedding of blood; but, on the other hand, such an illusion as deprives the
pannel of the sense that irhat he did teas wrong amounts to legal insanity,
though he was perfectly aware that murder in general was a crime; and there-
fore the law appears to have been more correctly laid down in the cases of Had-
dd and Bowles than in this instance, though no injustice may have been coin-
nutted in the actual result." No injustice may have been committed in the
actual result—simply—a hanging!—though the verdict was decidedly influ-
enced by a legal opinion, not "the most correct," seeing there was a better,
and though many strong facts sustained the plea! Alas—alas! 1 shall, pro-
bably, either find or take occasion to show how indignantly, and yet how justly,
at the distance of several years, Lord Brougham expressed himself respecting
the deplorable trial of Bcllingham. Sheriff Alison here closes the English cases,
428 CRITICAL REMAKES ON THE " PLEA OF INSANITY.""
and his third main proposition. In relation to one point connected with the
former examples adduced, I have a special reason, which may afterwards be
patent,, for quoting the opinions of an author whose judgment in such matters
is worthy of most serious regard.
" The subject of hallucination, in insanity, may be either entirely imaginary
and groundless, or may be a real event viewed in false relations and carried to
false consequences. This view of the subject bears upon an important point
which has been much agitated—the liability of maniacs to punishment—and
which has been ably and ingeniously argued by Lord Erskine in his defence of
Hadfield. The principle contended for by this eminent person is, that when a
maniac commits a crime under the influence of an impression which is entirely
visionary and purely the hallucinations of insanity, he is not the objcct of
punishment; but that, though he may have shown insanity in other things, he
is liable to punishment, if the impression under which he acted was true, and
the human passion arising out of it was directed to its proper object. He illus-
trates this principle by contrasting the case of Hadfield with that of Lord Fer-
rers. Hadfield had taken a fancy that the end of the world was at hand, and
that the death of his Majesty was in some way connected with important events
which were about to take place. Lord Ferrers, after showing various indica-
tions of insanity, murdered a man against whom he was known to harbour deep-
rooted resentment, on account of real transactions in which that individual had
rendered himself obnoxious to him. The former, therefore, is considered as an
example of the pure hallucinations of insanity; the latter as one of human pas-
sion lounded 011 real events, and directed to its proper object. Hadfield, accord-
ingly, was acquitted, but Lord Ferrers was convicted of murder and executed.
The contrast between the two cases is sufficiently striking; but it may be ques-
tioned whether it will bear all that Lord Erskine has founded upon it. There
can be 110 doubt of the first of his propositions, that a person acting under the
pure hallucinations of insanity, in regard to impressions which arc entirely un-
founded, is not the objcct of punishment (meaning ought not to be so). But
the converse does not seem to follow—namely, that the man becomes an object
of punishment merely because the impression was founded on fact, and bccause
there was a human passion directed to its proper object. For it is among the
characters of insanity, not only to call up impressions which are entirely
visionary, but also to d stort and exaggerate those which are true, and to carry
them to conscquenccs which they do not warrant in the estimation of a sound
mind. A person, for instance, who has suffered a loss in business, which does
not affect his circumstances in anv important degree, may imagine, under the
influence of hallucination, that lie is a ruined man, and that his family is reduced
to beggary. Now, were a wealthy man, under the influence of such hallucina-
tion, to commit an outrage 011 a person who had defrauded him of a trifling
sum, the case would afford the character mentioned by Lord Erskine—human
passion founded upon real events, and directed to its proper objcct; but no
one, probably, would doubt for a moment that the process was as much the
result of insanity as if the impression had been entirely visionary. In this hypo-
thetical case, indeed, the injury, though real, is slight; but it does not appear
that the principle is necessarily afl'ected by the injury being great, or more
in relation to the result which it leads to according to the usual coursc 01
human passion. It would appear probable, therefore, that, in deciding a doubt-
ful case, a jury ought to be guided, not merely by the circumstances of the ease
itself, but by the evidence of insanity in other things. This, accordingly, «P*
pears to have been the rule on which a jury acted in another important < case
mentioned by Lord Erskine, in which an unfortunate female, under the ini u-
euce of insanity, murdered a man who had seduced and deserted her. ^
was a real injury of the highest description, and human passion founded up
it and directed to its proper objcct; but the jury, 011 proof of deiangcnicn
CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " PLEA OF INSANITY." 429
other things, acquitted the prisoner, who accordingly soon passed into a state
of ' undoubted and deplorable insanity.' In the case of Lord Ferrers, also, it
would appear that the decision proceeded, not so much upon the principle of
human passion directed to its proper object, as upon an impression that his
lordship's previous conduct had been indicative of uncontrolled violence of
temper rather than actual insanity."—{Dr. Abercrombie, Intell. Powers.)
The remaining propositions set forth by Sheriff Alison scarcely come in my
way. But they may be quoted with the briefest possible annotations.
" (4.) The proof'of insanity it lies upou the pannel to establish; and, in the
case of an insane person having lucid intervals, it lies upon him to show that
the criminal act was committed during the continuance of the disease, unless
the intervals were of short duration. On part of which—or generally—he ad-
duces Hume's remark as appearing well founded—namely, in reference to the
pannel being bound to substantiate his defence if the lucid intervals were long,
whereas thereverse is the case where they are extremely short, 'and he was
apprehended shortly after the act in a state of furiosity,' thus, namely, ' that
the point should be left for the consideration of the jury, rather than made the
subject of unbending presumptions which must, in many instances be unsuitable
to the justice of the particular case with which they are intrusted." The ex-
tension of this remark, I am disposed to think, would be equally proper, to say
the least.
" (5.) Insanity may be pleaded in bar of trial, if the pannel be then insane,
and the Court, ex propria motu, will take cognisance of the state of a prisoner s
mind, if he appear incapable of conducting his defence.' Here it is observed,
as comparatively a recent thing, that " proof (of insanity) may competently be
brought forward by any one capable of speaking to the point, whether- contained
ln the list of witnesses or not; and the proof is taken by the Court itself, with-
out the intervention of an assize." This was first adopted in 1S01, and has
been since followed. . . , , . ,,
„ "(0.) Where the trial goes on, and insanity is found proven by the jury, the
Court orders the prisoner to be confined for life, or until caution is found by
his friends to put liim in a place of safe custody during the remainder of his
We." On this point I need not speak. As to sundry and important topics
connected with, or proceeding from it, everybody knows many \olumes have
been, and everybody will expect to be, written. My present object keeps me
aloof. Jt being understood, and Sheriff Alison having stated that, on matters
regarding the plea of insanity, there is a correspondence or essential agreement
between the laws, as well as the practice, ol Scottish and English Courts,
I append to these remarks an extract from the Times of 20th June, 1813, setting
•ortli minutes of proceedings in the House of Lords, when the Judges delivered
heir replies to certain questions on the subject.
' The House of Lords met yesterday morning at 11 o clock, to hear the opinions
0 the Judges on several questions relating to crimes committed by persons sup-
posed to be insane, or afflicted with monomania. There was a full attendance of
Peers, amongst whom were Lord Lrougham, Lord Cottenham, Lord Melbourne,
°<? 9<auiPbell, Lord Wynford, Lord Kenyon, and others.
II Majesty the Kiug of Hanover (who came down to the House exactly at
11 o'clock on horseback, attended by two grooms in undress liveries) was also pre-
sent, and sat on the woolsack by the side of the Lord Chancellor. His Majesty
paid the most marked attention to the reading of the opinion of the Judges by the
^ord Chief Justice Tindal.
' His Royal Highness the Duke of Cambridge was also present.
' Mr. Justice Maule, at some length, but in a low tone of voice, stated his
reasons for differing with his learned brethren on the questions which had been
submitted to their consideration. His Lordship said, that with reference to the
nfth and last question proposed—viz., Can a medical man, conversant with tlio
disease of insanity, who never saw the prisoner previously to the trial, but who
NO. vr £
480 CRITICAL REMAIIKS ON THE " PLEA OF INSANITY."
was present during the whole trial and the examination of all the witnesses, be
asked his opinion as to the state of the prisoner's mind at the time of the commis-
sion of the alleged crime, or his opinion whether the prisoner was conscious at the
time of doing the act that he was acting contrary to law ? or whether he was labour-
ing under any, and what, delusion at the time?—he had no hesitation in saying
that such a question could legally be put to a witness. It had been the practice to
adopt that course. He had no knowledge of such questions having been success-
fully objected to. The fact of the Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas, and the other distinguished Judges who presided with him on the trial of
M'Naughten, having allowed such questions to be put (to Dr. Forbes Winslow), was
to his mind a sufficient proof of their legality.
" Lord Chief Justice Tindal then rose and said, that Her Majesty's Judges
had most carefully and attentively considered the questions which had been sub-
mitted to them by their Lordships respecting insane persons accused of crimes, and,
with the exception of his learned brother, Mr. Justice Maule, they were unani-
mous in the opinion which he was then instructed to read to the House. It wa3
not necessary on that occasion to enter into the facts of any particular case; it
would be wrong to do so, as there was such an endless variety, all and each
attended with such improbable and different circumstances, that no general rule
could be laid down. Every case must be decided by its own particular cir-
cumstances. His Lordship said, as the subject was about to come under the con-
sideration of Parliament, the Judges had not lost any time in considering the
questions submitted to them : and as they were unanimous, with the exception,
he before said, of Mr. Justice Maule, they did not consider it necessary to give
their opinions seriatim. The first question propounded for their consideration was
as follows:—
" ' What is the law respecting alleged crimes committed by persons afflicted
with insane delusion in respect of one or more particular subjects or persons: a15/
for instance, where at the time of the commission of the alleged crime, the accused
knew he was acting contrary to law, but did the act complained of with a view,
under the influence of insane delusion, of redressing or revenging some supposed
grievance or injury, or of producing some supposed public benefit?'
" With regard to this question the opinion of the Judges %vas, that notwithstand-
ing the party committing a wrong act when labouring under the idea of redressing
a supposed grievance or injury, or under the impression of obtaining some public
or private benefit, he was liable to punishment.
" Second question— ' What are the proper questions to bo submitted to the
jury, when a person alleged to be afflicted with insane delusion respecting one or
more particular subjects or persons is charged with the commission of a crime,
murder for example, and insanity is set up as a defence ?' -
" The Judges, in answer to this question, wished him to state that they were o
opinion that the jury ought in all cases to be told, that every man should be con-
sidered of sano mind, unless it was clearly proved in evidence to the contrary^
That before a plea of insanity should be allowed, undoubtod evidenco ought to
adduced that the accused was of diseased mind, and that at the time ho commits
the act he was not conscious of right or wrong. This opinion related to every ca
in which a party was charged with an illegal act, and a plea of insanity was set up-
Every person was supposed to know what the law was, and therefore nothing
could justify a wrong act, except it was clearly proved the party did not *n0
right from wrong. If that was not satisfactorily proved, the accused was liable '
punishment, and it was the duty of the Judges so to tell the jury when sumnnnfe
up the ovidence, accompanied with those remarks and observations as the natui
and peculiarities of each case might suggest and require. f-on
•'With regard to the third question—viz., 'In what terms ought the ques '
to be left to the jury, as to the prisoner's state of mind at the time when the
was committed?'—the Judges did not give an opinion.
" The fourth question was— ffence
" If a person under an insane delusion as to existing facts, commits an o
in consequence thereof, is ho thereby excused ?' . opinion
" The answer to this question was, that the Judges wero unanimous in I
that, if the delusion was only partial, that the party accused was equally ia
CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " PLEA OF INSANITY." 431
a person of sane mind. If the accused killed another in self-defence, he would be
entitled to an acquittal, but if committed for any supposed injury, he would then be
liable to the punishment awarded by the laws to his crime.
'' With regard to the last question—
" ' Can a medical man, conversant with the disease of insanity, who never saw the
prisoner previously to the trial, but who was present during the whole trial and the
examination of all the witnesses, be asked his opinion as to the state of the prisoner s
mind at the time of the commission of the alleged crime, or his opinion whether
the prisoner was conscious at the time of doing the act that he was acting contrary
to law, or whether he was labouring under any, and what, delusion at the time?
" The Judges were of opinion that the question could not be put to the witness
in the precise form stated above, for by doing so they would be assuming that the
facts had been proved. That was a question which ought to go to the jury exclu-
sively. When the facts were proved and admitted, then the question, as one of
science, could be generally put to a witness under the circumstances stated in the
interrogatory.
" Lord Brougham said the House and the country were under great obligations
to the learned Judges for the care and attention they had given to the subject, .and
therefore moved that the opinions read by the Lord Chief Justice be entered on the
journals, as he was certain that an almost unanimous opinion would be found of
the greatest advantage when in future legislating on the subject.
'' Lord Campbell was glad this momentous question had been submitted to the
consideration of the Judges. They had been asked their opinion as to the existing
aw> and the answer, to him, was most satisfactory. They were not requested to
Slye any opinion as to future legislation. .
Lord Cottenham, Lord Wynford, and the Lord Chancellor, expressed similar
°pinions.
. '' The opinion of the Judtres was then ordered to be printed and entered on the
journals." •
The questions, it seems then, were five in number; and on four °f these,
l,.erc was unanimity of opinion in the interpretation ot the law by the Judges.
A he sole difference, however, is a very important one, because relating to the
Actual application of the law in courts, Mr. J ustice Maule, the dissentient,
plainly referring to a practice which the other Judges represent as illegal. 1 lie
nrd question, lie it said somewhat paradoxically, was not answered at all. llie
'fSi'. touching responsibility, in a manner involving the whole, is consequently
ot highest value—yet, singularly enough, the reply to it does not introduce
*e clause which relates to the spccial ground at issue, namely, " the influence
0 insane delusion," which is conspicuous in two places ol the query. Thus
7 What is the law respecting alleged crimcs committed by persons afflicted
with insane delusion" &c &c.and "Did the act complained of with a view,
Under the influence of insane delusion," &c. &c._ Answer—"Notwithstanding
e party committing a wrong act when labouring," &c. &c. (See again the
series at large.)
Now, besides the omission, which leaves the answer in the state of a mere
truism, if taken without reference to the question itself, the collocation of words
scenis to me peculiarly ill-chosen. For what, strictly construed, do they really
niean ,J Jri fact, that the party committing a wrong act is liable to punishment
position disputed by no one, and, therefore, not here required. The in-
ended meaning, on the contrary, clearly is that, notwithstandirg the party
abouring .under the idea of redressing, &c. &c. when committing a wrong act,
lc. w.as liable, &c.; or, as might have been expressed, " the (for a) party com-
mitting (or who committed) a wrong act, when labouring under the idea, &c. is
nevertheless liable," &c. But criticism of this kind—and there might be more
"—though surely fair where public interests are so much concerned, is vain ;
°r faulty as the language commented on may be, no one can absolutely mistake
what the Judges meant—namely, that if, at the time of committing the alleged
crime, the accused knew he was acting contrary to law, he is 1 able to punisu-
r f 2
432 CRITICAL REMARKS ON THE " PLEA OF INSANITY."
ment, even although he then laboured and acted under the influence of an insane
delusion. And accordingly the answer to the second question expressly says,
" that before a plea of insanity should be allowed, undoubted evidence ought
to be adduced that the accused was of diseased mind, and that, at the time he
committed the act, he was not conscious of right or wrong." " Nothing could
justify a wrong act, except it was clearly proved the party did not know right
from wrong. If that was not satisfactorily proved, the accused was liable to
punishment."
But farther, and conclusively as to a large class of cases, to the 4th question,
" If a person under an insane delusion," &c.—the reply is such as to leave no
room for doubting—" If the delusion was only partial," &c.; to which is added,
almost unnecessarily, one would imagine, "If the accused killed another," &c.
The 5th answer strikes me as being somewhat ambiguous, or, rather, not in
strict connexion with, or appropriate to, the question, which relates to the
medical opinion itself; whereas, the Judges, in the first place, say that "the
question could not he put to the witness in the precise form stated; " and then,
that " when the facts were proved and admitted, then the question, as one of
science, could be generally put to a witness, under the circumstances," &c. Now,
what are these ? The medical man is said to be " present during the whole
trial and the examination of all the witnesses; " while, what is asked of him
—not, be it observed, in any precise form—is simply " his opinion as to the
state of the prisoner's mind at the time," &c. or, " whether the prisoner was
conscious at the time," &c. or, whether lie was labouring under any, and what
delusion at the time. But, according to the supposition of the question, the
medical man must have had the facts before him (he having been present, as
above stated), or, in other words, the facts are supposed to be proved and
admitted. When, then, do the Judges mean lie is to be asked lus opinion?
Observe the very question, which is not to be put in the precise form, &c. In
short, no small explanation is needed in the whole affair—more light, with
greater distinctness of language; and I, for my own part, though willing to
concur with Lords Brougham and Campbell, in saying that the House and
the country were under great obligations to the Judges for the care and
attention tliev had given to the subject, cannot honestly congratulate them
on account of clear and satisfactory results.*
* It is proper to mention that there are different versions of the opinions—a cir-
cumstance in itself unhappy, and calculated to bewilder the public mind, already
distracted enough on this highly painful topic. In order to mitigate, or, rather,
entirely arrest the censure which might visit daring opposition to the decrees oi
certain eminent legal authorities, I avail myself of some of the sentiments uttered,
on a remarkable occasion, by the Hon. Thomas (afterwards Lord) Erskine. They
are, in themselves, exceedingly cogent. He is alluding to Lord Chief Justice Ilale,
who held, that prisoners should be acquitted only wlion a total and permanent wan
of reason was proved ; and to Mr. Justice Tracey, according to whom, a man, to
be exempted from penal consequences, must be ono that is totally deprived of his
understanding and memory, and does not know what he is doing any more than an
infant, than a brute, or a wild beast! Now, how did the eloquent and justly-8"'5"
eessful advocate meet these sad dogmas? " If a total deprivation of memory (|ie
of course comprehends 'understanding') was intended by these great lawyers to be
taken in the literal sense of the word : if it was meant that to protect a man from
punishment, he must be in such a state of prostrated intellect as not to know '
name, nor his condition, nor his relation towards others ; that, if a husband, ^
should not know he was married, or, if a father, could not remember he ^
children ; nor know the road to his house, or his property in it,—then no 8
madness ever existed in this world." most
Again. " In all the cases which have filled Westminster Hall with t ie ^v0
complicated considerations, the lunatics and tho other insane persons w "^jon.
been the subject of them, have not only had memory, in my sense of the expi1-0
