Psychology Of Berkeley
=======================

354
Art IV.—*
Six or seven years ago, a book was published to prove that there is
110 existence but mind or spirit in the universe, all the supposed mate-
rialism around us being only an illusive and unreal phantom. A prize
of one hundred pounds was offered to any one who, in the judgment
of some three or four individuals agreed on by the author and the
respondent as competent to decide, should be pronounced to have
satisfactorily refuted the arguments of the former. This challenge
was never publicly heard of more, and therefore we conclude was
never accepted. To the uninitiated in the history of metaphysics,
the above fact may seem curious enough; but it may serve at all
events to show that the Berkeleian cosmology and psychology (which
are one) exhibit a phase of speculation which, however strange and
staggering its results, has something to say for itself which is too
plausible or perplexing to be answered off-hand—either to be refuted
by Dr Johnson stamping with his foot, or as Pope has it,—
"To be vanquished by coxcombs with a grin."
We have little space for Berkeley's history; but the purity,
benevolence, and disinterestedness of his character, in connexion with
his extraordinary talents, gained him deserved admiration in his day
Pope ascribed "to Berkeley every virtue under heaven;" and
Atterbury, an acute but not very charitably-tempered man, said, after
his first interview with him: " so much understanding, so much
knowledge, so much innocence, and such humility, I did not think
had been the portion of any but angels, till I saw this gentleman.'
Adverse factions and hostile wits, as Sir James Macintosh remarks,
concurred " in loving, admiring, and contributing to advance him.
He was born in Kilkenny, in 1684. In 1709, appeared his " New
Theory of Vision and the next year his " Principles of Human
Knowledge," in which he totally denies the existence of every kind of
matter, whatever, independently of the phenomena of mind. In 171^>
lie defended still further his system of Immaterialism, in his " Three
Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous." He wrote a number of
other works, but the above contain his metaphysical theories. His
" Minute Philosopher" was addressed to the various characters which
the free-thinking of the times had assumed ; and his " Analyst," and
his " Defence of Free-thinking in Mathematics," were designed to
prove that mathematicians admitted mysteries into science greater
than those of faith; and that the doctrine of fluxions comprised even
* "Works of Gcorgo Berkeley, D.D., Bishop of Cloyno."
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
355
falsehoods. The latter allegation gave rise to Robins's " Discourse,"
and Maclaurin's "Treatise on Fluxions," and was thus satisfactorily
answered.
One of the most remarkable circumstances in the life of Berkeley
was liis offering to resign the deanery of Derry, worth 1100Z. a year to
him, in order to devote himself to the conversion of the North
American savages, by means of a college to be erected in Bermuda.
The scheme was abandoned in consequence of the government dis-
honourably failing to perform its promises of aid; and Berkeley
returned to England, after spending on the other side of the Atlantic
seven years of his life, and the greater part of his fortune, in vain.
Some of his biographers say that he had previously rejected an
English mitre. After his return, however, he was made Bishop of
Cloyne. He afterwards declined the see of Clogher, which was worth
twice as much; and though urged by some of his friends, in 1747,
to entertain thoughts of the vacant primacy of Armagh, he wholly
ejected the idea. On removing to Oxford, in 1752, to superintend
the education of one of his sons, he wished to resign the bishopric of
Cloyne; but the king declared he should " die a bishop in spite of
himself." He died in 1753.
The idealism of Berkeley, unlike that of the Germans, stands forth
in the philosophy of the country which gave it birth almost as an
insulated phenomenon—not as a normal development of principles
before admitted, or regarded as established in a reigning school of
metaphysics. It is quite at variance with the general sense and
tendency of British thinking, whatever Berkeley may say to the
contrary. For he persuaded himself that because the vulgar think
0'dy and talk only of what they actually see, hear, feel, taste, and
smell, and never trouble themselves about any unknown substratum
in which the qualities of the objects that occasion their sensations are
supposed to inhere—they therefore are the abettors of his views in
rejecting all materialism. "Rejecting all materialism"—an am-
biguous expression this, it may be said. It may be so, and no doubt
ls so; hut Berkeley tells us in brief what he means by it when he
says that the " sun, moon, and stars are only so many sensations in
their [men's] minds, which have no other existence but barely being
perceived."* Whatever be the case in the Continental schools, and
especially in Germany, certain it is that no considerable number ol
men m our country have ever maintained a doctrino which can bo
regarded as akin to this. AVe have as yet had no school of idealists.
I he development of the continental idealism, on the contrary, has
* " Principles of Human Knowledge," 94.
350
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
been gradual and continuous, from its germ in Descartes, through
Malebranche, Spinoza, the Leibnitz-Wolfian school, and Kant, down
to the strange and pantheistic phases which it has successively
assumed in Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. We have had no such
development; and we are too cautious a people to be led away so far
from terra fir ma and " common sense," (so much decried in some
quarters) as to allow either our imagination or our logic to carry us,
to such an extent, into the inconsistencies and dangers of intangible
and airy speculation. Happily we prefer doubt, or even ignorance, to
floundering, like the later Germans, beyond our depth in a sea which
has neither a bottom nor a shore. And what is more—we are not
ashamed to confess our ignorance or our doubt. This is the reason
why we have not had among us what can properly be called a school
of idealists—a school, we mean, that has with Berkeley maintained
that mind or spirit is the only substance in the universe. For even
Reid and Stewart were decided dualists, whatever interpretation
akin to Kantism or even to Fichteism some of their statements may be
regarded as capable of bearing, when exposed to a refined criticism
which they never anticipated. A proof of this is contained in the
words of Sir W. Hamilton, in a foot-note to Reid's Section on a
" Material Worldas follows :—
" Consciousness assures us that we are immediately cognisant not only
of a self, but of a not-self, not only of mind but of matter; and
matter cannot be known as existing except as something extended.
To this I venture a step beyond Reid and Stewart; though I am
convinced that their philosophy tended to this conclusion, which is
in fact the common sense of mankind."
Nevertheless, though Berkeley founded no school among us, and
represented no school; it must be admitted that he has not stood
entirely alone, in his denial of an external universe in the sense in
which its existence is ordinarily maintained. John Norris, a clergy-
man, published his " Essay towards the Theory of the Ideal World," in
1704; though it does not appear that Berkeley was acquainted with
this book. Its purport was to carry out the principle of Malebranche,
nous voi/ons tout en Dieu, to its legitimate results. Malebranche said
he could not deny a material world, because it appeared to him that
the Mosaic account of the creation demanded its admission; but he
did not know what use to make of it when he had admitted it; for he
asserted that we have nothing to do with it, all our perceptions and
ideas being the immediate effect of a sort of contact with the Deity j
so that the states of our own minds are really attached to the mind of
God. Norris does not appear to have cared what became of matterf
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
357
his only concern being to establish that "all objects are seen or
understood through the instrumentality of ideas; that these ideas do
not derive their existence from the senses, but are part and parcel of
the divine nature itself; so that an intelligible, that is ideal world
exists really and only in God." Arthur Collier, Rector of Langford
Magna, holds opinions in his " Clavis Universalis," published in 1713,
completely identical with those of Berkeley, of whose speculations
(which came out about the same time) he seems not to have been
aware; though he had read Malebranche and Norris. Collier's mode
of stating his argument is quite as clear and able as that ot Berkeley;
while as a writer he is not equal to the bishop in beauty of style and
variety of illustration. It is worthy to be noted that, in some cases,
he puts his argument almost in the same terms as Berkeley does.
" I declare that in affirming that there is no external world, I make
no doubt or question of the existence of bodies, or whether the bodies
which are seen exist or not—my inquiry is not concerning the exist-
ence, but altogether concerning the extra-existence of certain things
or objects; or in other words, what I affirm or contend lor, is not
that bodies do not exist; but that such and such bodies, which are
supposed to exist, do not exist externally; or, in universal terms, that
there is no such thing as an external world."*
This is like Berkeley himself speaking, and he could not in the same
brief space have more directly and guardedly stated the theory.
The inspiration which prompted Berkeley's zeal in contending for
his idealism, was the conviction he entertained that the doctrine of
materialism in all its forms, from the ancient atomic atheism to the
dualistic doctrine of the co-ordinate existence of matter and spirit, was
fraught with mischief to religion. He fancied that by banishing
matter from the universe he should go far towards banishing atheism
itself. For says he,—
" So great a difficulty hath it been thought to conceive matter pro-
duced out of nothing, that the most celebrated among the ancient
philosophers, even of those who maintained the being of a God, have
thought matter to be uncreated, and co-eternal with him. How great
a friend material substance hath been to atheists in all ages, were
needless to relate. All their monstrous systems have so visible and
necessary a dependence on it, that when this corner-stone is once
removed, the whole fabric cannot choose but fall to the ground ; inso-
much that it is no longer worth while to bestow a particular conside-
ration on the absurdities of every wretched sect of atheists." He
adds that, " men of better principles, observing the enemies ot religion
lay so great a stress on unthinking matter, should rejoice to see them
driven from their only fortress, without which your Epicureans,
* "Clavis Universalis," pp. 3, 4.
358 PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
Hobbists, and the like, have riot even a shadow of a pretence, but
become the most cheap and easy triumph in the world."*
What would Berkeley have said of the pantheistic idealism, of
various phases, which was destined to be developed from the ideal side
of the Kantian metaphysic ?—developments which we know Kant him-
self would indignantly have rejected: but how far were some of these
developments from theoretic atheism, and in what respect would
Berkeley have regarded them as preferable to that of the pantheistic
materialism ?
Our author was even yet more sanguine in his anticipations of the
good effects which were to arise from his speculations, if he could only
establish them in the minds of men. He thought not only that
matter as ordinarily believed to exist was the grand prop of atheism ;
he regarded it also as one great source of scepticism in respect to
Christianity.
"For example, about the resurrection, how many scruples and ob-
jections have been raised! But do not the most plausible of them
depend on the supposition that a body is denominated the same, with
regard not to the form or that which is perceived by sense, but the
material substance which remains the same under various forms ?
Take away this, about the identity of which all the dispute is, and
mean by body what every plain ordinary person means, to wit, that
which is immediately seen and felt, which is only a combination of
sensible qualities or ideas; and then their unanswerable objections
come to nothing."t
Our philosopher was especially desirous that his system might be
clearly distinguished from that of Malebranche; and as a passage in
which he points out the difference is at the same time explanatory of
his own views, we will give it from the second of his three dialogues
between " Hylas and Philonous," the work which contains the liveliest
if not the clearest exposition of his views. We scarcely need premise
that Hylas represents the ordinary cosmothetic materialism, as held by
mankind in general; for so we venture to say, though our author
maintains the contrary opinion: Philonous represents Berkeley him-
self and his system.
" I shall not be surprised if some men imagine that I run into the
enthusiasm of Malebranche, though in truth I am very remote from
it. He builds on the most abstract general ideas, which I entirely
disclaim. He asserts an absolute external world, which I deny. He
maintains that we are deceived by our senses, and know not the real
natures or the true forms and figures of extended beings; of all which
I hold the direct contrary, so that upon the whole there are no
* " Principles of Human Knowledge," 92, 1)3.
f " Principles," U5.
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
359
principles more fundamentally opposed than his and mine. It must
be owned that I entirely agree with what the Holy Scripture saith,
that in God we live and move and have our being: but that we see
things in his essence after the manner above set forth, I am far from
believing. Take here my brief meaning: It is evident that the things
I perceive are my own ideas, and that no idea can exist unless it be in
a mind. Nor is it less plain that these ideas or things by me perceived,
either themselves or their archetypes, exist independently of my mind,
since I know myself not to be their author; it being out of my power
to determine at pleasure what particular ideas I shall be affected with
upon opening my eyes or ears. They must therefore exist in some
other mind, whose will it is they should be exhibited to me. The
things, I say, immediately perceived, are ideas or sensations, call them
which you will. But how can any idea or sensation exist in, or be
produced by, anything but a mind or spirit ? This indeed is incon-
ceivable ; and to assert that which is inconceivable is to talk nonsense :
is it not?"
Thus anxious was Berkeley that his system might not be confounded
with Malebranche's, which evidently approached to some of the
speculations of the latter Platonists ; though there is a still closer
resemblance between Malebranche's " Vision in God" and the idealism
of some of the Hindus; who, according to Sir William Jones, believed
that the whole creation was not so much a work, as an energy, by which
the Infinite Mind exhibits to his creatures a " set of perceptions, like
a wonderful picture, or piece of music, always varied, yet always
uniform." In a letter from Paris, in 1713, addressed to the patriotic
and philanthropic Thomas Prior, Berkeley says : "I intend, to-morrow,
to visit Father Malebranche, and discourse with him on certain
points:" this interview took place, though it is not recorded in
Berkeley's biography.* In the " Biographia Britannica,"+ however, we
learn that the question turned, as might be supposed, on the existence
of matter; which though Malebranche contended for, he made no use
of in his system. Disputes are said to be vehement, often, in
proportion as parties come near together on controverted points, but
do not coincide. Father Malebranche, who was now upwards of eighty
years of age, was suffering at the time from inflammation of the
lungs ; and Berkeley found him in his cell preparing something for
himself, and cooking it in a small pipkin. Unfortunately the aged
father waxed very warm in the dispute about the existence or non-
existence of a material world; and he so violently exerted his voice
that lie greatly increased his disorder, which carried him oft' in a few
days. Dugald Stewart appears much to have relished the story of this
* By liis brother, Dr Robert Berkeley, and Dr Stock.
t Vol. ii. p. 251.
360
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
philosophical rencontre, tragical as was its issue, and regrets that
Berkeley did not make it the subject of a dialogue, like those between
" Hylas and Philonous." " Fine as was his imagination," adds Stewart,
" it could scarcely have added to the picturesque effect of the real
scene."
After all, however, some of Berkeley's statements are so much like a
description of Malebranche's system, that (bating the inconsequence
of the latter in admitting a materialism which it made no use of, and
which Berkeley denied,) it might almost be asked by one impatient of
metaphysics, what difference there was, as to the actual perceptions of
mankind, between " tweedle-dum, and tweedle-dee." At all events
there was one point of nearer approximation than Berkeley would seem
willing to admit. 'For while Malebranche held that matter has no
power to affect mind, that the ideas of all things exist in the mind of
the Creator, and that we see all in Him, and He is our " intelligible
world;" Berkeley, in his Third Dialogue, makes Philonous say to
Hylas:
" When I deny sensible things an existence out of the mind, I do
not mean my mind in particular, but all minds. Now it is plain they
have an existence exterior to my mind, because I find them by experience
to be independent of it. There is therefore some other mind wherein
they exist during the intervals between the times of my perceiving
them, as likewise they did before my birth, and would do after my
supposed annihilation. And as the same is to me with regard to all
other finite created minds, it necessarily follows that there is an omni-
present, eternal mind, which knows and comprehends all things, and
exhibits them to my view in such a manner and according to such rules
as he hath himself ordained."
The latter part of the above quotation, which represents the Deity
as exhibiting sensible things to our minds, (taken in connection with
what precedes,) might almost have been penned by Malebranche
himself.
Kant describes Berkeley's idealism nearly in the same terms which
the latter applies to that of Malebranche. The German metaphysician
says that the name which lie has given to his own theory
(Transcendental Idealism, as founded on a priori or strictly primary
and axiomatical principles,) will not justify any one in confounding &
either with the empirical idealism of Descartes, who tried to doubt of
everything before proof, excepting his own existence which he found it
impossible to question—or with the " mystical and fanatical Idealism
of Berkeley, and other chimeras of men's brains." Indeed Ivant con-
stantly maintains that it never entered his mind to doubt of the existence
of things in themselves (ding an sich) or material objects ; lie merely
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
denies that the sensuous i-epresentations of things (phenomena) are
things in themselves. Kant charges Berkeley with an idealism which
transforms real things into mere representations: on the other hand,
the common notion of mankind with respect to the objects of our
perceptions, which Kant says exalts mere representations into things
•—he chooses to call by the name of visionary (triiumenden) idealism.
Kant concludes by preferring the term critical to the term trans-
cendental as a designation of his own idealism, which he regarded as
the legitimate result of that self-review of the cognitive faculty which
he proposed.* It is almost superfluous to add that Berkeley's scheme
has nothing whatever in common with the subsequent development of
idealism—Fichte's for instance; which was a subjective, egoistic,
pantheistic hypothesis, in which the mind unconsciously created its
own objects, (though it is remarkable that Berkeley states the notion
of such an idealism in contrast with his own) or Schelling's
spiritualized form of Spinozism—or Hegel's absolute idealism of
thought, process, and relation.
Such is the licence and ambiguity of language, that we have almost
as many meanings of the term materialism in the writings of philoso-
phers, as of the contrasted term idealism. In its highest sense
materialism involves the entire rejection of all spiritual existence, as
iu the school of the ancient atomic atheism, and in that which
Marked the close of the eighteenth century in France. But we find
the term used with great limitations; as among ourselves, for instance}
in reference to the opinions of Priestley and others, who have denied
the existence of mind or soul as a separate principle in man from the
body, while they admitted a creating Spirit. Hartley's system of
vibrations, again, is frequently denominated by the term " materialism
m consequence of his attempting to account, in his mechanical way,
not only for our sensations and emotions, but also for our associations,
our most abstract ideas, and in short all our mental processes, what-
ever, even to the avowed rejection of Locke's second source of know-
ledge, namely reflection; which Hartley says is " not a distinct
source," since " all the most complex ideas arise from sensation." Yet
Hartley was very solicitous to obviate the inference that he held any
materialistic notions with regard to the nature or essence of mind.
T Penu dasa icli selbst dieser meiner Theorie den Namen eines transscendentalen
dealism gegeben habe, kann Keinen berechtigen ihn mit deni empirischen Idealism
1 es Cartes, oder mit dem mystischen und schwiirmerischon des Berkeley zu
w' s~ W'—(llosenkranz, S. 51).
'Venn es aber ein in der That venverfiicher Idealism (Berkeley's) ist, wirkliche
> aclien (nicht Erscheinungen) in blosse Vorstellungen zu verwandeln, mit welchem
amen will man denjenigen benennen, der umgekerht blosse Vorstellungen zu
kaclien macht? Ich denke, man konne ihn den triiumenden Idealism nennen, zu
nterschiede von dem vorigen der der schwiirmende heissen mag. u. s. w.—Ibid.
3G2
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
The ordinary notion of matter lias been that of something composed of
separate resisting atoms, each having a distinct existence; there is,
however, a view of it which may be termed the dynamic, in distinction
from the atomic theory of it. To omit any ancient speculations,
Leibnitz did not say that matter was a substance, but a phenomene
bien fonde; sometimes he uses the participle or adjective substan-
tiation for it; but his meaning is more clear when he speaks of the
"monads" of the lowest order (so called material atoms) as nothing
but a kind of 11 force." Boscovich, in 1758, advocated a dynamical
theory, maintaining that the ultimate elements of things are unex-
tended, or are in other words mathematical points, endowed with cer-
tain powers of attraction and repulsion; and that it is from these
powers that all the physical phenomena of the universe arise. Now
Berkeley's view of material objects was wholly opposed to all the
above senses of materialism, the last equally with any of those which
precede. Berkeley said, indeed, as we shall see, that he did admit the
existence of material objects ; but then we must interpret this asser-
tion so as to make it harmonize with his total denial that there are
any independent existences in the universe excepting spirits.
Previously to some further inquiry into Berkeley's main system, it
is worth while to advert to his " New Theory of Vision," the publica-
tion of which preceded that of his " Dialogues." This work brought
out into clear light a grand discovery in mental philosophy, and it ex-
hibits much originality in the author. It had been concluded by phi-
losophers as well as by mankind, that the cognisance which we take
of the distances, figures, magnitudes, situations, etc., of objects, was
the direct and immediate result of the power of vision. Berkeley was
the first to establish to all future time, by a clear line of demarcation,
the distinction between the original and the acquired perceptions of
sight—to teach, indeed, the " art of seeing things which are invisible,"
as Dr Reid has not unhappily expressed it. Berkeley clearly proved
that distance, magnitude, position, and solidity, are not strictly to be
called visible ; that is, they are not the true and immediate objects of
sight. By sight we see only coloured light; all the rest we learn
solely by custom and experience. We learn to see just as we learn to
speak and to read, only that we learn it more easily. On account of
the instantaneous and almost uniform judgments which we very early
form of the above-named affections of objects, we are induced to suppose
that we have only to open our eyes, and thus to solve the whole
mystery of vision: but we are deceived; wo require the aid of our
other senses. If we had only the sense of sight, wo should have no
means of determining anything but colour.
We have no proof that the true province of vision, as distinguished
I
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY. 3(53
from that of the other senses, was known to any of the ancient meta-
physicians. It is remarkable that Aristotle himself, by far the
greatest philosopher of antiquity, has actually particularized the senses
of seeing and hearing as examples of faculties which do not depend on
custom or habit in their exercise, but give us immediate knowledge—
making no distinction between what is direct and natural, and what is
so obviously acquired, in these perceptions.* It is more surprising that
Condillac, one of the most ingenious and popular of the French meta-
physicians of the eighteenth century, and who had studied Berkeley's
" Theory of Vision," should have argued at length, in his " Essai sur
l'Origine des Connaissances Humaines," against the English doctrine
of the acquired perceptions of sight; affirming in so many words that
" the eye judges naturally of figures, of magnitudes, of situations,
and of distances,"f and this, forty years after the publication of
Berkeley's work. It is but fair to add that Condillac was afterwards
convinced of his error, and expressly retracted it. It is perhaps still
more singular that an attempt was made by an ingenious writer,J not
many years ago, to prove the unsoundness of Berkeley's theory of
vision—we hardly need say, as appears to us, with entire want of
success.
Berkeley's psychological views on this subject have now long since
been incorporated into the elements of optical science; and they were
strongly corroborated, within twenty years of their being first promul-
gated, by the case of a youth who had been blind from infancy, who
was operated on for cataract and restored to sight by the eminent
surgeon Mr. Cheselden. The patient felt that everything was in his
eye at once — of distance he could form no judgment till he had
learnt it by experience. He knew a dog from a cat by feeling,
during his blindness; but when couched he had to form the associa-
tions between feeling and sight, before he could distinguish them
with his eyes open. At first he did not know by sight the shape
of anything, nor could he distinguish magnitudes in this way. In
short, Berkeley's theory was entirely established; and subsequent
cases of couching, which have sometimes been put forth as opposing
it, have when fairly examined been admitted to agree with it.
Though no one had ever before pursued the true theory of vision, as
Berkeley did, to the extent of marking a new epoch in psychology and
optics—it must not be supposed that in his hands the theory was in
all its elements original: indeed he did not himself claim that it
should be so considered; but rather that it was parti}' a correction,
• partly an extension and completion of principles which had been
* "Ethic. Nicomach," lib. ii. cap. 1. + Sect. vi.
J " A Review of Berkeley's Theory of Vision j" by S. Bailey, 1842.
304
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
partially admitted or hinted by previous philosophers. The " Optics" of
Alhazen, and the "Optica Promota" of James Gregory, among other
writings on the same subject, may be named as examples. Male-
branche also had clearly anticipated some of the metaphysical bearings
of the subject. Nor must it be forgotten that our immortal Locke
himself had already shown his remarkable sagacity in anticipating
the fact, as proved by Cheselden's patient, that a blind man when
first restored to sight would not know a " cube" from an object of any
other figure. Indeed Locke had been even more explicit: he says,
respecting perception, that " the ideas we receive by sensation are often
altered by the judgment, without our taking notice of it." He in-
stances a globe, which when before us presents to our minds the " idea
of a flat circle variously shadowed," while " our judgment by habitual
custom frames to itself the perception of a convex figure." He also
alludes to painting as illustrating the same thing. He adds : " Space,
figure, and motion, by their several varieties, change the appearances
of light and colours which are the proper objects of sight; so that we
bring ourselves by use to judge of the one by the other. This, in
many cases, by a settled habit of things whereof we have frequent ex-
perience, is performed so constantly and so quick, that we take that
for the perception of our sensation, which is an idea formed by our
judgment; so that one, viz. that of sensation, serves only to excite the
other, and is scarce taken notice of itself."* From this language of
Locke, it is clear that he really did, in the main, anticipate the very
same conclusion respecting the effect of association and habit on our
perceptions of sight, which Berkeley developed in detail; and which
renders his " Theory of Vision" so valuable a contribution to human
knowledge, and especially to mental philosophy—we may say the best
of his contributions.
It is, however, his psychological theory—in fact his reduction of the
whole universe to a psychology, that has distinguished him as one of
the acutest and boldest, if not most satisfactory of thinkers. His
theory may be equally well learned from his " Principles," or his
" Three Dialogues." In the former, however, there is greater condensa-
tion ; while the latter are by far the more lively and amusing. His
learning in the history of philosophy is but little shown in these
works: he seldom mentions the names either of ancients or moderns;
but originality of thought and illustration everywhere abounds. Alarmed
at the irreligious and atheistic tendencies which he saw threatening,
in his day, and thinking that they depended for support mainly on
the prevailing notions about matter, he was led to inquire into the
* " Locke's Essay book ii. chap. 9, § 8, 9.
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
365
claim -which these notions had to our belief, and finally to reject
them altogether. Materialism he held to he not only the chief " ground
of scepticism, atheism, and irreligion but at the same time the " chief
cause of error and difficulty in the sciences." With regard to religion
both natural and revealed, Berkeley was somewhat visionary in his
expectations of the benefits which would arise, if immaterialism could
but prevail. He thought that if the common theory of matter were
once banished, much would be done for Christianity, and against cer-
tain forms of unbelief.* But how closely blended with unbelief has
been the idealism which has been developed in the third period of the
German school of philosophy ! We fancy that Berkeley would not
have found some of these idealistic theories a whit more to his
mind, as to their religious bearing, than the materialism of which
he had so characteristic a horror; and would have acknowledged,
had he been witness of their rise and progress, that it must take
something more than the overthrow of all materialism to destroy
unbelief, and to regenerate the world.
Berkeley's views, though minutely unfolded and at great length in
his works above-named, are more capable perhaps of being condensed
within a small compass than most philosophical theories. We shall
endeavour to give as brief a compend of them as possible.
He holds that the opinion that we have a power of framing abstract
ideas is to be specially deprecated,t as having led men to these notions
about a material universe. He admits that we have " general ideas,"
but not " general abstract ideas which we certainly have not, in the
sense Berkeley intends (evidently that of the scholastic Conceptualists);
for undoubtedly we cannot frame in imagination the picture of a tri-
angle which is of no species, and yet of all, at once, as Locke describes,
not very happily, in his Essay but we can readily think of some
quality in which all triangles agree; and we can use one, therefore, as
the representative of all. Having fairly demolished abstract ideas, in
the above unintelligible signification of a sensuous form or schema in-
cluding various species, our philosopher considered that he had given
a fatal blow to the doctrine of a substratum, or support of sensible
qualities or phenomena, such as matter is held to be. These
sensible qualities, he maintained (as being only in us), require no syn-
thesis or bond to unite and sustain them,—all such synthesis is merely
the invention of our own imagination ; it is purely mental.
Locke had maintained that all our knowledge consists in the recog-
nition of the relations of our ideas, not marking the distinction be.
tween logical and psychological judgment, though admitting the latter
* "Principles," 95, 96.
+ Ibid. Introd. + 13k. iv., cliap. 7, $ 9-
NO. XXXI. u B
300
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
clearly enough under tlie name of intuition. Ideas, then, are the
true objects of knowledge. Very right, said Berkeley, according to
the ancient Platonic doctrine; and he added: " It is evident that the
objects of human knowledge are either ideas imprinted on the senses
[sensations], or such as are perceived by attending to the passions and
operations of the mind ; or lastly, ideas formed, by help of memory and
imagination, from those originally perceived in the aforesaid ways."*
It is evidently with the first kind of ideas that Berkeley's theory has
mainly to do. Thus, for instance, a certain well-known collection of
our ideas which have always been found connected, are signified by
the name apple; other collections may be a tree, a book, etc., respec-
tively. Now these ideas can only exist in a mind which perceives
them, and the existence of our minds is here assumed on the alleged
testimony of consciousness. And as all allow that our passions and
fictions of imagination do not exist externally to the mind, so it is not
less evident, says our author, that " the various sensations or ideas im-
printed on the sense, cannot exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving
them." This Berkeley regards as intuitively proving that the objects
which we call material are nothing more nor less than sensible ideas,
or sensations. " The table I write on exists, that is, I see and feel it;
and if I were out of my study I should say it existed, meaning thereby
that if I was in my study I might perceive it, or that some other spirit
actually does perceive it. For as to what is said of the absolute ex-
istence of unthinking things, without any relation to their being per-
ceived, that seems perfectly unintelligible. Their esse is pcrcipi, nor
is it possible they should have any existence out of the minds of think-
ing beings which perceive them."f " It is indeed an opinion strangely
prevailing amongst men, that houses, mountains, rivers, and, in a
word, all visible objects, have an existence natural or real, distinct
from their being perceived by the understanding. Yet whoever shall
find in his heart to call it in question may, if I mistake not, perceive
it to involve a manifest contradiction. For what are the forementioned
objects but the things we perceive by sense, and what do we perceive
besides our own ideas or sensations ?"
Now, says our author, since the objects of sense, which are my own
ideas (sensations) when I am recognizing them, evidently exist when
I am absent from them, they have a real existence; and as they can
only exist in a mind, there must be some other spirit wherein they
exist, in the intervals between my perceiving them; there is therefore
an infinite, omnipresent Spirit who contains and supports them. This
is Berkeley's main argument for the Divine existence, and he holds it
* "Principles," 1.
+ Ibid. 3, 4.
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
3G7
to be irresistible. Philonous says to Bylas, in the Second Dialogue
that he differs from the philosophers who say, " There is a God, there-
fore he perceives all things whereas, in order to state the whole case,
they ought to say, " Sensible things do really exist, and are necessarily
perceived by an infinite mind; therefore there is an infinite mind, or God."
Philonous adds, " This furnishes you with a direct and immediate demon-
stration, from a most evident principle, of the being of a God. Divines
and philosophers had proved beyond all controversy, from the usefulness
and beauty of the creation, that it was the workmanship of God. But
that an infinite mind should be necessarily inferred from the bare exist-
ence of the sensible world, is an advantage to those only who have made
this easy reflection ; that the sensible world is that which we perceive by
our several senses; and that nothing is perceived by the senses beside
ideas; and that no idea or archetype of an idea can exist otherwise
than in a mind." Thus does Berkeley rest the chief argument for the
being of God on the assumption that the objects of nature are neither
more nor less than our perceptions of sense ; which objects are nothing
but as perceived; so that, as they are not always perceived by man,
they must have an omnipresent mind to exist in. Elsewhere, however,
it is fair to say, Berkeley dwells eloquently on the argument from
causation; there are agencies at work producing in us the ideas which
are the actual objects of nature—what are these agencies ?—the perpe-
tual actings of the Creator.
In support of his theory of the utter inconceivableness of material
things as substances, Berkeley (alluding probably to Locke's statement
that " the ideas of the primary qualities of bodies are resemblances of
them, and their patterns do really exist in the bodies themselves"*)
maintains that ideas can only resemble ideas, which is strictly true;
but he need not, on this account, have denied that external causes
may be adapted, we know not how, to excite in us certain sensations
and ideas. Again: as we " only know by sense and reason, and as
neither informs us of the unperceived material substratum, but only of
our sensations and ideas," says our author, even if there were solid
bodies without our minds, we could never know the fact. That we may
have all the ideas of matter which we now have, in " dreams and
phrensies," is granted by all, when there is no matter causing them,
so that at all events matter is useless, since we can have all our ideas
without it.f
In justice to Berkeley we must say that there is nothing which he
more insists 011 than that, on his principles, " each part of the mundane
system is as much a real being as 011 any others." He must mean, hovv-
" "Essay," ii. 8. + "Principles," 8, 9, 10, 18.
II 11 2
3G8
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
ever, that the actual operations of the laws of nature, that is, the con-
stant agencies of the Creator, are real facts occurring in the consciousness
of minds. He can or ought to mean nothing more ; for he constantly
asserts that our own subjective states (sensations) are the objects
around us. He allows to spirits the name of substances, and to them
alone. On this point he is very decided, talking of spiritual substance
as something beyond its attributes or qualities, just as most men talk
of matter as something beyond the properties which belong to it. He
remarks that no idea can be formed of such a spirit; for " all ideas
being passive and inert, they cannot represent to us, by way of image
or likeness, that which acts." His language, however, respecting
spirit, is frequently obscure. It occasionally seems idealistic even in
the most absolute sense of the Germans: for he sometimes perfectly
identifies understanding and will with soul and spirit. But it is evi-
dent, on the whole, that he means to admit some being that is distinct
from its own acts, and is called spirit; for he says, " it must be owned
that we have some notion of soul," and its operations; and he speaks
of it as an agent, and as the only substance or support wherein un-
thinking beings or ideas can exist. Soul, spirit, and substance mean
a "real thing," not an idea. " What I denote by the term /, is soul
or spiritual substance." It is an active being, the existence of which
consists in perceiving ideas and thinking."* This last statement,
again, (such is the fluctuation of Berkeley's language,) might readily
be construed into absolute idealism, in the later German sense: and
there are other passages of the same kind ; in one at least of which our
author speaks, in an apparently slighting manner, of the common dis-
tinction between will and understanding, and a substance supporting
these powers. In fact Berkeley is not always consistent with himself,
and this is an example: for he constantly applies the term substance
to mind, while he stoutly and uniformly denies it to everything else.
Charity, therefore, must conclude that he did not mean to imply, with
Hume, that sensations and ideas are the only things in the universe ;
or, in other words, that God and created spirits are mere conventional
terms, amounting to nonentities ; for he expressly excludes them from
being "ideas;" and speaks of them as "active, simple, uncompounded
substance, which cannot possibly be affected by the decays which
befal natural bodies."f
Berkeley's hypothesis produced no inconsiderable noise in the reading
world when it first became known ; and it was just the kind of thing
to furnish a very cheap and easy theme for ridicule. Arbuthnot wrote
to Swift: " Poor Berkeley hath now the idea of health ; which was
* "Principles," 27, 135, 13D. + Ibid. 14.
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY. 3G9
very hard to produce in him, for he had an idea of a strange fever on
him." The most absurd thing of all was Beattie's angry declaration
that if these principles prevailed, they " would soon issue in the
extermination of the human race!" Berkeley's doctrines, however,
were adopted by Bishops Sherlock and Smallridge ; and afterwards by
Drummond and Ivirwan. Dr B-eid, whose criticisms of Berkeley are
not always very analytical, discriminating, or candid, admits that he
at one time fully believed his doctrine. The following is the way in
"which Berkeley was wont to reply to some of the most ludicrous or
popular objections which have been made to his views—objections such
as the above, and which we would strongly recommend to the adoption
of all superficial readers of a little philosophy, who are solicitous to
show their wit.
"You say, it sounds very harsh to say we eat and drink ideas, and
are clothed with ideas. I acknowledge it does so, the word idea not
being used in common discourse to signify the several combinations of
sensible qualities which are called things; and it is certain that any
expression which varies from the familiar use of language will seem
harsh and ridiculous. But this doth not concern the truth of the
proposition, which is no more than to say, we are fed and clothed with
those things which we perceive immediately by our senses. If, there-
fore, you agree with me that we eat and drink, and are clad with the
immediate objects of sense which cannot exist unperceived or without
the mind, I shall readily grant it is more proper or conformable to
custom that they should be called things rather than ideas."*
Hylas, in the Third Dialogue, asks whether it does not follow from
the principles laid down, that " no two men can see the same thing ?
and is not this highly absurd?" Philonous replies: "If the term
same be taken in the vulgar acceptation, it is certain (and not at all
repugnant to the principles I maintain) that different persons may
perceive the same thing. Words are of arbitrary imposition."
Berkeley then enlarges on the ambiguity of the word same; and says
that " same " may be very well applied to " agreement in perceptions :
the dispute is about a word. I know not what you mean by the
abstracted idea of identity; and should desire you to look into your
own thoughts, and be sure you understand yourself, Hylas. Take this
further reflection with you: the materialists themselves acknowledge
what we immediately perceive by our senses to be our own ideas,
^-our difficulty, therefore, that 110 two see the same thing, makes
equally against the materialists." Thus did our author dispassionately
show that if his system was to be confuted at all, it must be by some
other method than popular objections and claptrap ratiocinations ; and
* " Principles," 38.
370
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
thus dexterously did he avail himself of the argumentu/m ad hominem
in allusion to the theory so long current in the schools—that all our
knowledge can only be of our own ideas.
Berkeley's whole argument reduces itself to two aspects: one is,
that we have no evidence of what is called a material world; all that
we know may be given to us without it: and even if there were such a
world we never could know it; for whatever knowledge we have of
outward things must be by the senses, which can only give us know-
ledge of our own sensations ; and these sensations, being affections of
mind, can have 110 resemblance to a thing which is unthinking and
inert. The other point of view regards Berkeley's assertion of the
impossibility and absurdity of a material world; for he pronounces
most confidently that " the existence of bodies out of a mind
perceiving them is impossible, and a contradiction in terms."*
The latter and most dogmatical part of Berkeley's theory, is entirely
destitute even of plausibility; and appears to us opposed to what
might have been expected from his devoutly religious character. For
who shall set limits to the Divine Omnipotence ! Of course, logical con-
tradictions involve impossibilities; and they express what cannot be
conceived of as having any relation to the Divine power: as, for
example, that a square may have Jive sides; or that a triangle may be
constructed which has the sum of its angles equal to three right angles.
But where is the logical contradiction of supposing a material world ?
If it be in the power of God to produce all our present sensations and
ideas by his own immediate agency, without the intervention of any
third existence of any kind between us and llim ; and to do this in
such a way as that we shall always be irresistibly, though by an
illusion, led to believe in this tertium quid—something different both
from Himself and from ourselves, and from our own bare sensations or
ideas, and which immediately causes them—(and that it is quite con-
ceivable that the Deity might do so if it pleased Him, we are far from
denying:) then, on the other hand, what earthly or heavenly reason
can be assigned—why it cannot be regarded as a possible exertion of
the Divine power that the Creator should, amidst his infinite resources,
form an existence that should not have the attributes of thought,
O *
feeling, and will, as mind or spirit has—but which should have a
totally different set of attributes, by means of which sensations and
ideas should be produced in us ? And if it be asked how could any-
thing but spirit act on spirit ?—the retort is ready, how can or docs
spirit act on spirit ? We know not how. It does, certainly, appear
to us to require a little more boldness than is worthy of a cautious
* Second Dialogue.
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
371
inquirer after truth, to assert that it would he a logical absurdity to
suppose that God may choose to deposit in an unthinking existence
(matter) certain forces which shall act on us, according to what we
term the laws of nature. Yes, undoubtedly matter may exist—it is
not an impossibility or an absurdity, at all events; and if we were
very eager to saddle men's theology with the vices of their meta-
physics, we should be disposed to say that to pronounce " unthinking
substance impossible" is next-door to presumption. But we would
rather call it a violent assumption; or if we regard it as a conclusion
—a conclusion resting on nothing but assumptions for premises.
The other part of Berkeley's speculations, in which he virtually
challenges his opponents to prove the existence of a material universe
is, of course, less easily capable of being dealt with. For how can we
prove what seems to present itself to our faith, every moment, with
such direct and commanding self-evidence as to defy and supersede all
proof—a self-evidence second only to that of our own thinking
existence ? It is enough, however, if we are right in saying that
Berkeley, with all his acuteness and aptness for the subtilties of meta-
physics, has not one whit shaken the doctrine of a material world: he
has left the question just where he found it. His whole theory is
based on assumptions from beginning to end—assumptions sometimes
his own, sometimes adopted from the current philosophical opinions,
°r from his view of them—but assumptions still; and these assump-
tions are not seldom blended with inconsistencies and inconsequences.
It would be easy to bring forward germs and analogies of Berkelei-
anism among the ancient Greeks. Even in Plato we find the sug-
gestion that it would be difficult to prove that the life of man is not
a continued sleep, and that all our thoughts are anything but dreams.
But among the Sophists and the Sceptics we have what is bolder than
conjecture. Protagoras maintained that thought is sensation, and that
all our knowledge is phenomenal. Berkeley himself cannot be
excused from having dogmatically confounded sensations with ideas
and perceptions. Protagoras also said that " man is the criterion of
all that exists ; all that is perceived by him exists; that which is
perceived by no one does not exist."* This is a sort of Grecized
Berkeleianism. Our philosopher had an example of cosmothetic
doubting nearer home, in Descartes; who, however, finally anchored
bis belief of materialism in the "veracity of God."t Malebranche
rejected this argument, in one sense, but adopted it in another; lor he
admitted the existence of matter only as what he conceived to be a
* Sextua Empiricus, "Hypotyp. Pyrrhon," 44.
t " Sixth Meditation." It is remarkable that Descartes put down, among the
possibilities, a theory of idealism precisely identical with that of Fichte.
372
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
revealed truth. Berkeley, as we have already seen, regarded himself
as authorized by Locke, and the current opinion of the day, to connect
the theory of matter with the dogma that " the primary qualities of
body are resemblances of our sensations." Now, on this latter
assumption, we take it, the whole gist of that part of his argument in
which he attempts the disproof of matter, may be said to lie.
Probably the briefest form in which this doctrine can be put is the
following conditional syllogism: " If matter exists, it must resemble
the ideas which we have of it in our minds: but the properties of an
unthinking being cannot resemble the ideas of a conscious miijd;
therefore matter does not exist."
Now we hold with Berkeley, that our ideas and sensations can only
resemble our ideas and sensations: these modifications of a conscious
being can only have a mutual resemblance. The idealistic theory of
resemblance must, therefore, be abandoned. But when our philo-
sopher asserts that if matter exists, it must thus resemble the idea we
have of it in our minds—we regard his position as a sheer assumption.
Matter cannot be inert and extended, he says, unless mind be inert
and extended. Now this was saying that the cause must necessarily
resemble the effect. This is an assumption which would involve the
most absurd consequences. Does the energy of will, or of any
nervous force which our will excites to action, to move our arm, re-
semble the motion itself? Does the Deity who immediately pro-
duces, according to Berkeley, all our sensations, resemble those
sensations ? Does the view of impending danger resemble the
emotion of terror of which it is the cause ? And is there not, more-
over, in Berkeley's system a kind of confounding of cause with effect ?
We are told that sensible ideas (the only things in the world) are now
in our own minds, now in the mind of God ; who presents them in our
consciousness according to his own laws. These magical ideas are, of
course, effects when they exist in our minds ; but we are told they
have an existence in the mind of the "Eternal Spirit," when no
created being is conscious of them—what then are these same things
now but causes, causes which are to become effects when creatures are
experiencing these sensible ideas ?
Again: what strange consequences follow from Berkeley's distinct
assertion that the sensible world has an existence independently of our
minds; while at the same time he maintains that when I am pointing
to an object, this object has no existence external to my mind! This
table is my sensation, and yet this table (my sensation) can have and
must have an existence out of me! Where, then, is now the sensa-
tion ?—in the Deity, who is a spirit! There is nothing but mind,
says our author, existing in the universe—all else is but a modilica-
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
373
tion of mind : and yet the modifications of my mind have an existence
apart from my mind. The fact is, that Berkeley's language is often
liable to the most contradictory interpretations—interpretations
which, of course, he would in his own way have sought to repudiate.
We have too, in this system, it would seem, a kind of syncretism of
inconsistent idealisms. While Berkeley would annihilate matter, he
speaks of sensible objects in a way which is only due to things which
are separate entities, and which in some inconceivable way may pass
from one mind to another. These sensible ideas exist at this moment
in my mind ; but they will not do so when I am asleep. They exist
then, elsewhere. But what are these existences, which can have,
elsewhere, all the being which they have now in my own mind ?
They are, Berkeley tells us, not active things—they are passive and
inert; and we have seen that their residence may be reciprocated
from mind to mind. These statements cannot but suggest to the
student of the history of philosophy some of the dogmas of the
ancient atomic idealism of Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus, as
we have it described by Lucretius, in his poem " De Rerum Natura"
a theory from which, of course, Berkeley recoiled with horror.
Again: Berkeley says that by our senses we have no knowledge of
anything but our sensations and impressions of sense; and this is said
with a view to get rid of all basis for any positive real being distinct
from mind. Now, it should be remembered that while sense can
°nly, in itself, convey to us sensations, our senses do not act alone, but
in connexion with the intellectual faculty, which peremptorily tells us
that they must have a cause; for to believe in causation is constitu-
tional to the human mind. True, we cannot prove that every change
must have a cause; but we cannot deny it—we cannot doubt it.
Does not every rational being know that each event which happens in
the universe around us, must have its cause ? But what is the origin of
this knowledge ? The reply is : sense gives us changes, events, effects ;
but the intellectual faculty, on occasion of the experiences of sense,
rises beyond experience to the necessary and universal truth that
every change must have a cause, in all time, and in all worlds.
Berkeley's principle, therefore, that sense can give us sensation alone,
falls decidedly short when put forth as an argument against matter,
however true it is in the letter.
^or is it of any avail to our author to attempt to include the whole
of our knowledge within the limits of our immediate consciousness.
^ e are not concerned with the opinions respecting ideas which
Berkeley either found, or supposed he found, current in his day—we
limit our criticism to his own assertion that all the " objects of human
knowledge are either ideas imprinted on the senses; or such as are
374
PSYCHOLOGY OF BERKELEY.
perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind; or
lastly, some combination of the above by memory and imagination."
Now this doctrine, we should remember, is propounded with the view
of upholding the principle that we cannot know matter, because our
knowledge is limited to the modifications of our own consciousness ;
but, if so, then how can we know mind ?—how can we know God ?
Berkeley constantly proceeds on the understanding that our knowledge
does extend to the assurance of the existence of ourselves, of mind,
and of a Deity. He distinctly says that mind is the only substancc
in the universe, and he speaks of its powers; but how, on his prin-
ciples, is he entitled to this dogma? We do not perceive self as we
perceive its modifications; we do not take direct cognisance of the
substance mind, as we do of its attributes ; we do not perceive God by
any intuition, sensuous or intellectual, as we perceive his operations.
Berkeley did not deny that all properties imply a substance: but he
chose to assume that all properties are properties of mind. Hume saw
that, on the principle that we can know nothing but our own ideas
and "impressions" (sensations), we are not entitled to aflirm any sub-
stances—either a created mind (not even a me) or a God. Mankind,
says Hume, in his " Treatise of Human Nature," are only a " bundle of
perceptions." According to him, mind is as much a mere synthesis of
properties as matter is. We do not see that this deduction was any-
thing more than the legitimate climax of that idealism which led
Berkeley to reduce all the material universe to a mere synthesis of
the imagination—a synthesis of sensations, not a substance possessing
its own qualities and powers.
We maintain, therefore, in conclusion, that Berkeley's idealism is,
after all, incompetent to the grand object he had in view, the establish-
ment of a pure immaterialism on the ruins of matter. Ho as much
assumes the existence of the human soul, as mankind in general assume
that of the substance matter. He assumes a Deity as a necessary
depository of ideas, even more than he assumes his necessity as a
Creator. He argues against matter as an unperceived noumenon—he
admits mind, a noumenon equally unperceived. If the material uni-
verse be only an idea of our own, why not also the spiritual ? If
it be replied, there must be causes—then how do we know them, since
they are not our own consciousness, but only a rational suggestion,
inference, conclusion, intuition—call it what we may.
We have only to repeat that Berkeley's whole argument against the
existence of matter, ingenious and subtle as it is, and propounded with
extraordinary ability, leaves the question just where it was before—
just where the Greek sceptics left it, two thousand years ago, and
more. The ultimate basis of human knowledge has always been as-
AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGICAL LITERATURE.
375
sailed by scepticism, because it admits not from its very nature of
being fortified by proof; and yet our most certain knowledge re-
poses on no other foundation than self-evident principles. What
matter is, has long been a puzzle to natural philosophers; but even
the dynamic theory of it, which goes the farthest way towards
Berkeley's denial of its substantial existence, is far enough from the
assumptions, the extravagances, and the final goal of his system. The
machinery of this system, we are bold to say, instead of clearing up any
difficulties and making everything plain, as the author supposed, has
but introduced further grounds of scepticism. If the advance of the
human mind out of the immediate sphere of its own subjective con-
sciousness to objective knowledge is a puzzle, Berkeley has not solved it
^y confining matter wholly to the sphere of consciousness: he has only
cut the Gordian knot, by an hypothesis which would prove too
rnuch even for his own ultimate purpose—he has not untied that
knot.
