Address Given
===============

:Author: MR. L. G. BROCK, C.B.,
Chairman of the Board of Control,

at a Conference of Mental Health Workers held at Bristol on April 14th, 1934
I have not come down here with any idea of propaganda; this is not the
occasion for it, nor is it my task. We were appointed as a Departmental Com-
mittee to find the facts and to ascertain how far on scientific grounds there is
a case for sterilisation. To the best of our ability we have done so. It rests
With the Government to decide what action to take on our recommendations.

I have only come here this afternoon because Miss Darwin thought it might be
?f interest to you if I attempted some explanation of the main points in the
report. I thought at one time I might have tried to deal in my address with
the criticisms of the report. But although the press has been extraordinarily
kind to us, with negligible exceptions, there has been singularly little construc-
tive criticism to which I could attempt any reply this afternoon. Of course,
there has been a certain amount of abuse; that must be expected. A critic in
orie paper, whose name I cannot remember, said that the appendices to the
report would have been quite as useful and quite as convincing if the figures
had been thrown together by " orderly monkeys." Although I have a great
regard for monkeys, which seem to me extraordinarily intelligent animals,
few people I imagine would put them on the same level with Professor Fisher
as statisticians. I need not waste time on mere essays in vituperation like
this, and I had better come at once to the two main points, closely connected
points, on which the whole report turns.

The first question is, what conclusions did the Committee reach as to the
inheritance of mental abnormalities, and the second is, how far do their find-
ings of fact establish a case for sterilisation on scientific grounds? If I am to
explain the considerations which led the Committee to their conclusions, I
shall have to attempt, what I feel is rather a rash task, to give you some kind of
explanation of what is meant by the Mendelian theory of inheritance. I will
try to put it simply, not because you might fail to understand it, but because if
I do not put it simply, I may get lost myself. The Mendelian theory is the
most commonly accepted theory of inheritance; in fact it is the only attempt to
explain the machinery of inheritance which has behind it a large body of
experimental work. Quite briefly, what the Mendelian theory of inheritance
amounts to in outline is this. There is in the nucleus of every germ cell a series
of bodies, thin thread-like filaments, which can be seen under a powerful
microscope at certain stages of cell development. These are called " chromo-
somes," which means, literally, " coloured bodies." They are called chromo-
somes not because they have in reality any colour, but because they will take
a dye which is necessary to make them visible under a microscope. Chromo-
somes, although they look like threads, appear to be made up of a large number
of smaller units, which are called genes. No one has ever seen a gene : genes
are much too small to be visible under any microscope which has yet been
invented. Nevertheless, there has been a long series of experiments which
demonstrate that the genes are there. Every transmissible character is trans-
mitted through one or more of these genes. A character may depend upon a
single gene, or upon a combination of genes, but one way or another every in-
herited character is determined by these genes. The remarkable thing is that
the gene for a given character always comes in the same place in the same
chromosome. Each gene keeps its proper place in the series; we may, there-
fore, think of chromosomes not as single threads, but as strings of infinites-
imally small beads arranged in a definite order. Now the fertilised germ cell
contains two strings of chromosomes, one derived from the father and one
from the mother. The cells increase by division, but each cell always has two
sets of chromosomes, one derived from each parent. If the gene which deter-
mines a particular characteristic is the same in both chromosomes, that is to
say, if you get the same kind of gene from your mother as you do from your
father, then the given characteristic which those genes determine is bound to
show itself. But supposing you get two genes that don't match, what happens
then ? Either the result is intermediate, as happens with some physical charac-
teristics, or, as far more generally happens, one gene prevails over the other.

The gene which prevails is called " dominant," and the one that recedes, or
remains latent, is called " recessive." But the important point is that though
only the dominant gene shows itself by producing the given character in that
particular generation, the recessive gene may be passed on to the next
generation.

The simplest illustration of this that I can give is eye colour. Eye colour
is generally supposed to be the result of a single gene, or what, in the jargon
of biology, is called a unit character. Now if you get the gene for brown eyes
from both parents, your eyes will be brown; if you get the gene for blue eyes
from both parents, your eyes will be blue. But if you get a gene for brown
eyes from one parent and for blue eyes from the other, your eyes will be brown,
because brown is dominant and blue is recessive. Whatever you may think
about blue eyes from the aesthetic point of view, biologically, they are a kind
of defect, and defects are generally recessive, though recessive characters are
not by any means all defects. As I have said, if you get one gene for blue eyes
and one gene for brown eyes, you eyes will be brown, because brown is domin-
ant over blue, but you can pass on a gene for blue eyes to your children. That
is a most important point. You cannot tell by any physical examination
whether somebody with brown eyes is what is called homozygous, that is,
having two genes for eye colour which match, or whether he is heterozygous,
having two genes which do not match. I am sorry to have to use these terms,
but it is impossible in discussing a scientific question to escape from technical
jargon, and though we tried to explain the technical terms in our glossary, I
am not sure that the explanation always made them any clearer. But, coming
back to our illustration, the essential point is that because the individual has
brown eyes, it does not follow that he is, so to speak, pure bred in this respcct.
In other words, it does not follow that both parents were brown-eyed, or that
all his children will be brown-eyed. Two brown-eyed people who are hetero-
zygous, or carriers of a gene for blue eyes, may have blue-eyed children.

The point is important because people are so apt to think about inherit-
ance in the terms of the old saying " Like father like son," but that does not
describe inheritance as it is now understood, and it does not follow that because
the son does not resemble his parents in some particular characteristic, this
characteristic has not been inherited. Characteristics in which children differ
from their parents may have remained latent and been transmitted through the
parents from an earlier generation.

It is one of the great difficulties in investigating inheritance that there is
generally nothing to distinguish the heterozygote, or carrier, from the homo-
zygote, or pure bred type. In the case of some physical characteristics, the
heterozygote may exhibit some kind of intermediate type, but in mental
characteristics, so far as we know, there is nothing to distinguish the hetero-
zygous person from the homozygous. It follows that dissimilarity in type
between parent and child is in no way a disproof of inheritance. The qualities
which the child shows may have been recessive and therefore latent in the
parents. Most defects are recessive; if this was not so, defects would be far
commoner than they are. Normality is generally dominant, abnormality
recessive. In the case of the rarer recessives, a defect may be passed on from
generation to generation without coming to light until two persons each carry-
ing the recessive gene happen to mate. I do not know whether any of you
keep sheep, though I hardly expect that many do. I don't keep sheep myself;
what with my Commissioners and my family I have got my hands full already.
But you know the old saying that " there is a black sheep in every flock."
That is broadly true, and what it means is that blackness in sheep is a rare
recessive quality. Nobody wants black sheep; nobody breeds from black sheep;
nevertheless, in spite of all efforts to reject the black and to breed it out, from
time to time black sheep continue to appear. In other words, in every flock
there is a certain number of sheep carrying the gene for this defect, and, sooner
or later, they will mate with a ram which is also a carrier, and when this
happens, a certain number of the offspring will be black.

There could be no better illustration of the way in which the Mendelian
theory works than the piece of research mentioned in our report which was
undertaken in Sweden by Dr. Sjogren. He was extraordinarily fortunate,
because he found just the ideal conditions, which all investigators want and so
few find. He worked in a small village community in a remote part of Sweden,
shut in by high mountains. The village had little communication with the
outside world, and, consequently, almost no opportunity of marriage outside
its own population. The people of the village inter-married because they had
no one else to marry. Now some generations ago, I think more than a hundred
years back, three defectives appeared in that village community. I ought to
have explained that the Swedish parish registers are much fuller than ours,
and they report the physical characteristics of the inhabitants, and, fortunately,
this particular type of mental defect was marked by unmistakable clinical
signs. How the defect first appeared in the village I cannot say, but the im-
portant point is that for several generations afterwards it seemed to have dis-
appeared. Then, in comparatively recent times, and this was what attracted
Dr. Sjogren to undertake this investigation, a number of fresh cases showed
themselves, but the striking feature was that in none of these cases did any of
the parents or grandparents exhibit the defect. So you see, what happened was
that these three defectives appeared in the village, they married normal un-
affected persons, and their children became carriers of the defect. They did
not show it themselves, nor did the next generation of carriers, and it was only
in the third generation that the carriers became sufficiently numerous to marry
each other. Up to that point they had been too nearly related to intermarry.
Directly the heterozygotes, or carriers, began to intermarry, the defect appeared
again, and an examination of pedigrees showed that every single case could
be traced back to one or other of the three original defectives of three or four
generations earlier. The isolation of the village and the well marked charac-
teristics of that particular type of defect created ideal conditions for research,
and so afforded a classic demonstration of a mental defect inherited as a simple
Mendelian recessive.

That helps to explain what has puzzled a great many people when they
come to look for the causes of mental defect, that so surprisingly few defectives
can be shown to have had defective fathers or mothers. But, you may say, are
we to assume that all defect is transmitted according to simple Mendelian
rules? Is mental defect a simple Mendelian recessive? That is not an easy
question to answer. There are certain types of low grade defect which have
heen definitely proved to be simple recessives. Both types of amaurotic idiocy
are simple recessives, and so is the type of low grade defect which Sjogren
found. But most types of mental defect are certainly not simple recessives.

Some of them may be, but I am inclined to think many are, in fact, multi-
factorial recessives, that is, characters which require a combination of genes in
order to produce them.

Another difficulty in any enquiry into the causation of mental defect is
that the more you come to study it, the more I think you will be convinced
that it is not a single character, and that the difference between one defective
and another is not merely a difference in degree but in kind. Of course, it
has always been recognised that certain types of defect are clearly distinguish-
able from other types. The simplest and most obvious illustration of this is
mongolism, a type of low grade defect which is associated with clearly marked
and unmistakable physical peculiarities. You cannot mistake the mongol, he
ls the most clearly recognisable of all defectives. But while the existence of
separate clinical types has long been recognised, there has been a tendency to
treat feeble-mindedness as a single type. The conclusion to which the Com-
mittee came is that there are probably many more distinct types of defect than
have yet been identified. In the case of the high grades, mental defect is not
necessarily associated with any physical peculiarities, but we believe that even
Jn the higher grades of defectives different types of defect exist, though no
pne has yet devised any criterion by which to distinguish them. If this belief
m a variety of types is well founded, it helps to explain what would otherwise
?n Mendelian lines be difficult to explain, how two defectives can mate and
yet produce normal children. If it is assumed that defect is a Mendelian
recessive, then we must regard the defective parents as homozygous. If two
people who are homozygous for the same character mate, their children must
also be homozygous in respect of that character. The fact that you can find
two defectives mating and producing apparently normal children does, I think,
go to reinforce the view that there are far more different types of defect than
Jt has yet been found possible to identify.

Of course, the crux of the problem is always going to be feeble-minded-
ness. When you get to the higher grades, mental defect is not necessarily
associated with the physical abnormalities which are almost always exhibited
111 one form or another by the lower grades, and there are people who take the
view that a good deal of higher grade defect is really only a section of what
they call the general curve of intelligence. In other words, the people who
hold this view believe that defect is only an extreme form of dulness, and
that the point at which you draw the line between the child who is dull and
the child who is defective is really a shifting point which depends upon the
standard of intelligence in the community. There is a good deal to be said
for that view, but what I personally feel about it is that if you believe that high-
grade defect is only an extreme end of the curve of the distribution of intelli-
gence, it is extraordinarily difficult to explain why defectives exhibit not only
educational failure, but emotional failure and peculiarities of behaviour. For
myself, though I am very reluctant to formulate any theory at all, 1 think there
is much to be said for the view that, while dulness is unquestionably very
closely associated with defect, the merely dull child is different from the defec-
tive, but that dulness is favourable soil in which any inherited tendency to
defect is likely to become much more marked than in persons endowed with a
more active intelligence. That intelligence is transmitted seems to me beyond
doubt. I know some people sometimes question this, and point triumphantly
to instances of distinguished and able men who have had undistinguished and
stupid sons. But, after all, we have all of us had two parents, and able men
do not always marry able women, just as clever women sometimes marry very
stupid men. It may be that the dull son of the distinguished father inherited his
dulness from the mother's side, and equally a brilliant son of a dull father
may have inherited his brilliance from his mother's side. But the question of
the inheritance of intelligence has really been settled, and, in my view, put
beyond all reasonable doubt, not by arguments from isolated individual cases,
but by mass tests. If one were disposed to argue from individual cases, you
could not have a better instance of transmitted intelligence than the distin-
guished family to which your Chairman belongs; but I would much rather
rest the case for the transmission of intelligence, not on exceptional families
like the Darwins or the Balfours, but on the mass tests which have shown that
the children of the more intelligent parents do definitely beat the children of
the less capable classes even where, as in the United States, all are educated in
the same schools. Of course, the superior children enjoy a more favourable
environment, but, making allowance for this, I think no one would now
seriously question that intelligence is transmitted, though there is the widest
difference of opinion as to the manner of its transmission.

Research into the causation of defect may go either up stream or down.

Hitherto all enquiries, both in this country and on the Continent, have gone
up stream. The investigators have studied the families from which the defec-
tives came. We were peculiarly fortunate in having the co-operation of the
local authorities, and we were able to do what no investigators had done before,
to study the characteristics of the descendants. With the help of the local
authorities, and I am glad to take this opportunity of thanking you for the
part which many of you played in this enquiry, we were able to obtain par-
ticulars of some thousands of children of known defectives. That enquiry
produced very startling results. The children were divided into age groups,
and we found that with the higher ages and the consequent greater certainty
of diagnosis, the proportion of defective children showed a marked increase.
In the group of age 13 and over, out of more than 1,800 children 32% were
definitely defective, and 13% more were seriously retarded, and by retarded
I mean at least two years behind the average. In other words, if we take the
children of known defectives who are old enough for a definite diagnosis of
their mental condition to be made, we find that 45% exhibit marked mental
abnormality. That is a most astonishing result and one which has not yet
received the attention it deserves.

The enquiry would have been still more valuable if we had been able to
get more information as to the mental condition of the other parents. Prob-
ably in the majority of cases the other parent, if not actually defective, was not
far off it. As some of you know better than I 'do, defectives tend to sink to
the bottom, their economic and social inefficiency drives them down, and they
form a kind of social sediment. More than this, like marries like, and it is
therefore not improbable that in many instances the defectives were mated to
carriers of defect. But, even allowing for this factor, the proportion of defec-
tive children is so large that it suggests that possibly some forms of defect may
be really not recessives but partial dominants. However, that is merely
speculation.

There is one other feature of the inheritance of mental abnormality which
still further complicates the problem. There are many families in which you
find more than one kind of mental abnormality. You find defectives coming
from families which in other generations exhibit mental disorder, or allied
conditions such as epilepsy. This is what biologists call in their dreadful
jargon, " Polymorphism and some authorities, including Dr. Tredgold, have
put forward the theory that this occurrence of different types of mental
abnormality in the same family is inherited, but is not transmitted on Men-
delian lines. Dr. Tredgold, and those who share his view, believe that there
ls some impairment of the germ plasm which may show itself in a variety of
forms. It is admitted that the germ plasm may be affected by toxins, for
example, so that the offspring may be seriously affected. The doubt is whether
this germinal impairment can be transmitted to succeeding generations. The
theory seems to me to involve serious difficulties, because it cuts across the
^lendelian hypothesis which has such a mass of experimental work to support
it- It is possible, however, that the clue to the problem is to be found in the
lrtfluence of environment.

You are all of you familiar with the distinction between heredity and
environment, nature versus nurture. It is a beautifully clear cut logical dis-
tinction; the trouble is that it leads us to assume that any particular character
must be due to one cause or the other. But heredity and environment are not
Mutually exclusive causes. Nobody lives, as it were, in a vacuum; everyone
ls influenced in a greater or less degree by his environment. While experi-
ment lias shown that some genes will produce a given character in any environ-
ment in which the individual can live, others will only produce it in a favour-
able environment. It is extraordinarily difficult, and indeed, often impossible,
to disentangle the effects of heredity and environment. Incidentally, I would
remind you that a high familial incidence of disease is not necessarily proof
of inheritance, because, for one thing, members of the same family generally,
though not always, live in the same environment, and if you find members of
the same family exhibiting the same peculiarity, this is not conclusive proof
that the peculiarity is transmitted. Let me take a rather absurd illustration,
because absurd illustrations are easier to remember. Suppose a particular kind
of drinking water had the effect of turning hair green, and there was a village
partly supplied by a stream of ordinary water, while the other inhabitants got
their supplies from a deep well which had this peculiar contamination. You
would find, in our imaginary village, members of families in which the child-
ren and the parents both had green hair, but the greenness would not be an
inherited quality, it would be simply due to the environment. Take another
and more complicated case, the effect on children of having neurotic parents.
It is possible that the parents may transmit to their children their own nervous
irritability, but it is also highly probable that the way in which they treat their
children will produce in them the same kind of nervous symptoms which the
parents themselves exhibit. Who is to say how far the neurotic tendencies of
the children are due to inheritance, and how far to the abnormal environment
in which they have been brought up. The point is of special importance in
relation to what has been called the " social problem group." As I have
already said, the defectives tend to form the sediment of society, and Dr.
Lewis has well called the stratum at the bottom the " social problem group."
There you have a group who combine the worst possible inheritance with the
worst possible environment, an environment from which they have no chance
of escape, because it is of their own creation.

What are the conclusions which the Committee base on these findings of
fact? The importance of the hereditary factor is beyond question, but, in the
present state of knowledge, we cannot predict with certainty the results of any
individual union. We might predict with a reasonable degree of probability
the average results of a large number of unions, but it cannot be said with
certainty that the children of any two people must inevitably be defective. If
this conclusion is accepted, it seemed to the Committee to be fatal to compul-
sion. We did not believe that the legislature would feel justified in compelling
any person to submit to sterilisation unless it could be said with certainty that
he or she was incapable of producing normal children. On scientific grounds
the case for compulsion is not established, but, even if it were, there are grave
practical objections to compulsion. In practice, it does not work, as the ex-
perience of the United States has shown. Judged by the number of operations,
sterilisation has been most successful in those States where it is worked on a
voluntary basis. But there is the further objection that compulsion will in-
crease the difficulties of ascertainment by " driving defect underground."
Already there is evidence that one result of compulsory sterilisation in Ger-
many is that many doctors are refusing to give certificates in terms which
would bring the patient within the scope of the sterilisation law.

There are, of course, objections to a voluntary scheme; in this world there
are objections to most proposals. The objections to voluntary sterilisation fall
under four main heads. In the first place, it is said that a voluntary scheme
will fail because no one will volunteer. In the second place, it is argued that
consent is meaningless in relation to defectives. Thirdly, it is urged that a
voluntary scheme is a sham and will end in veiled compulsion. Fourthly, it
is said that defectives are so suggestible that they will volunteer wholesale and
repent afterwards. All these objections contain a certain measure of truth,
though to some extent they cancel out. As I have already said, United States'
experience indicates that a voluntary system is far more effective than a com-
pulsory one. As to the validity of consent, it is not true that consent in the
case of the higher grades is meaningless. High grade defectives may not
understand all the implications of sterilisation, but those who come in contact
with them agree that they are quite capable of understanding what it means
and what its results are. Indeed, one witness who argued most strongly against
the validity of consent, admitted that his patients freely discussed the whole
question. Even now requests for sterilisation from defectives are by no means
infrequent. I agree that veiled compulsion would be deplorable, but we have
suggested every possible safeguard to prevent this. As for the suggestibility of
defectives, they are suggestible, but so are many other people. Provided that
those who object are free to refuse, does it greatly matter if patients accept
the advice of those to whom they naturally look for guidance.

There is nothing sensational or drastic in the report, but it is at least an
attempt to apply the principles of biology to a practical problem of everyday
life. But there is one caveat which I am bound to add. Sterilisation can never
be a substitute for the provision of institutional beds. It may, I hope that it
will, tend to check the increase in the incidence of defect, but it will not enable
local authorities to do without colonies and certified institutions. We have
said this in the strongest terms, and the witnesses with practical knowledge of
mental defectives and their needs were emphatic in confirming this view. In
our view, sterilisation is neither a penalty nor a panacea, and we regret that
in some foreign laws, such as that of Denmark, it has been given a penal
character. The Committee regarded sterilisation as an act of social justice, a
nght which society ought not to refuse, least of all to the carrier of defect. Let
us have every possible safeguard against abuse, but do not let fear of abuse
condemn people to a choice between unnatural abstinence and the risk of
bringing into the world children who can never have a chance, who will be a
misery to themselves and a burden to society.
