omne Aspects of Stammering
=============================

:Author: E. J. Boome, M.B., Ch.B., M.R.C.P., D.P.H.,
Divisional Medical Officer, L.C.C.

Stammering is no longer regarded as a defect of the speech apparatus
but is now definitely recognised as a nervous disorder. 1 could go further and
add that in many cases it amounts to a disorder of the whole personality affect-
ing behaviour, temperament and outlook.

On investigation of cases it will be found in probably every instance that
there is a neuropathic inheritance, by which I do not mean insanity or mental
deficiency but nervous instability in some form or other. Frequently one or
other parent is said to be " nervy " or " highly-strung."

In the Great War cases of shell-shock rarely occurred unless with a similar
neuropathic history, and so may be considered on parallel lines with stam-
mering.

The determining cause of a stammer in many cases has been the repression
of some concrete or imaginary fear or dread which can be dispelled by
discussion.

Puberty is seldom a determining cause since the stammer usually starts
long before. However, it very often results in a definite relapse which may
continue until the disturbing elements have resolved themselves. The acute
self-consciousness induced by the change of voice alone is often enough to
upset the stammerer's nervous equilibrium.

Self-consciousness is in any ease the lot of the stammerer, and it is not the
only symptom adding to his difficulties. He is often emotional and easily
upset, he goes about in continual fear of ridicule, he is accused of being bad-
tempered perhaps, or lazy. Worst of all is the sense of " difference " from his
fellows and the general feeling of inadequacy induced by his inability to express
himself. This sense of inferiority is not confined to his speech; it gradually
colours his whole conception of himself. His appearance and manner are
eloquent of his poor opinion of himself. He may hide himself as much as
possible and never speak unless forced to do so, keeping in the background
and avoiding responsibility, or he may be boastful and noisy, adopting an
attitude of defiance that is just as much an indication of the inferiority sense.
Constant fault-finding and discouragement will very rapidly undermine
a child's self-confidence, and one whose manners, appearance or achievements
arc the subject of continual criticism can hardly fail to develop an inferiority
sense.

Prolonged worries, anxieties and fears, however small, take their toll of
mental energy and sooner or later react dcletcriously. Apart from this the
stress and strain of present-day life is likely to increase any existing nervous
tendency. One cannot help feeling that these conditions may be the factors
underlying the increase in the incidence of stammering. There has certainly
been a greater number of female stammerers recently than was observed ten
to fifteen years ago. Some years back I was informed by a leading Japanese
authority that stammering was practically unknown in his country. A recent
report returns 2% stammerers in the Japanese Army.

Stammerers are never wholly free from fear, although many are so un-
conscious of the emotion as to deny its existence. Seth found at the University
Psychological Clinic for children and juveniles in Edinburgh that it was possible
on the basis of physiological symptoms alone, as revealed by the medical exam-
ination, to be reasonably certain of the presence of chronic anxiety in some
30% of the cases. Dreams and the like raised the proportion of cases showing
some degree of anxiety, i.e., of irrational fear not specifically related to the act
of speech, to about 50%. These figures arc borne out by investigations in
London.

Stammering in the past was frequently regarded as a sign of mental
deficiency, and this view is still held by a small minority to-day. I would say
that stammering is scarcely, if at all, more prevalent among amcnts and de-
ments than it is among the normal population. In the ament, who is at best
an unfinished product, the speech control is deficient in the same way as is his
physical and mental make-up. When stammering exists in the mentally de-
fective it will usually be found in one of the higher grade neurotic types.

One of my duties is to examine these mentally defectives, and in the
course of examining cases of cerebral paralysis, often very high grade mentally,
the general muscular spasm and athetosis aroused is often very noticeable. As
with a stammer, the more difficult the test the more marked the spasm.
Lefthandedness
The connection between lefthandedness and stammering has been over-
stressed. In 1930, in the L.C.C. Annual Report, Miss M. A. Richardson found
that the number of lefthanded children among normal speakers would appear
to be double the number found among stammerers. Dr. Christopher Tibbits,
School Medical Officer for the Nottinghamshire County Council Education
Committee, in a very interesting report (1933) on " Lefthanded Children,"
says: " The proportion of stammerers is therefore greater in the whole school
population than in the left handed fraction of the school population." This
inquiry which is to be continued over a number of years will be followed with
great interest.

Prophylaxis
------------

In any discussion concerning the treatment of stammering, prophylaxis
seems to me to take first place. Many a stammer has been confirmed by the
wrong attitude adopted by parents or teachers, whereas, if rightly treated in
the initial stages it might never have developed. How many children, for in-
stance, develop a species of stammer during the process of learning to talk!
One might call this type of stammering purely physiological. The explanation
of it is simple. The child's mental processes are in advance of his powers of
muscular co-ordination. He will try to speak as quickly as he can think, and
the resulting confusion in the still developing speech mechanism is almost in-
evitably a species of stammer. If undue attention is drawn to the difficulty, or
constant correction or ridicule applied, the child will become nervous. Very
soon the act of speaking will be associated with anxiety and with the fear of
making mistakes. By this time the stammer will have become firmly estab-
lished with its attendant symptoms of tension, over-effort and sense of
inadequacy.

All this might have been averted by rational treatment such as the preven-
tion of undue excitement, plenty of rest and sleep and above all by not focusing
the child's attention on his difficulties.

Treatment
---------

Quite a number of writers on Stammering admit that it is a nervous dis-
order but only offer speech training as a cure.

Stammering is not an organic speech defect. Elsie Fogerty says : " When
a child suffers from a lisp or tongue-tie, he will make the same mistake invari-
ably on the same sound. He should be educated or trained by careful repetition
to make these sounds properly. But the stammerer sometimes sticks on one
letter, sometimes on another and sometimes not at all. Let him go and play
in a room by himself and he will probably talk without any difficulty to him-
self. So, too, in acting or reciting. What we have to do then is not to re-
educate the child in speech, but to take away the difficulties which prevent him
from using his power of speech."

We can say that we have at least some approach to the cure, because we
now know that it is a nervous condition and not an organic defect of the speech
apparatus. This is a great stride after the speech training methods of the past
which usually did not alleviate and frequently aggravated the trouble. The
present therapy tends to ignore the spoken word instead of emphasising the
stammerer's obsession with it by speech gymnastics. Articulatory exercises
may induce a temporary improvement, sometimes amounting to an apparent
cure, but they do not, as a rule, result in a permanent cessation of the trouble.

The reason for this is that such exercises can in no way reach the cause of the
condition, nor can they release the tension caused by the nervous or unstable
state of the patient.

The only thing that can help the sufferer to recover mental and nervous
poise without any danger of increasing his difficulties is muscular relaxation.
There is nothing new in the principles of relaxation. It is an art that
has been known and practised for centuries but it has gradually been lost in
these days of rush, hurry, anxiety and stress. It is an art that needs re-learning
and is essential for the alleviation of the symptoms of highly-strung individuals,
whether they suffer from stammering or some other nervous complaint. Such
patients have to be taught how to " let go," often almost muscle by muscle,
until that state of relaxation is reached when the real work begins. It is at this
stage that the true curative powers of relaxation manifest themselves by a gen-
eral, all-round improvement in the patient. This curative value of relaxation
is unfortunately not sufficiently recognised to-day. It looks so easy when a
class of children is seen practising it, that it is hardly to be wondered at if
many visitors to a Centre for stammerers depart fully convinced that they know
all about so apparently simple a method. The technique of true relaxation
can, however, be very elusive and can only be successfully taught by those who
have personally been through the whole process.

It is not only the stammer itself that derives benefit from relaxation, in
fact it is often the last symptom to yield to treatment. In the earlier stages of
practice the patient usually shows improvement in general health; he finds
himself able to face life more confidently; he worries less over trifles. Children
very often show a marked improvement in school work or in games with the
gradual increase of confidence, concentration and co-ordination. It is remark-
able, too, how they will lose the habit of enuresis (bed-wetting) which has per-
haps been chronic for years. Some have been known to cease the habit after
the first week of attending at a Centre for stammerers. However frequent
the enuresis may have been in the past it always clears up long before the
patient has cured himself of stammering. Similarly, headaches, constipation,
nervous debility, etc., will disappear under the influence of curative relaxation.
The stammer itself, unfortunately, takes much longer to disperse, and
disappointment is often felt at the slow progress of many children. Cases have
been known to make little or no advance over a period of three years or more,
after which time they may make a sudden and complete cure. A whole class
will sometimes " stick " in the most disheartening way for months at a time
only to make startling progress eventually. One has therefore learnt never to
give up a case. Even when the parents do not co-operate it is still possible for
many children to carry the cure through to a finish. Most parents, however
little educated, wish to help, but their manner of helping often leaves so much
to be desired that it remains as much of a lone struggle for the child as if there
were no parental help. Where it is difficult to get into touch with the home
we are able to obtain reports from the social worker who is often instrumental
in persuading the parent to visit the Centre and discuss the case with the
therapist. Even when the parents arc able and willing to co-operate cases can
be very slow, but these are not subject to the constant stream of discouragement
as are their less fortunate brothers.

The question of whole time as opposed to part time treatment for stam-
merers in the schools is one that is sometimes raised. 1 am inclined to think
that the latter is ccrtainly the better. It has been found that excellent results
accrue where the children attend a Centre twice weekly. The child's normal
routine is hardly interfered with and he is not made to feel that he is different
from his fellows. Moreover, where reorganisation of the nervous system is
in progress, it is found that greater advance is made in the intervals than during
the actual time of instruction, and stimulation is far more effective if inter-
mittent than if constant. Travelling to and from the Centre by tram 01* omni-
bus is often a decided help in restoring confidence to a hitherto timid child.
Whole time treatment, on the other hand, tends to separate the individual
too much from his fellows. It provides him with the ideal environment
instead of helping him to adjust to, and to deal with, the existing home con-
ditions. The result of this type of treatment is too often: " I was perfectly
all right while 1 was away but as soon as I came home I found myself stammer-
ing again."

The work carried out at the Centre can be materially helped or hindered
by the attitude of the schoolmaster. A school where the routine and discipline
are maintained without fuss or strain will be able to report an improvement
in any stammerer attending the Centre than will a school where slackness
and over strictness prevail. The schoolmaster who can keep a restful atmos-
phere in his classroom will be doing a great deal to help any stammerer work-
ing under him. He will incidentally find this to be good for the whole class.
I heard recently of several teachers who have tried the experiment of giving up
the first few moments in the classroom to acquiring a sense of ease and rest-
fulness. The results I understand are excellent. The children are attaining
a higher standard of work and the teachers report a distinct decrease of strain
in themselves.

In cases of severe stammering it is generally found advisable to ask that
the child may be excused from all oral work until he has regained some measure
of confidence. This helps to obviate that state of strained anticipation in
which so many stammerers live. They can sit back and divert the nervous
energy hitherto used up by the ever constant dread into more creative channels.
Schoolmasters arc as a rule most anxious to help. I have come across many
instances of a head teacher giving up his room to the child for practice when
lie has known the home conditions to be poor and unlikely to provide any
facilities for curative relaxation.

Educational
------------

One is often asked to advise parents whose child proposes entering for
a scholarship. The parents want guidance as to whether it is worth while, for
instance, or as to whether the strain of working for and taking the examina-
tion is justified. The points to remember are:

1. The stammerer on the whole does well at most examinations as the majority
are of a written and practical character and his speech is therefore no
handicap.

2. The stammerer as a rule reads more than the normal speaker.

3. Though the stammerer wins many scholarships, the nervous strain is great
and lie should be allowed increased periods for relaxation before, during,
and after the examination.

4. Parents and teachers should be warned that, owing to the increased strain
and tension, the stammer itself may tend to become temporarily worse.

5. The stammerer who is not allowed to enter for scholarship examinations
is likely to feci thwarted and to lose confidence and interest. He feels
that he is a " dud " and refuses to take any further part in helping himself.

I consider that the child should be allowed to take the examinaion. His
stammer will not interfere with the written work, and if there is an oral test
examiners should be warned to deal gently with the candidate and to let him
take his time. I remember the case of a medical student who had a bullying
examiner and was unable to utter a sound until another examiner took him in
hand with sympathy and understanding. He was then handed back to the
first man having recovered sufficient poise to satisfy him.

An interesting sidelight 011 the stammerer's temperament is furnished by
comparing his preferences in school subjects with those of normal speakers.
The comparison is made between the evidence set out by Dr. Cyril Burt and
that collected from Centres for Stammerers in London.

Broadly speaking, both normal speaking children and stammerers prefer
the same subjects at the age of seven, but dancing comes first with both boy and
girl stammerers.

At the age of ten the stammerer is becoming more conscious of his dis-
ability and places singing and drill higher than do those on Burt's list. It is
significant too, that higher place is also given to history, literature and scrip-
ture. The attraction of these subjects lies in the opportunities offered for silent
rather than for oral reading.

The difficulty is deeply felt at the age of thirteen when the children are
very self-conscious and when the onset of puberty frequently complicates
matters. Boy stammerers place reading last on the list at this age and girls do
not place it at all. There would seem to be a very definite desire on the part
of both boys and girls to avoid those subjects in which speech plays an import-
ant part.

Looking over the stammerer's preferences?apart from the natural objec-
tion to " making a fool of himself "?there is nothing to indicate that he is
O O t
other than normal in his outlook on the curriculum; neither do his selections
indicate any tendency to mental deficiency.

Familial
-----------
McMinn says: " I am not disposed to believe much in the hereditary trans-
mission of stammering, as I have known several instances where the children
of inveterate stammerers have never had the slightest trace of it." Some years
ago I interviewed a woman with a severe stammer. She had brought her
daughter suffering with chorea to see me. Neither this girl nor her two
O t O O
brothers, aged nine and twelve, had the least trace of a stammer and had always
been normal speakers.

Among 522 eases in the London Centres 179 were found with stammer-
ing 'k in the family," but 1 am inclined to the view that the child inherits
peculiar neuropathic tendencies which predispose him to stammering, rather
than to the view that the actual stammer is inherited.

Enquiries were made during the year 1932-33 into the familial distribu-
tion of stammering incidence. The results are given in the following table.
Of 455 cases investigated, 273 were found to have another member of the
family who stammered, this member being an immediate relation in 174 cases.
<D ?
, en ?
^ ? .5 ? g
S C 1 s
_ .   u i-i 3 ? o O
w PQ O O < P (J ?.3
1 2 | 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
A 50 ! 7 10 1 2 ? ? 2 3 ? 25
13 53 | 3 12 1 5 ? 42 23 21
C 50 | 2 53 71 22 62 20
D 63 | 6 9 4 4? 2 4 8 3 23
E 53 3 82 8?1 1 91 20
F 67 3 8 2 10 1 ? 3 11 2 27
G 57 5 8 5 10 1 1 1 1 1 24
H 62 3 93 6?3 4 75 22
455 32 69 21 52 3 13 19 47 17 182
Looking at the above table it will be seen that the male predominates.
Of 455 consecutive cases 182 had no stammer in the family. With regard to
the nearer relationships in columns (3) and (4) only 101 out of 455 cases
occurred, and this confirms the opinion that stammering is not usually in-
herited. Columns (7), (8), (9) and (10) are much more in agreement with
the view that the child inherits peculiar neuropathic tendencies which pre-
dispose him to stammering, rather than that the actual stammer is inherited.
Columns (3), (4), (5) and (6) (174 cases) are rather against the view of Forshaw
who positively asserts that imitation and not heredity is the essential factor;
but as Catherine Osborne says: " If imitation were as baneful as it is said to
be, the whole community would long ago have lapsed into hopeless stam-
mering."

CONCLUSIONS'"
1. Stammering is a nervous disorder.
2. It is definitely curable.
3. Lcfthandcdness as a factor has been over-stressed.
4. Stammerers arc frequently above the average in intelligence.
5. Stammering is not usually directly inherited.
6. Part time treatment is found to be more suitable than whole time.
One is glad to see that local authorities are being gradually awakened to
the importance of providing treatment for the stammerers under their charge.
One hopes that the day will come when no stammerer will have to forego
treatment for lack of suitable provision.

REFERENCES
-----------

Prof. Cyril Bukt, " General Preferences of School Children," Report of the Consultative
Committee 011 the Primary School, 1931.
Elsie Fogerty, " Stammering," London, 1930.
Sir Frederick Menzies, K.B.E., L.C.C. Annual Reports, 1930, 1931 and 1933.
Fred. J. Schonell, " The Relation between Defective Speech and Disability in Spelling,"
British Journal of Educational Psychology, June, 1934.
George Setii, " The Problem of Stuttering?the present position," Edinburgh Medical
Journal, August, 1934.
Dr. Cristopher Tidbits, " Left Handedness," S.M.O. Report, Notts. C.C. Education Com-
mittee, 1933.
Boome and Richardson, " The Nature and Treatment of Stammering," London, 1931.
