An Experiment in Boarding Quit
================================

By V. M. BURDETT
Organising Secretary, Suffolk Mental Welfare Association
The Boarding Out of Cases from the Suffolk County Mental Hospital
Was first started in this County in July, 1933, under the auspices of the Central
Association for Mental Welfare, who through the generosity of Lady Darwin
have been enabled to make the Scheme financially possible during the first
experimental year.
In starting a Scheme such as this it is naturally imperative to obtain the
co-operation of the Medical Superintendent and of the Mental Hospital Com-
mittee. We are fortunate in Suffolk in having a Medical Superintendent who
ls ready to give every assistance by choosing the right type of patient, and to
give his sympathetic help and advice in any difficulty, and a Committee who
are far-sighted enough to realise the financial advantages of such a Scheme.
After Conferences between Miss Fox, the Medical Superintendent, the Chair-
man of the Suffolk Mental Welfare Association, and myself, a preliminary
Scheme was drawn up. This Scheme was submitted to the Mental Hospital
Committee for their approval, and in July, 1933, the first list of suitable patients
was received from the Medical Superintendent. These patients were all housed
at a Public Assistance Institution, in an isolated corner of West Suffolk, where
a certain number of patients are received from the Mental Hospital.
34
MENTAL WELFARE
In order to get to know the patients, and to learn all we could from the
officials of the Institution as to their individual peculiarities, my Assistant and
myself visited the Institution and spent some hours interviewing each of the
sixteen patients. Thirteen of these patients were women and they were brought
into a room singly to see us. They were all elderly, and were mostly rather
senile, but some had fixed but harmless delusions. Their ages ranged from 56
to 83 years, and the majority had been in an Institution for from 10 to 30 years.
At first they appeared suspicious of us, and we gathered that they had heard
a rumour of their impending uprooting, and after living an uneventful life in
an isolated Institution for so long, they were fearful of the unknown, and
had some extraordinary ideas as to what was to become of them. Some seemed
to have the idea that they were to be precipitated into some employment. These
wistfully suggested to us that they considered they were too old for work and
we could seek for labourers elsewhere. A few would have nothing whatever
to say to us, and our remarks were received in stony silence. We realised that
these patients were mostly the ones who very seldom, if ever, had a friend to
visit them and they were resentful of being disturbed from their usual afternoon
routine. I must confess that we came away from these interviews somewhat
disheartened, and uncertain as to the future of the venture.
Some of the patients were quite useful in the Institution, but owing to
their advanced age, the majority had not been capable of much more than
handing round the meals to those too infirm to help themselves, or in doing
a little polishing or dusting. The first to be interviewed was a woman of 72
years, and stone deaf. We were told that she was always contented and happy
if allowed to be continually occupied in scrubbing and cleaning floors. So
strenuously did she work that she would wear down two scrubbing brushes
each week. She has been placed with a trained nurse who has a little imbecile
boy under her Guardianship. The woman has taken upon herself to look
after this child, and delights in keeping him as clean as her floors. She lives
in a world of phantasy, and being unable by reason of her deafness to have
contact with those around her she will talk happily to her " unseen " children.
This woman's breakdown seems to date from the time her youngest child was
severely burnt, and thought by her to have died. It almost seems as though
the presence of the imbecile boy has restored to the woman someone on whom
she can lavish the affection she was unable to give her own child. She has
also developed an unexpected delight in flowers, and shares her Guardian's
love of gardening, and will follow her about with a dog-like devotion. Similar
in type was a married woman aged 60 years whom we next interviewed. This
woman, who appeared to be of a rather solitary type, we have placed with the
young wife of an Estate groundsman. This young couple live in a comfort-
able cottage in a village within easy distance of a town. They have one little
girl of two years of age, and take an interested part in all that goes on in the
neighbourhood. The patient has become very devoted to the family, and is
made much of by the neighbours. She has settled quite naturally into the
life of the village, and now speaks regretfully of the years she spent in the
MENTAL WELFARE 35
Institution when she might have been living in her new-found home. A
woman of 61 years who has a fixed delusion that she is superior to all around
her is placed under the care of a nurse in the country, where there is a good
garden and summer house. The woman is able to sit in the garden nearly
all the year round and is kept occupied in making really beautiful embroidery
work. With her we have placed an old lady of 83 years who is able to potter
about the garden, or to sit contentedly listening to her companion as she prattles
?f her exalted life. Both these women have put on weight and improved
physically. In the same house is a woman of 55 years who has been in the
Mental Hospital for 30 years. She is almost certainly feeble-minded, and an
indefatigable worker. These patients have a sitting room devoted entirely to
their use. In this room there is keen competition as to who can acquire the
greatest number of photographs, the portrait itself seems to have little signifi-
cance. In a house where the Guardian already has a feeble-minded woman on
licence from an Institution we have placed a woman of 59 years. This woman,
who is of a kind and friendly disposition, is a great talker, in a slow and
monotonous voice, with many repetitions. This does not weary the feeble-
minded woman, who is fascinated by the fairy stories told to her. The Mental
hospital patient likewise delights in having the attentions of the feeble-minded
woman. Both these patients have crippled feet and are unable to walk far, so
many hours are spent sitting in armchairs on either side of the kitchen fire. In
another house we have placed a woman of 64 years with an elderly but active
c?uple. These old people lead a very happy existence together in a comfortable
cottage home. The patient, who had been in the Institution for 28 years,
seems to have brightened up considerably, and whereas in the Institution she
could hardly be persuaded to speak above a whisper and in monosyllables, she
now becomes alert and animated when describing her first visit to " Wool-
Worth " and such-like places. Nothing is too good for this patient in the eyes
her Guardian and she shares in all the amusements and life of the family.
With a woman who works her own small holding we have placed a patient of
71 years. The Guardian has had much nursing experience, and in spite of her
many and varied occupations, she seems to have a flair for caring for elderly
people. She has made her old patient wonderfully happy by giving her the
care of the chickens. A great part of her day is spent in sitting by the fire,
nursing the cat in the old-fashioned farmhouse kitchen between the intervals
?f running out to see that her chickens are still safe. She is made much of by
all the village, and is entirely devoted to her Guardian who cares for her like
a Httle child.
Nine patients have been placed in homes direct from the Mental Hospital,
pf these, one old lady of 74 years, is under the care of a retired nurse who also
as the care of three mentally deficient girls. This Guardian has a large house
standing alone and surrounded by common land, and both she and her daughter
nave a happy knack of entering wholeheartedly into the lives of their patients,
jmd in keeping them happily occupied. The Hospital patient is deeply deluded,
ut is usually of a happy nature. She is not strong physically but is kept in-
36 MENTAL WELFARE
terested in making rag dolls. Owing to their original appearance we have
little difficulty in selling the dolls when the patient can be persuaded to part
with them. Around these dolls she weaves endless stories which are a never-
failing source of pleasure to the feeble-minded girls. In the same house is a
woman of 64 years from the Mental Hospital. This woman is given to fits of
deep depression, but she is now more cheerful and is given a certain amount
of responsibility. She is capable of such jobs as taking one feeble-minded girl
at a time to the village to have her hair cut. She is grateful for this liberty
and it tends to keep her happy and contented. Another woman is placed with
a woman who has had long experience in nursing elderly people in Homes for
the Aged. Here again there is a feeble-minded girl in the house. This girl
has become the special responsibility of the Hospital patient who before her
breakdown had been in good domestic service. She is allowed to take the feeble-
minded girl to church alone, and to see that she is properly clothed. It requires
much tact on the part of the Guardian to remove the vivid creations of ribbon
which appear from time to time on the girl's hat and frock, but both patients
remain extraordinarily happy. At times the Hospital patient speaks wistfully
of her dread of waking up in the morning to find it is all a dream, and she will
discover she is back in an Institution Ward, but she is gradually realising that
her life away from the Institution is an established fact.
From the foregoing notes it will be seen that in practically every case,
Guardians have been taken from women who in addition to being capable,
and cheerful, have had definite nursing experience, or are used to dealing with
elderly people. One or two have held responsible positions in Public Assistance
Institutions, and some are district or Hospital nurses who have married, and
find that the care of their homes does not absorb all their energies. With one
such nurse we have placed an educated married woman, who before marriage
was a School Teacher. This woman has very definite delusions which do not,
however, interfere with her everyday life, and she is taking an intense interest
in teaching the two year old daughter of her Guardian. She is allowed to take
the child for short walks in the village alone, and she has become so engrossed
and interested in the life of the family in which she lives that the delusions
seem to show themselves with much less frequency. In many cases it has been
possible to use Guardians who are already caring for one or two mentally
deficient children or women, and this experiment has proved very successful.
The feeble-minded enjoy the society of the often very humorous Mental
Hospital patients. The humour is usually fairly obvious, and easily under-
stood by the feeble-minded and likewise the Hospital patient appreciates the
little attentions such as threading needles, or cleaning shoes, which the feeble-
minded like to do for them. It was felt at first that the finding of suitable
Guardians would be a difficulty, but this has not been so in this County, and
indeed our supply of Guardians is far in excess of the demand. Having success-
fully placed a case, we are constantly confronted with a number of relatives
and friends of the Guardians who are eager to have a similar type of patient
to live with them.
MENTAL WELFARE 37
1 have spoken only of some of our successes, but naturally there must be
some patients, who after so many years of Institution life cannot adjust them-
selves to living in the greater freedom of the outside world. We have had to
return three women to the Hospital for this reason, but as all these cases were
?ut less than four weeks I think we may fairly conclude that the patients now
under care, after a period of from 4 to 9 months, can be considered to have
adjusted themselves to their new surroundings. The failure of those patients
who returned was due to different causes. In the first case the one desire of
the patient seemed to be to turn on every gas and water tap at every available
opportunity, and in addition her language was said to be corrupting the neigh-
bourhood. This woman was 70 years of age, and had evidently lived a very
rough existence before her admission to the Institution. Gas taps were a novelty
to her which she could not understand, and swearing was just a long-standing
habit. Another woman who had expressed a desire to be allowed to work on
a farm was placed in a small farm house, where she settled happily for a short
while, but then seemed to gradually realise that she was surrounded by open
country and few restrictions. For what appeared a love of exploring, she
would wander away, and the Guardian felt that the responsibility of her was
too great. The third patient to be returned to Hospital had a sudden and un-
expected mental lapse.
So far we have had little experience in placing the men patients. Three
elderly men from the same Public Assistance Institution from which the women
^ere taken, were placed under the care of a woman of 40 years of age who had
had long experience of nursing old and infirm men and women. Unfortunately
this woman became seriously ill and it was necessary to return the men to the
Mental Hospital. During the three months under private care these old men
settled very happily. They were too infirm to do much, and would spend
practically the whole day sitting in the sun. One had not spoken for many
years, but was obedient and responded to any kindness shown to him. The
second was a depressed, anxious type, but willing to follow the lead of the
others in everything. The third and eldest became a great favourite, as he was
^Ways cheerful, and became greatly devoted to his Guardian. He refused to
eave the house or garden without her, and would obey her implicitly. Clay
Ptpes were introduced for these old people, and were a source of much amuse-
ment to them, and also a means of administering punishment. A pipe was
stopped for any misdemeanour and was a certain corrective.
The success of the Boarding Out Scheme seems to depend very largely
?h fitting the right patient under the care of a Guardian who is likely to give
the patient the particular attention and supervision that his individual need
emands. We have found it necessary in one or two cases to change the patient
rom the care of one Guardian to another who is more likely to understand his
peculiarities. It is, for instance, useless to place a woman who is only happy
^hen she is working off her energies in some active occupation with a Guardian
Who prefers to do her own housework while the patient sits and sews. We
aye tried to help the patient to fit into the family life of their Guardians by
38 MENTAL WELFARE
providing them with suitable clothing, which will not make them conspicuous
as coming from an Institution. In this we have been much helped by the
Matron of the Public Assistance Institution from which the majority of the
patients have come. She has been most helpful in selecting the outfit of each
patient, to try and provide clothing which would give the patients a sense of
self-respect, and well being, and which on washing day the Guardians would
not object to display on their clothes line. These clothes were not at first
altogether appreciated by the older patients, who seemed to consider there was
something slightly indecent about the shorter and narrower skirts, and the
woollen underwear provided for them. To many of them now their clothing
is one of the attractions of living outside an Institution.
Whenever possible the patients are encouraged to take an interest in
some handicraft. Materials are provided and if they are capable of making
saleable articles, they are given any profits on the sale of goods, which they can
spend on stamps or sweets. We find that many of them have failing eyesight
and the majority have so far only accomplished rather coarse sewing such as
hemming dusters, or making kettle holders, but some bright wool work is being
introduced. The average maintenance fee allowed to each Guardian is 16/-
a week but this varies slightly according to the type of home, and the amount
of supervision required by the patient. Each patient is provided with an Out-
fit when they leave the Hospital, and after the first quarter the sum of 1/6 a
week is allowed for the upkeep of clothing.
At Christmas time we thought that the patients who had lived together
for so many years might like to meet, and it was suggested that those living
within reasonable distance of each other should join a few mentally deficient
girls at a Christmas tea. Rather to our surprise, only two Hospital patients
accepted the invitation, the excuse given by the others was to the effect that
having broken loose from the Institution they did not wish to renew the
acquaintance of anyone connected with their old life. They seem pleased to
know that their friends of former days are as fortunate as themselves, but seem
quite detached from them.
The experience of dealing with these old people is vastly interesting.
Their gratitude is so spontaneous, and genuine, and one cannot but be struck
by the gradual, but very perceptible clearing of the mind of many of these
people, who after years of comfortable vegetation have evolved into a world
where they are a single unit, and as such receive personal consideration. The
relatives of the patients are perhaps equally grateful. Many of the
patients have not been visited for years, partly owing to the inacces-
sibility of the Institution in which many of them lived, and partly owing
to the disinclination to visit a relative detained in a Mental Hospital. It is quite
astonishing to find how many relatives, who up to now have been unheard of,
have turned up to visit our patients, and how interestedly, and thankfully they
speak of all that has been done for them. The visits of these relatives have
added yet another interest in the patient's life.
MENTAL WELFARE 39
All the administrative work, such as the finding of Guardians, the trans-
Port, and supervision of patients, and the maintenance payments, are carried
out directly from the office of the Suffolk Mental Welfare Association. The
guardians have the full assurance that they will get prompt help in any
difficulty, and if necessary the patient will be removed from their care within
a tew hours. From the point of view of the Guardian this confidence is prob-
ably the best incentive for undertaking the care of a Mental Hospital patient.
am very gratified that I, and the Staff who work with me, have had the oppor-
tunity of working out this most interesting experiment, and I confidently
ope that the work entrusted to us in this County, may be the forerunner of
carding Out Schemes in other areas, with the same encouraging results.
