No Title
=========

A commentary on this Report was published in the January number of
Mental Welfare, but as the Report had only just been issued it was not possible
then to give the views of the C.A.M.W. on the findings of the Committee.
Since then the Report has been before the Medical Committee and before
a special committee on sterilisation composed both of lay and medical members
?f the Council. Their Recommendations were submitted to, and adopted by
special meeting of the Executive Council held on March 4th, 1934, when the
blowing Resolutions were passed: ?
jj That the Council of the C.A.M.W. are in general agreement with the recommendations
(( contained in the Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilisation and are
2 << PrePared to give support to suitable parliamentary action."
' u That the Council of the C.A.M.W. are not prepared to support any attempt to restrict
the sterilisation to be authorised by the new legislation to mental defectives alone."
P The special Committee on Sterilisation was re-appointed and this further
Solution designed to give effect to Resolution 1 was passed: ?
(( That the Council empower the Special Committee on Sterilisation to take steps,
<( together with other bodies, for the appointment of an ad hoc Committee to carry out
(t the recommendations of the Report on Sterilisation on the general lines of
Resolutions 1 and 2."
Meetings of the special Committee have since been held, and informal
/scussions have taken place with various Associations and it was decided that
e C.A.M.W. should send out invitations to those organisations whose work
^?uld be definitely affected by the adoption of the recommendations of the
rock Report asking them to appoint three representatives to serve on a Joint
onimittee to give effect to these recommendations. The first meeting; of the
I Hint- . . . . ^
c Committee will be held on May 4th next by which time it is hoped that
answers will have been received from practically all the Associations concerned.
46 MENTAL WELFARE
The decision in Resolution i was not reached without very mature delib-
eration by the Committees and by the Executive Council and without a full
realisation of the gravity of the issues concerned. It was recognised by the
Chairman, Sir Leslie Scott, and by the Council that Resolution i, expressing
the general agreement of the C.A.M.W. Council with the Brock Report might
not be acceptable to some of the organisations represented on the Council, but
the Resolution was carried by so overwhelming a majority as to leave no doubt
of the views of the Council. At the same time its actual wording allows liberty
for the future discussion of the detailed recommendations of the Report. These
will come up for close consideration by the Joint Committee and if it be decided
to embody them in a Bill they will be referred to the Constituent bodies for
final approval.
Evelyn Fox.
Motion in the House of Commons
On Wednesday, February 28th, Mr. Hugh Molson, Member for Don-
caster (U), moved: ?
" That this House considers that the facts set out in the Report of the Departmental
" Committee on Sterilisation indicate a state of affairs calling for action, and respectfully
" requests His Majesty's Government to give immediate consideration to the unanimous
" recommendation of the Committee in favour of legislation permitting voluntary
" sterilisation in certain classes of cases."
Mr. Molson remarked that a unanimous report had been presented on
what was admittedly a most controversial subject, recommending that volun-
tary sterilisation should be legalised subject to certain safeguards. He spoke
at length on the volume of evidence both in this country and abroad which
tends to show that there was a likelihood of mental defect being transmitted,
and of the dangers of the transmission of certain physical disabilities.
Wing Commander James, Member for Wellingborough (U), seconded
the motion but was interrupted for the consideration of a private Bill which
came up for a second reading.
Mr. Molson's speech was an interesting contribution to the discussions
which have taken place on this subject, and it is to be reprinted shortly in the
form of a leaflet. Copies will be obtainable through the C.A.M.W. Price id.
each.
