Mantal Hygiene in the Community
================================

:Author: Book Reviews and Abstracts
:Author: lara Bassett. Macmillan. 1934. 15/-net.
TVii
acco ls ^00-page book contains a detailed
t0 m n|. mental hygiene and its application
Sical a^' soc^? intellectual, legal, theolo-
acti '. 1.n(lUstrial and recreational, among other,
but 1 leS*- comprehensive a study can have
of ?ne a*m, " to show the breadth and scope
hygiene " as set forth in the intro-
Jtg ^ 9^aPter.

t? Purpose is that of a reference book
iilg ^ those who are interested in organis-
bratich *mProving ^e facilities in their own
introd Wor^ may turn. No new material is
arid a UCe^' existing material is correlated
aCce r.^anSetl in such a manner as to be easily
reader anc^ reaclily digested by the casual
As ?

***** be expected from a non-medical
fyin ' *he medical section is the least satis-
With ' while much of what the writer says
hygjere^ard to paucity of teaching on mental
true i*t iln medical schools is unfortunately
tribut*1 01 110 menti?n is made of the con-
t? theIOn medical profession has made
giene study and advancement of mental hy-
The uring the present century.

?u theSec^on on mental hygiene and nursing,
and mVk f ^anc^? is particularly adequate,
Who a * We^ reac^ anc^ utilised by those
traini re resP?nsible for the education and
trast *he nursing profession. The con-
c?ntroll VCen t^le handling of a patient under
h?Hie /if k?sPital conditions and in his own
to what efe t^le nurse must be able to adapt
bought1S ?^en a difficult family group is well
Who f0ii?U^ ail(^ emphasises the need, by those
Under . ?W. ^le nursing profession, for a real
behind tUdinS the mechanisms which lie
The man relationships.

close c aUthor
rightly stresses the need for
*)sychiat~?*5era^on between social agency and
?ress a r*c chnic if mental hygiene is to pro-
is that n per^aPs the best chapter in the book
^uency?U mental hygiene in relation to delin-
favo aUC* t-^le ^aw' *n which the arguments
Uient r-lfv, *ndividualised study and treat-
theorie ? than the handling of offenders on
*?rth. revenge and punishment is set
cati0n , conception of the clinical classifi-
Ccntre for delinquents is a significant
one, stressing as it does the theory that the
" sentence " should be based upon the thera-
peutic needs of each case with the necessity
for knowledge rather than force as the decid-
ing factor in the solution of individual pro-
blems.

The treatise forms a practical, scientific and
constructive statement of the present position
with regard to mental hygiene and is eminently
readable. It is limited in one direction only
in its usefulness in that it deals solely with
conditions and facilities as they exist in the
United States of America, and to that extent
is of less value to workers in countries such as
Great Britain where working conditions are so
different.

With the exception of a few carelessly
written passages such as that on page 46 which
contains a series of split infinitives, the book
is written in a clear, flowing style, is easy to
read, and owing to its freedom from scientific
terms will be readily followed by the general
reader.

Although full attention is paid to the theory
and practice of mental hygiene as a science,
the importance of vocational fitness, selection
and adequate training of workers in this field
is never overlooked. The general impression
is that of a writer who, although she has
turned to many different authorities for her in-
formation, is also expressing views which are
based upon a wide personal experience.

Each chapter concludes with an appendix
in the form of suggestions for the scientific de-
velopment of mental hygiene in that particular
subject, and should prove a valuable aid to
those who are undertaking reorganisation and
development of existing facilities.

The book is one which should find its place
on the shelves of every well-equipped sociolo-
gical library.
M.I3.H.

A Point Scale of Performance Tests. Vol.
II. The Process of Standardisation.
By Grace Arthur, Ph.D., Psychologist, St.
Paul Child Guidance Clinic. The Common-
wealth Fund, and Humphrey Milford, Ox-
ford University Press. 1933. Price 6/6 net.
This volume concludes Dr. Arthur's valu-
able contribution to the measurement of I.Q.
by use of performance tests. The use of the
scale has demonstrated that intelligence as
measured by the Binet scales can also be
measured by performance tests.

The point scale is derived from the follow-
ing performance tests : ?
Form I. Knox Cube I.
Seguin Form Board.
Two-figure Form Board.
Casuist Form Board.
Manikin and Feature Profile.
Mare and Foal.
Healy Picture Completion I.
Porteus Maze (including Adult
Mazes I and II).
Kohs Block Designs.
Knox Cube II.
Form II. Knox Cube I (tapping from left to
right).
Seguin Form Board (inverted).
Triangle Test (Gwyn).
Five-figure Form Board (Pater-
son).
Ship Picture Form Board
(Glueck).
Healy Picture Completion II.
Porteus Maze (rotated 90 deg. to
the left).
Kohs Block Design (inverted).
Knox Cube II.
These tests are standarised on more than
2,000 children, ages 5 to 15 years. The work
of standardisation extended over a period of
two years. For determining whether the
groups represented a sampling of an average
American population, the 2,000 children were
classified according to the occupation of the
fathers, and compared with known norms.
The various performance tests were examined
in great detail for the most discriminative scor-
ing procedure, and data is supplied in the
present volume which should be useful to
other psychologists who are interested in the
discriminative value of these tests. The
volume is a veritable mine of information on
the matters just recorded, as may be judged
from its 43 tables.

Five hundred and seventy-four of the sub-
jects were also tested for Binet mental age, and
the final point scales were compared with these
Binet measurements. The point scales were
reported in Volume I, but are again printed in
the present volume. The standardisation for
Form II is admitted to be less satisfactory than
that for Form I.

Correlation tables, for correlation betvvcc11
Binet I.Q. and Point Scale Performance,
given in detail for each chronological age. *
is a pity, however, that the actual producf'
moment correlations are not reported. ThlS
seems to be the only weakness in the other'
wise excellent record of standardisation datfl;
The final Chapter (VI) gives a short accoU^
of a study on the race and sex different
shown in the comparison between the Bioe
and the Point Scale Performance I.Q. measufe'
ments. The racial differences are only sugg'f6'
tive, for a group of 18 Italians, and 38 JeW^
children. The Jewish children succeed bette
at the Binet Simon than at the Performance
whereas the opposite is the case of the Itali3'1
children. There are no significant sex difie^,
ences for the Performance tests for the 2,0^
data, except a repetition of the well-kno^11
fact that girls earn slightly better ratings 011
the Binet scale, on the average, than do boy5'
Any differences between boys and girls on t*1
Point Scale Performance test are probably
to this fact.

The whole is a thorough exposition of $
standardisation procedure followed by
Arthur and Dr. Herbert Woodrow. It is _
book of facts only, which, of course, can
peal only to those interested in test constr^0
tion and standardisation.

W.S.
The Oxton Group Intelligence Test. Ve
vised by G. Perrie Williams, M.A., D.L1*'
G. G. Harrap and Co., Ltd. Forms 6d. e&c
25 for 6/-, 100 for 21/-. Key 1/6 net.
The test is apparently meant for juiU0
children, although this is a matter for surinisej
since there is no information to this effect 0
the test itself. It has five subtests, and ta^
half-an-hour to apply. Perhaps its most cO&
mendable feature, if not its only one, is
three of the subtests are comprised of pict
test-units.

Page I, a sheet 10 by 16 inches, requires tP
usual information as to the child's name,
and school. The page might have been put
much more use by providing, for install
forepractice in one or more of the subtest'
Pages 2 and 3 contain 20 picture test-it^
(questions) of a simple classification kin j
Thus, in one test-unit, a drawing is shown 0
a beet-root, and the child has to select ff0,i
eight drawings two which are " most like
I

njp eet-root?in this case a drawing of a tur-
Su^and one of a malformed carrot or parsnip,
but GSi 0n PaS'es 3 and 4, is again pictorial,
Seri 0n, y ^as seven test-units of a selective
to - ^111(i- The subtest is far from satisfac-
niisn' i know it to be unreliable, and is easily
Uriit ersto?d by children. The seven test-
0rci S ar*r too few, and they appear not to be in
an^ g ^ difficulty. Subtest III, on pages 5
-j,, > ako pictorial, is in analogous form.

Pictoi"ial tests may appeal to
illan cmldren, but they have been shown,
Verba1 ^ears. aS'?> to offer no advantages over
ligen in point of measurement of '' intel-
cnSadCe- ' They suffer, indeed, from the same
buiarVan^aSes as verbal tests. There is a voca-
Suvl P^tures as well as of words.

$trike CS^ ^ merely requires the child to
U^b ?U* largest number in a line of six
test \^n" ^ncler most circumstances this sub-
t^t'sfi ^ave a g-saturation (an index of the
gible *ness to measure intelligence) of negli-
grouna?10Unt' more especially as applied in this
is Sll?, es*- On the same page (page 7) there
0ne es* V, a verbal selective opposites test,
its on ?r ? *s S'iven, and the child has to select
^Qposite from a list of five words.

The 3n?ri?s or reliability figures are given,
as a minutes' testing time is for the test
Way u, e' That is, the children work their
niqu r?ugh the test as they list. This tech-
in his'>aSe^ a^so ky Professor G. H. Thomson
Ulend ?V0rt^lumberland tests, has little to com-
fav0llr ' and very much can be said in its dis-
dardio'j ^e tests might, I suggest, be stan-
Use ;cv ^or 9 to 10 year olds. Otherwise its
ls hmited.

r W.S.
LEPt p
With ATE Speech. By Joan H. van Thai.
Alleri u11 appendix on kindred disorders.
, n & Unwin. 3/-net. 1934.
pi
Cleft Palate Speech is, un-
^terest ^' ll0^ one universal interest, such
chiefly as exists probably being confined,
therap-V to surgeons, dentists and speech
^atrtip Cac^ wh?m P^a^ their part in the
the o-ennt this distressing condition. Among
rec?gniGral Pu^ci the majority would not
hear^ speech for what it is, even if they
haj' Xvith the possible exception of a few
' ^vithC encountered some unfortunate person
?? roof to his mouth "?the popular
l01i of this defect. The only people
who are, naturally, deeply concerned are those
who are actually in contact with such a case,
either among their friends or in their own
family.

This organic defect is, happily, compara-
tively rare, although one cannot give statistics
to show how often it occurs. Where such a
condition is present, the speech is very ugly,
and, often, completely unintelligible to those
unaccustomed to it, and anybody who has
dealings with such cases would do any-
thing within his power to help them to
correct it. It is not only a great handi-
cap in every-day intercourse, but also in the
way of finding employment, which is a serious
consideration in these days of reduced incomes.
What is just as important, in a different way,
is the psychological effect, upon an individual,
of being unable to speak normally. If this in-
ability is not removed, his whole mental and
psychological development is liable to be
affected. It is, therefore, urgent that speech
training should be given as soon as the child
is old enough to benefit, and such training
should be in the hands of an expert who has
made a special study of this particular branch
of the subject. There may, however, be child-
ren who live far from a town and out of reach
of such an expert. In any case, the expert will
probably see a child two or three times a week
only and for short periods. Is he to continue
to speak in the old, faulty way between these
visits, and is the child who is out of the ex-
pert's reach to have no chance of improving
his speech ? The answer to these questions is
that much may be done by the parent 01*
teacher, or by the sufferer himself, and it is
to help these people that Miss van Thai has
written her book. She has specialised, for
many years, in the treatment of Cleft Palate
Speech and can, therefore, speak with author-
ity. The book is excellent?simply written, so
that it may be understood by anybody. She
has deliberately avoided the use of technical
terms. It is divided into four chapters : ?
1. A description of what Cleft Palate is.
2. How Speech is affected.

3. Treatment (with a table of exercises).
4. Advice to Pupils, Parents and Teachers.
There are, also, two short appendices, one
on kindred disorders, and one describing a
simple apparatus used in the treatment and
devised by Miss Elsie Fogerty, who contributes
a Foreword to the book.

The first chapters, which give a description
of Cleft Palate and explain why it should affect
speech, also tell how surgical or dental treat-
ment may be given, and ably answer the
anxious question of parents as to " What can
be done." Without surgical or dental treat-
ment first, it is not possible to improve the
speech to any great extent.

The exercises, given in later chapters, are in-
teresting and very well graded. They really go
back to the foundations of speech and keep in
mind the precept, quoted by the author, that
we must walk before we can run, gradually
working up to more advanced practice. The
three " Slogans " express what is required,
but might, perhaps, have been worded in a
way which would appeal more to a child and
so remain in his memory more vividly. Slogan
3 is the best in this respect:?" Keep your
mouth shut, unless you are putting something
in oil letting something out," but Slogan 1 : ?
" You must practise at least twenty minutes
every day " might be expressed in a more in-
teresting form. We do not altogether agree
with the author's definition of a continuant
and a fricative as the same thing (on page 61).
That, however, is a minor point, and one which
would not trouble the average reader. It does
not, in any way, detract from the merit of the
book as a whole, which is excellent and to be
very warmly recommended to all who are in-
terested in the subject of Cleft Palate Speech.
D. M. Fleming.

Social Work for Mental Hospitals and
Out-Patient Clinics. By St. Clair Town-
send. Published by Child Guidance Council,
Woburn House, Upper Woburn Place,
W.C.I. Price 3d.

With the passing of the Mental Treatment
Act, and the subsequent developments in the
establishment of Out-Patient Clinics and the
increase in early and voluntary treatment, the
necessity for specially trained psychiatric
social workers is being increasingly recognised.
Miss Townsend has in this pamphlet given a
brief but comprehensive account of the work
there is to be done by the social worker both
in Out-Patient Clinics and Mental Hospitals.
Cases illustrating the valuable assistance which
can be given by a worker are quoted. The
question of the type of worker, most fitted to
undertake work of this nature is also deal
with and stress is laid on the need for sped3
training.

Social welfare organisations, whether direct'
ly connected with mental health work or n?
will find this an informative pamphlet whic.
will help them in answering enquiries on thlS
branch of social work.

The Care and Training of Mentally DefE1^
tive Children. By Jennie Benson. LaW,cfi
Local Government Publications, 1934. 3/
net.

As we go to press we have received a copy
of this book, the publication of which we ha\c
awaited with great interest. Unfortunately*}
is too late to include a review of it with
issue but it will appear in our July number.
