The Chances of Morbid Inheritance
==================================

MENTAL WELFARE
:Type: Book Reviews and Abstracts
:Author: various authors, edited by C. P. Blacker,
M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P., Sec. of the Eugenics
Society. H. K. Lewis and Co., Ltd. Pages
xii and 450. Illustrations and charts.

Demy 8vo. Price 15s.
The volume is a symposium by 19 contribu-
tors, each specialists in diseases generally rec-
ognised as depending in whole or in large part
on hereditary endowment. This work, al-
though designed to meet the requirements of
the general practitioner, deserves recognition
and study by all those whose work lies within
the realm of medical science. Since increas-
ing requests dealing with eugenic prognosis
are likely to be made in the future, a complete
production of this kind, although by no means
professing to be free from the uncertainties
and difficulties so manifest in such a subject,
should be of great service to those who have
concern for the future of humanity, nationally
and internationally. Enlightenment of our
profession on a subject of such importance is
the best means of enlightening the various
grades of society and thereby developing in
time a eugenic conscience, especially amongst
those whose very fertility is becoming almost
a menace to civilisation.

As is rightly pointed out in the course of the
introduction by Sir Humphry Rolleston, Presi-
dent of the Eugenics Society, the science of
eugenics has been brought into prominence by
the alteration in the birth-rate due to the pro-
gressive adoption of birth-control which, with
the stress of economic conditions, has materi-
ally disturbed the balance between the well-
endowed stocks and the defective in mind and
body, the latter group now preponderating.
The advance of medical science has likewise
greatly contributed to disturb the balance of
nature by increasing the survival rate of the
unfit and it is the aim of eugenics to counter-
act these influences which are combining so
harmfully if not disastrously against the fur-
ther development of modern civilisation. The
need is urged for close investigation of a vast
amount of available data, thereby enhancing
the accuracy with which a medical man could
give a eugenic prognosis. How this aim
could best be achieved is outlined, the fore-
most amongst the collaborators being the gen-
eral practitioner.

Towards the end the book is supplied with
an appendix giving analyses of pedigrees by
Prof. Hogben, a glossary of genetic and psy*
chiatric terms and a clearly written schedule
for recording pathological pedigrees.

Since this work is strong meat even fQl
those moderately versed in a difficult and Pr0^j
lematic subject and is necessarily packed fu*
of detail, space will only permit of reference
to certain sections without implying, however*
that those omitted are any less interesting ?r
useful.

The book firstly introduces the reader to the
genetic principles underlying inheritance; thlS
chapter by Prof. Ruggles Gates, although 1,1
the main clearly expressed, suffers from the
complexity of the subject. His general re-
marks emphasise the increasing gravity of
task in combating the problems now inflicted
on civilisation by the progressive success 01
medicine in overcoming the symptoms of in'
herited diseases. By means of graphs a11
tables the various modes of inheritance are
shown. It would, however, have been of grea
advantage if diagrammatic drawings had bed1
added of the exact behaviour of the chrofflO'
somes in mitosis, of the important process 01
maturation of the germ cells and of the subse*
quent events leading to the variations in Me*1'
delian behaviour in order to clarify his dlS'
cussion. A clear conception of these funda*
mental phenomena of nature is essential to the
full appreciation of the remainder of the boo^
and it is hoped that the contributor will c?u'
sider remedying the defect.

Two chapters by W. Russell Brain, D3a-?
F.R.C.P., deal with hereditary nervous dlS*
orders and epilepsy. In regard to the forme
it is striking how relatively clear-cut are fflO?
of the disorders described in the mode of the11
inheritance in contrast to somatic diseases-
The absence of hereditary factors in disse#1'
inated sclerosis supports the theory of an e*"
ogenous etiology affecting the individual latel
in life in contrast to many of the lesser know'11
and definitely inherited diseases of the nervo^5
system. The discussion on epilepsy clearly
shows the need for careful investigation 0
pedigrees since in about 50% inherited pred15'
position plays a part; in the balance other
portant etiological facts also exist, there b&&D
those in whom combinations of predisposition
and exogenous factors operate and others lia
whom the former may be excluded altogether
from the picture. Multiple factors of Me11'
ehan inheritance, rather than the dominance
?r recession of a single factor, would appear to
^the most probable mode of transmission.
. il1 some 60 pages Chapter Four deals with the
important but still obscure and somewhat con-
a Sed subject of heredity in mental disorders,
t the beginning of the section the author, Dr.
Ubrey Lewis, has boldly admitted our past
"Ures as psychiatrists and geneticists alike
^0 strug-gie with the difficulties peculiar to the
ela of psychiatry. It appears likely for some
me to come that our position will improve
? lively slowly until we can differentiate
a Carly between what is exogenous and endo-
i-.^Us in the causation of the psychoses. Un-
extended knowledge makes possible a rap-
th? ement between psychogenic schools and
^.e Physiogenic, confusion must remain,
nevertheless, this ably-written chapter clears
e ground in many respects and the practi-
ner is given an understanding of what is at
d C!ent accePted as fact and also what is
tful in regard to the main conceptions of
j Gtl^al disease and the multiplicity of factors
Volved such as environment, personality and
in if Contributing causes. In discussing the
diffi aPProach towards overcoming our
tal H^ltieS' wr^er? referring to those men-
^ . disorders seen in institutions and their
lo regarded by some as not necessarily bio-
5 gJCal types, states that this criticism may be
diffi ?n c^n^cal grounds and that " however
^cult of application the same non-social
0? ^lcal principles are used for the recognition
-p Rental disorders as for 'physical diseases.' "
itii i uninitiated I fear this statement may be
jt sleading and, without wishing to be critical,
0fS-eetns to require qualification. If our mode
s 111 Vestigati?n, clinical but, in the living in-
e e> rnore especially pathological, had been
a^ to that in physical diseases it is probable
c i, these mental diseases so categorically
ret endogenous could hardly even to-day
igrf111 term which frankly admits our
of ?f etiology. It is the implications
? he expression " endogenous " to which it
^ecessary to call attention and the part
Wh *^ey play in our outlook and diagnosis.
f0r er the issues at stake bode for good or
for ^uture surely have to be faced
^ > as has been pointed out, any improvement
pe ?Ul Power to alleviate mental disorder, es-
sifv t^le gTaver forms, will at once inten-
y the eugenic problems, Let it be said that
this is no reason for curbing our efforts towards
establishing to the full extent the role of ex-
ogenous factors as related to causation and
heredity. Detailed information is supplied as
to the mode of inheritance in the manic-de-
pressive psychosis and schizophrenia, these
diseases serving as an interesting contrast to
each other. The discussion on blastophonia
and idiokinesis might have been treated more
fully but much more will have to be known
before we can claim to assess the importance
of these influences upon germ plasm. In view
of this the writer may be excused the sug-
gestion of bias obtained by the reader. The
summing up of the position is clearly if
cautiously expressed and forms a valuable
guide to the psychiatrist and practitioner as to
the main lines of approach in giving advice on
genetic prognosis.

Of interest to everyone is the chapter on
mental defect contributed by Dr. Henry Herd.
In the preliminary pages he points out the
failure of the policy of segregation and the
lack of unanimity of experts regarding steril-
isation mainly because there is still no agree-
ment as to the relative importance of heredity
and environment and therefore on the effec-
tiveness of the measure. Rightly the attitude
to the whole problem is regarded as being not
one of public policy but in relation to the in-
dividual case, and grave responsibility rests on
the general practitioner in giving advice.

Whatever views may be maintained for or
against sterilisation, it can be said that a
broad minded, balanced and scientific attitude
has been adopted throughout the whole chap-
ter. The nature and varieties of mental defect,
the method of inheritance and its two main
theories, Mendelian and toxic, are clearly ex-
pressed and make interesting reading. Numer-
ous pedigree charts are given which will en-
able the physician to build up similar family
histories in his own cases.

In the latter half of the book various author-
ities contribute chapters on diseases of the
skin, eyes and ear, asthma, the blood, cardio-
vascular diseases, renal disease, the endoc-
rines, tuberculosis and cancer, each chapter
being supplied with numerous references. The
potential value of the book is tremendous, cov-
ering as it does wide fields in medicine and bi-
ology. It is to be hoped that its essentially prac-
tical nature will be appreciated and made use
of by those for whom it has mainly been com-
piled and that it will mark the beginning of
another phase in our national history when
we, as citizens, have become eugenically self-
conscious in the interests of humanity as a
whole.

W.M.F.R.
The Last of the Taboos: Mental Dis-
orders in Modern Life. By Isabel Emslie
Hutton, M.D., Hon. Physician, British
Hospital for Functional, Mental and Ner-
vous Disorders; Physician, Ellen Terry
National Home for Defective Children, etc.
London. Wm. Heinemann (Medical Books),
Ltd. 1934. 6s. net.

Those whose work is in any way concerned
with the care and treatment of the mentally
sick continually realise the handicap to their
activities caused by the public attitude towards
this type of illness. This handicap arises not
only through the unwillingness of relatives to
face the fact that a member of their family is
mentally ill and in need of specialised treat-
ment, but also from the intense fear which is
so commonly shown by the patient himself if
any suggestion of an illness of the mind is
made to him. Although much lip-service to a
new point of view has been paid by substi-
tuting the term " mental hospital " for that
of " lunatic asylum," and " mental illness "
for " insanity," yet the underlying fear which
remains in the lay mind frequently prevents
satisfactory treatment from being arranged.

Dr. Hutton's small and simply written book
is an attempt to bring the whole subject of
mental illness into line with public thought
about sickness in general. It fulfils a great
need and the method of arrangement is admir-
ably suited to its purpose. Beginning with a
chapter on the attitude of the public towards
insanity, the author passes on to simple
definitions of the various types of such illness,
followed by a consideration of the underlying-
causes and the possible treatment that can be
adopted. A subsequent interesting chapter
deals with the history of the care of mental
patients, and she then considers in a frank and
courageous way the vexed question of steril-
isation of mental defectives. Her conclusions
on this subject tally very closely with those
reached by the Sterilisation Committee which
has recently issued its report.

In attempting to deal in a simple and yet
comprehensive manner with such a subject
as mental illness, it is naturally impossible to
avoid all expression of personal opinion afld
one cannot help feeling that the author5
opinion is in many cases rather more optimists
than is justified by facts. It is of course very
much better to err on the side of optimist
rather than pessimism in presenting the sub*
ject to the lay reader, but if such a book is read
by people who have near relatives suffering
from mental illness it may lay them open to
future disappointment, especially with regard
to the possibility of cutting short an attack bv
early treatment.

The emphasis on the eugenic aspect of the
problem is wise and in no way extreme and
should encourage those who are in any way
anxious about possible hereditary taints 111
their families to seek sound advice on the
subject.

The author has throughout attempted to
dispel the popular notion that mental patients
are dangerous, almost inhuman creatures
can never again take their place in ordinary
life, and her suggestions for improved treat-
ment of these patients are constructive and
practical.

One can only hope that such a book will
a good deal to render its title no longer true?
for all who are concerned with mental illnesS
realise that until the subject ceases to be " thc
last of the taboos," their efforts must continUe
to be handicapped.

M.C.I-
A Hand Book of Psychiatry. By John
Ewen, M.R.C.P. (Edin.), D.P.M. Bailliere,
Tindall and Cox. 1933. 262 pages. PricC
12/6 net.

Dr. Ewen states in the preface that th^
volume "aims at giving as complete an accou11
as possible in small compass of the salieI),
features of the subject of mental disorder-
He further hopes that the " book will pr?Yc
of use to those studying for a diploma 1,1
Psychological Medicine and perhaps to thoSc
taking Psychiatry as a subject in the hig'hcl
medical examinations."

In form it has the appearance of being VrC'
pared with some regard to order and method-
But there is little evidence of critical selection
or clarity of thought as revealed by his e*'
position, if such a jumble deserves the nam0.
Thus we read " Pathological reactions t?
Psychic trauma may be looked on as manifesta-
l0ns of organic memory." (page 6.) Without
f?m9 elucidation in the text, which it does not
Jceivc, such a statement is, to say the least,
Scure, and there are frequent examples
^?ughout the book of a similar kind.
. tn the section on heredity, there is no men-
^ whatever of the work of Rudin and his
c ?.?1; the results of Stockard (page 11) con-
rmmg the " Law of Plastophoria " (sic) is
fiVeVnd no mention made of its lack of con-
aP?a^on in the careful work of Durham
th Woods; we are informed (page 9)
c . " much of what has previously been
jj nsidered as constitutional is now be-
eved to be individual," whatever this
ay mean, and that " statistics show "
pj^gst other things " (d) a very high pro-
aro 1 forebears mental defectives
u? ^coholic or the subject of nervous disease.
tin ?th er - da u gh t er is the common form of
]j nsinission," and that " neuropathy is be-
Unif by. some to be an heritable mendelian
TV anc^ *s probably recessive." (page 10.)
0r1ls cbapter, " The Aetiology of Mental Dis-
CovGr " ends with the words, " General Re-
Ce rate. Of late cases, twenty-five per
fr-f ' recover. Twenty-five per cent, improve.
y per cent, die or become chronic."
ti^*1 Page 27 we read "2. Disorders of Idea-
tj0^* A. Absence of ideation. Stupor, exhaus-
i^ei and confusional states, schizophrenia,
l^richolia, amentia, dementia."

Sch' " Theories of Causation " of
^ 1?0Phrenia, no mention is made of the well-
v*ews ?f Adolf Meyer, whereas to
in it?,^a11 is ascribed the view that he sees
reo a disturbance of the sentiment of self
Per J ' ^a=>e 35.) As to heredity, " fifty
Sec^Gn^ show some hereditary taint." In the
ctfsi?M ?n Pathology " The haemoclastic
to described by Robertson, now known
?onM.T?d. on statistical fallacies, is men-
Pr0o- Spielmeyer's name does not occur. In
qu ?sis, no mention is made of the f re-
Set / benign significance of a stormy on-
Wn single points probably the most
juable.

ti0n .^e section on " Melancholia," no men-
A. se1Sfllla^e the frequent paranoid features.
ProQ0 .n devoted to the " Insanity of Re-
state^Ct^on " (page 130) in which it is truly
sCpa bat " it is not now considered to be a
^ate entity.'' Why describe it as such?
^e 100 pages of the total are devoted to
the consideration of the various organic types
of reaction; 2 pages are allotted to anxiety
states.

The book keeps up its standard to the very
end, for in the glossary we read : " Affect. A
psychic feeling state correlated with a physio-
logical innervation state. Feeling if strong,
becomes affect as physical innervations may
be released. Sibling. Brother or sister of
psychotic."

Surely publications of this kind do nothing
but harm to psychiatry.

The Care and Training of Mentally Defec-
tive Children. By Jennie Benson. Local
Government Publications. 1934. 3/6 net.
There is a dearth of books on the actual
training of ineducable defectives in groups
and for this reason, Mrs. Benson's book is to
be welcomed. It is of special value because it
is an account of actual work which she has
done. Written as the result of close and sym-
pathetic contact, she speaks with conviction
of what she believes to be the duty of the com-
munity to the low-grade child.

Her concern is with the occupation centre
child, who she believes, with right training,
may live in the community and be a " social
asset " rather than a " social liability." She
stresses the right of the deeply defective child
to a place in the world and an opportunity to
be educated for the life he will live when he
becomes a man in years?not for his com-
mercial value, but as a human being with
rights. That this may be more completely
done, she emphasises the importance of an
early beginning, that good habits may be
formed and a right social attitude assured.
She gives in her first chapter what she con-
siders to be the aims of an Occupation Centre
and then proceeds to plan an ideal building for
its work. She states her belief that the time
will come when "Authorities will arrange for
the education of all defectives, just as normal
children are catered for to-day."

The building she plans is very much after
the pattern of a modern open air Nursery
School and she rightly emphasises the necess-
ity for space, air and freedom and would add
a garden as a necessary part of the Centre.
Knowing, as she does, the difficulties under
which Occupation Centre workers labour, she
gives this picture of the ideal setting, as an
encouragement to present-day pioneers to work
unceasingly for better conditions.

Mrs. Benson considers that the chief factor
in such a Centre is the Supervisor?" An ex-
pert in all modern Infants' School methods
and accurate knowledge and understanding of
the Montessori method." The atmosphere
created by the right type of woman will be
calm, pleasant and strong, and the teacher
drawn to the work by genuine love for the
child.

It is obviously difficult to compress into a
book of less than 100 pages a full account of
the work of a Centre.

A short chapter is given to the children who
attend?the low-grade defective excluded, as
ineducable, from the special school, the child
who, in some areas has ineffectually passed
through the elementary school and cannot ad-
just himself to normal life. Within these
groups again there are many individual differ-
ences of character and capability and, as with
normal children, the individual potentialities
of each child have to be discovered and dev-
eloped and harmfully-directed energies re-
directed?the good strengthened in order to
eradicate the possibilities of evil. After one
chapter on the general programme of a Centre,
seven are devoted to an account of the various
subjects of the curriculum.

First place is given to training in good per-
sonal habits?training which is impossible in
many of the children's homes. Bodily clean-
liness, good habits of eating and drinking,
leading to pride in their environment and care
of the Centre itself. The value of the holiday,
when the teachers live with the children for a
week or fortnight and are able to carry this
training much further, is specially emphasised.
A full chapter is given to the programme of
physical work and a separate one to poetry
and musical appreciation.

A list of individual occupations with some
general hints on the use of the apparatus,
forms another chapter and in a short chapter
on speech training a number of exercises are
given, as supplementary to the incidental
teaching of speech.

The chapter on handwork opens with the
quotation " I, too, will something make and
joy in the making." The text following does
not elaborate this thought and this to the re-
viewer is disappointing and the quotation from
the report on the Primary School does not seem
very helpful in considering handwork in rela-
tion to the definitely defective child. A l*5*
of suitable types of handwork is given.

Chapter 12 deals with Nature Study an<j
Scripture. Through the gentle handling ?j
pets, the care of flowers and plants, the child
comes to understand the love of God and even
the defective child can develop the religi?llS
sense. Through this training, he feels the Pr?'
tecting love of God. Hymns and stories afC
suggested to help to develop this side of ^)e
child's life?leading from Nature to Nature 5
God. She says : " The daily kindness to o^e
another, the tending of plants, flowers and Pe 5
will do more to satisfy the ethical instincts tha11
any number of prayers committed to we'/1
ory." She does not, however, consider t*1
teaching of prayers a vain proceeding?Pr?
sumably, if the right atmosphere has bee1
created and the prayers are a true express#1
of the child's feelings. ,

Chapter 13 deals with Medical Treatme^
and the great importance that should
attached to the treatment of the physical a
normalities from which defective children a ^
most invariably suffer. Failing their system
atic supervision by the Public Medical ^
she shows what can be done by the supervis
and teachers to help the child's physical con-
dition, by proper attention to rest Per*
clothing, diet and exercise. She points 0
the importance of the mid-day meal and
gests menus for winter and summer.

The purpose and method of keeping prog're
books and the importance of contact betwe
the Centre and the children's homes is "'
cussed.

A special chapter is devoted to the
sion Band, based on the methods of Miss
Rusette. It is a very practical chapter, fr^v
which almost any teacher could start |
branch of the work. It describes the devd0^
ment of the band, the method of conducting
lesson, the work to be achieved, and a list
suitable music. At the end of the book, a c??
prehensive list of music, with the necessary 1
struments and their cost, is added. . a
A chapter on the telling of stories, vV 0n
list of suitable stories and a special chapter
the Project method conclude the main portl
of the book. f

In conclusion, Mrs. Benson reiterates 11
conviction that the sub-normal child can ^
socialised. Her own personal experience V
proved this to her. She has seen individ^e
and homes changed through the help
?Ccupation centre and she hopes to see this
w?rk made so efficient that if, at any future
Period, it is taken over by the Education
Authorities, there will be found to be a begin-
nirig of a perfect system of training.
A foreword is contributed to the book by
lss Ruth Darwin.

E.E.W.
Report of the Commissioners of Prisons
and the Directors of Convict Prisons
for the Year 1932. H.M. Stationery Office.
cmd. 4553. 1934. 1/6.

The statistics with which this report opens
? ^Sent many aspects?it seems of particular
terest to note that although convictions
mong men jlaye rjsen j^y approximately 3,000
Uring the year under review, the convictions
der the Intoxicating Liquor Laws have
tio by over 1,000; that of the total convic-
, ?ns, by far the larger number were sentenced
?r short periods?-only 5% of the men and
(pr 2% of the women receiving sentences
68?/ rnontks and over, while 49% of men and
/o of women received sentences of one
v 011 th or less; and that over a period of 10
A ars? while male convictions have shown a
a ctuating but mainly constant figure, those
women have steadily decreased,

oc large section of the report deals with
'National therapy, the teaching of trades,
p the vocational selection of work to suit
th r &r types?all arranged with the aim of
e physical and moral regeneration of the
^lsoner. This will be of particular interest
fyr readers, as will be the report of the
c0ri . Commissioner, Dr. Norwood East. In
c ^eetion with vocational training, Dr. East
att S Mention to the success which has
Se 5n~ed the training of prisoners of both
\vJes general, nautical or domestic cooking,
traereby 903 prisoners, out of the 1,000
catllle^' ^ave Passed and obtained the Certifi-
a e of the Universal Cookery and Food
Association.

f0^r; East calls attention to the want of uni-
Co in the manner in which summary
rts of jurisdiction deal with mentally
is t ^ Prisoners. While the usual practice
q0n^.r?mand an accused person whose mental
itiav K0n *S susPected, so that a medical report
hea ? submitted to the court at the second
lng, and the case, if defective or insane,
transferred to an institution or mental hospital
in lieu of sentence, some courts sentence an
offender (whom they have reason to believe
is defective or insane) to a term of imprison-
ment, with a request that he or she may be
kept under observation with a view to certifi-
cation. Dr. East says : " It is obvious that
justices who follow this practice may sentence
to imprisonment an insane or defective per-
son who might be dealt with by the court as
such, or one who is suffering from some minor
mental disorder which might properly be
taken into consideration in mitigation of pun-
ishment." He adds : "... there can be no
doubt that informed opinion to-day expects a
court to take into consideration the mental
condition of the offender, as well as the nature
and circumstances of the offence, before im-
posing a sentence of imprisonment. It is diffi-
cult to understand how this can be done if a
court is in doubt in regard to the mental con-
dition of the accused and fails to settle that
doubt until the sentence is completed." He
suggests that whenever justices are in doubt
in regard to the mental condition of an
offender, the fact should be determined before
sentence and that the contrary practice is un-
desirable and may be inequitable.

Dr. East also suggests that the diagnosis of
the mental condition of an offender on remand
or a prisoner serving sentence would be much
facilitated if there were closer co-ordination
between the courts and the prison, whereby
information known to the courts as to the per-
sonal, family and medical history of the ac-
cused and the specific matter requiring investi-
gation might be available for the medical
officer to assist him in making his decision.
Examples of cases are quoted showing how
carefully all evidence as to the mental con-
dition has to be sifted if a right diagnosis is to
be arrived at; of the distinction between in-
complete or arrested development and the
mind, properly developed but failing to func-
tion; of the necessity in the case of feeble-
mindedness not only of proving defect but also
its existence " before the age of 18 years ";
of the difference between deficiency and in-
efficiency?all pointing to the fact that while
the difficulties confronting the justices may
be appreciated it may be a more laborious
matter to decide as to the mental condition of
an accused person than to determine his guilt
or innocence.

Dr. East states that action is about to be
taken to carry out the recommendation of the
Persistent Offenders Committee that " a med-
ical psychologist should be attached to all
penal establishments to carry out psycho-
logical treatment in selected cases." In con-
clusion he points out that the importance of the
mental and psychological aspects of crime has
been recognised for many years as is shown
by the recent decision of the examining board
of the Royal College of Physicians of London
and the Royal College of Surgeons of England
to accept twelve months' appointment as M.O.
in either of the four large prisons as equivalent
to twelve months' mental hospital practice re-
quired for the diploma in psychological
medicine.

Psychopathology. By J. Ernest Nicole,
L.M.S.S.A., D.P.M., M.R.C.P., and S.
Second Edition. With a Foreword by W.
H. B. Stoddart, M.D., B.S., F.R.C.P.,
Lond. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. 1934. 12/6.
In this second edition of Dr. Nicole's book
on Psychopathology, the revision of several
chapters and the addition of four entirely new
ones have added materially to the value of
what was before a most useful and clear epi-
tome of the various schools of thought in
psychology at the present day. It is, of course,
but a brief summary of the very wide field of
psychopathology, but the subject is covered in
all its branches in a manner not only reliable
but also readable, and the bibliography of
recent work on the subject, which is limited
to those papers and books written in, or trans-
lated into, English, affords ample suggestion
for further reading without being overwhelm-
ing.

To anyone who wishes to get a clear insight
into the various differences of theory and
method which obtain amongst different schools
of psychopathology, this book can be con-
fidently recommended. To the medical stu-
dent who is beginning to study psycho-
pathology it should be of the greatest value.
R.W.G.
