Impressions of Mental Deficiency Work in England
================================================

:Author: Edgar A. Doll, Ph.D.,
Director of Research, The Training School at Vineland, New Jersey
It was my good fortune to be the guest of Dr F. Douglas lurner and t e
Royal Medico-Psychological Association on the occasion of the 1933 anni^a
meeting of that Association at Clacton-on-Sea. This afforded an opportunity
for meeting the leaders in the field of mental deficiency in England with w ose
work I had heretofore been familiar only at a distance. It also mac*e , e
brief visits to a few of the institutions for the mentally deficient, and fulfil e a
long-standing desire to see something of England itself. Unfortunate y, my
visit was far too brief to permit any real appreciation of what is being done,
or to evaluate the difficulties which confront such work and the opportunities
for its further development. . ..

To record my impressions is hazardous for on a first visit one is natura y
at a disadvantage by the total lack of acquaintance with conditions, men an
events. There is also the temptation to compare the ideal in one's own country
with the actuality in another, so that one tends to over-emphasise the advantages
at home in contrast with apparent limitations abroad. If such impressions are
unavoidably comparative, the comparisons themselves may be of additiona
interest to readers of this Journal who may not be familiar with conditions in
the United States.

Since no field of work rises much above its leadership, my impressions
of the professional personnel engaged in mental deficiency work in Englan
are of special interest. I find it difficult to avoid effusive comment regarding
the universal courtesy and hospitality accorded me by those engaged in this
work, courtesies which were so generous and spontaneous that to call them
surprising " or " unexpected " might seem a dubious compliment. Yet, a
stranger is so fearful of obtruding, that every courtesy assumes international
importance and any rebuff justifies one's worst fears of a foreign country.
However much I should have been prepared for such a universally cordial
reception, this remains one of the outstanding and most gratifying features of
my visit.

It was particularly pleasing to meet some of those whose names have
loomed large in the history of mental deficiency in England. One hesitates to
single out individuals whose published reports of their work have reached
foreign shores. One of the specially pleasant advantages of visiting abroad is
the discovery of those other leaders performing perhaps equally important
work whose lack of articulate expression reflects a modesty not consistent with
promoting the work at large. I frequently encountered this reluctance to
recount really important progress where published reports would mean much
to those not familiar with those advances.

Leadership in mental deficiency in England seems more definitely
restricted to the medical profession than is the case in the United States. This
is particularly true in the institutional field. In this regard I sensed an atmos-
phere of conservative administrative policy, apparently reflecting traditional
social attitudes. In many quarters dominant views obviously restrict individual
initiative and freedom, so that experimentation with new procedures seems
unduly hampered. While this may produce a slow-but-sure type of progress,
it also tends to limit creative variation and to restrict practice to orthodox
activities. One readily notes some unrest and dissatisfaction on the part of the
younger professional workers whose eagerness and enthusiasm seem unduly
restrained by conventional conservatism and official supervision.

As my visit progressed I became aware of a lamentable lack of mutual
familiarity with what is being done in England as compared with the United
States. I was naively unprepared for many of the programs I encountered,
and was just as ingenuously surprised to learn that so much of the American
work was quite unfamiliar in England. The exchanges of professional visita-
tion in this field which have recently been taking place are most encouraging,
but this movement will not be really successful until similar exchanges of views
are promoted in the field of publication. It is little short of distressing that in the
absence of any difficulty of language the publications in each of these two
countries should be so generally unknown in the other.

Most English visitors to the United States commend the high develop-
ments in plant and equipment in the American institutions. Physical comforts
and mechanical facilities, which America takes for granted, are still relatively
uncommon in many English institutions where the need for " contraptions "
seems not so keenly felt. What is more important than these material facilities
are the programs of education, care, treatment and training. Here it seems
that practice lags rather seriously behind ideas and a conventional inertia cools
the ardour of enthusiastic novitiates.

Also, the authority of the superintendent or medical director of the Eng-
lish institution is much less than seems consistent with the high type of
personnel so engaged. Man for man, talent for talent, the American super-
intendent has much more authority in the immediate administration of his
own institutional affairs and much more freedom of action in initiating new
practices.

In the treatment and training programs there appears to be more
successful emphasis in the English institutions on physical education and
recreation, than is the case in America. On the other hand, manual education
of the classroom type seems not so highly developed. Medical treatment
seems fairly comparable in the two countries, although the emphasis in
respect to clinical categories takes different directions. Thus, the subject
of epiloia, which has received such definite attention at Caterham, is hardly
touched in the United States, while the recent emphasis on birth injuries
in this country seems to have had comparatively little development in England.

The excellent all-round program at the Royal Eastern Counties Institution
reflects a standard that many American institutions are striving for; the extra-
ordinary development of trade training at Besford Court sets an ideal which
has not yet been reached in similar institutions in the United States; the inter-
esting work at the Borstal institution for delinquents at Feltham has its counter-
part at Napanoch, New York.

An interesting development in England is the comprehensive scheme
of social control which owes its origin, in great measure, to the Central Associa-
tion for Mental Welfare. While other countries have experimented with
various aspects of this program, none appears to have achieved such a well-
rounded synthesis of all aspects of protection and prevention. The objects of
the Central and of Local Associations provide a plan which embraces the
essential aspects of social control and provides for detailed developments in all
modern directions.

One cannot think of this Association without, also, thinking of Miss Evelyn
Fox and her important personal share in its success. Her visits to the United
States and her writings in this Journal have already prompted a similar move-
ment in this country. Indeed, the initial steps towards this end have already
been taken in several of our states.. Here and there in the United States local
organisations are carrying out some of the details of the program of the
Association, but nowhere is there a central organisation or a comprehensive
scheme.

The unified body of information and the centralized uniformity of legisla-
tion in the field of mental deficiency in England is another objective not yet
attained in the United States. The co-ordination of school authorities con-
cerned with mental deficiency has also not yet been achieved. Unfortunately,
I did not have time to observe the work being done under the education
authorities.

The impression one gets in discussing sterilization with English authorities
is that this is a subject in which one " believes " or does not believe, and an
issue on which one takes sides in a rather partisan manner. Professional opinion
seems not to have reached that stage of academic deliberation and factual
scientific basis which is necessary to the development of sound programs.
The objections to sterilization seem to reflect professional rather than public
opposition and to rest on dogma rather than evidence.

English writers have long been classical authorities in the text-book
descriptions of the various problems of mental deficiency, and Tredgold's book
is still unrivalled in American publications. Nevertheless, progressive research
seems not to have developed a very broad scope or an exceptionally high level
except here and there. To observe Brushfield's prolific eagerness for scientific
knowledge and to explore the research library at the College of Surgeons, to
the organisation of which he is devoting his retirement, is a delightful experi-
ence. The young man who has not met Brushfield has missed a rare treat in
scientific enthusiasm and devotion, just as the American clinician who misses
Tredgold has made an incomplete journey. The scholarly research work of
Stewart and Ashby at Leavesden; the original program of research activity
of Earl at Caterham; the extensive and well-planned work of Penrose
and Turner at the Royal Eastern Counties Institution; the long-continued pro-
ductivity of Berry at Stoke Park; the psychological investigations of Father
Erlington and others under the stimulation of Monsignor Newsome at Besford
Court, are all gratifying developments of great promise, not to mention the
work being done in other quarters.

On the administrative side, the visitor is impressed with the overlapping
of different agencies and the apparent confusion of authority arising from the
different administrative groups. There is, nevertheless, a high degree of co-
operation on the part of the various agencies working side by side in both
voluntary and official capacities.

Finally, some caution must be observed by those visiting between the
United States and England because of the oft-times contradictory meaning of
terms. Thus, the " voluntary " worker in the United States is both unpaid
and unofficial and has a very different status from that of the voluntary worker
in England. The private " school of America is apparently the " public "
school of England. The American " moron " is the English feeble-minded.
And so for many other expressions both lay and technical in respect to which
one must be on guard if one is to be understood and not be seriously misunder-
stood. Even in every-day speech it behoves the visitor to guard well his
language lest the cultured expressions of one country be vulgar parlance in the
other.

But it is the unexpected experiences that most intrigue the visitor. The
many generous courtesies, the constantly distracting beauty of village, town
and countryside, the cordial hospitality; these non-professional experiences are
what make the visitors so receptive to favorable impressions. Americans
may well continue to look to England for important advances in the field of
mental deficiency, yet mutual exchanges of views are of the utmost importance
and definite facilities should be provided for more intimate familiarity with
the work in both countries on the part of workers in each.
