Ivamtial Defect
================

MENTAL WELFARE 25
Book Reviews and Abstracts 
 By L. R. Penrose, M.A.,
1933 ?P* 183' Sedgwick & Jackson. 8/'6-
volume is one of a series of text-books
p r 0cial Biology published under the General
i orship of Professor Hogben. Dr. Penrose
atrt^rf post Medical Research Officer
e R?yal Eastern Counties Institution, Col-
Mpi-er' and *n dedicating this volume to the
Tur Superintendent, Dr. F. Douglas
to rnCr> aut^or Pays a well-deserved tribute
asi^110 W^? ^as rendered great service in many
of w?rk pertaining to the welfare
? e mentally defective.
text*! nrose has not attempted to write a
pre . ??k summarising the data and views of
th investigators and generalising from
is thC ata- One admirable feature of this book
annr? e!lce generalisations. The author's
Point^f *s essentially critical. The stand-
dimt i?m xv^ich the book is written is in-
Con by Dr. Penrose in the Preface: " I
a br1 v, study mental deficiency to be
fuj of human biology. It provides a fruit-
this i ^?r research, when approached from
bee aPS^e. In the past, however, research has
ideas lny.ede(1 by the widespread acceptance of
l0o: V'^ch are not in keeping with recent bio-
the c SC0Veries. I have, therefore, subjected
of m Urrent theories of the nature and origin
de^eiency to critical examination."
acce ?ubtedly there has been a tendency to
classir readily certain conceptions of the
Dr p1Cation and causation of mental defect.
c?genenrose's criticisms owe much of their
the ex ^ ^ t^le ^act t^at they are based upon
appiv^nee he has gained in attempting to
given in most current
Counr ? to .the Patients at the Royal Eastern
t? mif-es nstitution. This thought enables us
resenf1^a^e ?llr instinctive rather than rational
?ne af?en* as the author dashes to the ground
review ^ an?tber of our idols. In this short
Penro ' , vever, we will dwell not upon Dr.
structfe S destructiveness but upon his con-
and ? c?ntributions?and these are many
^aluable.
of the1tlr)?rt-ant contribution is the application
the sn ^nique of the statistical geneticist to
Chapt Cla^ Problems of mental deficiency,
person^ 6 deals with the methods of collecting
and family histories; and in Chapter
7 the author discusses the analysis of these
histories. Social investigators will find in these
two chapters much that will repay the closest
study.
The author deprecates the tendency to rely
upon the issue of large stereotyped forms for
the ascertainment of individual histories. He
emphasises that the most essential equipment
for the person recording an individual's history
is a sound medical and psychological know-
ledge. The fact that Dr. Penrose is well-
versed in statistical genetics gives much signifi-
cance to the view he expresses on this point.
Another important principle enunciated in
Chapter 6 is that enquiries into family history
should be guided by the consideration of what
use is to be made of the knowledge when it is
obtained. The author then proceeds to in-
dicate the special points that should be kept
in view when the disease under investigation is
suspected to be inherited as a dominant or
recessive character. Here we have the begin-
nings of a new but very important art. Upon
the progress made in perfecting the technique
of this new art will depend largely the future
of the science of human genetics.
Chapter 7, in which the author discusses the
analytic methods applicable to the data of
family histories affords a good example of the
harnessing of statistical methods to the study
of mental deficiency. Many readers have been
given a distressing feeling of inferiority owing
to the thoughtlessness of some modern writers
who, without the slightest warning, not to
mention apology, suddenly cease to write in-
telligible prose and then proceed to scribble
some " obvious " but incomprehensible math-
ematical formula. These readers will feel grate-
ful to Dr. Penrose for the pains he has taken
without being patronising, to elucidate some
of these mathematical mysteries to the average
intelligent reader.
The most important but also the most con-
troversial chapter in this book is that which
deals with the " Classification of Mental De-
fect." The dichotomy of Primary and Second-
ary Amentia Dr. Penrose regards as embody-
ing a concept of causation that cannot be
harmonised with the results of modern genetic
research. The classification of pathological
and subcultural amentia he finds to be practic-
able, although there are numbers of cases in
which both pathological conditions and sub-
cultural inheritance are aetiological factors,
26 MENTAL WELFARE
This new classification has to its credit the
negative quality of not making any assump-
tions concerning the method of transmission of
defect in any particular case. Dr. Penrose,
near the end of this chapter, makes the state-
ment that " methodologically the only satis-
factory way to classify is to group cases
together first from the clinical medical point of
view, judging each case on its own merits and
to leave open the question of causation to sub-
sequent research." Since both hereditary and
environmental determinants are involved in
nearly every case, the author maintains that
any attempt to classify mental defectives as
primary or secondary, congenital or acquired
cases, is at present foredoomed to failure.
As the " mongol " child often is the pet of
the ward in our institution, so " mongolism "
can be said to be the pet topic of writers on
mental deficiency. So much had been written
previously on this subject that we were getting
to adopt the attitude of assuming that nothing
new could at this stage be said about it. Dr.
Penrose, however, not only presents the find-
ings of previous investigators in a new light
but has himself made several new and signifi-
cant findings. Although Mongolism is dis-
cussed primarily as an example of the patho-
logical type of mental defect, the subject is
presented so as to demonstrate the scientific
method of assessing the relative parts played
by heredity and environment in producing this
clinical type of defect. . The presentation is
concise, clear and critical, but definitely con-
structive.
We wish Dr. Penrose had not deferred to con-
ventionality by concluding with a chapter on
" Treatment." Or is the correct explanation
not any conscious deference but that the re-
pressed sub-conscious " perorator " has for
once escaped the vigilance of the censor in
even such a well-disciplined scientist as the
author ? A chapter indicating specific problems
for research and methods of investigating these
problems would have been a more appropriate
conclusion to this admirable book.
The reviewer feels he should in concluding-
state definitely the view implied in the pre-
ceding remarks. This is not a book for be-
ginners. And it is not likely to give much
satisfaction to the reader who likes to have
stated for him pontifically and with an air of
finality the facts concerning mental deficiency.
On the other hand, it is essentially the book
for the serious student who is approaching the
perilous state of stability of thinking that he
knows the causes of mental defect. Dr. Pen-
rose, however, does much more than disturb
our complacency; he gives a new orientation
towards the genetic problems presented by
mental deficiency.
Heredity and the Social Problem Group.
By E. J. Lidbetter. London. Edward
Arnold & Co. 1933. Price 21/- net.
The author of this book has had quite
unique opportunities for investigating the con-
stitution and origin of what is now known as
the social problem group. Until very recently*
it has been generally accepted that, in the
main, the socially submerged were victims of
misfortune and social inequality. They re-
quired only a helping hand and they could
crawl out of their misery to occupy much more
comfortable and reputable positions in society-
But lately the notion has been gaining ground
that numbers of these unfortunates were what
they were because, from their very beginnings,
they were doomed by their own hereditary
constitutions to be misfits in a community
organised like our own.
For 25 years Mr. Lidbetter has been search-
ing for evidence which would permit him to
form an estimate of the role of organic inherit-
ance in the production of the social problem
group, and this evidence is now about to be
presented. The data collected during this time
is to appear in a series of volumes of which this
is the first. It contains 26 pedigrees with des-
criptive matter and related statistical material,
and shows the Poor Law history of such in-
dividuals as claim public assistance, and estim-
ates their total chargeability to public funds.
The pedigrees are such as to suggest very
strongly indeed that chargeability runs i11
families, and moreover that it runs in families
because it is inherited, and not merely because
one generation is in intimate contact with the
preceding for a long period of time.
It is to be assumed that the majority of those
who know the social problem group will eager-
ly attempt to deny the validity of the very
tentative conclusions to which the author al-
ready seems to have arrived. The cure of this
corroding cancer on the face of our civilisation
would, of course, be a much simpler matter
through improvement in the environmental
MENTAL WELFARE 27
conditions the social problem group could be
iquidated. But these may rest assured that
0?r" ^idbetter is fully aware of the influence
of e'1Vl!"onmental agents upon the development
the individual, and even if it be granted
in at Present time, he has a definite lean-
g toward the conventional eugenic explana-
i 11 ?f social failure, his critics at least can
tVi es*1?a*e his pedigrees for themselves, and
i ey are very much worth while studying. It
stated that no attempt will be made, until
^ the material has been issued, to draw in-
ences or conclusions from the facts dis-
.Sec^) but, having examined this first volume,
Possible to anticipate that in the end Mr.
better have shown that there is very
th ?n^ reason indeed for holding the view that
? Soc^a^ problem group is one which can be
Q Ved not through the improvement of envir-
^ent alone but also, and especially through
ofG ?n^orcement non-propagation on the part
si ?Se *n Aybose family histories there is
th \ent evidence to make it undesirable that
in their turn should repeat hereditary
^nders. In the pedigrees that Mr. Lidbetter
is^S ?ne ^at the present-day defective
\vK from several defective ancestors
s-,? collectively share the hereditary respon-
Uity. This volume differs from most other
^ ?ks of this kind for the reason that one has
{ecoine accustomed to trace back all the de-
iri *n subsequent generations to one indiv-
fairly far back.
^ . lnce, in the absence of adequate knowledge,
ls impossible to frame appropriate curative
^ures, it is of the utmost importance that
j^Udies such as this of Mr. Lidbetter's should
ei}couraged, and that results of such inves-
fc?ations should be most carefully and critic-
? examined. This book is strongly recom-
ter ^ w^? c^a^m to seriously in-
Gsted in problems of societv.
F.A.E.C.
T
Nature and Treatment of Amentia :
^sycho-Analysis and Mental Arrest in
relation to the Science of Intelligence.
y L. Pierce Clark. Balliere, Tindall &
Pp. 296. Price 12/6 net. 1933.
ahi ? *s an important work, especially valu-
v ? ln being based on detailed clinical obser-
as l?ns clearly described. Dr. Pierce Clark,
is w^H known, is a prominent American
psycho-analyst and a psychiatrist with wide
experience of mental deficiency. He accepts,
on the whole, current views on the funda-
mental organic origin of amentia and appreci-
ates many of the accepted methods of training.
He endeavours to supplement these by in-
vestigating the total personality and the
dynamic mechanism and psychic location in
development of mental arrest. For this purpose
and to help individual patients he uses psycho-
analysis, which he terms the " depth psychol-
ogy of Freud."
The author and his colleagues have con-
ducted experimental analyses in an institution
on a number of defectives (imbeciles and
feeble-minded) with neuroses, character or
behaviour difficulties. Excerpts from analyti-
cal interviews are given. He claims 110 cures
but treatment led to wider development,
greater adaptability and harmony. He sug-
gests methods of using the new know-
ledge of unconscious processes in educating
defectives. Some confirmation of these results
is derived from the work in this country of
Melanie Klein and her followers, who observed
increased learning capacity in retarded child-
ren after " play analysis " had diminished
emotionally caused inhibitions.
Dr. Clark's cases all showed some instability.
Admittedly, the stable, well-adjusted defective
did not come his way. For a deeper under-
standing of the psychological nature of defect
and its relation to known psychic mechanisms
the analysis of some of these uncomplicated
cases at an early age would be enlightening.
An interesting account is given of a closely-
observed idiot boy of 16 (Ralph), which shows
the relationship between intellectual arrest, a
feeble ego and fixation of both libidinal (love)
and aggressive instincts on the self in a state
of primary narcissism. Such rudimentary
object relationships as were occasionally pos-
sible could only be manifested while he was in
the complete physical security of being en-
folded in an attendant's arms. Jimmy (another
idiot patient) hugged himself when happy,
while Ralph struck his own ears when angry.
This action seems to the reviewer to arise from
the orientation of the source of disturbing
sounds in the subject's own ears and a general
inability to recognise an environment separate
from his own person, rather than self-punish-
ment and rudimentary super-ego (conscience)
formation, Both possibilities are mentioned,
28 MENTAL WELFARE
and recent psycho-analytical work on children
support an earlier super-ego formation than
was formerly supposed. Further study of low
grade aments should throw light on these and
other problems.
In addition to clinical material the author
discusses theoretical problems and methods of
amelioration, since individual psycho-analysis
except for research is too time-consuming for
extensive use with such unpromising subjects.
He considers that to acquire knowledge, libido
is first detached from the ego and projected on
to other persons. Identifications are made
with these persons, displaced to concrete ob-
jects and, still later, to abstract concepts. By
sublimation these identifications become de-
sexualised. Fusion of the libidinal with the
aggressive instincts is necessary for mastering
and " taking in " new knowledge. This must
then be absorbed and made part of the ego and,
for full possession, be controlled, re-projected
and utilised in making new adjustments to
reality. The author considers weakness of the
ego to be the central problem in amentia, but
that learning may be further handicapped by
difficulty in fusion between erotic and aggres-
sive impulses and in transition from concrete
to abstract interests. Lower grades may, ow-
ing to narcissistic fixation, lack the capacity
make identifications. It is suggested that sub-
limations from the oral stage of development
(" ingestion " of ideas) are especially import-
ant for learning. Too hasty interference with
such habits as thumb-sucking are deprecated
in children whose rate of growth is retarded,
since some erotic pleasure in this stage must
?be experienced before sublimations can be sat-
isfactory. It is recommended that aggressive
impulses be worked through in play and phan-
tasy and that necessary discipline be main-
tained chiefly through the affections, with the
aid of rhythm and habit, and every effort made
to strengthen the ego. Dr. Clark emphasises
the importance of the educators having self-
knowledge and the power to bestow and con-
trol their affection in dealing with their
charges.
The book covers a wide field in an interest-
ing manner though the reviewer would prefer
less frequent use of terms based on analogy,
such as " Castration " for " deprivation
The short bibliography might with advantage
be amplified and the glossary revised in future
editions. The paper and print are good. The
book should be widely read and should be the
precursor of researches by other investigators to
determine controversial points, further advance
knowledge of primitive psychology and the
unconscious mental life of defectives, and the
correlation of these observations with ascer-
tained facts of early development in unretardeo
persons.
M.E.F.
How the Mind Works. By Cyril Burt, M.A-,
D.Sc., Ernest Jones, M.D., Emanuel Miller,
M.D., and William Moodie, M.D. Alld1
& Unwin. 7/6 net. 1933.
The subject matter of " How the Mind
Works " is based on a series of popular talk3
on psychology broadcast under the auspice?
of the British Broadcasting Corporation. The
volume is divided into three sections, cad1
being treated by experts in that particular
branch of psychology.
The first section is concerned with the min^
of the adult. Prof. Cyril Burt outlines various
methods of studying the minds of others an('
of one's self. Dr. Ernest Jones, one of thc
foremost exponents of psycho-analysis in thi*
country, contributes three chapters on the ufl'
conscious mind.
In this section Prof. Burt and Dr. JoncS
together show that human behaviour may only
be understood by taking account of the inter'
play between the conscious and the uncoil'
scions aspects of the human mind.
The second section, which deals with the
mind of the child, contains contributions by
Dr. Emanuel Miller and Dr. William Moodi^
All who know the work of these two Medical
Directors at their respective clinics will realise
how well qualified they are to throw light ofl
the working of the child's mind. This sectioij
should prove of practical help to parents aii('
others who are concerned with the upbringing
of young children. Attention is drawn t?
many " behaviour difficulties " which nia)'
arise and adults are encouraged not to exa?'
gerate their significance : at thc same time,
the need for " careful but unemotional nur-
ture " is emphasised. Child study is shoW'1
to be not only an interesting and satisfying
study but also a profitable one, in that, a
greater understanding of the child will lead
a more sympathetic treatment resulting 1,1
normal, happy development.
MENTAL WELFARE 29
he last section is entitled " How the Mind
vorks in Society," and is again a contribution
.y Prof. Burt. He says: " Psychology must
j^clude a survey of every form or aspect the
Uttian consciousness can take." This phrase
l111?ht be taken as the keynote of the book and
ls an indication of its value, in that it touches
011 so many phases of psychology. As a brief
survey Gf the main topics with which the
science of psychology deals, the book fulfils a
?Ug-feit want. How often the question is
^>ked ; " What is psychology? " Here is the
0o-SW-er *his question. It shows that psychol-
&y is a study with a wide appeal dealing as it
, ?e:s with practical as well as theoretical
Problems.
liof. Burt, in the third section, discusses
anc^ temperamental differences between
n V ^V? sexes> racial differences, questions of
? Jtics, leisure, art and religion. In these
int^01"8 ^ro^- Burt shows how wide are his
erests, and how sound his knowledge of the
?-r?Us topics with which he deals. Those
a f ?11vv?llW follow in his footsteps and come to
aii 1 v!" Understanding of their own mental life
nil ? Cental lives of those around them,
a cultivate, as he has done, interest in every
eve*" human conduct. There are, how-
^u|r' asPects of the subject which one cannot
regret have not had a fuller exposition,
to^trial psychology, for instance, is only
oby ^ 011' u*- *n a wo1'^ such scope it is
the10Usly impossible to do more than indicate
Psv v.lany branches of so wide a subject as
toJ^ogy. From the wealth of possible data
auc^t! P?Pu^ar interest have been selected
1<"C\V choice would appear to be a wise one.
have f listened to the wireless talks could
terest Uled some topic of personal in-
reali ' ai1^ w^? lcac^ the book will, likewise,
DrnKi^ ^lat psychology deals with the everyday
Qu^ms ?f the average man.
book ^le m?st interesting features of the
exper1-S ^le sh?rt account in each section of the
011 Wh1'11!011^ researches which supply the data
are b^s conciusi?ns ?f modern psychology
teehm r^00^ throughout is written in 11011-
the Sc- ^an?uage and as an introduction to
reade/eilCe Psychology should find many
n?rinal' -^e book deals primarily with the
the natiln"1(^. ^ut those who are interested in
Well , l0l?gical mind will also find the book
1 01'th readinq.
To specialists, the volume presents little
that is new, but future lines of research are
suggested.
This is a book which can be recommended,
especially to those whose knowledge of the
subject matter of psychology is slight.
A.M.J.
