Training of Social Workers in Mental Health
============================================

The year's training course for social workers in Mental Health is now
an established part of the Social Science Department of the London School of
Economics. Through the generosity of the Commonwealth Fund it is again
possible to award six scholarships to experienced social workers to enable them to
meet the expense of undertaking this Course. Particulars of the scholarships
offered for this year appear in the advertisement on page 30 of this issue.

The advantages of the appointment of specially trained social workers in
this field is being increasingly recognised both by Psychiatrists and by the Com-
mittees of Mental Hospitals and in the last report of the Board of Control the
opinion was expressed that " these advantages have now been amply demon-
strated " and that " We know of no Psychiatrist who, after having experienced
the benefits of the service, would be without it."

It is interesting to note that the Course has not been confined to those
intending to work in medico-psychological clinics or Mental Hospitals but has
been taken up by Probation Officers, Public Health Visitors, School Care
Committee organisers and so on, who have returned to their former posts after
this additional year of valuable training.

New Year Honours
-----------------

We should like to offer our hearty congratulations to Miss Turner of the
Royal Eastern Counties Institution, who was awarded the M.B.E. in the recent
New Year Honours. Miss Turner's devotion to the work of the Royal Eastern
Counties Institution and to the general well-being of defectives is well known
to all workers in this field and those of our readers who have been fortunate
enough to have been shown round the Institution by her will not have failed
to have been struck by her infectious enthusiasm and cheerful outlook. It is
very gratifying that her work should receive this public recognition.

Award to Dr Penrose
---------------------

Another award made this year to a member of the staff of the Royal
Eastern Counties Institution is that of the Buxton Brown Prize, which has been
awarded to Dr Lionel Penrose, who is at present carrying out investigations
into the causation of mental defect. The prize is offered annually by the
Harveian Society to medical men under 40 years of age, for a paper on some
subject chosen by the Society. The subject for this year was " The Influence
of Heredity in Disease." We congratulate Dr Penrose and wish him success
m the important work which he is doing.

Guide and Scout Conference: Coleshill Hall
-------------------------------------------

The Sixth Annual Conference of the Mental Deficiency and Epileptic
Section of the Special Tests Branch of the Boy Scouts Association was held at
Coleshill Hall, near Birmingham, on the 28th November last.

The Board of Control was represented officially by Miss Redfern, the
Special Tests Branch by Dr Mary Andrews, A.H.Q. Commissioner for the
Northern Division, and Colonel Strover, A.H.Q. Commissioner for the
Southern Division, and the Extension Branch of the Girl Guide Association by
Miss Joan Gibsone.

Alderman Miss Bartleet, O.B.E., J.P., Chairman of the Mental Deficiency
Acts Committee of the City of Birmingham, presided at lunch, at which Sir
Hubert Bond, Senior Commissioner for the Board of Control, was the guest
of honour.

There were 47 visitors in all, including Officers of the Mental Deficiency
Acts Committee, Stoke-on-Trent, the Medical Superintendent of Great Barr
Colony, five Matrons from Mental Deficiency Colonies, and Guide Captains
and Scoutmasters attached to Brentry, Calderstones, Cell Barnes, Colchester,
Coleshill Hall, Great Barr, Lingfield, The Manor, Pevsey, Rampton, Starcross,
Starnthwaite, and Weston Colonies, also from certain Special Schools and
Homes for Epileptics.

Interesting papers were received on how to form a troop and on the choice
of patrol leaders by various Scoutmasters and Guide Captains.

Epileptic Children
---------------------

In the last Annual Report of Sir George Newman, Chief Medical Officer
of the Board of Education, a chapter is devoted to the consideration of the
position of the Epileptic Child in special day and residential schools. The
shortage of accommodation in special schools makes it essential that the places
should be used to best advantage and Sir George Newman makes various
recommendations to this end. He is of opinion that a number of children in
existing residential schools for epileptics should be classified as ineducable (in
an enquiry into 605 children he found as many as 10% ineducable and 20%
feeble-minded) and that these should come under the aegis of the Board of
Control for institutional care. Sir George Newman suggests a more careful
selection of children on admission to these schools, a periodic review of children
in the schools, so that those whose intelligence is at a standstill or deteriorating
should be detected, and a probationary period of not more than a year for
children of doubtful educability.

Sir George Newman also stresses the need for further research into the
relationship existing between the incidence of fits and intelligence and the
need for a very careful system of testing by which the child's progress as well
as his attainments may be gauged.

Retirement of Dr Ralph H. Crowley
-----------------------------------

It is with very great regret that we have read of the retirement of
Dr Crowley from the post of Senior Medical Officer of the Board of Education
which he has held for so many years.

Dr Crowley has worked unceasingly for the well-being of the children
of this country and has always shown a particular interest in the care of defec-
tive and backward children. His interest in this branch of education has been
invaluable to this Association and we have always been able to turn to him for
advice and active support in any new developments we were considering.

We wish him many happy years of leisure and hope that his retirement
from his official position will not rob us of his friendly help in the future.
Margaret Macdowall Memorial Scholarship, 1934

Applications are again invited from persons wishing to obtain specialised
training in the care of mentally defective children for two scholarships available
ln *934 under the Margaret Macdowall Memorial Fund. The Scholarships will
be tenable at one or other of the Courses arranged by the C.A.M.W., according
to the qualifications and eligibility of the successful applicants.

The Fund is administered by a Committee of the C.A.M.W., who act as
trustees, and all enquiries and applications regarding the Scholarships should
be addressed to die Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.i.
Training Courses in 1934

The following Courses have been arranged by the C.A.M.W. to take
place during the year 1934 : ?

1- Course for Medical Practitioners on Mental Deficiency and Allied
Conditions at the University of London, South Kensington, S.W.

Part I. April 16th to 21st.
Part II. April 23rd to 28th.
2- Courses for Enquiry Officers, for Supervisors of Occupation Centres and
for Institution Staffs, at Notcutt House, Dorset Square, London, N.W.i.
June 30th to July 21st.

3- Courses for the Training of Teachers of Retarded Children.
(a) The Nine Weeks' Course will be held in London from Monday,
May 14th to July 13th or 17th.
(b) The Short Courses organised by the C.A.M.W. on behalf of the Board
of Education will be held as follows: ?
Advanced Course (in London), July 3rd to 25th.
Elementary Course, September 7th to 27th. (Probably in Liverpool).
Note.?The dates given for the Teachers' Courses are provisional,
details will be circulated in February.
^est of Scotland Neuro-Psychiatric Institute
The following interesting account of the formation and work of this
Institute has been contributed by Dr W. M. Ford Robertson, the present
Erector: ?

0? West of Scotland Research Institute was established in 1909 and, for a period
to fi:teen years 11P to the commencement of the Great War, made valuable contributions
the advancement of our knowledge of the pathology of mental diseases. From 1919 to
1928 the activities of the Laboratory were renewed under the directorship of Dr W. Whitelaw,
who was instrumental in widening the scope of the routine, instruction and research work
and in stimulating the interest of Medical Officers associated with the Laboratory in the
application of technical methods to the clinical aspects of mental disorder.

With the passing of the Local Government (Scotland) Act in 1930, whereby seven mental
hospitals or institutions came under the administration of the Glasgow Corporation Health
Services, these and former contributing bodies, including Gartnavel Royal, Kirklands Mental
Hospital, Lanarkshire, the Burgh of Paisley and the Renfrew District Board, decided to
place the whole scheme for maintaining the Research Institute on a sound and adequate
financial basis. In August, 1932, Dr W. M. Ford Robertson, M.D. (Psychiatry, Edinburgh),
was appointed Director of the Institute now termed the West of Scotland Neuro-Psychiatric
Research Institute. In November the Executive Committee under the Chairmanship of
Bailie V. M. C. Roberton, Convenor of the Glasgow Corporation Health Committee, met
and received the Director's report, in which he outlined the aims and objects of the
Institute and put forward plans for its re-organisation and equipment. The Board of Man-
agement of Gartnavel Royal Mental Hospital, represented by Col. J. A. Roxburgh (Chairman)
and Dr A. McNiven (Medical Superintendent), contributed generously to the scheme in
undertaking structural alterations and re-fitting many departments of the Laboratory, which
stands in the grounds of this Hospital. The work of re-construction, equipping and re-
organisation was completed in June, 1933, and the commencement of the new scheme was
marked by the Research Institute's formal re-opening by Sir Arthur Rose, Chairman of the
General Board of Control for Scotland, on June 28th, 1933.

The Institute is a single-storied self-contained block of 12 rooms, including mortuary,
chapel and post-mortem room. The Laboratory itself is now divided into four main depart-
ments for biochemistry, bacteriology, serology and histology. Sub-departments such as
those for sterilising and cleaning, micro-photography and animal experimental work are
also re-fitted and equipped with modern apparatus and appliances requisite for the particular
needs of routine and research work.

The present staff consists of the Director, an experienced technician and a junior assist-
ant; later, it is hoped to augment the qualified and technical staff as circumstances demand.
The Board of Management hope that in the future the Research Institute will have increased
support as the result of a greater number of mental hospitals or institutions in the West of
Scotland becoming contributors to the scheme.

The Research Institute, as re-organised and equipped under the Board of Management,
whereof Bailie V. M. C. Roberton is Chairman, with both lay and medical representatives
from each hospital in the scheme, has the following functions and objectives :?
1. The primary aim is research, its initiation, maintenance and propagation, especially into
the functional pathology of the living insane. In this direction it is hoped to conduct
investigations in bacteriology, bio-chemistry and certain aspects of leucocytic changes.
Part of the work is intimately linked with the question of physical therapeutics and thus
its interest will, it is hoped, be extended into the clinical field of each hospital.
2. This broad basis of investigation will, it is believed, provide a sufficiently wide range of
interest and choice to those intending to work in the Laboratory and should thus stimulate
Medical Officers of the mental hospitals and Post-Graduates to take up research in the
Institute and, in many instances, to continue it on their return to the wards of the hospitals.
It is also the Institute's aim to keep in touch with the clinicians and their cases and to
maintain that contact in such a way that the three main provisions constituting the care
of mental patients, in the sense of their clinical, laboratory, and therapeutic problems, are
welded together into a constructive whole. In this way it is hoped that, in time, there
will be built up what may be termed a " rationale of therapeutics " based on all grades
of clinical and laboratory investigative methods. Substantial progress in the future un-
doubtedly lies in this direction but, to be realised, the active co-operation of the whole
hospital personnel is essential.

3. In course of time it is intended that a comprehensive set of microscopic slides should be
made dealing with the normal and morbid conditions of the central nervous system and
bodily tissues. This, and sets of anatomical specimens of the brain and spinal cord, will,
it is hoped, provide in the future an adequate medium for demonstration and teaching
purposes.

4. It is hoped to maintain an efficient standard of routine work embracing the main branches
of laboratory investigation for those hospitals which are at present unequipped with
laboratories or technical staff, and also to supply special reagents, media for bacteriological
research and therapeutic agents such as sera, vaccines, etc., as circumstances demand.

5. A library of text books and scientific journals will be formed for the use of the medical
staff in the associated hospitals and institutions.
