The Border Lime FeeMe-Miiided Child: How can he be catered for in the School System?
=====================================================================================

MENTAL WELFARE
99
By RAYMOND B. CATTELL, M.A., B.Sc., Ph.D.,
Psychologist to the Leicester Education Committee
Before we can get to grips with the educational problem we must define
more exactly the type of child with whom we are dealing?the much neglected
border line feeble-minded child, widely scattered in our schools. Current ideas
as to the extent of feeble-mindedness remain surprisingly conflicting. We are
also in some doubt as to whether defect is increasing or decreasing and at what
o o
rates in various types of locality.
This being so, it follows that the I.Q. level below which, other things
being equal, feeble-mindedness can be said to exist, is a highly debatable matter.
As everyone knows, the criterion is not in the first place one of I.Q. at all
but of relative educability and aptness of social adjustment. According to this
broad criterion the percentage of mentally defective children (idiots, imbeciles
and feeble-minded) found by various observers, varies from ^ to 2%. The
intelligence quotients of children thus selected fall, with a few exceptions,
below 70. Since roughly, one per cent, (let us say) of children are defective
and defectives fall below the 70 I.Q. mark, it is frequently but illogically sup-
posed that one per cent, of children have I.Q.'s below 70. Actually the per-
centage of persons with I.Q.'s below 70, is much greater, since not all of them
attract attention or are referred to the certifying officer.
In the report of the Mentally Deficiency Committee the proportion of
children with I.Q.'s below these figures varies from 2.2 to 5.1%, according to
whether urban or rural areas are concerned. The recent investigation of the
Scottish Research Council, however, points to a much greater scatter of in-
telligence quotients among school children than has hitherto been revealed
by the Binet Tests which, after all, are noted rather for their antiquity than for
their conformity to the demands of modern research. In an adult population the
present writer recently found some 12 to 14% of people with I.Q.'s below 70.1
Evidently the exact percentage of children with I.Q.'s below 70 remains
a matter for investigation, but this much is certain : that there is a considerable
number of retarded children having such low I.Q.'s and who yet cannot be
accommodated in the special schools. The special school accommodation in
most towns is decidedly smaller than that which would be recommended by
an impartial scientific witness having no regard to the feelings of the people
concerned. Most right thinking people, having regard to the popular stigma
which still attaches to mental defect, are keen to keep the child in the normal
school if he can possibly be educated there. The teacher is loathe to report
1 " Occupational Norms of Intelligence and Standardisation of an Adult Intelligence
Test." British Journal of Psychology, July, 1934.
100 MENTAL WELFARE
the border line defective; the parents resent his being transferred and the
medical officer is generally highly cautious. In short, the cumulative effect of
a whole series of reluctances is to keep in the normal schools a considerable
number of children of no greater mental capacity than the certified feeble-
minded. These children contrast with the certified feeble-minded, not in
mental capacity but in their relative freedom from behaviour difficulties, in
their steady application and ability to scrape along in a normal class without
exciting too much attention. Occasionally, by dint of great industry and
application, they achieve a skill in such matters as reading, mechanical arith-
metic and handwork equal to that of the average C Class (dull) child with
whom they are classified, but in true arithmetic and composition?perform-
ance in which is more limited by actual mental capacity?they are generally
little better off than their coevals in the special school. They differ from the
special school child in one other important respect, namely, that they succeed
much more readily in obtaining and retaining employment when they leave
school.
So much for the general state of affairs. The next question is what can
be done for the education of this type of child?the retarded or border line
feeble-minded child?a type numerically much more important than the certi-
fied feeble-minded? The solution adopted by certain education authorities,
notably by Leicester, and the one which I am purposing to describe, consists
in setting up in the ordinary elementary schools a number of special classes
in which the general aims and methods of teaching are akin to those in the
special school. Thus the school system is equipped on the one hand with a
special school for children who are definitely feeble-minded and who are un-
likely to be in employment in later life (even under normal economic con-
ditions) and, on the other hand, with classes specifically designed to cater for
border line feeble-minded children who nevertheless have a good chance of
o
finding useful employment of a simple kind if they are not labelled as special
school children.
This question of employment needs stressing for it reminds us of the
important discrepancy that exists between the legal definition of mental defect
among adults and that among children. As everyone with experience of this
matter knows, the school life criterion of feeble-mindedness, namely, " inedu-
cability " cuts off a larger slice of the population than the adult criterion, " re-
quiring care, supervision, and control." Probably only one half of the school
" feeble-minded " become adult " feeble-minded." As a result many in-
dividuals who as children are placed in special schools do not continue to have
institutional care as adults but are pushed out into the world to fend for them-
selves with the added handicap of having been classified as feeble-minded.
It is not the object of the present paper to ask how this cruelty can be
avoided or to question whether the adult standard might not be adjusted to
the childhood one, e.g., by the provision of agricultural colonies to accommo-
date adult feeble-minded who otherwise swell the ranks of the unemployed.
Suffice it that the problem is partly solved by sending to the special school only
MENTAL WELFARE 101
those who are most unlikely to become successful wage earning citizens and
by drafting into special classes those who may reasonably be expected to earn
a living in later life.
It is found that the accommodation required in the Special Classes is five
or six times as great as that available in the Special Schools. This, in any case,
is exactly what one would expect from the normal distribution curve of in-
telligence quotients; the section of the curve immediately above the feeble-
minded level includes a considerably greater number of children than the
feeble-minded section itself. In organising, the aims have been to provide one
special class in an infant school, one in a junior school and one in a senior
school, in each division of the city (since these children cannot be collected
by bus as is done with Special School children). In some instances, two classes
have been provided in each school department in order that the age range in
one class may not have to include the whole school range. Unless this is done,
the age range in the junior school classes, for example, may extend over three
or four years.
Nevertheless, the range of mental age is not as great as this, since,
on an average, these children only make two-thirds of a year's progress
in mental age for every year's increase in actual age. In practice there is no
difficulty whatever in dealing with the scatter of mental age that exists in such
a class, for a little calculation will show that it is no greater than that which
exists in a class of normal children. But in order to avoid differences of physical
size it seems desirable, wherever possible, to halve this age range by having two
special classes?one taking the higher and one taking the lower ages?in each
school department, infant, junior or senior, of the school that is handling
special class children for a given city area. In Leicester, which has a school
population of about 30,000 (and a total population of about 239,000), the City
schools are divided into five regions, each being supplied with three or more
special classes. These regions are not of equal area because it is found that
the incidence of special class children is much higher in some?notably in
slum areas and slum-clearance estates?than in others.
All the children who enter these classes are given intelligence tests and
attainment tests by the Psychologist or his Assistant and are examined again
from time to time. Except in rare instances, a child who has been drafted into
a Special Class in the infant school will continue to pass from one special class
to another throughout his school life. This is a necessary consequence of the
constancy of the I.Q. Thus he receives a suitable education at every stage of
his school life.
This conception of the special class as a permanent home for certain child-
ren at first surprised many teachers who were accustomed to placing in the
old-style special class a good proportion of children accidentally backward but
of good intelligence. In fact there is considerable confusion of thought as to
the real object of Special Classes. They contained a mixture of children of low
intelligence quotients and others who had good intelligence quotients but who,
through accidental circumstances, had low scholastic attainment. As a result,
102 MENTAL WELFARE
unless the classes were very small, neither type of child received a suitable edu-
cation. Under the present arrangement, children with scholastic disabilities are
drafted to an Experimental School where the staff is specially trained and
constantly concerned in remedying, in a comparatively short time, years of
retardation in school subjects. The Special Classes, on the other hand, contain
only those children who are of definitely low intelligence.
Under the new conditions just described, the teaching can be much better
adapted to the particular mentality of the children for whom these classes are
designed. The classes can also be much larger. Such a statement, though it
may have an instant appeal to administrators, needs some defence before
teachers. So long as special classes were a mixture of types requiring com-
pletely different treatment, the teaching had to be highly individual and in
consequence the numbers could only be about one third or one quarter of those
in the normal classes. Individual teaching may, of course, be considered as
the ideal in all education, but it is unfair and foolish to wive to the child of
o
small promise what we cannot afford to give to the normal child. Adminis-
trators, moreover, are in practice unwilling to create adequate special class
accommodation on these extravagant terms. The belief that these classes must
be extremely small arises from the tradition of mixed classes just described
and from misconceptions about the goals of teaching in special classes. A
special class containing children carefully selected to be of approximately
uniform I.Q. and mental age need be only slightly smaller than a normal class
providing the goals of school attainment aimed at by the teacher are suited to
the natural abilities and interests of these children.
The principal modifications of curriculum consist of (i) the introduction
of more handwork and manual skills generally, (2) the postponement of read-
ing, etc., until the children have more nearly attained the mental age at which
normal children make progress in reading, (3) the couching of arithmetic and
allied studies in concrete terms, and practical situations designed as direct train-
ing for after-life, (4) the introduction of lessons akin to the infant school
" sense training " to encourage alertness, to increase the sense of achievement
by success in matters in which these children are under no handicap relative to
children of good intelligence and, again, to provide direct training in habits
required in after school life.
Arithmetic becomes practical training in buying and selling, with a shop
set up in the classroom. Boys and girls who cannot work out the simplest
sum in abstract terms can nevertheless acquire calculating habits which enable
them to give correct change, to calculate tram and bus fares, and realise the
value of various wages, etc.
Reading is, in the last resort, more important to the child than arithme-
tic, for without it he cannot find his way about or respond to the simplest
notices. Although reading is postponed until the child has a mental age of
five or six, i.e., until he is in the junior school, it then receives considerable
attention. Here, too, the teaching method involves an emphasis on reading
for practical purposes. Some action follows on the sentence read. Dramatisa-
MENTAL WELFARE 103
tion has been very successfully employed here. The handwriting of special
class children is frequently decidedly better than that of children in the normal
classes, though, owing to the association of motor inco-ordination with low
intelligence, there are some marked exceptions to this.
The emphasis on handwork is symbolised by a re-shaping of the class-
room itself. It becomes, primarily, a work room, with tables and benches
replacing desks. In addition to ordinary woodwork or metal-work, there is a
good deal of training in weaving, basketwork, bookbinding and varieties of
needlework. In a few places where gardening has been tried out, it has
evoked considerable interest and, if taught on suitable lines, can have great
training value, but the distribution of special classes, unfortunately, does not
permit of its being a regular subject of instruction in most of them.
It is a common observation that the majority of entrants to special classes
come with a sense of failure and frustration from the ordinary schools in which
they have been trying to struggle along. One of the most important aims of
the special class instruction is to remove this attitude and substitute for it a
positive one, involving a sense of achievement, self-respect, and ability to do
as well as other children. In the school work itself, the " sense training "
lessons go> a long way to produce this result. Here the child achieves skill in
selecting colours and shapes, and in various games such as that in which the
child attempts to judge various substances by smell alone, or to recognise com-
mon coins by a sense of touch alone, or tell what objects are passing in the
street from the sounds that they make. In these matters, which require alert-
ness and good memory rather than intelligence, the special class child rapidly
acquires skill surpassing that of the normal child who does not get so much
training in this direction. He thus realises that by close application he can
actually excel in competition with children from the other classes.
There is still room for considerable experiment in lessons on these lines,
i.e., lessons designed to increase alertness, to give a sense of achievement and
to supply the child with skills and information which will be directly useful to
him when he leaves school. Consequently the policy in Leicester has been
to encourage special class teachers to progress on different lines and to come
together at regular intervals with the object of discussing the success or failure
of the methods they have adopted. One teacher has recently developed a
special lesson called " Observation," in which the child's capacity for observing
useful factors about the locality is brought out. He is asked, for example,
" How many grocer's shops are there in a certain street? " " Where is the
nearest fire alarm? " " Where do the coal carts come from that go along such
and such a street? " Another class has developed a kind of game akin to
" Man and his object," in which powers of cross-questioning and clear and
logical answering are developed. It should not be overlooked that one of the
most frequent criticisms from employers and others is that they are unable to
get a sensible question or answer from this type of child or get him to speak
in intelligible sentences.
io4 MENTAL WELFARE
For certain subjects the special class children are dispersed among the
other classes. Indeed, it is a definite policy to give them a place in the general
work of the school and to do away with any suggestion that they are a special
class. They can join in singing, in physical training, in games, and in some
handwork activities, with the rest of the school.
Wherever psychological testing has been carried out, both in this country
and abroad, it has been found that the population below an I.Q. of 80 generally
contains an undue proportion of difficult and delinquent people. Consequently,
one is not surprised to find that a certain number of the children who are
referred for special classes are also delinquent or the subjects of some nervous
disability. This arises principally from two causes: (1) the nature of the
homes, and (2) from the previous school experience of the child. The parents
of these dull children are in nine cases out of ten dull themselves. Although,
as Penrose has pointed out, the relatives of idiots fairly frequently are normal
people, the relatives of feeble-minded and border line feeble-minded, arc more
frequently of the same mental calibre. A good proportion of the homes from
which these children come are poor, overcrowded and ill-managed, providing
a very fertile soil for all kinds of moral delinquency. The handling of the
home problem in these cases is a task for the Psychiatric Social Worker attached
to the Psychologist. Rut a surprising number of the difficult and nervous cases
are in that condition for no other reason than that they have continually failed
in the ordinary school. They have been driven by competition, by threats and
by all manner of pressure, to accomplish things which they were inherently
incapable of accomplishing. They have been held up to ridicule, branded as
dull or, more commonly, as unwilling and idle, and have been generally
frustrated in their self-expression. In these circumstances, it is not surprising
that some have become highly timid, nervous and lacking in initiative. Others
have become rebellious and spiteful, and practically all have developed habits
of inattention, inability to concentrate and a general sense of " I can't." One
could cite case after case in which glaring symptoms of this kind have com-
pletely cleared up under no other influence than that of the special class en-
vironment itself. It is no exaggeration to say that the most important function
of the special class is to train character, and that frequently in a remedial sense.
With children of this level of intelligence direct therapeutic work by the
psychologist is rarely possible, for they are not able to achieve insight into the
emotional situations in which they are entangled. It is necessary to proceed
by modification of environment, e.g., change of treatment at home or in
school, separation from undesirable companions, provision of suitable outlets.
To such changes they respond very quickly. This ready response has its dis-
advantages and it is very noticeable that special class children tend to regress
in behaviour after even a comparatively short vacation in which they have
been exposed to a slack, indifferent or disorderly home atmosphere. Character
training in the special classes is largely a matter of habit formation. That
freedom from supervision and interference which is essential to the character
MENTAL WELFARE 105
development of the highly intelligent child is inappropriate in most situations
in the special class.
On leaving school, the special class child generally needs some assistance
in finding a suitable job. The majority succeed in holding simple repetitive
jobs in factories. Among the boys, a fair proportion successfully hold jobs as
errand boys, but they are liable to be unemployed again in two or three years
time, for the work of a shop assistant to which they would normally graduate
is too much for them. Of one girl who had become a shop assistant the em-
ployers wrote: " She is getting on quite well provided her work is well super-
vised, but she is not quite up to the standard we usually employ."
Considering the greater cost involved in educating the child of this level
11. r* ?
of intelligence and the difficulty in finding suitable employment for him in
after life, it is obviously incumbent upon society to adopt eugenic measures to
reduce the number of children so handicapped. This falls outside the province
of the educator, but it is his duty to point it out, for no one else is in a position
to observe so clearly the sad fact that the majority of special class children grow
up in families of five or six or more.
A word about the training of the teacher. There has been in the past a
common attitude, rarely frankly expressed, that the poorest teacher should be
relegated to looking after the special class. Yet if these children are to be
taught?and the price, in crime and uselessncss, of not teaching them is heavier
than with the normal child?they will require in most respects a more able
teacher than the teacher of A Classes. It has been the policy with the special
classes here described to appoint to these classes the teacher who has in the
highest degree the true teacher's personality?being more interested in the
child than the subject?and who has had some special and additional training
in psychology. Courses have been arranged for these teachers in the theory
and practice of mental testing and in the handling of " problem " children.
They become specialists who are responsible for the complete mental testing
of the children in their classes and for the preliminary testing of children in
neighbouring schools who are referred as likely subjects for the special class.
The special class is not labelled as such among the children but is vari-
ously designated in each school, e.g., in one it is " 3D," in another " the
Remove." Nevertheless, the methods of organisation are well known through-
out the schools. The child in a Special Class moreover has a special record form
on which I.Q., attainment on performance tests, school attainment in English
and arithmetic on various occasions, and medical and home history are entered.
This goes with the child from school to school.
As emphasised at the beginning of this article, it is as yet too early to pre-
dict exactly what numbers and what I.Q. ranges are the optimum ones for
Special Classes. Some senior school Special Classes have been successfully run
with 35 children but the infant classes need to be smaller and some have only
fulfilled their purpose when they have been cut down to twenty. The I.Q.
range promises to settle down at from 65 to 75.
