Report
=======

The Report is signed by all members of the Committee,* and especial
attention is called to the fact that they are unanimous in all their recommenda-
tions. In presenting their conclusions, they use the words (103) : It would be
improper for us to anticipate the criticisms which our proposals will inevitab y
excite. But we may perhaps be allowed to say that our recommendations are
not a compromise between conflicting views adopted reluctantly in order to
secure the appearance of agreement. On the contrary we were fortunate at the
end of a long enquiry in finding ourselves in complete harmony.
After an introductory chapter dealing with the present legal position and
the extent of the problem, there follow chapters on:?Present knowledge of
the causation of mental defect and of mental disorders; Results of sterilisation;
Dominion and foreign legislation; Recommendations of the Committee on
legislation and suggested research. The Report ends with the conclusions and
summary of the principal recommendations and appendices on the memoranda
submitted by various witnesses, and on legislation elsewhere in force.
*Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilisation. Presented to the Minister of
Health December, 1933. H.M. Stationery Office. Cmd. 4485. Price 2/- net. 19. 14.
Members of the Departmental Committee appointed by the Ministry ot Healtn, ju ,
1932: L. G. Brock (Chairman), E. W. Adams, R. H. Crowley, Ruth Darwin, R. A. Fisher,
E. O. Lewis, A. F. Tredgold, Wilfred Trotter.
The numbers in brackets denote the numbered paragraphs of the Report.
2 MENTAL WELFARE
Compulsory or Voluntary Sterilisation
The attitude of the Committee towards compulsory sterilisation is summed
up (66) as follows:?" We assume that the Legislature would not be justified
in compelling any persons to submit to sterilisation, unless it could be shown
beyond reasonable doubt that some at least of their offspring would either be
mentally defective or would develop mental disorder. In the present state of
knowledge no such proof can be produced," and further (67): '' If public
opinion is favourable, compulsion is unnecessary; if public opinion is indiffer-
ent, compulsion tends to convert indifference to hostility."
The Committee recommend (Summary of principal recommendations,
page 57) that subject to the safeguards proposed, voluntary sterilisation should
be legalised in the case of: ?
(a) A person who is mentally defective or who has suffered from mental
disorder (paras. 70 and 71).*
(b) A person who suffers from, or is believed to be a carrier of, a grave
physical disability which has been shown to be transmissible (72).
(c) A person who is believed to be likely to transmit mental disorder or defect
(paras. 73 and 74).
It may here be remarked that group (c) connotes "all persons whose family
history gives reasonable ground for believing that they may transmit mental
disorder or defect "?a group which might perhaps, the Committee suggest,
be more narrowly restricted by taking as a criterion the birth to such parents of
a defective child (74). So strongly do the Committee feel that to limit their
recommendations so as to exclude those suffering from certain physical defects
would be indefensible, that their words (72) must be quoted in full: ?
" We feel strongly that to impose any such arbitrary limitation will go far to defeat
the object of the measure we advocate. Any measure which limits sterilisation to mental
cases will carry with it a stigma, much as certification does now. It would give a
quasi-penal character to a measure which in our view is properly to be regarded as an
act of social justice, as a right to do something which is in the interest of society and
not merely of,the individual. Anything which gives to a voluntary action a penal
character is clearly bound to act as a deterrent. So strongly do we realise this that
we should feel unable to recommend any sterilisation scheme limited in this way. It is
not for us to discuss how transmissible physical defect should be defined for this pur-
pose, but we are unanimous in the conviction that it is both anti-social and inequitable
that persons who have good reason to fear that they may transmit to their offspring
grave physical disabilities should be left without any remedy except the harassing un-
certainty of contraceptive devices. That the right to sterilisation should be carefully
safeguarded we readily admit, and the nature of the safeguards desirable is discussed in
a later portion of the Report. Recognition of the need for carefully studied safeguards
does not lessen our strong conviction that sterilisation ought to be regarded as a right
and not as a punishment."
*The term " mental defective " is used in the Report (unless otherwise stated) to mean
a mentally defective individual within the meaning of Section 1 of the Mental Deficiency
Act, 1927."
MENTAL WELFARE ? 3
Causation of Mental Defect and Mental Disorder
Reference is made to the present evidence on the incidence of m
abnormalities in the families in which mental defectives occur, a
research which is being carried out, e.g., in this country at t e Pres
the Royal Eastern Counties Institution (22). The Committee eci p
proach the problem from a different aspect by a special enquiry in
of children born to mental defectives (24). Local Authorities were
asked to send a return of the children of all known defectives in their areas, a
very interesting detailed examination of the figures obtaine is Pnn e
supplementary chapter (pages 60-74). The total number of cases repore P
was 3,733, the mother being defective in 3,247 cases. As t e ommi ee p
out, the defective mother, especially if children are illegitimate or neg . '
is more likely to be brought to the notice of the Local Authority. ese
tives produced 8,841 children, of whom 2,001 or 22.5 per cent. !have du=d,
percentage which is so high as to go far, in the opinion o t c ommi
confirm the evidence from other sources of a relation between men a
and inherent poor physique. After the exclusion of children un er se^c
(because of the difficulty of ascertaining mental defect below that age) and o
those about whom no definite information was available, the remaining 3> 5
children were divided into two groups:
Group I. (Ages 7-13). 1,802 children.
305 of these (16.9 per cent.) were classified as defective
423 of these (23.5 per cent.) were classified as retarded
21 of these (1.2 per cent.) were classified as superior
Group II. {Ages over 13.) 1,848 children.
599 of these (32.4 per cent.) were classified as defective
240 of these (13 per cent.) were classified as retarded
10 of these ( .5 per cent.) were classified as superior
The Committee point out that the higher proportion of defectives in Group II
as compared with retarded children suggests that many of the chi ren in
Group I (seven to thirteen) who were classed as retarded will later e oun
to be defective. Taking the two classes together the percentages o menta y
subnormal children for each group are 40.4 and 45.4 respectively. T e om
mittee state: " When it is understood that 22.5 per cent, of the children had
already died and that these percentages apply to survivors, the figures indicate
that here we have a social problem calling urgently for some practical preventive
measure." (27) _
The conclusions of the Committee on the causation of mental de ect are
so germane to the discussion of the value of sterilisation that we quote t em
in full (33): ?
!? In many cases of mental defect there exists in the family some form of-
abnormality, i.e., insanity, psychoneurosis, epilepsy, defect or dulness. _ nre^ent
of such cases there is evidence of heredity but the mode of transmissio 1 p
unknown.
4 MENTAL WELFARE
2. In the case of certain rare forms of defect, not only is the fact of hereditary
transmission known, but the method of transmission has been demonstrated.
3. It is probable that some mental defect is determined by a combination of genetic
and environmental factors.
4. Some mental defect is not inherited, i.e., the defect is acquired after conception as
a result of environmental causes. There is no evidence that such defect is transmissible
to subsequent generations.
5. Low grade mental defect is more frequently associated than is high grade defect
with environmental factors, and it appears to be fairly equally distributed among all
classes of society.
6. There is some evidence that conditions operating during the intra-uterine period
may produce mental defect, but very little is at present known on this point.
7. High grade mental defect occurs proportionately more frequently in the lowest social
stratum than in the rest of the population. In this stratum there appears to be an
unduly high incidence of mental defect, insanity, intellectual dulness, epilepsy, as
well as tuberculosis and other physical defects. Cause and effect of the conditions
found in the social problem group are debatable, but it is possible that selective mating
may to a large extent account for this concentration of physical defects and mental
defects and disorders. There is evidence that in the poorest districts, neighbour
marries neighbour, and like marries like.
8. There is no evidence that parental alcoholism is responsible for any appreciable
amount of mental defect. Recent research on this matter casts doubt on some of the
earlier conclusions based on animal experiments.
9. Our evidence does not indicate any causal connection between tuberculosis and
mental defect.
10. Syphilis is responsible for some, though an undetermined amount of, mental defect.
11. It is impossible in the present state of our knowledge about the causation of
mental defect to forecast with certainty whether a child of any given union will exhibit
mental abnormalities. It can, however, be shown that, whether the cause be bad
heredity or adverse environmental conditions, or both, the children of parents one or
both of whom are mentally defective are, on the average, below the normal, and our
enquiry shows that nearly one-third of such children as survive are likely to be
defective, and more than two-fifths must be expected to exhibit some degree of mental
abnormality.
In regard to the causation of mental disorder, the Committee confined
their enquiries to the more serious forms which constitute legal unsoundness
of mind. The Committee point out that though there have been various in-
vestigations in recent years, the available data are still insufficient to enable a
final answer to be given to many questions relating to causation. While the
evidence before them was to the effect that inheritance was the commonest
single cause of mental disorder in general, environmental factors played, in
many cases, a very important part, and it appeared to them that in a consider-
able proportion, probably the majority, of cases, there was an " inherited pre-
disposition, and that were it not for this predisposition, exciting factors would
have comparatively little effect." (45) Summing up the evidence available, the
Committee state (46): ?
" In view of the facts that there are so many different clinical forms of mental dis-
order, and that these forms probably differ widely in their causation and transmissibilitv,
we "are of the opinion that there is 110 justification for restricting propagation by all
MENTAL WELFARE 5
persons suffering from mental disorder. In some cases the disorder is due to lome^cases
and is transmissible; in others morbid inheritance is slight or a s ._ , inimical
the mental condition of the patient is such as inevitably to create an , varvine
to the satisfactory upbringing of a family; in others this is no s"- hesitation
conditions cannot be met by any indiscriminate measure. Whi e v. <? to have
in saying that there are certain sufferers from mental disorder w o> 2 ersons lare
children, we are of the opinion that the decision as to who these p< <? P - '
is one which can only be made after a careful investigation of the a . 1
history of each individual case."
Safeguards and Conditions
As stated above, the Committee whole-heartedly recommend v?j"^ry
sterilisation. They consider that vasectomy in the case of ma es an sa p g
tomv in the case of females should be the operations sanctione , a y
should only be performed in a general hospital (92) and that tie cos s 0
operation should be borne, in cases where the patients cannot pay t eir o ,
bv the Mental Deficiency Act Committees, the Visiting Committees, an
Public Health Committees respectively. (93) lo meet the anticipate viev^' ,
the medical profession, they recommend that protection simi ar to t at acco
under the Lunacy and Mental Treatment Acts should be accortet to me
practitioners recommending sterilisation. (88)
The Committee express their anxiety that every case should be safe-
guarded, and they therefore recommend that no operation shouid e per or
without the written authorisation of the Minister of Health, (81) w o s ou
have power to cause the patient to be especially examined if it is consi ere
advisable. The original recommendation must be made :>y two mecica
practitioners, one of whom should, if possible, be the patient s ami y oc o
and the other a practitioner on a list approved by the Minister (sue 1 is , cove
ing a rather wide area, to be drawn up by the Minister anc not y oca
Authorities). The consent of the patient in writing is to be obtained, or it tne
patient is not competent to give reasonable consent, the consent o t e paren
or guardian, or persons responsible for the patients maintenance. ( 9)
special proviso is inserted in the case of " carriers (82) to enable the lnister
to appoint a small Advisory Committee of medical practitioners and geneticists
for the consideration of doubtful cases.
Social Results
One of the most interesting sections of the Report discusses the social
results of sterilisation of mental defectives. (53"59) Committee st^c
definitely (53) : " Sterilisation will not in our opinion reduce to any appreciable
extent the present wide disparity between the number of institutional beds
available and the best estimate of the number needed. We would go further
and say that until sufficient institutional accommodation is provided and ascer-
tainment and community care are better organised, proper use cannot be made
6 MENTAL WELFARE
of sterilisation as a supplementary measure of care for the mentally defective
and the protection of the community."
They are further most insistent that the question of sterilisation only
arises if the defective appears suitable to live in the community. Having regard
to the probability that in the future younger defectives will be admitted to
institutions for training and that the number of well-trained and stabilised
defectives leaving institutions for community care will thereby increase, the
Committee consider that sterilisation would in many such cases be an additional
safeguard. It is estimated that even if sufficient accommodation were pro-
vided, approximately two-thirds of the defective population would be capable
of community life, (56) and it is for these even more than for those leaving
institutions from time to time that sterilisation should be considered.
The Committee have been " impressed by the hardships involved in
preventing marriage in the case of a feeble-minded man or woman living in
almost normal surroundings, under guardianship or on licence," (58) and they
think that such marriage would be less likely to fail, and in the event of failure
be less disastrous and far-reaching if uncomplicated by children. The evidence
before the Committee showed that the marriage rate of defectives is lower than
that of the normal population, but the illegitimate birth-rate considerably
higher.
The Committee are fully aware of the possibility urged by some witnesses
that sterilisation might increase promiscuity and venereal disease. Unless
supervision and after-care were adequate they realise that there might be un-
fortunate social results, and they point out (55) that although the " limitations
of supervision remain the same whether a defective is sterilised or not, sterilisa-
tion would at least obviate the risk of procreation."
Research
Presenting their conclusions, based on such knowledge as is available,
the Committee say (103): "In framing our proposals we have gone as far as
the evidence appeared to us to warrant, and no further."
Because of the need for further scientific investigation of many aspects of
the whole problem of mental diseases the Committee devote a chapter to
Research. The subjects suggested for research are the effect of vasectomy on
development, influence of consanguinity, investigation of twins, classification
of mental defect, nature of defective inheritance, investigation of the causes
of mental disorders, influence of intra-uterine conditions, study of germ muta-
tions, sociological research.
It is specially interesting to note that the Committee suggest that an enquiry
parallel to the Royal Eastern Counties Institution enquiry should be conducted
on unselected non-institutional cases, and that there should also be a " control "
group of normal families. They urge further research into the inheritance of
MENTAL WELFARE
mental defect, reiterating that they cannot ignore the evi ence , ?
tion between defect, dulness and disorder of mind. If t eir rec ^ , nrob-
that research into what the Wood Committee referred to as t e ^ throw
lem " group be adopted, the results should, as the Commit ee St J' , .
valuable light on some of the social consequences of men a
tendency to perpetuate itself by creating an environment mi
development of normal mentality." ,
The whole report with the various appendices is comparative y s '
a detailed study of it is necessary for the proper understan ing o p' P .
The Committee have been able to present their arguments an con ier
so succinct a form that they should arrest the attention o t e gene
as well as of all social workers. The evidence before them has een c0 .,
but they are careful to show that it is still incomplete, an to recogni_ ,
they were to issue a report at all they could only be guided in t e.r reco
tions by the conditions as at present known. With this limitation ac no S '
they have produced a report which marshals the evidence an ma es 1 P
for the reader to survey the argument in favour of voluntary s en ls
the light of present knowledge and experience. The than s o e p
due to the Committee for the care taken to obtain adequate evic ence
the clarity of expression.
note.
Since the publication of the Report a meeting of the Medical Committee of the'Central
Association for Mental Welfare has been called and when that Committee have considered
the Report there will be a meeting of a Special Committee of Council members, represe
tive of all branches of medical, educational, social and administrative work tor detect yes,
which was especially appointed by the Central Association for Mental e are - ,, ?
Council, at its meeting on January 8th. This Committee will report to the Counc , g
suggestions as to the policy to be adopted in regard to the Report. r , ,
Readers of the Magazine may care to be reminded of the position which the Uentra
Association for Mental Welfare have up to the present taken on the question ot sterilisation.
The Central Association for Mental Welfare, the British Medical Association, the Count}
Councils Association, the Mental Hospitals Association, the Association of Municipal corpora-
tions and other bodies were of opinion that the sterilisation of defectives should not me
sanctioned by law until the whole subject had been fully investigated, and they therefore
welcomed the appointment of the Departmental Committee by the Minister of Health in
June, 1932. . .?
The attitude of the Central Association for Mental Welfare to the question of sterilisation
has, from time to time, been put before the public. They regard it as beyond question t a
mentally defective persons (within the statutory definition of the Mental Deficiency Acts)
should not have children, and they feel that for a large number of cases adequate protection
must be achieved by an extension of the present system of segregation. But for those yv 10
might safely live in the community under suitable supervision (many of them self-supporting)
apart from the danger of procreating children, the Central Association for Mental W eltare
have expressed the opinion that sterilisation might be an appropriate and desirable procedure
and that the Association should favour legislation to admit of such selective sterilisation,
provided that adequate safeguards could be devised to prevent improper use.
In a letter to the Times in June, 1932, signed by the Chairman and Hon. Secretary
of the Central Association for Mental Welfare, the public were warned against expecting that
the sterilisation of certified defectives would have a very marked effect on the incidence o
mental deficiency, but it was made clear that the Association fully recognised that even a
slight lessening in the incidence would be an advantage to the nation.
