No Mental Wilfare
=================

:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts
Tiii'; Twentieth Annual Report of The
Board of Control for the Year 1933.
Part I. H.M. Stationery Office. 2/- net.
1934.

In spite of necessary restrictions in the
development of the mental health service due
to current financial difficulties, the Board of
Control is able to report an increased accom-
modation for the year in both Mental Hospitals
and Certified Institutions and general progress
in nearly every branch of the service. There
are, however, one or two disappointing facts
to which the Board calls our attention; one is
the small extent to which temporary treat-
ment under the Mental Treatment Act has
been made use of in rate-aided mental hos-
pitals, and the other (concerned with mental
deficiency) is the very small proportion of de-
fectives notified by the Local Education Au-
thorities to the mental deficiency authorities
for supervision.

Ascertainment
--------------

The annual returns for the year 1933-34 gave
a total of 106,439 defectives (whether subject
to be dealt with or not) reported to Local
Authorities. Of these, 70,764 were actually
under care, i.e., in Institutions under the
Mental Deficiency Acts, under Guardianship
or Statutory Supervision. In spite of this in-
crease in ascertainment on the previous year,
the figure for 1933-34 of 2.65 per 1,000 popu-
lation of defectives still falls short of the
estimated figure given by the findings of the
Wood Committee, i.e., 4.52 per 1,000 popula-
tion.

As already mentioned above, the Board
reports a decrease in the number of children
notified by Local Education Authorities this
year. The Board very truly states that this
decrease is disturbing. Complete ascertain-
ment must depend largely on the thoroughness
of the Local Education Authorities to notify
children under Sections 2(2)a and 2(2)b of
the Act. Moreover, until the Act is amended
to allow for defective children leaving elemen-
tary schools at the age of 14 being notified to
the Mental Deficiency Authority, it is only by
close though informal co-ordination that any
continuity of care can be maintained. The
Board mentions 28 areas where five or less than
five children have been notified by the Educa-
tion Authority during the year, and six areas
in which 110 cases at all have been notified.
The Report includes a full table (p. 57) of
all areas showing the proportion per 1,000 of
population of cases ascertained as subject to
be dealt with; cases reported to Local Autho-
ities by the Local Education Authorities and
the proportion of defectives receiving institu-
tional care.

Accommodation
-------------

The total number of institutional beds avail-
able at the end of 1933 is reported as being
34,357 (p. 59), of which Local Authorities
have provided 15,426. This is still far from
adequate to meet the need and the Board refer
to certain authorities who are still content to
rely on obtaining beds in charitable institu-
tions or to allow low grade defectives who can
be certified under the Lunacy Acts to fill costly
beds in mental hospitals. However, plans for
schemes to increase accommodation have been
passed for several areas and other schemes are
in preparation. An event of the year was the
opening of Cell Barnes Colony, Hertfordshire,
only the second complete colony to be provided
by a Local Authority.

Community Care
-----------------

The report summarises the practical help
which should be given to parents or guardians
with defectives living in the community. They
include:?advice of a practical nature as to
treatment and control; facilities for training
in Centres or by Home Teachers; some meas-
ure of control by means of guardianship or
licence, and the assurance that the institution
is prepared to re-admit the defective at short
notice.

There has been an increase in the numbers
011 licence and under guardianship during the
year and there are now 196 Occupation
Centres, Industrial Centres and Clubs in exist-
ence. Figures supplied from the Royal Eastern
Counties Institution and accounts of some in-
teresting cases are given to illustrate some of
the advantages and difficulties of the licence
and guardianship systems.

Mental Defectives in Mental Hospitals
An investigation begun in 1931 (p. 76) into
the number of defectives in mental hospitals
and fit to be transferred to Certified Institu-
tions has been continued in eleven mental
hospitals. Seventeen per cent, of the total nuin-
)ei of patients in these hospitals, selected by
le Medical Superintendents as being prima
Jicie mentally defective, were examined and
amongst these, 14% were found to be mentally
^fective, and 12.2% found fit to be trans-
^.t'ed to Certified Institutions. The report of
118 investigation should be carefully studied
ail(l the results show fully the desirability of
gloving mental defectives from Mental Hos-
j^tals to Institutions in the interest of proper
eatment, administration and economy.

Cental Defect and Crime
-----------------------

A review of the figures of persons found
Siulty of criminal offences and dealt with as
.^ntally defective is given for the three years
1 ^1-33 inclusive (p. 81). For this period the
otal number of persons found guilty of in-
| stable offences was nearly 170,000, and the
Uinber of these offenders found certifiable as
Mentally defective was only 728. Even allow-
nS" for cases in which mental defect is not
,oc?onisai)ie when they first come to Court,
le proportion of defective offenders to the
otal number remains very small. Amongst
types of offences committed, offences
' gainst the person, and in particular sexual
^nces, stand highest amongst the defective
ass of offenders. This points again to the
? CCessity for early ascertainment and immed-
iate action in the case of defectives showing
any anti-social behaviour.

Cental Disorders and Mental Treatment
Act.

1 here was an increase during the year in the
tubers of voluntary admissions to Mental
0sr>itals and also in the number of out-patient
^ 'nics established, which in turn will lead to
hirther increase in the voluntary admission
The position with regard to temporary
^tients is disappointing. The total number of
ate-aiclod patients admitted as temporary
atients during the year only amounted to 298,
I1(l private patients to 99. Excluding volun-
ai.y patients the proportion of rate-aided to
'"'Vate patient admissions is 97 to 3. There are
''Irnittedly difficulties in the working of this
.jrction of the Act but as the Board points out
these can be overcome in some areas it is
? llstifiable to believe that they can be over-
?nie elsewhere. At the moment it would
Ppear that except in a very few areas the pro-
cure is available for the rich and not for the
Poor.

Out-Patient Clinics

A full account is given in this year's report
of the growth of clinics for the treatment of
mental illness which form sections of the out-
patient departments of general hospitals.

During the five years, 1925-30, the 12 volun-
tary general hospitals thus associated with
mental hospitals grew to 25. Since the passing
of the Mental Treatment Act in 1930 this has
grown to 85 such hospitals working in con-
nection with 67 mental hospitals (excluding
those for the County of London). An account
is given of the working of some of these clinics
(pp. 46-51). It is encouraging to note the
number of such clinics in which a social worker
is employed.

Board Out from Mental Hospitals
--------------------------------

An experiment is being tried out in East
Suffolk in the boarding-out of patients from
Mental Hospitals. (An account of this experi-
ment was published in the April issue of this
journal.) At the end of the first six months
of the experiment, 25 patients had been placed
out from St. Audrey's Hospital and 15 from
Kedington Public Assistance Institution. The
sums paid to guardians vary from 14/- to 17/-
weckly, in addition to a clothing allowance.
The general scction of the Report includes
an account of research carried out during the
year. Part II contains a supplement on Scien-
tific Research Work and lists of Institutions,
Mental Hospitals, Nursing Homes, etc. The
scction of Part T dealing with Mental Defici-
ency may be obtained separately, price 1 /- net.
Crime: Its Cause and Treatment. By
Clarence Darrow. Watts and Co. 1934.
Pp. 239 and Index. Price 2/6.

This criticism of the American penal system
and of the popular attitude concerning
offenders and their punishment, together with
the writer's suggestions for their betterment,
is based on deterministic grounds.

Society, however, is unlikely to feel ade-
quately safeguarded, if moral responsibility in
the individual were to be abandoned, by the
proposal to teach the convict that his offence
was " the necessary result of cause and effect,
and that, given his heredity and environment,
he could have done no other way," nor is there
corroboration in this country for the view that
a very considerable proportion of the criminal
population is not responsible for its act owing
either to insanity or mental deficiency.
It is unfortunate that no statistical evidence
is given in support of the theories advanced.
The writer's opinion that " the expense,
formality and power of the (English) Court (of
Justice) all conspire to destroy every oppor-
tunity of escape, regardless of innocence or
guilt," should be mentioned.

H.T.P.Y.
Investigations into the Causes of Mental
Deficiency. By II. O. Wildenskov, M.D.
Oxford University Press. 1934.

The main purpose of Dr Wildenskov's in-
vestigation here presented is to see whether
differences in results obtained in the study of
mental deficiency depend on the degree of de-
ficiency?mild or severe?in the material under
analysis. The investigation was carried out
over a period of five years, entirely by himself,
the case material being from the Keller Insti-
tute for Mental Defectives, of which he is the
Medical Superintendent. Two groups of 50
children were investigated and the results
compared. Group A (mild degree of mental
deficiency, from the School), Group B (severe
cases) a slightly younger group from the Asy-
lum. He considers that the advantages of
using young material are overwhelming, since
memories are likely to be more accurate,
grandparents alive, and cousins available.
Dr Wildenskov began with the intention of
elucidating acquired factors, but concluded as
he proceeded that all investigations should be-
gin with a study of the family history of the
patient, since subsequent data so often showed
that inheritance could not be ruled out as a
contributory factor; he refutes the idea of
monocausel pathogenic factors and suggests
that, since families of defectives " strikingly
often " show histories of meningitis, encepha-
litis, etc., unfavourable inheritance prepares
the soil for the noxious effects of acquired
disease. In only 10 of his cases could he con-
clude that deficiency was acquired?(2 in Group
A; 8 in Group B); these cases are excluded in
the summary of results and are discussed sep-
arately with fuller histories illustrating how
hard it is to unravel etiological conditions.
Unfortunately, mental tests were not give11
to the relations investigated. Dr WildenskoV
relied on teachers' reports, certificates' fi'0111
schools, and his own judgment; moreover, he
uses the German classification covering all dc"
grees of intelligence up to normal by the tern1
" oligophrenic," thus including persons not
so deficient as to need social care. He does
not, however, consider that the border group
(I.Q. 75-85 dullards, I.Q. 85-90 simple-minded)
is too large, since all doubtful cases were eX"
eluded.

Results are tabulated under the degree p1
relationship. Of the sibs of patients, 52% 1,1
Group A, and 25% in Group B, were " olig'P"
phrenic of the parents of patients, 65% 111
Group A, and 12% in Group B. Sufficient
material was not available to give percentages
for uncles, aunts, and cousins. A separate in*
vestigation of 15 mentally defective girls rc"
vealed that of their 39 children, 13 only were
of normal mentality (66% " oligophrenic ")?
Dr Wildenskov concludes that the " here-
ditary taint of mental deficiency is demo11'
strated considerably more often in the niikj
(98%) than in the severe (74%,) cases, a,1(
that " oligophrenia " in the nearest relatives
is demonstrated to be far more frequent in tbc
mild cases (90% against 60%)."

He also concludes that among the relations
of the slightly defective a lower moral a11(
social standard exists than among those of tlie
severely defective, finding that of Group
76%) are the offspring of labourers or sei'V*
ants, and 22% illegitimate as against 22% an(1
6% of Group B. It seems possible that in splte
of the writer's emphasis on the fact that the
biased selection of material for analysis influ-
ences the results of the investigation, some
such selection is obtained by using " mild
cases from an Institution, since children whose
parents are inefficient, defective, or from tl1(j
lowest social strata, arc more likely to be fount1
there than children of similar mentality with
better homes. Where the degree of deficiency
is severe, no such selection is likely to be 111
operation.

The book is well documented throughout
with frequent references, for purposes of com-
parison, to recent work on mental deficiency-
The material is systematically presented a11(!
concludes with a summary of case records an"
family histories.

M.M.
MENTAL WELFARE n
^ian Sterilisation of To-day. By Cora
S. Hodson, E.L.S. Walls & Co. L011-
c^?n. 1934. Pp. 55. Price l/-net.
j ^le author, in producing this little book,
as succeeded in placing before the public at
lll0st moderate charge a lucid explanation of
e niuch discussed and important question of
uman Sterilisation.

. ^ it is presumed this is a book mainly for
le ^formation of the unscientific reader, she
^as done well to omit, as stated in the fore-
biologicai laws and the laws of heredity.
11 the first chapter she has clearly shown that
'.^disation has been practised in the past for
benefit of human health, thereby indicating
lat there should thus be no reason to post-
?iie the legalisation of similar operations for
i10 benefit of humanity in general; or what is
Allied " Eugenic Sterilisation."

he reference to evolution and preventive
tdicine is clearly and tersely put, summing
I' with what is obvious to the scientific mind
lhat
th
progress in preventive medicine has made
for
(lit
e question of legalised sterilisation, or other
111 of prevention of procreation by the here-
r ary unfit; a practical necessity for the
Uture of the human race.
? i!1 a brief history of sterilisation experience
1 American States, she clearly shows the iu-
jSVlsability of Sterilisation being associated
j. any form of State punishment or being
lyted to particular institutions.
he chapter on the progress of this form of
catment as practised in California contains
,seful information.

^ Denmark's experiences are related but it
to?uld appear unnecessary to refer again here
^ this form of treatment as castration. A
Un of Colony Segregation of habitual crim-
als as practised by the Danes might also with
Vantage be considered in England.
A good description is given of the present
Option in regard to the new Eugenic Law
llch came into force in Germany in Tanu-
ary. 1934.

j, ^ d'usal of this book will show that even in
'uSland there have been cases of voluntary
ei'ilisation.
th S^ort summary is given in Chapter IX of
findings and recommendations of the Com-
mittee set up by the Board of Control, with
Reasoned comments on the same.
liis little book has evidently been written
1Ay after painstaking enquiry by the author
iii various countries and is worthy of the care-
ful perusal and consideration of all who are
interested or desirous of information un this
most important subject.

T.P.P.
Tiie New Philanthropy. A Study in the
Relations between the Statutory and Volun-
tary Social Services. By Elizabeth Macadam.
London: George Allen & Unwin, Ltd.
1934. Pp. 320. Price 7/6.

Miss Macadam's latest book fills a big gap
in the literature of public administration, tills
it moreover with the sure touch of long ex-
perience of the subject on which she writes.
Her thesis is the " combined statutory and
voluntary social service which has grown up in
the last 40 years this new philanthropy is of
a twofold nature, the voluntary society work-
ing (with the aid of paid officials) in conjunc-
tion with the statutory body, and the in-
dividual voluntary worker occupied in the
service of the statutory body, either as a
committee member or as an assistant to a
responsible official.

The book surveys the whole field of statu-
tory and voluntary social service under the
divisions of home assistance, health services,
housing, the elementary school, education out-
side the school, and delinquency. Under each
of these headings a description is given of the
work performed by voluntary societies in inter-
relation with statutory services, and the open-
ings, both actual and potential, which exist
for the volunteer. It is no easy matter to fulfil
such a task without giving merely a dull cata-
logue of activities, leaving the impression that
adequate provision exists against every human
ill. Miss Macadam has not only accomplished
this task with great skill in a small compass,
she has also preserved the ability to see things
with a detached mind which results now and
then in a searching criticism of some too much
taken for granted institution, as for example
her query as to the continued necessity for
large numbers of homes for " orphan and
destitute " children. One curious omission
from this otherwise catholic survey demands a
passing comment, that is, the lack of all but
the most passing reference to the two great
classes of the physically and mentally defec-
tive, whether children or adults. The crippled
and the deaf and dumb receive no mention,
the blind but a passing glance, while the pass-
age on " mental deficiency which stops short
of lunacy," obscures the difference between
the two and refers apparently to functional
mental disorders. Yet surely physical and
mental defect between them represent two of
the biggest fields of co-operation between vol-
untary and statutory bodies and offer the
greatest scope for that painstaking care for and
interest in the individual which is one of the
distinguishing marks of voluntary work?
In addition to this survey, the book is con-
cerned with an analysis of voluntary bodies,
how they are controlled, how they raise their
funds, the future of voluntary social service,
and its international aspect. Such a review-
leads inevitably to a plea for rationalisation to
be achieved by co-ordination under a central
board whose functions and responsibilities are
lightly sketched. Anyone contemplating the
rich luxuriance of unco-ordinated effort, the
No Man's Lands and the Too Many Men's
Lauds of our social services might well endorse
this plea. Such planning would involve, in
addition first of all to the elimination of re-
dundant societies, systematic methods of money
raising" and allocation. It would involve, too,
the realisation that present methods of recruit-
ing voluntary workers arc haphazard in the
extreme, that if we continue to rely to the ex-
tent envisaged by Miss Macadam 011 voluntary
services (and it seems debatable whether the
whole time work entailed by conscientious
membership of, for example, a big local author-
ity, can indefinitely remain voluntary) we must
be prepared for thought-out schemes of re-
cruitment, coupled with a demand for stand-
ards of competence in those who offer their
services.

The rationalisation of social work, both
statutory and voluntary, would make a fascin-
ating study, it is moreover a subject of the
greatest practical importance. The sincerest
compliment we can pay to the book at present
under review is to ask Miss Macadam to follow
up the tantalising hints she there throws out
with a second volume developing this theme in
greater detail.

K.L.Y.
