News and Notes
===============

Conference on Mental Welfare, November 21st, 22nd and 23rd, 1934
The first session of the C.A.M.W. Conference will be a Joint Session with
the Public Health Congress and will be held at the Royal Agricultural Hall,
Islington, at 10.30 a.m., on Wednesday, November 21st, 1934. Mr. L. G.
Brock, C.B., Chairman of the Board of Control, will be in the Chair. Papers
and addresses on " Boarding Out from Mental Hospitals," and on " Mental
After Care," will be given.

Other sessions of the Conference will be held in the Great Hall of British
Medical Association House, Tavistock Square, W.C. On Thursday morning,
November 22nd, the Rt. Hon. Sir Leslie Scott, K.C., will preside at a session
devoted to papers and discussion on " Modern Tendencies and Developments
in Work for Mental Defectives," when the following aspects of work will be
dealt with:?historical survey, the modern institution, community care, and
research.

A Luncheon will be held at the Hotel Russell at 1.15 p.m. on the 22nd;
it is hoped that the Minister of Health will attend and will speak.
On Thursday afternoon, Mr. L. G. Brock will take the Chair and papers
will be given on " The Voluntary Provisions of the Mental Treatment Act."
Friday morning is free, to enable delegates to attend a session of the Public
Health Congress on " Voluntary Sterilisation " (see below). For those who
wish it, visits to Institutions, Occupation Centres and Schools will be arranged.
Mr. Herwald Ramsbotham, M.P., Parliamentary Secretary to the Board
of Education, has kindly agreed to preside and to give an opening address at
the afternoon session on Friday, when the subjects of papers and discussion
will be " The Work of the Educational Psychologist," and " Some Experiments
in the Education of Retarded Children."

Conference Tickets, price 10/6, Luncheon Tickets, price 6/-, and all in-
formation, may be obtained from the Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24, Buckingham
Palace Road, S.W.i. This fee will entitle delegates to tickets admitting them
to the two sessions of the Public Health Congress mentioned in the preceding
paragraphs.

Public Health Congress
-----------------------

A discussion has been arranged by the Public Health Congress Council
in conjunction with the Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilisation on "Volun-
tary Sterilisation and the Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilisa-
tion." This discussion will be held on Friday, November 23rd, at 11.0 a.m.,
in Hall No. 1, Royal Agricultural Hall, Islington, London, N.
Speakers at this meeting include Professor Julian Huxley, Dr C. P.
Blacker, and Wing-Commander James, on behalf of the Joint Committee, and
Mr. G. Gibson, Mr. Cemlyn Jones and Mr, Councillor Loxley, on behalf of
the Trade Union Congress, County Councils Association and Association of
Municipal Corporations respectively.

Tickets for this session may be obtained free from the Secretary, Joint
Committee on Sterilisation, 69, Ecclcston Square, S.W.i. This meeting is
open to delegates to the C.A.M.W. Conference.

Extension to Prudhoe Colony
----------------------------

Prudhoe Colony, controlled by the North Eastern County Borough Joint
Board for the Mentally Defective has been recently extended, and accommoda-
tion provided for an additional 200 mentally defective patients. This brings
the total accommodation up to a little over 600 and the final plans allow for
1,000 cases.

At present in addition to 200 low-grade cases from the six authorities
forming the Joint Board, there arc also 99 cases from Durham County and 77
from Northumberland, as these counties have not yet been able to provide their
own accommodation.

St. John's House, Basingstoke
------------------------------

This house (known previously as Sherborne House) has been recently
taken over by the Sisters of the Transfiguration for the reception of 20 low grade
defectives under the age of 16 years. The community has run a certified in-
stitution at Mount Tabor, Basingstoke, for some years past for 50 women and
girls over the age of 16.

St. John's House has been certified by the Board of Control and at the
request of the Dorset County Council, where the Sisters previously worked,
eight children have already been accepted.

Extension to St. Raphael's Colony, Barvin Park
A new wing has been opened at St. Raphael's Colony, Barvin Park, Herts.,
for epileptic and mentally defective youths. This Colony, which was opened
in 1932, is conducted by the Roman Catholic community of the Brothers
Hospitaller of St. John. There arc now 50 youths over 18 years of age in
residence and the new wing is to accommodate 50 more. The total waiting
list for admission amounts to 200 cases.

The colony is an estate of about 100 acres. Occupational training and
manual work form a large part of the life of the colony and in the course of
their work the boys attend to the farm and large vegetable gardens.

Runwell Mental Hospital
------------------------

The foundation stone of the new mental hospital which is to be the joint
undertaking of the county boroughs of East Ham and Southend-on-Sea, was
laid in July by Mr. Brock, Chairman of the Board of Control. Dr Rolf
Strom-Olsen lias recently been appointed to act as the first resident medical
superintendent of the hospital. Dr Strom-Olsen has had several years of ex-
perience of the treatment of mental disease in the department of Psychiatry at
the Royal Infirmary, Cardiff, in the Cardiff City Mental Hospital, and has
done a considerable amount of research work on the subject both in Cardiff
and when in charge of the clinical department of the Derby Mental Hospital.
Mental Treatment Act, 1930

The Board of Control has issued a list revised up to May, 1934, of medical
practitioners in England and Wales approved for making recommendations
under the Mental Treatment Act, 1930. This list contains the names of 2,800
such medical practitioners with particulars as to the towns and cities in which
they can be found. This list can be obtained 011 application to H.M. Stationery
Office or to the Board of Control.

London Child Guidance Clinic
-----------------------------

The Report of the Clinic for the period January, 1932, to December, 1933,
includes an interesting survey of the growth of the clinic since its opening four
and a half years ago.

The work of the Clinic is divided into two sections?treatment and train-
ing. In the treatment section, each case is allocated from the first to one of the
three Psychiatrists who is thereafter responsible for it. The Psychiatrist works
in conjunction with a Psychologist and two Social Workers, forming a unit
which makes case work more personal than it would otherwise be.

The training section is responsible for training Fellows in Psychiatry and
Psychology appointed by the Child Guidance Council, the training of social
science students taking the Mental Health Course at the London School of
Economics, and practical work in connection with the Academic Diploma in
Psychology of the University of London.

A survey of the Intelligence Quotients of cases referred for treatment over
the two years 1932 and 1933 shows that the largest number of cases have an
I.Q. round about 100?that is, they arc drawn from the normal child popula-
tion. Backwardness in some specific subject was found in a good proportion
of these cases. A full scientific report on the work of the Clinic will be
published at the end of the first five years.

The Report concludes with statistics of the age groups of the cases, in-
telligence quotients and the results of cases which are now closed. In dealing
with Finance, attention is drawn to the necessity of building up a regular
income to meet the whole expenditure of the Clinic without the assistance at
present received through the generosity of the Commonwealth Fund. Annual
Subscribers and Donors are needed and it is hoped that all interested in the
work of the Clinic will try and enlist the support of other sympathisers. Par-
ticulars of the work of the Clinic may be obtained from the Medical Director,
London Child Guidance Clinic, 1, Canonbury Place, N.i.

Forthcoming Lectures
Amongst the lecturcs arranged for the Autumn Sessions are the
following: ?

Institute of Medical Psychology
--------------------------------

A course of eight lectures at the Institute on Thursdays at 6 p.im, 011
Psychology and Modern Problems. The speakers include Prof. Seligman,
Dr Emanual Miller, Prof. Flugel and Dr Crichton Miller. Full particulars
may be obtained from the lecture secretary of the Institute, Malet Place, W.C.i.

Institute of Child Psychology
-----------------------------

Eight lectures on Common Difficulties in Normal Children, on Wednes-
days at 6.15 and 8.15 p.m., by Dr Margaret Lowcnfcld, Dr Ethel Dukes, and
Miss Kirschncr. Particulars may be obtained from the Institute, 26, Warwick
Avenue, W.9.

Home and School Council
------------------------

Lecturcs and study groups have been arranged from October to December
in London, Barking, Dagenham and Birmingham. The Autumn Programme
can be obtained from the Home and School Council, 29, Tavistock Square,
W.C.i.

The Speech Institute
---------------------

A number of classes for Elementary and Secondary School Teachers and
others, on Speech Training and Dramatic Production, will be held at the
Speech Institute, 56, Gordon Square, W.C.i. This Institute was founded in
1932 by Miss Marjorie Gulland and Miss Clarissa Graves. Full particulars and
time tables of the courses may be obtained on application to the Institute.
Travelling Speech Therapist, C.A.M.W.

Miss Marion Fleming, who had held the post of Travelling Speech
Therapist under the C.A.M.W. since September, 1931, resigned her post 011
her appointment as Speech Therapist under the Birmingham Education Com-
mittee at the end of September, 1934. She has been succeeded by Miss Kathleen
Jones, who has for several years carried out Speech Therapy for the Liverpool
Education Committee.

It is of interest to note that the value of the Speech Therapist is becoming
increasingly recognised by Local Education Authorities, with the result that
Miss Jones' services are booked until the end of February, 1936.
