Matter Lesser Known Views of Mental
===================================

:Author: Richard J. A. Berry, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S.E.
Director of Medical Services, Stoke Park Colony, Stapleton, Bristol
and Chairman of the Burden Mental Research Trust

As with many other human beliefs, views of mind are usually and largely
a matter of faith, with little or no scientific evidence behind them. The strong,
^ent men of fiction, for example, are often endowed with a sixth and marvel-
. Us sense, and their lady friends with small, but very beautiful, heads. There
1S' course, no mental defective who does not possess at least three times six
Senses> whilst many are also the proud possessors of heads of unenviable
smallness. 7 F F

There is, however, another aspect of mind which makes no such universal
^ppeal. The hours of study and toil; the tedious examination of thousands
Microscopic slides of the human brain; the checking and testing of every
a Scjrvation by means of controls; the correlation of results; the statistical
blalysis of masses of figures; the pursuit of many paths which prove to be but
alo^ a^eys' an^ ^le wearis?me return to the straight and narrow path which
?ne leads to the scientific goal of Truth. These make no such universal
appeal, but they are the everyday lot of those engaged on the disentanglement
mind out of brain, and at long last there is light.

. Some thirty odd years ago the British Association for the Advancement of
ience issued instructions for the correct measuring of the living human
. 1' and these methods have not yet been substantially improved. Somewhere
?ut this same period the Royal Society of London published the brain capac-
ICs of a number of then living scientists, obtained mathematically from head
..foments recorded as above. They gave some curious results. Scientific
1 appeared to be independent of head size. Nor did any of the many
subsequent investigations reveal any more striking or noticeable association
between head size and intelligence. In large groups it did, however, look as
though the more highly educated classes had rather larger heads than the
socially inferior ones, but most of the investigators, whether in Australia, Eng-
land, or the Continent, seemed to agree that head measurement is not a measure
of intelligence, and that there is little or no physiological correlation between
the two. Though this temporarily ended anthropometric attempts in this direc-
tion, the relationship between brain and size of head most certainly exists,
because growth of the latter is largely determined by that of the former.

Coincident with these anthropometric studies of, roughly, the first decade
of the present century, other investigators had been equally busy in other fields,
and were enunciating strikingly novel views about the brain and its functions.
They were, indeed, suggesting that the grey matter of the human brain was a
tri-laminar arrangement, built up on a mammalian infra-granular basis with,
from the marsupials upwards, constant accretions of brain cells at the head
end, and that these different pyramidal, granular and polymorphic brain layers
might have different functions. If these statements were true?and their
exponents backed up their opinions by a mass of scientific evidence?they
clearly denoted an incremental association between the growth of brain struc-
ture and intelligence on the one hand, and size of head on the other. The
human brain is considerably larger than that of a mole and thus requires a
larger box for its accommodation. Of the former fact the Royal Society pub-
lished a striking illustration, which has since found its way into many of our
text-books, where it usually passes unnoticed as it is more difficult to under-
stand than the many ologies and isms which masquerade as the science of
mind.

A chance remark of a student wrought a revolution, at least, in the life
of the writer. The student argued that if these facts were true they should
be demonstrable on the living subject. Were they? Apparently no one knew.
Enquiry revealed the astounding fact that, notwithstanding the thousands
and thousands of measurements of all kinds and sorts which had been made
on the living child, no one knew the size of his head at different chronological
ages. The measuring rod had, therefore, to be made, and to make it the
heads of 10,000 living children and students of both sexes and all ages were
measured in strict accordance with the precise instructions of the British Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Science. From the measures so made were
calculated mathematically the brain capacities of each of the 10,000 children,
and the final results tabulated in the form of Sir Francis Galton's percentile
tables for each year of chronological age from six onwards; The checks,
calculations, controls, statistics, and figures?all that procedure previously
mentioned?were culled and collated for three long weary years. But the
end was attained The rod was produced and the normal standards achieved
for the first time in the history of science. It is now possible to set any child
against this rod and to say definitely?within the probable error of the method
?whether its head size is that of its age or is only that of a normal child of
three, four or more years its junior. It would indeed be a bold man who
Would assert that such differences between children of the same age, sex, and
social standing are devoid of significance. They are not. On the contrary,
tney strongly suggest that, whilst the physiological correlation between size
of head and intelligence is negligible (only .3), the pathological correlation is
high. Persons of abnormal mentality tend?only tend, be it noted?to have
abnormal heads.

One swallow does not make a summer, nor do a few isolated facts taken
trom their context establish a scientific truth. But the following, amongst
many others, are suggestive: ?

A group of 355 criminals was found to have a brain capacity barely equal
to that of a normal sixteen-year-old boy.

Another group of twenty-year-old Reformatory boys had a head size
only equal to that of the normal twelve-year-old schoolboy; that is to
say, their brain growth was eight years in retardation.

Out of 31 criminals hanged in Australia for murder, only a few were, as
regards head size, within the known statistical range of the normal
variation.

An adult student of vicious school history and subsequently rusticated
from his University was found to have the smallest head of his age
?gr?Up'.

Or two juvenile fratricides, a female murderess found " guilty but
insane," and an adult male hanged for murder?but previously
examined by the same methods?all had abnormally small heads.
Using the term in its anthropometric and correct sense, hundreds of
Cental defectives show this same tendency to microcephaly. In fact, always
provided that the necessary measurements are correctly recorded, smallheaded-
ncss appears to be the common characteristic of the majority of those half-wits
""-the feeble-minded.

And in the meantime, what of the brain? Much that was previously
thSCUre *S n?W increasin?1y less so- That man has, as it were, two brains,
e one for those instinctive animal reactions which he shares with all mam-
Qr ' phe other a more recent evolutionary addition of control and inhibition
0 which he is the proud and very nearly the only possessor, appears to some
Us to be just about proven. It is thus not repression which causes the rais-
in le*-> but its lack. This brain of repression always lags behind in its deve-
pment and sometimes never completes it. Hence the smaller heads of the
Hit-wits, the defectives, and their likes, whose behaviour certainly seems to
the facts.

It is surely something more than the chance in an Irish sweep that in-
stigations amongst Australian aboriginals, Victorian defectives, criminals
Z1 murderers, educated and non-educated East African natives, and English
cntal defectives, all carried out by the same methods, by independent inves-
tors cjuite unknown to each other and working thousands of miles apart,
ulu arrive at practically identical conclusions.

If the lot of the mentally infirm is to be relieved it can only be so by
the application of scientific, not legal, methods, and demands the closest study
of the living rather than the dead. Hence the preference for the brain capa-
cities of the living, because though many facts are known concerning brain
weights as recorded after death, they are obviously inapplicable to the living,
and only useful to-day as a check on the latter, but neither is an infallible
guide to the mentality of the individual. To the query, then, is mere size of
brain alone a true guide, the answer is No. And the reason? Because the
phenomena of mind depend on a sufficiency of minute brain cells, technically
called neurones and estimated in the mentally normal at around 14,000
millions. But besides the mind-forming neurones, the brain is made up of
other things, such as neuroglia and blood vessels, and though we can see and
study, under the microscope, all these essential and non-essential elements of
the brain, we are never at the moment quite sure of their relative proportions.
An excess of non-nervous elements may, therefore, give that large heavy brain
of crass stupidity so frequently flung in our faces as disproving the relation-
ship of brain to mind, and the fact that the latter depends on the necessary
number of neurones. It is once more a case of the exception proving the rule.
And so with those other infrequent cases, where a sufficiently large number
of neurones are packed into small compass giving that rarer combination of
small head and high intelligence. But the odds are against it. About evens
against the small head and two to one on the big head?at least as regards a
high intelligence.

By another of those legal fictions so universally accepted and so false to
the facts of nature, man attains maturity at 21 years of age. Whereas he really
achieves three different maturities?sexual, bodily, and mental?and does
so at three quite different ages. When he does not do so, or when he loses
them in the wrong order, it is not improbable that he may require legal cer-
tification as a mental defective or a dement, though that is not to imply that
there are not other causes of mental disorders. Just as man acquires these
different maturities at different ages, so also does he lose them at different
ages, which again differ in different men. Old age brings on a loss of the
reproductive powers and eventually a physiological senile dementia, so?
dementia and death?" last scene of all that ends this strange eventful history,
second childishness and mere oblivion."

If the foregoing brief and inadequate survey of the histological factors
underlying the phenomena of the human mind and its aberrations be correct,
it is evident that the biological approach to mental deficiency (amentia) and
cerebral dissolution (dementia) differs from the legal or the social. The first
method seeks the causes, the last two, the results. There should, therefore,
be room for all in the investigation of a hydra-headed subject like mental
deficiency.

It is a truism, though one but little appreciated, that scientific achieve-
ment?always the work of a more than usually gifted few?has outstripped
human development, and this has been especially the case during the nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries. Contrast, for example, the enormous
destructiveness of modern war with the days of a Wellington when his foot-
soldiers were instructed not to fire their inadequate firearms until the whites
?f the eyes of the enemy could be seen, and reflect that this enormously in-
creased modern power for destruction is the result of a century's " scientific
progress."

In its more beneficent results, science has almost annihilated time, dis-
tance and space, and has thereby speeded up modern life to such a terrific
rate as to make it impossible for the weaker human brethren to keep pace
With it. Scientific discovery has thus been too rapid for the much slower
numan development. The latter has, indeed, always been of remarkably
slow movement. Paleolithic man, the man of the old Stone Age, made no
appreciable cultural or other advance for a period of over 150,000 years. So
r?m these two opposed factors there results the important conclusion that
Modern civilisation has become too complex for those human individuals
Wlth inadequately developed brains. In such an environment they are re-
garded as legal defectives, whereas in that simpler environment for which
Mature clearly intended them they might and,presumably would hold their
?Wn without segregation, sterilisation, certification, or the countless other
w^apons with which modern civilisation has now to protect itself in the dis-
proportionate race between the tortoise of human mental progress and the
are of scientific advance.

The scientific study of legal mental defectives, at least as revealed by
^searches in this Institution, is strongly confirmatory of the hypothesis that
Rental deficiency is neither a disease nor a combination of disease, but is a
histological manifestation of an all-round under-development. Compared
Scientifically with the known standards for normal children of their own
j*?e> sex, and social status, they are found to be of inferior physique, of inferior
rain size, of a grossly diminished intelligence, with little resistance to dis-
ease, and with a consequently greatly diminished expectation of life. A pre-
lrninary, and as yet unconfirmed, investigation at Stoke Park as to the
^xpectation of life amongst certified defectives shows that the average longevity
|s only half that of the normal; say 35 years as against the 70 of the Psalmist,
ctectives thus frequently undergo, on top of their amentia, a premature
ementia, for with their undeveloped neurones and physical systems they are
Unable to " stay the course." From the standpoint of human social civilisa-
tion it is a misfortune that those parts of the cerebral cortex concerned with
histological activities of all animal life, namely the sexual and the
acquisitive, are precisely those which in the higher grade defective are the
east functionally impaired. Hence the frequency with which such ill-deve-
?Ped individuals, lacking a properly developed brain of control and repres-
Sl0n, offend against the laws of civilisation and find their way into our police
courts, gaols, reformatories, and institutions. It is probably precisely here-
?nts that lay bodies interested in mental welfare can perform so much useful
?rk for the individual and the community by finding, if and where possible,
that simple environment to which alone the cerebral inefficient can usefully
react.

It appears, at least to the scientific student of mental deficiency, to be a
hopeless task to seek a cure for an ill-developed brain, for it is beyond human
power to put brain cells where Nature has denied them. Once an idiot,
always an idiot. Without a sufficiency of such cells it is a physical impossi-
bility to expect those normal reactions to a normal environment which
civilisation necessarily demands for its own protection and its own perpetua-
tion. Prevention, rather than cure, is the problem.

As mental deficiency appears to be a genetic manifestation of the inability
of a human fertilized ovum of impaired stock to undergo that correct cellular
division which can alone lead to a sufficiency of cerebral, somatic and repro-
ductive cells to fulfil the ordinary functional requirements of brain, body and
sex, some adequate conception of the underlying genetic and embryological
causes responsible for these developmental errors seems to be essential before
the problem of mental deficiency can be adequately combated.

In the furtherance of such research work Mrs. R. G. Burden recently
donated a sum of ^10,000, and on the advice of the writer a Representative
Committee of Administration and Direction was created to deal, in the
national interests, with the problems confronting us. On this Committee the
Central Association for Mental Welfare is represented by Miss Evelyn Fox.
As regards the investigations so far visualised by the Committee and its Re-
search Staff, the Principal Investigator, Mr. J. A. Fraser Roberts, M.A., D.Sc.,
F.R.S.E., reports as follows: ?

The establishment of the Burden Trust has enabled a comprehensive
scheme of research to be inaugurated, with the special object of securing
further information on the relationship of heredity to amentia. A consider-
able amount of work has been carried out in this field both in this country
and abroad, and much information has already been secured. It is hoped
that the work of the Burden Trust will extend that knowledge.

The genetics of amentia is a most complex subject. No one would now
contend that a simple single factor scheme could accommodate the findings,
and while it is possible that inheritance is simple in certain cases, it is not
possible to distinguish such cases from those in which inheritance is also
simple but due to a different factor, nor from cases which are complex in
inheritance, nor from those in which environment plays a part. For these
and other reasons it is not likely that the mere accumulation of pedigrees can
add much to what is already known. Pedigree collection is only likely to be
of value in the future if it is concerned with very rare and special cases, is
directed to the elucidation of a particular problem, or is based upon a general
and complete ascertainment.

A more general and biometrical approach is possible. How many
affected persons have an affected parent, what is the proportion of affected
brothers and sisters, how many defectives are the offspring of cousins? Such
information can be very valuable, but it is not easy to collect. Institutional
cases are always a biased sample, and in order to secure reliable figures it is
necessary to survey a complete population, or, more valuable still, a complete
cross-section of a population?i.e., within certain narrow limits of age. It is
an ascertainment on these lines that forms the first task of the Trust, and upon
lt:> it is hoped, will be based the main work of the Trust. An attempt is being
niade to measure the intelligence by means of standard tests of all the children
particular age groups in given areas. This ascertainment will permit a
amily study to be carried out on a truly random unbiased foundation, with
proper control groups. It will also provide data that will be the basis for a
pumber of other and relevant investigations, e.g., the resemblance between
brothers and sisters, and also cousins.
