The Work of ao Approved School
==============================

:Author: J. Douglas Johnstone

Headmaster, Werrington School, Stoke-on-Trent
There are in England and Wales, 71 residential schools known as
Approved or Home Office Schools. Their function is to receive young delin-
quents and neglected children from the Juvenile Courts and turn them into
useful citizens. Before the Children and Young Persons' Act, 1933, these
Schools were known officially as Reformatories and Industrial Schools. This
distinction has now vanished and they are all known as Approved or Home
Office Schools. Those for boys are classified in three groups: Junior, Inter-
mediate and Senior, admitting respectively boys between the ages of 10 and 13,
13 and 15, 15 and 17. Those for girls are classified in two groups with the
dividing age at 15. Children under 12 may be detained until they attain the
age of 15: young persons over 16 until they are 19; and the others for three
years. The majority of the Schools (55) are under voluntary management and
the remainder are provided by Local Authorities. Most of the Schools also
receive boys and girls who are not sent to them by the Courts?chiefly from
Public Assistance Committees. Half the cost of maintenance is borne by the
Exchequer. The other half is borne by the local education authority in the
case of children from its area, or by the county or borough council in the case
of young persons from its area. The Schools are under regular inspection by
the Inspectors of the Children's Branch of the Home Office.

The School with which I am connected is now a Junior School for boys,
who are sent to us from different parts of the country. The majority have been
found guilty of offences punishable in the case of adults with imprisonment;
and of the remainder, some have been beyond parental control, some have
had parents not exercising proper guardianship over them, others have not
complied with school attendance orders, and others have been troublesome in
one way or another in public assistance institutions. We thus have in resi-
dence, young offenders along with boys who need care and protection. In
practice there is nothing difficult about this and the " illogical discrimination
between the treatment of the neglected and the delinquent, has given way
to the principle of dealing with the boy according to his needs." Probably
the chief cause of a boy's getting into trouble is neglect, and when he is re-
moved from undesirable surroundings to a school where proper provision is
made for his education and training, he is started on the way to decent man-
hood.

The primary concern of the School is for the physical health and fitness
of the boys. We have our own visiting medical officer whose duty it is to
examine every new case, to visit the School weekly and when required, to
examine every boy stripped every quarter, and to supervise the buildings from
a hvgienic point of view. Individual medical dossiers are kept in which are
recorded the medical histories of the boys. Special treatment is provided for
those who need it, and daily clinic needs are met by the Matron or her Assist-
ant working under the direction of the medical officer. We also have our own
visiting dental officer who examines every boy quarterly and does the dental
work which he deems necessary. Individual dental records are also kept.

Boys' heights are taken quarterly and their weights monthly, the latter being
recorded on individual graphs. These growth statistics are of the utmost
value to the medical officer and are referred to regularly. The following table
gives the heights and weights of the boys, in age groups, at the last quarterly
inspection:?

Age Group No. Height in inches Weight in lbs. (stripped)
15-16 ... 20 ... 62^ ... II4
58>4 ... C)2'/2
5 6y2 ... 84
55 79
53 7llA
50 ... 62
14-15
I3_I4
12-13
11-12
IO-II
9-10
40
27
26
6
5
1 ??? 46'A ??? 54

The foundation of physical well-being is, of couse, food, and the Dietary
Scale is such as to provide adequately for maintenance and growth. It is
arranged on a four weeks' basis, i.e., it does not recur for that period; its
vitamin value is satisfactory; and it provides daily for each boy over 3,400
calories, which partly arise from 100 grams of protein of which approximately
5? grams are those of animal origin. The meals are well cooked, attractive
and varied.

We pay a good deal of attention to housing conditions: the dormitories
are cheerful places with their comfortable beds, chairs, pictures and curtains;
the washing lavatory and bathroom, with individual toilet requisites, have a
plentiful supply of hot water; the dining hall with its small tables, tablecloths,
chairs, flowers, pictures, earthenware, is an attractive and popular room; the
schoolroom is always bright with miscellaneous samples of the boys' work;
the gymnasium and concert room is brightened by photographic records of
teams and educational journeys; the lawns and gardens are well kept?in fact
we do all we can to provide interesting surroundings in order that the boy
will receive harmonious impressions. The clothing is neat, warm, and sensible,
like that worn by reasonably well dressed boys in ordinary homes. This atten-
tion to housing has borne a good deal of fruit. I know many homes which
have been considerably improved not only through the influence of boys re-
turning to them either on leave or licence, but also through the effects of
parents visiting the School.

All boys attend the schoolroom full time until they are 14 years of age,
and after that age they attend half-time until they leave the School, which is
usually between the ages of 15 and 16. They are classified for schoolroom pur-
poses partly on attainment and partly on ability. Where there is considerable
divergence between these two, it is usually the result of some physical dis-
ability or irregular attendance at the previous school?for various reasons?
and we find that after a comparatively short while the two approach nearer.

Promotion from class to class is of course by merit. We do not usually hesitate
to classify older boys of low mental ages with boys a year or two younger, for
very often they associate, socially, with those of their own mental status. I
have tested, at least once, every boy who has been in the School since 1918,
using Terman's revision of Binet's tests. We have found the I.Q. arrived at
by these tests to be a very reliable assessment of mental ability. Often, new
boys have been placed in their School classes on attainment before the testing
has been done, and when amendment has subsequently been deemed necessary
on mental age, the latter classification has almost invariably been the truer.
The following table shows a distribution of the I.Q.'s of all the boys, includ-
ing transfer cases from other similar Schools:?

O
I.Q. Group Number of Boys Approximate Percentage
40-49 ... 3 ... .6
58
I03
146
I25
47
6
!-5
"?3
20.1
28.5
24-4
9.1
2.9
1.1
50-59
60-69
70-79
80-89
9?"99
100-109
110-119
120-129
i3?"I39

From this and other tables I find that about half the boys are of normal
intelligence or better, and that the other half are almost equally divided into
(1) backward and (2) dull and backward or defective. I do not think that
many true defectives have been admitted?probably less than 3%. An Ap-
proved School is not the proper place for the biologically defective?nor is
any school for that matter?though he is admitted, maybe, as a result of his
defect. But a School like this offers excellent facilities for the education and
training of the dull and backward as well as for the normal boy. The follow-
ing figures may be of use to those interested in this aspect of the subject. Since
1919, 63 boys of I.Q.'s less than 70 have left the School. Of these, 53 have
finished their period of supervision, i.e., a period of at least three years after
leaving. Of these 53 boys, omitting two in mental institutions, one who died
and one whose whereabouts was unknown, 87% finished their supervision
period satisfactorily and were self-supporting.

The table, when plotted, gives a curve approximating to the normal dis-
tribution curve thrust backwards. The average I.Q. is in the lower 8o's, which
means in educational practice that the average boy admitted is retarded one to
two standards. It will be seen that the mental range is as wide almost as it
is possible to be and for this reason, if the School is to be of any use, it must
provide a very wide curriculum in order to meet individual needs. I think
it does this bccause in addition to the ordinary schoolroom work, we have
woodwork, metalwork, gardening, farming, domestic work of all kinds, work
on the maintenance of extensive premises and the estate, besides all the train-
ing derived from the social and recreative sides of school life, in most of which
the boys share, in, of course, varying degrees.

The schoolroom, which boys attend full-time until they are 14 and half-
time until they are licensed, is the centre of the School system. There is co-
ordination between it and the various departments, and the opportunities
afforded by the latter are eagerly used by the teaching staff. Quite a number
of new boys, even to-day, are unable to read when admitted, so that the work
ranges through the whole elementary school scale. All the usual subjects are
taught and as much practical work as possible is introduced. The three R's
are treated broadly. The ordinary arithmetic syllabus is supplemented by
practical exercises involving measuring, weighing, etc., and in the higher classes
by the use of various instruments such as the theodolite (home-made), pris-
matic compass and surveyor's chain. Roads, paths and fields of certain dis-
tricts have been surveyed and maps of them made. A good deal of scale
drawing is done. This leads to the construction of scale models of small
familiar objects and ultimately to bigger objects such as farm buildings and
local churches. It is also preparatory to a course in technical drawing and
the drawing necessary in the manual instruction classes. The elements of
design are also taught?from stick printing to simple pottery decoration. In
geography use is made of graphical and diagrammatical methods, and much
useful work is done on educational journeys, to which reference will be made
later. Weather readings are taken and recorded every day. In English a good
deal of dramatic work is done. This is supplemented and polished by the
School Dramatic Society which produces in public on its own completely-
fitted, home-made stage, small plays of all kinds. Last season's big effort was
Scrooge " in eleven scenes. Singing is also taken throughout and many
songs are known and " community singing " is a very popular form of self-
entertainment. Nature Study is a good introduction to Gardening and Farm-
ing and is treated in a practical way.

Physical training consists of the usual school exercises, Morris and Folk
dancing, games, athletics and some swimming. The House system for games,
etc., has been in use for nineteen years. Each House has its football, cricket,
baseball and athletic teams and trophies are striven for on the league method.
Matches are arranged with other Schools and teams, and these serve a valuable
social purpose. We have two sports fields and on them most of the light nights
are spent in organised and voluntary practice of one game or another. The
House system is, of course, very precious and boys remain keenly loyal to their
old Houses for years after leaving. As each House has its own leader, there
are valuable opportunities for both the leaders and those whom they lead.

In the summer the whole School spends a fortnight in camp. We have
forsaken tents for huts and hostels, because we regard camp as an educational
journey and we find more can be accomplished if cooking is done for us,
Besides, the change of food does no harm. Before going to camp, lessons are
given in the schoolroom on the geography, geology, history of the district,
maps and guide books being prepared for use on the spot. This year, as an
experiment, the School was split into three groups. Group I, the largest, and
consisting of the youngest boys, went into a hut-camp in the Peak district:
diey explored caverns, moors and dales; visited castles, old houses, and churches
and in the latter took rubbings of brass memorials; and made collections of
wild flowers, found fossils and mineral ores. Group II stayed at an old manor
house which has been converted into a Youth Hostel. From there they traced
the course of the River Dove for twenty-five miles from its source; inspected
tumuli and stone circles; visited churches and made sketches and brass rub-
bings; and noted all kinds of wild flowers, birds and fish. A good deal of
map reading was also done. Group III, the smallest in number, spent their
holiday " cruising " on the canal system of Staffordshire and two adjacent
counties, eating and sleeping in a canal boat and visiting all kinds of interesting
places en route, besides taking data for models of boats and locks to be made
during the winter.

Almost every boy receives instruction in woodwork and metalwork,
though in the future the shortened detention period may necessitate these sub-
jects being alternatives. The curricula are graded in preliminary, intermediate
and advanced groups, the first named working as a class and the others in-
dividually. The advanced woodwork boys can make useful articles of
furniture?in fact the boys' own clubroom was furnished with their work;
and the advanced boys in metalwork can use lathes. We use much of their
work but a good deal of it is taken home at holiday times as specimens of
their skill and progress.

In gardening, which comprises work in the schoolroom and kitchen
gardens, every boy shares at some time or other. The schoolroom garden
includes theoretical and practical instruction: it is an attractive place with
individual and communal plots; herbaceous borders with plenty of flowers; a
greenhouse and cold frame made by the boys; a weather station and wind direc-
tion indicator, also made by the boys; and garden seats from the woodwork
shop. Gardening is a very fruitful subject: it means taking the long view, it
means care and patience over a long period, and results appear in stages to
encourage and inspire. Boys with a knowledge of gardening have a definite
peg to hang on when they leave and many of them find it a pleasurable, and
often a lucrative, way of spending their leisure. Perhaps that is why it is a
good subject: because it is training for leisure time. The kitchen garden pro-
vides opportunities for continued experience in the ordinary processes with the
addition of lawn mowing, hedge cutting, planting beds, etc.

We have our own farm of over 50 acres, some of which are cultivated.
The stock includes horses, cows, pigs and poultry. Practical work is supple-
mented by theoretical lessons from the farm bailiff. The boys share in all the
various work necessary on a mixed farm?carting, feeding, cleaning out, milk-
ing, hoeing, weeding, harvesting, haymaking, etc., and ultimately, if they
desire, are found work on farms in the district. Farming is a good disposal
and many boys choose it.

In Domestic work, the boys assist the women members of the staff in the
kitchen, scullery, dormitory and house work generally, and really valuable
training it is, whether the ultimate aim is House Service or not. One
advantage of a large, mixed staff and a number of departments, is that the
boys gain useful experience in working under varying conditions and tempera-
ments?factors which they will meet later in life. All the boys, of course,
share in the general domestic work?making their own beds, laying and clear-
ing tables, sweeping, dusting, scrubbing, cleaning windows, etc. This is useful
socially as well as physically.

A very important department we call the " Artisans'." These boys assist
in the repairs to the fabric; tend the boilers which produce the steam for heat-
ing, cooking and power; see to the electric light plant and maintenance of
the wiring, lamps, switches, etc.; help with repairs to the laundry machinery?
all of course under the supervision of the engineer, who also gives them courses
in simple engineering. On the whole, we are self-supporting in the directions
indicated and thus the boys, sharing in everything, have unique opportunities
for acquiring knowledge and skill, and for self-finding.

In the winter, as already mentioned, classes of all kinds are arranged.
Last winter the programme included Morris dancing, singing, dramatics,
ambulance work, farming, gardening, pottery, engineering, and church archi-
tecture. Boys, who are not in classes, spend their time in playing indoor games
of all kinds?many home-made?or in reading their own or library books.

Perhaps " Pottery " is the only one indicated above which needs further
mention. It began as an evening class subject but now has a Saturday morning
to itself. We have a thrower's wheel (which was made in the School), and a
lathe (adapted from an old sewing machine), and a kiln. The boys in the
class can all " throw," make moulds, model and cast. We use clay from our
own land. It is a very fascinating subject and, at the moment, we are con-
templating extending the facilities it offers.

The older boys run their own Club and Clubroom. They elect their own
officers who arrange fortnightly lectures by visitors, prepare refreshments for
sale to the members and organise some form of entertainment. They keep
minutes and conduct the meetings in the orthodox way. Their clubroom is
furnished with tables, benches, pictures, chairs, etc., all made by boys. It
also has a billiard table, and a liberal supply of papers and books. The older
boys, too, mix a good deal with the people of the locality, attending whist
drives, and other local functions. Nearly all village concerts are held in the
School and various bodies, such as the Parish Council, the Women's Institute,
the Village Hall Committee, the local School Managers, meet here. Visits to
the School by outside bodies and individuals are also encouraged, and the boys
gain much by these contacts.

There is comparatively little corporal punishment and its administration
is closely regulated by the Home Office. The discipline is free : the boys have
the lun of a good part of the estate; they go for walks, unaccompanied, at the
week-ends if they wish; they are not locked in anywhere and there is nothing
material to prevent them absconding. Those who are troublesome are dealt
with in various ways: they are deprived of some recreation or not allowed out,
they are left out of teams or the club, they lose some award money, and they
may lose their home leave. Every boy receives a penny weekly, and can by
reasonable behaviour get another; work boys, by good report, receive twopence
extra and efficiency certificate holders get a penny a week for each. These
certificates are obtained by examination or award in the following: ?athletics,
domestic work, woodwork, metalwork, schoolwork, gardening, farming,
engineering, prefectship. They are only granted, except in special cases, to
boys over 14. Many boys have accounts in the Post Office Savings Bank or
the National Savings Association, of which the School has its own branch, in
which they can deposit some of their award money and that which their friends
send them. Parents often send them parcels and papers and they are allowed
to visit on any Saturday afternoon once a month. We also have, annually, a
special Parents' Day. The parents become very keen on the School and we
find their co-operation, especially later on, very useful indeed. About 80% of
the boys spend a week at their homes in August and at Christmas. Some have
no homes, some refuse to go, others stay here because their parents do not find
it convenient to have them, some are still " new boys " and are not allowed to
go, and others have bad homes. In the case of the latter, however, we find it
wise to allow boys, when older, to visit them, as there is a definite tendency,
through prolonged absence, to idealise even the worst. After home leave, the
boys invariably return at the stated time, and where they have had a thin time
they are glad to get back. I do not remember a single case of unsatisfactory
conduct during home leave.

When boys are " licensed " or " discharged," some return home to work
in pits, or workshops, works or factories, some go to house service, and others
to farm work. In some cases they are apprenticed and maintained until self-
supporting. We keep in touch with them for at least three years after they
leave. This is done by visiting them three or more times a year in their homes
or at their work; by receiving periodic reports on their work and behaviour
from employers, parents or friends; by encouraging them to visit and stay at
the School; by arranging for someone in their locality to be their friend; by
sending them a letter each month; and by the School magazine which is pub-
lished at Christmas time. During last year 259 letters were received from
Old Boys, 155 visits were paid to the School by Old Boys, 67 reports were
received and 102 visits were paid to them. There is a tremendous loyalty to
the School and I think that pride in it is one of the chief factors in spurring
boys on to prove worthy of it. Most of the letters are closed with the initials
of the School motto, which is " Quit yourselves like men."

Though the discipline is " easy," though Christian or nick-names are
used, and though there is a pleasing cameraderie between boys and staff, there
is no suspicion of licence. The boys receive a great deal, they have a very full
and happy life, they are "better oft" than most boys outside, but they earn it
while they are here and they justify it when they leave, for judging them three
to four years afterwards, 90% to 95% " quit themselves like men,"
