Psychology of Wolf
====================

Aet. VIII.? #
BY PROFESSOR HOPPUS, LL.D.
In the career of German psychical speculation, a conspicuous part
was borne by Johann Christian von Wolf. He is mainly cha-
racterized as the author of a philosophy founded on that of
Leibnitz, but modified, systematized, and exhibited, according to
his own forms and modes of thinking, being expanded into
elementary treatises, and reduced from the scattered and desultory
materials which abound in the multifarious productions of
Leibnitz, into a digested arrangement. Hence it has been usual
on the Continent, since the time of Wolf, to designate the mass
of these speculations as the Leibnitz-Wolfian philosophy.
Like not a few others of the great metaphysicians of the ideal
school, from Descartes downwards, Wolf was a man of encyclo-
paedic learning in his day. He was born at Breslau, in 1679,
and early devoted himself to the eager pursuit of knowledge in
the Magdalen Gymnasium of his native city. He here acquired
no' small reputation for his skill in the wrangling disputations
which were the fashion of the age, and he is said to have met
with few who could compete with him in these exercises. He
had scarcely passed his youth, when having heard of the effects
which the writings of Descartes were producing, in opposition to
the old scholasticism still in vogue, Wolf ardently applied himself
to the Cartesian philosophy ; and he appears, at this early age,
to have conceived the idea of doing for practical, the same ser-
vice which Descartes had aimed to renderto theoretical philosophy.
This task he hoped to achieve by the application of a stricter
* Opera J. C. Wolfii. Breslau.
736 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
mathematical method than had hitherto been attempted. With
this view, he entered on the study of the exact sciences.
In furtherance of his design, he repaired to Jena, where
mathematics engrossed his attention, in the hope of preparing
himself for securing a solid basis for metaphysics in the science
of number and quantity. He afterwards passed some years at
Leipzig ; and he here maintained a thesis on the mathematical
method, which was published in 1781, under the title Philosophic^
Practica, mathematico modo conscripta. At Leipzig he
studied under Tschirnhausen, delivered lectures, and published
his treatises De Rotis Dentatis, and De Algorithmo Infinitesi-
mali Differentiali. It appears to have been his early intention
to take holy orders : but this project was overruled by his ardent
desire for the pursuit of intellectual and scientific truth ; and
perhaps in some measure from the encouragement he received
not only from Tschirnhausen, but also from Leibnitz himself, to
whom he had been introduced by Munken. Perhaps Leibnitz
saw that Wolf was eminently adapted, by his methodical and
rigorously logical cast of mind, to complete what Descartes and
himself had done so much towards achieving?the final over-
throw of the empire of Aristotle in Germany.
In 1711 our philosopher became professor of mathematics at
Halle, having previously been invited to Giessen. At Halle he
wrote his treatise De Metliodo Mathematicd, and his work entitled
Elementa Matheseos JJniversca. This voluminous publication,
which in the later Genevan edition extended to five volumes
quarto, comprises, along with other subjects, " A Description of
the Mathematical Method ; Arithmetic; Geometry; Plane and
Spherical Trigonometry ; Mechanics and Statics; Hydrostatics ;
Optics; Perspective; Astronomy ; Geography ; Chronology;
Dialling; Pyrotechny ; Architecture and an " Account of the
Principal Writings of Mathematicians/' In 1710 he was elected
a Fellow of the Royal Society of London. In 17?S he published
his " Tables of Sines, Tangents, and Logarithms." The " Acta
Eruditorum" bear many testimonies to his industry and learn-
ing, in the papers which he contributed relating to the mathe-
matical and physical sciences.
But Wolfs inclination led him to devote his energies almost
entirely to the study of metaphysical and moral philosophy; and
in order to gain the public ear for these subjects, he did not
hesitate to depart from the immemorial custom in Germany of
publishing learned works in Latin. He made the German
language the vehicle of his philosophy. This circumstance alone
could not fail to give him a great advantage over Leibnitz and
all who had preceded him in the career of speculation in that
country ; no doubt it contributed very greatly to the popularity of
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 737
his more strictly philosophical writings. His works in Latin and
German are from sixty to seventy in number. Between the years
1712 and 1723, he published his Verniinftige Gedanhen von
den Kraften des menschlichen Verstandes?Metaphysik oder
Verniinftige Gedanhen von Gott, der Welt, und der Seele des
Menschen, anck alien Dingen iiberhaupt* ? Anmerhungen
dazu?Versuche zur Erhentniss der Natur und Kunst?Ver-
niinftige Gedanhen von den Wirhungen der Natur?Von den
Absichten der Naturlichen Dinge?Von des Menschen Thun
rend Lassen?Politih, oder verniinftige Gedanhen von dem
gesellschaftlichen Leben der Menschen?Nadir id it von seinen
eigenen Schriften in Deutscher Spraclie in verschiedenen
Theilen der Weltweisheit?Gesammelte Kleine philosophische
Schriften. Wolf also published at a later period a " Mathema-
tical Dictionary," in German. The detached pieces in this
language under the title of Gedanhen, which treat of the powers
of the human mind, the Deity, the universe, the operations of
nature, the search after happiness, the constitution of society,
and other subjects, present their respective doctrines in a simpler
and more concise form than is adopted in the great work in
Latin, which embraces the same topics in an extensive and far
too diffuse course of philosophy. These smaller pieces which
preceded are still highly useful to all who read German, and are
calculated to give a very adequate knowledge of the author's
doctrines; indeed it was these pieces in the vernacular tongue
that spread the fame of Wolf over Germany.
Wolf was now regarded as Leibnitz's most illustrious disciple,
and he received while at Halle invitations to the chairs of philo-
sophy, at Wittenberg, Leipzig, and St. Petersburg. However, he
remained at Halle till a violent hostility towards him arose
among the theological professors of that university. Wolf him-
self was, at the time, Dean of the Faculty of Theology, and a
jealousy appears to have arisen from the circumstance of the
Dean appointing one of his own pupils to be his assistant, in pre-
ference to another student whom he thought incompetent, but
who, unfortunately, happened to be the son of one of the other
professors. Thus an occasion arose which proved of serious con-
sequence to our hitherto prosperous philosopher. It is certain
that Wolf was a man of pure morals, amiable temper, and
orthodox Christianity. In conformity with his system of proving
everything, he applied the Cartesian method strictly to religion,
and he endeavoured to establish its usually admitted doctrines
by a series of syllogistic demonstrations. He maintained that
the truths of religion ought to be believed, because they could
* If ever there was a man who tried to grasp the omne scibile, it was surely
Wolf!
738 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
be put to the test of the syllogism. His opponents held that
they ought to be believed because they were received from
Scripture by the almost universal consent of the Church. Wolfs
intention was to do service to Christianity by reducing it to logic;
the divines of that day were not prepared for so bold an inno-
vation, and they charged him with heresy, and inferred every-
thing which is always supposed to be at once capable of being
inferred from such a charge. His philosophy was opposed to
religion and morals?he substituted the agency of mechanical
causes for the empire of Providence?he introduced fatalism into
the events of the moral world?his views regarding " pre-estab-
lished harmony" left no room for freedom in God or man. That
these allegations were not just was no matter : they alarmed
heads that did not want their brains puzzled with metaphysics;
and which, perhaps, could not always, if they would, very well
distinguish between a mere metaphysical question and the
article of a creed.
To make matters worse, it happened that Wolf, in lecturing to
his class,* had pronounced an eulogium on the moral precepts of
Confucius, which had lately become known in the West by means
of the researches of the Jesuit missionaries. This unlucky cir-
cumstance greatly inflamed the controversy. To approve of the
ethical doctrines of a pagan philosopher was pronounced, in that
bigoted age, unworthy of a Christian divine, and even heretical,
by the dominant party at Halle. They were known in Germany
by the name of " Pietists," and with all credit for sincerity, their
views of religion, of man and his moral nature, were, in some
respects, founded on narrow and mistaken conceptions and inter-
pretations of Holy Scripture. Hermann Franke, founder of the
Orphan School, one of the best and most celebrated of the Pietists,
held at this time a theological chair in the University : crowds of
students from various parts of Germany had flocked to hear him ;
but it was in vain that he opposed the new philosophy from his
chair; he now found himself comparatively deserted for the
more attractive lectures of Wolf. The Pietists first accused him
before the Academical Senate, and afterwards complained of him
to the King of Prussia, Frederic William I. They proceeded
to the length of charging him with atheism. They denied the
possibility of his demonstrations, though some of their party in-
consistently adopted a line of argument very similar to that of
Wolf himself.f It was even alleged by some of his opponents
* 'This Lecture was published, entitled Oratio de Sinarum Philosopliid. Halle,
1726.
f Yid. Lange's Causa Dei et Religionis Naturalis adversus Atheismuvi et Pseudo-
plalosopliiam. Halle: 1723.?Also Ribov's Baveis dass die geoffenbartc Relvjion
nicht Jconne aus der Vernunft criciesen werden. Gottingen: 1710.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 739
that his doctrines were dangerous to the army, and tended to
excuse desertion ! This was enough : Wolf had orders to quit
the Prussian dominions in two days, on pain of the severest
penalties of the law ; though he informed the minister at Berlin
that he had intended to publish his lecture at Rome, with the
consent of the Inquisition?so little did he apprehend persecu-
tion for it in philosophical and enlightened Germany! But
such was the feeling among the Pietists, that no sooner had
Wolf quitted Halle, than the excellent Franke threw himself on
his knees in the church, and gave thanks to God for the deliver-
ance, almost as though Wolf had been the animal which his
name imports.
Driven thus summarily, and without a fair hearing, from Halle,
in 1723, Wolf took up his abode in Hesse Cassell, where he was
well received by the Landgrave, who appointed him Professor of
Philosophy and Mathematics at Marburg, and conferred on him
the title of Aulic Councillor. Wolf continued here about eighteen
years, and from 1728 to 1740, he published his metaphy-
sical works in the large Latin edition. This immense course
of philosophical disquisition comprehends Philosophia rationalis,
sive Logica methodo scientifica pertractata?Psychologia em-
pirica?Philosophia prima sive Ontologia?Cosmologia gene-
ralis?Psycliologia rationalis?Theologia naturaiis?Philo-
sophia practica universalis?Philosophia vioralis sive Ethica
?Jus Naturae. He also wrote Specimen Physicca ad Theolo-
giam naturalem applicatce. His Latin course of philosophy
was published in no less than twenty-four quarto volumes. The
Jus Natures, alone, in the Frankfort and Leipzig edition of 1732,
is in eight quartos. His Jus Gentium was not published till
1752.
Wolf did not fail, in his new chair at Marburg, where he was
beyond the reach of his opponents, to vindicate himsslf with a
vehemence proportioned to their attacks. The dispute, indeed,
had extended itself far and wide over Germany, and Wolfian
fought with anti-Wolfian incessant metaphysical battles, in which
neither party gained the victory, though both claimed it. Among
his own followers the controversy was identified with the inde-
pendence of philosophy. At length the opinion gained ground
that Wolf had been unjustly and harshly dealt with ; and that
neither religion nor good government would be promoted by the
attempt to suppress freedom of inquiry?an attempt which is
always sure, sooner or later, to be succeeded by a re-action.
Frederic appointed new commissioners to examine and report on
the writings of the banished professor. They declared that
Wolfs philosophy contained nothing opposed to the interests of
the State, nothing dangerous to morals and religion, nothing con-
K NO. VIII.?NEW SERIES. 3 C
740 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
trary to the orthodox Lutheran doctrine. Wolf was repeatedly
invited to return to Halle; this, however, he refused to do so
long as Frederic William reigned. In 1740, Frederic the Great
ascended the throne, and the next year Wolf accepted the
invitation. Among other honours domestic and foreign which
now fell to his lot, the king made him a privy-councillor, vice-
chancellor and afterwards chancellor of the university ; and the
Elector of Bavaria conferred on him the dignity of a Baron of
the Empire. Wolf died in 1754, of gout in the stomach, in the
seventy-sixth year of his age, having borne his sufferings with
Christian piety and fortitude.
From Descartes Wolf imbibed that independence of thought,
and attachment to the mathematical method which charac-
terized the school of that eminent philosopher. From Tschirn-
hausen he obtained the idea of the necessity of aiming at pre-
cision of language, logical exactness in definition, and the har-
monious combination of the a 'priori method with the results of
experience. But it was to Leibnitz that Wolf directed his
principal attention. He thought the time was come for attempt-
ing a national philosophy to which Leibnitz might furnish the
clue, more especially as Germany was now no longer contented
with having a foreign literature, and was advancing towards one
that should be indigenous to its own soil. Wolf found the
thinking world grown weary of the scholastics. Aristotle, whose
excellences and errors were equally confounded with the dogmas
of the schoolmen, had already shared largely in their fate.
Platonism was less known than Aristotelianism, and it was more-
over always wanting in a didactic method. Thomasius was not
elevated enough for the taste of the learned public. Descartes
had not so applied his principles as to promise durable results.
Leibnitz, indeed, the cynosure and prodigy of his age and nation,
had laid foundations which the best minds of the day were dis-
posed to regard as solid ; but on these foundations he had only
built limited and detached erections. Wolf had an ambition
to finish what Leibnitz had begun, with such alterations both
of plan and execution as he might himself deem expedient; and,
whatever may have been his success or failure, he went to work
like a true German, and fully sustained the character of a most
indefatigable student, and a writer of vast industry and enormous
labour. He appears to have had several points of character in
which he much resembled the head of his school. He was candid,
simple, and disinterested. When the King of Sweden asked
him what he could do to serve him, he merely replied that he
" wanted nothing." Amidst vicissitudes of fortune, and bigoted
and unjust persecutions for his opinions, he sustained equality
and serenity of mind. Like his great master in philosophy, he
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 741
was not free from vanity; but he was ingenuous and urbane, and
was generous even towards his enemies. The love of intellectual
truth was a passion with him. He was more attached to method
and system than Leibnitz, at least to its forms and signs. In
originality, however, he was far inferior to his master, Leibnitz
was the fathe^ of German philosophy: Wolf was the reviser,
the critic, the systematiser of German ideas. He brought to the
sciences which he studied a great talent for arrangement, but he
was not a creative genius. He gave to human knowledge a didactic
form which it had not previously received. It was the order,
method, and comparative clearness of his writings that enabled
him to reign over the mind of Germany for more than half a
century, in a manner which Leibnitz, for want of more system,
for want of a vernacular garb for his thoughts, and for want,
perhaps, of an equally enlightened tribunal to appeal to, had
not attained. It must not be supposed from what has been
said that Wolf was a mere echo or copyist of Leibnitz. In
many respects he differed from him. Wolf was a kind of eclectic
philosopher, and in this he showed wisdom: for unless truth be
sought on the principles of eclecticism, an existing age must
reject much of the advantage which is to be derived from the
history of human thought?its errors and its triumphs. Wolf's
eclecticism was not bound by any national or sectarian pre-
judices. Like Leibnitz himself, he borrowed from the ancients
as well as from the moderns, and he did not disdain to cull from
the scholastics. We sometimes find him endeavouring to bring
Descartes and Leibnitz into union. In his attempts of this sort,
he has shown judgment and independence, if he has sometimes
failed in the arduous task of reconciling different points of view.
It must be admitted that his harmonizing efforts sometimes lead
. him into heterogeneities and incompatibilities with himself.
Wolf has developed germs of thought, and combined scattered
ideas from Leibnitz: he has modified the elements which passed
through his hands, and clothed them in a new form. Descartes,
Spinoza, and Leibnitz, all more or less employed a method bor-
rowed from mathematics : Wolf aimed at this method in a more
rigorous form. In fact, the idea of reducing philosophy to mathe-
matical formulae was his idol: it was founded on a capital over-
sight of the essential difference there is between the science of
quantity (in which such elements as time, space, and the fixed
relations of number are concerned) and the mental and moral
phenomena of man in general. Even the example of Spinoza
does not seem to have warned our author from this course. The
exact sciences are strictly and purely " rational." On the basis
of definitions, and with the aid of undisputed axioms, the most
extended and intricate combinations become plain by means of a
3 c 2
742 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
series of transformations in which there is no room for any dif-
ference of opinion or point of view. Logic is based on these
grounds, and the exact sciencesas such are exemplifications of logic.
But beyond this domain?in the speculations of psychology and
morals?experience has a wide sphere. Their objects are of a
mixed and often of an indefinite nature, and they do not admit
of being reduced to the well-defined conditions of the mathe-
matical sciences. In order to meet this difficulty, Wolf endea-
voured, in various branches of philosophy, to separate the purely
rational part from that which belonged to experience, and to
reduce all under one system by prolix demonstrations. That he
was as successful as he thought himself to be, none of his readers
will now admit. The appearance of mathematical accuracy in
subjects not mathematical may seem grave tod strict, inspiring
the expectation of great accuracy; but the appropriateness of the
method, beyond the domain of the exact sciences, has now long
since been more than questioned. It was, however, popular in
Germany under the auspices of Wolf, and it was not till Kant
arose that a final blow was given to this dogmatic method of
reducing all knowledge. Wolf had at least the merit of putting
this method, as an organon of all truth, to the test; and it must
be admitted that, however unsatisfactory his procedure for the
cure of error may have been, his influence on the entire intel-
lectual development of Germany was very great, and the German
language is much indebted to him for being the first to make it
the general vehicle of philosophy.
In his Ratio Prailectionum our author prefers Aristotle's
division of the sciences (theoretic, poietic, and practical) to that of
Lord Bacon (history, poetry, philosophy); but proposes his own,
which is history, philosophy, and mathematics. Science he defines
to be the " process of demonstrating what is asserted." Philosophy
he terms the "science of all that is possible and real, and of the why
and wherefore of its possibility and existence"?it is the "science
of what is and has been, and of that of which a reason can be
assigned."* Cause is that which contains within itself a reason
for the existence of some other thing. Relatively to the maxim,
that every thing, change, or circumstance, must have a cause?he
states a somewhat qualifying condition, namely, that " what has
only a contingent existence must be produced by some efficient
cause,"t The first thing which ought to occupy the philosopher
is Logic, or " rational philosophy,"* which derives its principles
from ontology, or the "science of being a 'priori," and from
psychology. Wolfs logic is essentially Aristotelian, though like
most of the logicians, he has made his own changes and emenda-
* Logik, Vorbericlit, ? 5. + Ontol. cap. ii.
J Yid. Fhilosophia Ilationalis give Logica. 1734.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 743
tions. He treats it in the way of Leibnitz, and defines it the
" science which directs the thinking faculties in the search after
truth." He divides it into theoretical (with nearly the ordinary
heads) and practical logic, which distinguishes and discovers
truth, is a basis for criticism, communicates instruction, estimates
evidence, and aids in the common duties of life. The criterion
of truth in a proposition is that the " predicate may be deter-
mined by the notion of the subject." This looks at first like
Kant's description of the " analytical proposition/' to the exclu-
sion of the " synthetical" one; but on tracing the theory of
knowledge as held in the school from Descartes, we see that it
was meant to be a general account of propositions. Descartes'
criterion of truth was the " distinctness and clearness of the
ideas" under which the proposition is couched ; and Leibnitz's
criterion was the " consistency of the ideas among themselves."
The latter view seems hardly to differ from Wolf's, except in
words.
Our author's speculations on Truth are much hampered by his
artificial method, and by his assumptions respecting the extent
to which mathematical principles may be applied in general.
His developments are often exceedingly tedious, and his proofs
are sometimes not more evident than the- proposition to be
proved. He has long disquisitions on method, on hypothesis, on
the inductions of experience, and the like topics, which are felt
by the reader to be not only wearisome but also trite and com-
monplace. Respecting the connexion of the sciences, we again
encounter his rigid abstractions, in his attempts to seek their
relations in a, priori deductions rather than in any more practical
and obvious source. In discussing these and other topics, how-
ever, he conferred upon his age the benefit of introducing even
into popular use a great number of scientific terms which had not
previously been generally current.
Many of our readers will be aware* that Leibnitz, while
reducing all truth to the two principles of " contradiction," or
identity, and of the " sufficient reason " (the former of which
included all a priori truth, and the latter all other truth), never-
theless maintained that, in the last analysis, even the principle of
contradiction might be regarded as falling within the range
of the principle of the sufficient reason: for the proposition
{a + b) + (a?b) = 2a has a sufficient ground for being believed,
from its denial involving a contradiction. Wolf, with less pro-
priety, we think, holds the opposite vjew, that the foundation of
all rational knowledge, even of the principle of the sufficient
reason, as well as of every other metaphysical axiom, is the principle-
* See our notice of Leibnitz in a former dumber.
74-i PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
of contradiction : for, says he, " if a thing had no sufficient reason
for its being, something must arise from nothing, which is a con-
tradiction/'* To us there appears, here, a confounding of strictly
logical with metaphysical truth?the analytical with the syn-
thetical judgment, which were afterwards so well distinguished
by Kant.
Our author's division of philosophy is into two general parts?
theoretical, which relates to knowledge, and practical, which
relates to action. Under the first head he includes Ontology,
Psychology, Cosmology, and Natural Theology: under the
second, Ethics, Politics, and the Law of Nature and Nations.
This classification has to a considerable extent influenced the
method of those systems of philosophy which have subsequently
appeared among the Germans. We may add, that Wolf tried
everywhere to separate the " purely rational" from the " experi-
mental " part of knowledge ; but it is generally admitted that he
was not very successful in disentangling elements which are so
closely blended in all our cognition.
Ontology, or jihilosophia prima, relates, after the scholastic
fashion, to the doctrine of being, (Wesenheitslehre.) And here
we find Wolf differing from his great predecessor with respect to
the simplicity, composition, and essential nature of substances, a
topic abstruse and shadowy enough in the hands of Leibnitz, and
not much illuminated by the criticisms of Wolf. Leibnitz said
that only simple or uncompounded substances are to be regarded
as having reality (ovtuq ovra): Wolf admitted also compound
ones to the honour of this category?and why not ? Leibnitz
bestowed on each of his monads, or simple unities, a sort of
representative force (Vorstellungskraft) each being a kind of
" mirror of the whole universe Wolf denied this,f and rendered
the doctrine of the schools less mystical by retaining, as common
to all the monads, only the inward efficient energy. Leibnitz's
ontology is a pure ideal monism : Wolf's is a dualism of spirit
and matter, of simple and compound, of representive or per-
ceptive, and non-representive substances. The universe with
him is not a living organization, as Leibnitz maintained, but a
mechanism on which force has been impressed. The dualism of
Wolf was so far a recession towards the old Cartesianism, and
not an onward march from Leibnitz towards the absolute and
nihilistic idealism which at last marked the German school in our
own times. It is no wonder that Wolfs dualistie ontology is
much blamed by some of the later Germans?it was at least
two degrees from zero. In regard to the essence or nature of a
* Log. iv. ? 5. Metaphysik, iii. ? 192. + Ontol. ? 64. Kosmol. ? 598.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 745
thing, we find him mainly agreeing with Leibnitz.* This nature,
or essence (Weseri) is its intrinsic possibility, the reality being
the fulfilment of the possibility, f The essence of the composite
is the simple, for the composite can have its cause only in the
simple, which renders it possible.^; We know from reason that
there are simple existences, though they never present themselves
in experience. Their origin is inexplicable ; but they cannot in
any natural way perish, nor can they undergo change otherwise
than by the alteration of their limits. ?
A substance, or a thing subsisting for itself, is that which has
the sources of its changes in itself: but a thing which subsists
by means of another thing is nothing else than a limitation of
the preceding. || Now, since the source of changes is called
power or force, it is necessary that in everything which subsists
for itself there should be a certain power and changes which
take place by means of this power in a thing subsisting for itself
are actions of this thing, which have their cause in itself: and
through these actions a thing evidences its reality and self-de-
pendence (Selbstandigkeit), as well as its distinction from other
things.** Moreover this power or force must not be confounded
with a bare faculty (Vermugen), for a faculty marks only the
possibility of doing anything: force, on the other hand, is that
by which the possibility is translated into reality?that is into a
continuous effort, or an action which produces an effect, and
which consequently helps a possible into existence Qiilft einem
Moglichen ins Daseyn).tf And since everything which subsists
for itself is making a continual effort to change its limits, that
is, to alter its condition, and as nothing, and therefore no change
can occur without a cause, therefore the preceding change must
always contain something out of which the following one has its
origin: for in this way only is the course of nature at all
conceivable.^
It is evident that closely as "Wolf followed the traces of his
master in his ontological speculations, he did not hesitate, as he
went on, to modify Leibnitz's doctrines according to his own
more logical and less imaginative turn of mind. Leibnitz en-
dowed even his lowest order of monads with some kind of per-
ception and appetency. Wolf, as we have seen, was not so
indulgent to the plebeian herd as to allow them to be a kind of
living " souls" ('times); and by thus distinguishing the higher
from the lower class, he evidently receded from the bold advance
of his predecessor, who brought them, in some respects, into one
* Monadologie. + Metaphys. cap. ii. ? 55. + Ebend. ? 76.
? Ibid. ?? 86, 87, 96, 102, 106?108, 113. || Ibid. ? 114.
T Ibid. ? 115. ** Ibid. ? 116. ?? 117?120. ?? Ibid. ? 128.
746 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
category; and Wolf was, so far, apart from the identistical idealism
which afterwards reigned in the German school.
Psychology (Seelenlehre) is, according to Wolf, either em-
pirical or rational. The former is merely the history of our
actual consciousness; the latter is the " science of what is pos-
sible (i. e. a priori) with respect to minds." The being within
us, the soul (Seele) is conscious of itself and of other things with-
out itself; and its own existence is immediately certain to every
knowing thing as such. The prime activity of the soul is the
exercise of the representative faculty (Vorstellung), or of the
power of forming ideas. From this, as united with consciousness,
knowledge arises; and such union of representation with con-
sciousness is called thinking.* The under-standing (Ver stand) is
the source of those clear and distinct ideas which are owing to
the proper self-activity of the soul. The senses (Sinne) and the
imagination (.Phantasie) are the source of direct sensations,
and of obscure and confused representations. Reason ('Vernunft)
is nothing more than the faculty of discovering the general con-
nexion of truths by means of conclusions and inferences, t We
see, here, that the distinction between understanding and reason,
was not first introduced into the German school by Kant, as some
have supposed : it is evidently a Leibnitz-Wolfian distinction ;
but it was not always consistently maintained?not even by
Kant himself.
Nothing corporeal can think, says Wolf, that is, can by its own
activity represent anything to itself with consciousness?nay, it
cannot even be passively sensible of anything acting on it, so as
to feel the change effected. The power of thought and the
faculty of sensation {Empjindungs-vermogen) belong exclusively
to soul, which is placed in entire contrast with body, being
incorporeal and simple. All the ideas and sensations which
occur to it are only modifications (Modificationeri) of its own
constant and unchanging essence, produced from within or with-
out itself. J
The souls of men alone, adds our author, are spirits (Geister);
that is, beings which are simple, having the faculty of repre-
sentation, endowed with understanding, will, and freedom : con-
sequently they alone are immortal. The souls of animals have,
indeed, the faculty of representation, but they have no under-
standing, freedom, and will: like the simple (uncompounded)
points (monads) of inanimate bodies they are not subject to
natural decay, but they are not destined to be immortal.?
All the movements of the human soul are dependent on its
own peculiar nature, conformably to which it represents to itself
- * Metaphys. cap. v. ?? 192, 194. + Ibid. ?? 194, 277, 282, 284, 368.
$ Ebend. ??.222, 738, 742, 784. ? Ibid. 896, 921, 92G.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 747
the objects of the universe; just as all the movements of the
body follow from the nature of its own peculiar composition.
The fact that these affections of the soul and the body har-
monize with each other, is not the consequence of a reciprocal
influence between them, nor of the immediate agency of the
Deity, nor of occasional causes,* but is the result of a previously-
established harmony which is not to be ascribed to the mere
general principle of the will of God as the Author of nature, but
depends on the special principle that every soul always repre-
sents to itself the world only according to the constitution of its
own organic body, and according to the changes which take
place in its organs of sense. Hence those representations and
these changes always take place exactly at the same time, with-
out the one being properly caused by the other : we should
rather say, that'both have their cause in a third thing?namely,
the changes which are occurring in the universe itself, which
reflect themselves in the body and on the soul.f
Wolf appears to have limited the Leibnitzian doctrine of
" pre-established harmony" to the mutual relations of the body
and the soul. Leibnitz himself had made it general throughout
the universe. The monads had no real agency on each other;
none of the objects in the creation exercised any reciprocal in-
fluence?not more than two clocks, each independent of the
other, one of which is regulated to strike the hour at the moment
the other points to it. This harmony is not the result of the
immediate and constant agency of the Creator, but of an original
arrangement of the parts and forces of the universe, which is a
kind of machine set in motion at its creation by the first cause.
Of course neither this theory itself, as applied to mind and body,
nor any conceivable modification of it, solves any difficulty, such
as, for instance, might occur especially to the moralist. It is
fair, however, to remark that both Leibnitz and Wolf strenuously
maintained the "freedom of the will," and repudiated the form
of necessarianism?fatalism?which some have charged upon
the doctrine of pre-established harmony,| according to which
* The doctrine of " occasional causes" was developed from the Cartesian prin-
ciples probably by Geulinx of Antwerp, and was fully adopted by Malebranche: it
amounted to this?that God is the real agent in all changes; what are usually
termed "secondary causes" are only the occasions on which he acts.
f Ebend. ?? 765, 979, 368, 786.
| This " harmony," unfortunately, seems to have been one source of the discord
between Wolf and his colleagues in the Senate at Halle, and especially the cause
of his incurring the displeasure of the King of Prussia, which led to his banishment,
as we have already stated. Euler, in his "Letters to a German Princess," says
that when the King was told that Wolf was lecturing to his students on "Pre-
established Harmony," he inquired what it meant. Frederic William I. was not
possessed of a very subtile understanding, and had no patience for philosophy.
One of his courtiers waggishly told him that it was a doctrine according to winch
748 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
they both maintained that the soul acts as it would do if there
were no body, the body as if there were no soul. It is not the
volition of my soul that moves my arm, or causes the force to
act which moves it; both agencies are independent of each
other, and both are merged in the original pre-ordained harmony
by which they seem, but only seem, to co-operate.
Wolfs Cosmology defines the universe to be a series of things
finite and changeable, partly contemporaneous, partly successive,
and united together in a whole. The rational science, which has
for its object the world as a whole, capable of undergoing certain
changes, is called by the above names (Kosmologie?Weltalls-
lehre).* The changes in the universe are conditioned by the
nature of its composition, according to the laws of motion, there-
fore by its mechanism : hence the universe may be compared to
a piece of clockwork or a machine.f In virtue of the general
laws of this universe-timepiece, no contingency is imaginable;
everything which once has its ground in the series of things
which belong to the universe comes necessarily to pass. Still
this necessity, says Wolf, is also hypothetical, for the universe
might have been different from what it is; various other con-
nexions of things were possible, only they could not have been
brought into real existence at the same time with the pre-
sent arrangements.^ Wolf, again, does little more than rehearse
Leibnitz when he adds, that the constituent parts of the physical
world are the bodies (Korper) which compose it; the constituent
parts of bodies are their simple elements or natural unities (the
Leibnitzian monads). The elements or unities have no special
magnitudes, and therefore cannot be distinct from each other in
quantity or figure, but only by means of powers and qualities ;
and they really are distinguished from each other, inasmuch as
that nowhere in the whole universe one of them is perfectly like
another.?
The language of Wolf as to dynamics is a compound of that
of Newton with that of Leibnitz. Every body (Korper) has a
certain amount of innate force ([Tragheits-macht?vis inertiai),
by which it strives to maintain itself in its place, and to hold its
existence and its essence; on the other hand, every body has
also a moving power (Beivegimgskraft?vis motrix), by which
it endeavours to change its condition, and to act without itself. ||
The continuity of bodies, and their extension in space, although
his Majesty's soldiers were nothing but "mere machines, so that if they deserted
they could not help it, and were not by any means, therefore, worthy of punishment
for it." The King immediately flew into a rage, and ordered Wolf to quit Halle
without delay.
* Metaphysik, oder verniinftige Gedanken, u. s. w. cap. 4, ? 544.
f Ibid. ? 556. | Ibid. 569, 576. ? Ibid. ?? 583, 585, 586, 5S9.
|| Ibid. ? 607- See also Leibnitz's Monadologie.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 749
they are composed of simple and inextended elements or
unities, arise from this, that their elements are quite distinct
from each other, without their unity among themselves being
thereby prevented or impaired ; for this unity is founded solely
upon the connexion of the condition of each monad with the
condition of all the rest.* This Leibnitz-Wolfian doctrine of
elements wholly without extension, having no parts and no posi-
tion in space, but yet constituting the bodies which are extended in
space, is a paradox which no ingenuity can solve. Wolfs argu-
ment confounds the alleged unity of inextended elements with
the property of extension ; it is like saying that though nought
or zero is nothing in itself, yet if you heap up an indefinite
number of simpie noughts you will obtain an arithmetical
quantity!
Some of the later Germans complain that "Wolf has, in some
of these cosmological dogmas, lowered too much Leibnitz's theory
of a universe of monadic souls, and almost changed it into a dead
mechanism. They allege that he seems chiefly to conceive of
the material world as a multiplicity of varying forms, showing
themselves in the changes which are evident to our senses, while
he almost seems to forget the unity and unchangeableness of
the essence of the whole. It is true he makes the unities or
monadic elements to have a certain life and activity, but he
denied them the perceptive power with which Leibnitz endowed
them. He made them, it is alleged, neither material nor spi-
ritual, so that what they are is not plainly evident.f We are
not at all disposed further to trouble our readers with these
knotty points ; we have already dwelt quite long enough on
them. We will not enter on the question how far this criticism
is just, or whether it is quite consistent with itself. Some of
Wolfs cosmological speculations are, no doubt, obscure enough,
and there is little here to choose between him and his master.
His failure to make intelligible to the speculative intellect of his
most acute countrymen who are advocates of idealism what these
said " monads " are, speaks for itself. He is complained of for
holding the dualism of matter and spirit; and he is complained
of, at the same time and in the same quarters, for making the
monads, which are of the essence of either or both, neither one
nor the other. The moral of this is the old lesson : it is no
wonder that so bright a genius as Leibnitz, and so arrant a
plodder as Wolf should equally break down in the attempt to
substitute fine-spun theories for real evidence, and to cure man's
ignorance by giving loose to the reins of imagination.
* Metaphysik, ?? 604, 605.
f Yid. Itixner's Geschichte, ii. 203, Anmerlc.?"We must here acknowledge the
aid we have derived from this author's labours.
750 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
With respect to Natural Theology, "Wolf endeavoured to
elaborate the Cartesian arguments from the a 'priori principle of
necessary existence, and from the psychological fact of our notion
of superior power : but in regard to the principle of the su fficient
reason, he agreed with Leibnitz, who had maintained that " with-
out this principle we cannot arrive at the proof of the existence
of a Deity."* This is basing the grand fundamental truth of
religion clearly on the ground of causation ; and whatever may
be said respecting what have been technically named by the
later Germans the " ontological," the " cosmological," and the
" physico-theological " arguments,f respectively, we are decidedly
of opinion that, so far as they have any force, they are all vir-
tually only so many forms of the argument from causation, which
is evidently itself founded on the essential constitution of the
human mind?an analysis than which nothing can be more
ultimate and final. The external universe, says Wolf, as well as
our own souls must have a sufficient reason (zureichendenGruncl)
of their existence : now neither of them contains any such reason
in itself, for they are not of themselves, and cannot be ; there-
fore the sufficient reason of both must be contained externally to
both in a being which requires for its existence no ground or
reason beyond its own essence. This being is God.%
Wolf's further views respecting the nature and attributes of
the Divine Being scarcely differ from those of philosophical
theologians in general, up to the time when pantheism reduced
all theology to an idle dream. God is simple (einfach) un-
changeable, and unique (einzig)?an eternal, infinite, and abso-
lutely self-existent being, the first and the last, before whom
nothing was, and after whom nothing can be; a being entirely
of and from himself, and independent of all other beings. ? In
strong contrast with the dogmas of Spinozism, which so much
gave the cue to some forms of the subsequent pantheism of which
it was the parent, Wolf held that all that is was created by the
Deity, not through mere necessity, but by reason and will. He
is the absolute, free, and all-wise Author of all things, and he
cannot be the mere "soul of the world" (Weltseele?ipvxv ro"
koctjuov), that is to say, he cannot stand in that relation to the
universe in which the souls of men and beasts stand to their
bodies: for God knows all things immediately, of himself, and
not as the soul knows mediately through the body. We must
regard him as the purest, the most perfect, the most unlimited
spirit, free from all corporeal impediment; a spirit whose under-
standing is all light and clearness, in which alone all things as to
* Recueil de Diverses Pieces.?Vt'cl. our notice of Leibnitz in this Journal.
f Vid. Kant's Kritik der r. Yernunft (Rosenkranz), a. 462.
+ Metaphys. cap. 6, ? 945. ? Ibid. ?? 947, 948.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. Vol
their conception and their possibility were always contained,
since nothing is possible but in so far as God recognised it from
all eternity. From the divine attributes, as those of a being
who is not only almighty, but all-wise, all-benevolent, all-perfect,
it follows, as Leibnitz maintained in his " Optimism," that among
all possible worlds God has created that which is the best.*
Under the head of " Practical Philosophy," we find those sub-
jects treated which are usually comprehended under this name
among the Germans : Ethics, Politics, and the Law of Nature
and Nations. Baumgarten, we believe, was the first who added
^Esthetics, or the philosophy of the sublime and beautiful, to
this division. In his Ethics, theoretical and practical, Wolf
sets out with the principle that consciousness truly attests
man's freedom of choice in all actions of the will. Still he
maintains that motives have such a determining power that
their effects are inevitable. It is impossible that we should not
will what presents itself to us, in our present state of mind, as
good, and reject the contrary, as soon as the two objects are
clearly apprehended. That which furnishes the motive by which
we are determined to volition binds us to action, for without
motive we cannot act. Liberty, therefore, is the faculty which
man possesses to determine himself according to what appears to
him, at the time, the best choice. It is evident that this theory
of freedom and volition, as held by Wolf and his predecessor
Leibnitz, was similar to that of President Edwards, the great
Transatlantic metaphysical divine. It was, in fact, the doctrine
of philosophical necessity as much guarded as possible against
interference with human responsibility, as we find it expounded in
Edwards's great work, " The Freedom of the Will."
Our author, in detailing the moral processes of the mind,
remarks that men's sensibilities and ideas are the source of their
appetites and their determinations?and this in virtue of the
native energy of the soul itself, which has a faculty of desiring as
well as of knowing. This faculty of desire, like the knowing
faculty, is twofold: inferior and sensuous, which belongs also to
the brutes, and the higher or rational form of desire which dis-
tinguishes man from the lower creation. The desire (or the
aversion) which belongs to sense is an inclination or disinclination
of animal nature to a given object, arising out of the idea or
feeling of sensuous perfection or imperfection, the former being
connected with pleasure and satisfaction, the latter with the
absence of pleasure, with dissatisfaction, pain, or with hatred
or disgust On the other hand, rational and intelligent
desire or aversion?that which belongs purely to the mind
Metaphys. ?? 951, 982, 959. .
752 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
itself?is excited solely by intellectual perfection, fitness, and
moral good, or by the want of these, or by their opposites. The
actually existing desire or aversion of the individual always
necessarily follows the sensuous, or the intelligent and rational
ideas which predominate in him : but his freedom of will consists
in a man's always determining himself for that which appears to
him the best in his existing inclination.*
Wolf's general principle of practical morals is, that every man
should, to the utmost of his power, do that which is adapted to
render his own condition and that of others as perfect as possible.
Moral perfection he regards as essentially consisting in the
" agreement of the results of a free action with the previous and
subsequent conditions of being, according to a law of nature
established by the Divine wilL" Reason is the power by which
man takes cognizance of moral rules. Everything which tends
to perfect the condition of man as a rational and moral being is
moral good : whatever makes him more imperfect is moral evil.
All man's free actions are necessarily either morally good or
morally evil, as either conducing or not to the real highest welfare
of man (dem wahren Besteri) present and eternal.f Hence the
universal principle of moral action may be reduced to the pre-
cept : " As far as lies in thy power, do that which truly makes
thee and thy condition, as well as all others and their condition,
more perfect, and forbear the contrary." The obligation of this
principle, adds our author, lies in the divinity of reason itself,
which, according to the will of God who has created us rational
beings, we are bound unconditionally to obey.! Reason takes
cognizance of the conjunctures which arise as consequences of
our moral actions ; and by the estimate she forms of these con-
sequences she echoes the law of nature on which morality is
founded. The beneficial consequences which God has connected
with certain free actions constitute natural reward; the oppo-
site consequences of other (bad) actions constitute natural
'punishment.? But as man is a rational being, he is a law to
himself, and so far as reason prevails, he needs not that rewards
and punishments should lie in the perspective. Only let reason
be supreme, and he will determine himself to known good and
will forbear from known evil. So far as he does this he will be
happy; and his happiness consists in a perpetual advance from
perfection to perfection. |
While admitting that all moral good originates ultimately in
God, Wolf regards actions as good or bad, intrinsically, and for
their own sake, independently of the divine sanction or com-
* Metaphys. ?? 432, 492, 878, 889, 514, 519. f Ibid. ?? 422, 426.
? Moral, oder Verniinftige Gedanken von der Menschen Thun und Lassen,
?? 9, 12. ? Ibid. ?? 36, 37- II Ibid. ?? 24, 38, 44.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 753
mand. This doctrine of the immutability and necessary fitness
of morality is, we think, undeniable; even God himself " does
right;"* and if we are commanded to obey our parents, the
reason is that "it is right."t Our author goes further, and,
with many of his successors, argues from the idea of duty, moral
fitness, and moral order, that the obligations of morality would
still subsist, even apart from the belief in a Deity, that morality
is binding, as a law of nature, even on the atheist himself. But
as human nature has received from its Author the laws which
govern it, he is, in this sense, the prime source of moral law;
and he has attached happiness to virtue and misery to vice as a
part of the whole economy of causes and effects.
In his discussions on Ethics, Wolf has not only given rules for
self-knowledge, but has also, by way of promoting our knowledge
of others, introduced some physiognomonical remarks, which were
the more ingenious because he anticipated Lavater, who at a
later period elaborated the theory of physiognomy, in which,
however, he is said to have had less confidence in after-life. Our
author's ethical system has been objected to as liable to difficulty
on account of a certain vagueness and indetermination attaching
to his fundamental idea of " perfection." His system certainly
seems to want something more definite in another respect?
that which relates to the means of exciting a moral impulse that
shall sway the conscience, a faculty which, though so important
in the sphere of " practical" philosophy (in the German sense),
he has not dwelt on to the extent that might have been desired.
His moral philosophy may be said to have a considerable
tendency to endemonism, the perfection of happiness being
apparently made the end of man's existence, rather than that
goodness which draws happiness in its train; but Wolf's ethical
system would be most unfairly treated if it were confounded
with the utilitarianism of later times.
Wolfs Jurisprudence naturally partakes of liis ethical
theories. He considers natural right as resting on the same
foundation as moral law, in so far as both tend towards perfec-
tion. Every right has its corresponding duty, and right must have
duty as its foundation. The aim of all law should be to advance
the human species towards perfection, by a constant progression ;
and if the whole race is thus to go on from perfection to perfec-
tion, then the same moral idea must prevail in the common-
wealth as in the mind of the private individual; " every one in
the community should do that only which the perfection of his
own condition and that of others unitedly involves and demands,
and should refrain from doing that which would make his own
* Gen. xviii. 25. f Eph. vi. 1.
754 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
condition unitedly with that of others more imperfect."* Every
man has originally the same rights with every other, in the
highest perfection ; hut in the State every one can only lay
claim to a perfection of right conformable to his position, since
the very nature of an organic union of individuals implies that,
among the several members and their particular callings, the
greatest multiplicity and diversity should exist, though without
injury to the most harmonious order of the whole. No man,
therefore, should either do or forbear doing anything thought-
lessly, or without an express purpose ; as every rational purpose
will subserve the last and highest end of social life, the per-
petually growing perfection of the human race.f
Wolf has been blamed for having comprehended under juris-
prudence certain rules which belong only to morals, and with
having too often subjected the principles of natural right to the
maxims of the Roman law. We are not disposed to detain our
readers with a detail on this point; but to whatever extent our
author may here have erred from love of theory, there is no
doubt that he was one of those writers who gave a new impulse
to the study of jurisprudence in Germany by the elevated aim
which he assigned to it, the place he demands for it among the
moral and political sciences, and the general interest which he
contrived to throw around it.
Our voluminous and indefatigable author also treats copiously
of Political Philosophy, under which he discusses the domestic,
social and governmental relations, the rights of the sovereign,
the executive authority, and international law, including the
rules of war. He lays the foundation of political science, as
applied to civil communities in the maxim : " Do whatever the
common safety and the common good require." That is the
best government which most efficiently tends to this issue. He
considers the monarchical form as most calculated to fulfil the
above axiom, though he admits that it has certain drawbacks.
His notions on government are not always quite consistent with
themselves?certainly not always such as to suit our English
ideas: and this we need not regret; for he denies to subjects, as
such, the right of examining what the general interest demands,
and reserves this right to the sovereign. He does, however, limit
by the laws the right of the sovereign to do what he deems the
public weal to require. Political economy is another topic under
this head, and here Wolf handles various points relating to the
well-being of society in general?such as the wealth and power
of nations, and the means of their advancement. But many of
his views on these subjects show that, in his day, political
* Politik, oderVerniinftige Gedanken vora gesellschaftlichen Leben derMenschen*
im gemeinen WeseD, ? 1. f Ibid.
PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF. 755
economy was quite in its infancy, and that his ideas respecting it
were chiefly influenced by what then existed, and not so much
by a wide survey of the future destinies of society. Still, Wolf
did good service by including among subjects which called for
philosophical treatment, matters which up to that time had been
considered as limited to the cabinets of princes, and hardly open
to public discussion. He, at all events, secured a place for the
political sciences which should open the way to their impartial
and thorough investigation.*
Those among the Germans who have taken the least favour-
able view of Wolf's labours have represented his philosophy as
consisting merely of such fragments from the system of Leibnitz
as were most capable of a popular exposition, the more strictly
speculative parts being less brought into notice; so that the
more recondite points have been too much ignored. The modern
idealists regard Wolfianism in the light of a popular eclectic
dogmatism, couched under an artificial imitation of the mathe-
matical method, though the author himself sometimes admits
that mathematics and philosophy are very different sciences ;
since mathematics can demonstrate the general conception of the
pure form out of every intuition of the single object ;t while
philosophy, on the other hand, can render the sensuous appear-
ance an object of intelligence only out of the pure conceptions
which belong to the supersensual being?soul or mind. The
ideal school regards Wolfianism as by no means satisfying the
demands of science, and as having obtained the popularity
which it acquired in all the seats of learning in Germany solely
from its meeting one want, at least, the want of some regular
system : it was therefore accepted in the absence of a system of a
higher order, and it produced no inconsiderable revolution in,
the republic of letters. Wolf may be said to have spent his life.
* M. Degdrando, an elaborate historian of philosophical systems, praises Wolf's
"practical" philosophy, for "the vast extent of its plan, its general harmony, its
noble tendency, its abundant promises: its point of departure is human freedom,
perfection is its aim, nature is its type, disinterestedness its condition, the con-
nexion of rights and duties its result." But Degerando thinks that in the
execution, Wolf often disappoints the hopes he had raised in the minds of his
readers. He is also one of those who view W olf's and Leibnitz's doctrine of
volition as tending to an objectionable necessity. " Elle (La Philosophic Pratique
de Wolff) trompe trop souvent dans 1 execution les esp^rances qu'elle avait fait
naitre. Ainsi la liberty s'evanouit sous 1 efficacite des motifs determinants, dont
les effets, aux yeux de Wolff, sont inevitables. Aussi a-t-il partage les reproches
dirig^s contre Leibnitz, et a-t-il <5tc accusd, comme celui-ci, d'introduire une sorte
de n^cessite dans l'empire de la volont<5 humaine."?Histcdre Comparee, torn. viii.
p. 31.
*t* That is, in German phrase, the properties belong to the general conception of
the pure form (schema), which can never be reduced to intuition (anschauung), the
properties, for instance, of the plane triangle: but any particular empirical intui-
tion, any plane triangle, of any form or size, will suffice as the means of the general
demonstration.
NO. VIII.?NEW SERIES. 3 D
756 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOLF.
in explaining and defending the principles of liis school; for he
was ever ready to enter the polemical arena against its adver-
saries. The rigid order and the close concatenation of his
method was an imposing feature of his writings, and from him
may be traced the practice of treating every branch of know-
ledge in mathematical forms which became current throughout
Germany. Croon, Kelsh, Stellwaag, Wasser, Feyerlin, Hagen,
and others, all wrote in favour of this method. It was applied
to theology, to the instruction of youth, and to the teaching of
Hebrew: in short, it became general. Poppe, Hismen, and
Basedow, at length, put a check to it by their remonstrances.
The difficulty which we have had to encounter in the attempt
we have made to give some account of Wolfs views, may be seen
from the following passage of Brucker :
" Wolf possessed a clear and methodical understanding, which by
long exercise in mathematical investigations, was peculiarly fitted for
the employment of digesting the several branches of knowledge into
regular systems. The lucid order which appears in all his writings
generally enables his reader to follow his conceptions with ease and
certainty through the longest trains of reasoning. But the close con-
nexion of the several parts of his works, together with the vast variety
and extent of the subjects, renders it impracticable to give a summary
of his doctrines."*
We will add a brief quotation from Tennemann, the well-
known historian of philosophy, who (after speaking with ap-
proval of Wolfs definite method, order, precise distinctions, and
improved terminology,) remarks:
" The errors of his philosophy consist in his taking mere thinking
as his point of departure; overlooking the difference between the
formal and the material conditions of thought; his regarding philo-
sophy as the science of the possible so far as it is possible; making the
principle of contradiction the ultimate principle of all human know-
ledge ; in his placing mere ideas arid verbal distinctions at the com-
mencement of every inquiry; his drawing no limit between rational
and experimental knowledge; his confining the activity of the mind
to the phenomena of perception; and in his neglecting to distinguish
the peculiarities which separate mathematics and philosophy both in
their form and matter."j-
The above criticism is for the most part correct: Ave may
state, however, that it is taken from the Kantian point of view,
which was destined soon to become almost the exclusive one in
?Germany. The Wolfian philosophy reached its culminating
point while its author was Professor at Marburg, from 1723 to
1740. A reaction had shown itself before his death, in 1754
* Historia Critica Philosophise: vid. Wolfius.
+ Grundriss, s. 425.
PSYCHOLOGY OF "VVOLF. 757
It had, indeed, previously begun to wane, from various causes?
the overwrought formalism of its demonstrations, its dogmatic
attempts to answer all objections, the pedantry of many of its
advocates who tried to reduce the simplest truths to logical
demonstration, the introduction of Locke's writings into Germany,
the eclectic spirit which ensued ; but the rise of Kant, the
greatest of the German metaphysicians, and the rapid progress
of his philosophy, finally overthrew it.
Wolf was much addicted to the exact sciences; but he made
no discovery. His chief merit, here, was as a teacher. His
course of mathematics long remained the most complete ever
published in Germany; but in this science, the most concise of
all by its very nature, he did not fail to manifest his tendency to
prolix diffusion. Into philosophy he introduced many new terms
of technical meaning from the Greek language, which have been
retained by his successors. His German works are usually con-
sidered as the best-written; and the language is indebted to
him for the facility he has shown it to be capable of, in express-
ing by German compounds the Latin terms and phrases which
had before been employed. This coinage of new words, how-
ever, renders a vocabulary sometimes desirable to the uninitiated
reader ; and this aid has been rendered by the author, at the
end of such of his works as seemed to require it. His Latin
works are not much to be praised, either for his choice of words,
for his adherence to the classic sense, or for general excellence
of style.
We close by stating that we are not aware of any edition of
Wolf's whole works having been published since his death. The
edition of 1739 came out, in octavo, at Breslau. Ludovici wrote
a digest of his philosophy, and Hartmann published an intro-
duction, but we have not met with either of these works.
Meissner composed a philosophical lexicon, for the explanation of
Wolfs system from his German writings. Biographies of him
were written by Gottshied and Biisching.
3 D 2
