Notes on Belgian Lunatic Asylums, Including the Insane Colony of Gheel
========================================================================

209
Art. II.?
By John Websteb, M.D., F.R.S., &c.
{Continued from page 78.)
Gheel.
Amongst tlie most remarkable localities of Europe, in reference
to its inhabitants, none seems so singular, stands more promi-
nently forward in various phases, or deserves inspection by-
philanthropists and curious travellers, like the establishment for
lunatics, which forms the subject of subsequent observations.
Situated in the north-eastern portion of Belgium, towards the
confines of Limburg, and formerly occupied by the Texandrians,
mentioned in Csesar's Commentaries, but subsequently called
the Siberia of the Low Countries, Gheel long remained almost un-
known to foreigners. Until very lately, no roads existed through
this outlandish district; consequently, it was rarely approached,
even by the natives of neighbouring provinces. Nay, in 1821?
when Esquirol paid it a visit, with my friend M. Yoisin?the
journey then proved a most difficult undertaking. Indeed, so
recently as the Revolution of 1830, only one crazy lumbering
vehicle, of the rudest description, carried travellers twice a week
from Lierre?a cantonal town of 13,000 inhabitants?which is
situated at the confluence of the great and little Nethe rivers,
about eighteen miles towards Malines. This distance, however
short, often required from nine to ten hours travelling; the car-
riage being frequently up to its axle in mud or gravel, according
a<s weary wayfarers then experienced wet or dry weather.
At present matters are entirely changed; and those who under-
take the same journey, which only twenty years ago was sur-
rounded with many difficulties, need not now hesitate, notwith-
standing former discouraging statements. These accounts belong
to history, of which a parallel no longer remains; as the follow-
ing outline of my recent journey to Gheel amply demonstrates.
Leaving Brussels early by railway, I stopped at Contich, the
second station south of Antwerp. From thence a train imme-
diately started for Herenthals, on the Turnhout line, where it
arrived about an hour afterwards. There, a two-liorse omnibus
was waiting, to carry passengers to Gheel, eight miles further, in
which town I arrived in about one hour and a half, without
encountering mishaps, or experiencing the slightest fatigue ;
having thus travelled the whole distance in little more than four
hours, but altogether very differently from that described by
former tourists visiting Campine.
P 2
210 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
For the information of those who may hereafter propose to
sojourn at Gheel, I would briefly mention that two good hotels
are open to receive strangers. Both may be entered with con-
fidence ; but the one I selected was "De Schild Van Turnhout,"
kept by M. Fr. Wouters. Certainly, it has seldom been my good
fortune, while travelling, to obtain better lodgings, and experi-
ence more satisfactory treatment, in all respects, than at this
hostelry. The bed was excellent, linen white as driven snow,
with unexceptionable food, and all cooked admirably. Doubtless,
the sanded rooms lacked carpets, and the attendants were not stiff
neckclothed waiters, like those often seen at English hotels, while
serving in silver dishes burnt mutton-chops or tough beef-steaks;
which frequently cause fits of indigestion, not alleviated by an
expensive bill afterwards presented. There, on the contrary, a
smiling servant-girl attended, at table who, although unable to
speak either French or German, and only her own native Flemish
tongue, yet understood whatever the guests required. To these
details I would also add, that the cost was extremely moderate.
Thus for breakfast, consisting of better cafe au lait than one
often gets in England, with unexceptionable bread-and-butter ad
libitum, the charge was sixty-five centimes ; or only six pence
halfpenny sterling ! For dinner, composed of soup, three kinds
of excellently cooked viands, vegetables, followed by cheese and
dessert, I paid one franc and a half; while another franc per
night was added for the sleeping apartment. In short, nothing
could be more satisfactory in every respect. Therefore, should
future Glieelois pilgrims propose making a journey thither, they
need not apprehend suffering perils or privations; but quite the
reverse. My sojourn and treatment at the " Turnhout Arms"
hence proved extremely agreeable; and when returning to
Herenthals, the inside of our conveyance was filled with
twelve young ladies, going home from a school of repute near
Gheel, to pass their autumnal holidays at Antwerp and Brussels.
These facts are now mentioned to indicate, that this district,
formerly considered almost beyond the pale of civilization, and
but little known even by residents of adjacent provinces, has now
joined in the onward march of improvement.
THE INSANE COLONY.
According to tradition, the town previously named, and capital
of Campine, has for ages been celebrated as a refuge for lunatics;
in which, since long bygone times, it was popularly believed, a
residence would prove greatly conducive towards an insane
patient s recovery. The legend respecting the origin of this
reputation is thus reported:?Late in the sixth century,
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 211
Dympna, a daughter of an Irish king, became converted to
Christianity, by an anchorite named Gerebert. The father felt
much enraged at this conversion, and being also amorous, it is
said, of his own child, threatened vengeance ; upon which the
young lady, with her male companion, fled across the sea,
and arrived safely at Gheel; where, she resolved to dedicate
herself to devotion and celibacy, along with St. Gerebert.
However, the old pagan sovereign having discovered their retreat,
insisted upon Dympna again changing her religion ; but she
would in no way consent. This refusal made the savage monarch
so furious, that he drew his sword and cut off her head merci-
lessly at one blow; having done the same previously to Gerebert.
These cruel acts greatly frightened several lunatics, said to be
then present; and tradition reports cured them immediately,
through the strong impression this horrible spectacle produced
on their excited feelings. Immediately, the cry of " A miracle !
a, miracle !" was raised by the wondering bystanders; and thus
Dympna?saint and virgin?became ever after the patron of all
mad persons. This faith having spread abroad, lunatics were
brought to Gheel to get cured through St. Dympna's intercession,
and firmly established its reputation. About A.D. 1200, a church
was erected on the spot, where the murder above described had
been committed, in which the saint's bones and relics were
subsequently deposited.
The principal altar of this ancient sacred edifice?which
deserves inspection?represents an allegorical figure, larger than
life, of St. Dympna?not headless?seen elevated on a cloud im-
ploring the Divine mercy upon several lunatics standing in her vici-
nity. At each side, groups of insane persons?all large statues?
may be likewise observed, whose feet and hands are bound by
golden chains, identical in form with those still used to restrain
violent maniacs. In a central chapel of the ?' diambulatorium, an
elaborate carving in oak?much admired by sculptors?represents
the tragical history of this church's patron saint. In the first com-
partment of that curious work?made by an unknown artist?
the birth of Dympna is portrayed. The second typifies the Queen
her mother's death. In the third, the devil appears tempting the
Irish sovereign. The fourth shows Dympna embarking on
board of ship with St. Gerebert, in order to cross the ocean.
The fifth exhibits the King in pursuit. In the sixth, he is seen
cutting off liis daughter's head, close to the decapitated corpse of
her pious instructor. In the seventh, several priests?wearing
rich habiliments?are carrying the saint's relics in a grand proces-
sion. Finally, in the eighth compartment, the devil is observed
issuing from the head of a female lunatic, while prayers are
being said by some priests; and near whom another chained
212 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
maniac seems anxiously waiting his turn of deliverance from the
demon by whom he is supposed to be possessed.
But the most remarkable object, perhaps, in this church, is a
highly ornamented tomb, said to contain the saint's bones. This
tabernacle stands on four stone pillars behind the great altar, so
as thus to form a passage about three feet in height, and through
which lunatics, brought here for cure, were accustomed to pass on
their knees. Poets say the palace stairs of great personages are often
worn by beggars asking favours. Here, the poetical sarcasm is
really verified; since, the stone floor of this formerly much-revered
locality appears worn away, to some extent, by the pressing limbs
of devotees; analogous, in fact, to the marked result I observed on
the bronze figure of St. Peter, at Rome, whose toe?not the original
appendage, as a joining near its ball shows the present has been
added?was actually much decreased in size by continuous oscu-
lades from faithful " pellegrini/' frequenting the Eternal City's
magnificent cathedral. This phenomenon I personally noticed,
when examining the above celebrated statue, which is believed
to have been cast from the metal forming, or as some authorities,
confidently assert, once was the real" Jupiter tonans" of antiquity.
At Gheel, these idolatrous genuflexions, under St. Dympna's
tomb are now of much rarer occurrence than in more ancient
times, so that cures through such means have become, of late, very
unfrequent: or, to quote the words of a late writer, " ever since
faith has been extinguished and religion almost exiled from the
earth." Nevertheless, examples still sometimes occur, where per-
sons devoutly crawl on bended knees through this once-hallowed
spot; as well to get cured, as to prevent their subsequently being
attacked by mental aberration. Indeed, this ceremony actually
took place not long previous to my visit; the party and assist-
ants, all the while, then singing or praying, in order thus to
obtain the saint's intercession in the lunatic's favour ; whereby
they believed, the ultimate result would prove more efficient and
satisfactory.
Near the central part of this temple, on the left of the choir,.
St, Dympna's statue, clothed in silken garments, and profusely
ornamented with gold lace, fills a large glass case, before which
wax tapers and a " prie-Lieu" are placed, ready for any person
to use, who might desire to address the image in question. This
figure once possessed great repute ; and although less now than
formerly, it was reported to me that demented persons still fre-
quently visit the locality mentioned, but always accompanied on
such occasions by some attendant; since an express regulation
forbids any lunatic frequenting the churches at Gheel, without
a sane companion.
In addition to the peculiar features above described, charac-
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 213
terizing this far-famed sacred edifice, the most singular place of
all is, indubitably, a darkish dungeon-looking apartment, in a
small house attached to the principal church tower, now occupied
by two female officials. Within this hole?apparently a kitchen?
maniacs brought for cure were lodged by their relatives, for the
space of nine days consecutively. During the whole of that
period, the insane victim remained chained close to the fireplace,
by iron rings fixed on one wrist, having another on the ankle; both
being still seen as originally arranged. At night, the lunatic was
put into a wooden bed adjoining the chimney, to which strong
iron chains bound its occupant by the feet, as also both arms,
having straw under, and some covering thrown over the wretched
sufferer. I carefully examined the fetters of this real Procrus-
tean couch?all being the original implements?and thought the
links sufficiently strong and massive to restrain any prisoner,
however violent; nay, by bulls or tigers they could not have been
readily broken.
On one side of this room, but close under the roof, a confined
gallery exists, from whence relatives, or favoured curious specta-
tors, could witness whatever mystical ceremonies might be per-
forming below. Throughout the entire nine days?always con-
sidered essential towards ensuring recovery?nine young virgins,
hired for that purpose, made a daily procession round the church
aisles, passing nine times on their bended knees under St.
Dympna's tomb ; all the time invocations being offered up for
the chained maniac's recovery, at the same period that certain
formulae were gone through in the patient's presence; whilst a
priest likewise recited prayers appointed for such occasions,
besides imparting to his afflicted auditor religious consolation.
Formerly, proceedings like those detailed were much more
common, than in the present enlightened age; and these brought,
sometimes, a considerable revenue to the various performers.
The maniac's board had to be paid to the owners of so famed an
apartment, wherein the party was lodged. The priests received
their " honoraria," and the nine young ladies did not chant, walk
in procession, or even creep under St. Dympna's relics gratui-
tously ; but quite the reverse. Nay, if the patient could not
attend personally, a substitute had to be hired to make the
ceremony full and complete ; the rule here being, as elsewhere,
" Point d'argent, pas de Suisse " Hence, the expense of such
performances proved often no trifle, but even of some amount.
Although the superstitious practices just narrated appear almost
fallen into desuetude; nevertheless, examples have occasionally
taken place during very modern times, of which an instance
was related, with all its details, which happened recently. But
whether the poor maniac for whose benefit the ceremony was then
214 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
performed got effectually cured, my reporter could give little
satisfactory information.
Sometimes, it was stated, persons have been brought hither,
alleged to be insane from interested motives ; and, if not really
mad before, thus to try and make them so by cruel treatment, as
the following authentic illustration, communicated by a medical
friend of mine, who was consulted professionally, amply testifies.
The father-in-law of an heiress much wished that young lady to
marry his own brother, and thereby retain her fortune in the
famity. However, her heart being already in the keeping of a
more juvenile and longer known suitor, she would not agree to any
such money arrangement. This refusal enraged the proposers; and
therefore a rumour was industriously spread abroad, that their
intended victim had become crazed. To verify the fact more
publicly, Miss was in due time transferred to St. Dympna's
chamber; where, all the requisite formalities were followed, but
without the desired result. Afterwards, the stepfather tried to
obtain a certificate of insanity from Dr. , in order that she
might be consigned to an asylum ; but the physician refused to
grant any such document, as he could perceive no decided evi-
dence of mental alienation. Fortunately, during several profes-
sional interviews with his patient, Dr. heard the whole story,
and how harshly this love-sick maiden had been treated.
Whereupon, he took the proper steps to get her liberated from
all control of either parent; and proving successful, she now lives
elsewhere unmolested, the selfish brothers being thus completely
baulked of their greatly-coveted prize.
Notwithstanding the present sceptical world entertains much
less faith respecting the sanative powers of St. Dympna to cure
mental diseases than formerly, but which prevalent incredulity
fanatics ascribe to the wickedness of mankind; still, whenever the
saint's annual feast-day occurs, viz., about Pentecost, thousands of
people, from many neighbouring or even distant villages and
towns, flock into Gheel, to behold the ceremonies which then
take place, mix with the crowd, and otherwise enjoy themselves.
During nine days, the saint's relics, with her shrine also, remain
exposed in the church to public gaze ; whereby, the assemblage
of sight-seekers and idlers often becomes very great, whilst many
devotees may even be seen crawling through the narrow passage
under the hallowed tomb. After performing this act of blind
devotion, these parties hope they will never afterwards become
insane, through St. Dympna's intercession. Whatever sensible
people may think of similar proceedings, and of their saturnalian
character, a large expenditure is thereby caused in the town; much
to the advantage of shopkeepers, cabaret hosts, and the ultimate
pecuniary profit of numerous inhabitants. On the last occasion
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 215
when this fete was celebrated?only a few months past?such an
immense concourse of visitors then arrived, that Gheel was quite
full for an entire week, and the streets seemed constantly
crowded ; all the time, most people appearing chiefly bent upon
amusement, pleasure, and physical gratification.
Various authors might be named respecting the early history
of Gheel, the discovery of St. Dympna's remains, aud the great
reputation which this 'locality has long enjoyed, as a favourite
refuge for lunatics ; but one or two quotations will suffice. Thus,
M. Gife states, in a work published by the Literary Society of
Turnhout, that, about the seventh century, a chapel was built
in honour of St. Martin, around which nearly 700 houses were
soon erected. Again, M. Gazet says, in the Ecclesiastical His-
tory of the Low Countries, dated 1614, that, led by popular
tradition and belief, the clergy searched for the bones of St.
Dympna and St. Gerebert, which they actually discovered?as
he asserts?buried in two stone coffins, white as snow, although
only dark-coloured rocks were found elsewhere. This peculiarly
strange circumstance was therefore believed to have been the
work of angels, to indicate these holy martyrs' candour and
chastity. Lastly, in a volume published in 1658 byM. Craywinkel,
attached to the Abbey of Tongerloo, it is gravely asseverated,
" if the wonderful cures witnessed of insane persons resident at
Gheel were not real miracles, at least they must be held as
astonishing recoveries, effected wholly through the powerful in-
tercession of the holy virgin, who has become patron saint of this
locality?these facts being, he then adds, extracted from an
ancient yet authentic register, belonging to the collegiate church
of Gheel, and consequently implying that no mistake could pre-
vail regarding such narratives!
The locality where insane patients have, during many cen-
turies, been associated with the general population, constitutes
part of the province of Campine, or " Kempen-land," which
means, flat and without trees ; whereof the capital is Gheel.
The district now particularly referred to forms a level rather
elevated plain, about three leagues in diameter, having a fertile
soil, but surrounded, on several sides, by open sandy fields, or
steppes of considerable extent; while turf being in many places
dug as fuel, these parts hence afterwards seem very like stagnant
marshes. The immediate environs are much more productive than
adjacent districts, which still continue often covered with broom
or stunted trees ; whereby, this central division of the commune
truly resembles an oasis in the desert. Again, the town itself
occupies a moderate elevation, lying betwixt the river named
the Great Nkthe, and the two smaller streams called the eastern
Nkthes; but, as winter often proves severe from strong north-
216 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
east winds, and snow or frost, followed sometimes by liot sum-
mers, while damp weather is not uncommon, this portion of
Belgium is not considered salubrious. Another drawback should
likewise be enumerated ; viz.,?the water used by residents is so
much charged with sulphate of lime, that it virtually becomes
improper for domestic purposes. However, most excellent water
could be easily brought by pipes from the sandy hills near
Casterl^, towards Turnhout; which possesses such superior quali-
ties, that parties have proposed to make a reservoir at Casterld
for the supply of Brussels.
Influenced by the causes just enumerated, intermittent fevers,
typhus, and pectoral diseases in winter are by no means un-
requent ; such results arising or being greatly promoted through
t le cold soil and humid habitations, occupied especially by
peasants. Nevertheless, Gheel is considered a more healthy situa-
lon than the adjacent villages. It seems also rather pretty for a
country town, has some good, and one long broad street; while the
central square or " Place" is rather large, contains mostly two-
storied houses, and several well-furnished shops; while the cathe-
dral-cliurch of St. Amand occupies one end of this enclosure. The
urban population amounts to nearly 4,000 persons; that of the
whole commune being at least 9000, of whom, on an average,
there are always nearly 800 certified lunatics; thus giving one
insane "to every twelve sane residents.
Before proceeding to describe the chief features characterizing
e lunatic population of Gheel, their general treatment and
sllPeyin en<-|ence, some outline of the chief regulations specially
a ecting this singular colony will be neither inappropriate nor
uninteresting. Besides the laws applicable to every insane
asyluin throughout Belgium, and being also placed under the
inspection of the permanent commission charged with the spe-
cial surveillance of lunatics, an additional code, or new " Rbgle-
rnent, dated 31st December, 1852, was promulgated by the
Minister of Justice for its government, but afterwards modified
by a late Hoyal Decree. According to these laws the colony of
Gheel is now regulated, the chief authority being vested in a
committee of eight members, who superintend the entire esta-
blishment Of the above, four are annually appointed by the
supenoi Commission, either from their own body, or of persons
resident in the commune of Gheel, and' places adjacent. To the
parties thus nominated, the Minister of Justice adds four other
members, taken from a double list of candidates submitted for
his choice, by the communal council. Over this managing com-
mittee so selected, the Burgomaster of Gheel presides, or one of
the sheriffs, who then has a deliberative voice. These officials are
especially charged with the receipt of all moneys received as
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 217
board for lunatics; they pay disbursements, distribute the
patients in different dwellings, besides watching over their in-
terests and treatment. Further, the committee likewise see that
the hosts and hostesses perform the duties required, towards any
inmate consigned to their keeping. Every month, one member
of the surveillance committee is nominated as visitor, whose
delegated function is to preside when patients are admitted and
discharged ; but no admission or dismissal of any inmate can
take place without previously consulting the inspecting phy-
sician.
All householders, within the commune, authorised to receive
lunatic inmates as boarders, are divided into two classes, one
being denominated " hosts," the other foster-fathers or " nour-
riciers?the former being those persons licensed to take insane
patients paying at least 25 francs per annum more than indigent
lunatics ; the latter, or " nourriciers," comprising individuals who
receive inmates at the minimum rate of payment. Both these
parties are^ inscribed on a register kept on purpose ; the distri-
bution of patients newly arrived being made, as much as possible,
according to rotation, still leaving relatives power to select any
registered person with whom they would prefer placing the
lunatic.
Unless under ver}r particular circumstances, not more than
three lunatics can reside in one dwelling-house, while two or
more insane boarders are not allowed to occupy the same bed-
chamber. Special sanction ma}', however, be granted by the
permanent committee to admit a larger number, after they have
received a report thereon from the divisional and inspecting
physicians. When such exceptional permissions are given, the
room occupied must always contain fifty cubic feet of air to each
resident; the roof and walls being lime-washed, twice a year at
least. Strict rules are also laid down respecting the furniture,
the food supplied to inmates, and their clothing, which must
consist of woollen stuffs in winter, with cotton in summer; but
without distinctive patterns, or made like an uniform. Again,
their body-linen should be changed always once weekly, or
oftener when necessary, especially dirty patients. Lastly, no
lunatic can be employed in any bodily labour, unless considered
judicious by the sectional physician, and provided it does not
induce injurious fatigue.
During summer, insane residents are not allowed to leave their
domicile prior to six o'clock in the morning, or remain longer
from home than eight in the evening; the hours being 8 A.M. to
4 P.M. in winter. They are not permitted to enter any cabaret,
excepting tranquil patients who may require refreshment; but
it is then expressly prohibited to serve even these with spirituous.
218 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
liquors, and none can smoke near a stack-yard with uncovered
tobacco-pipes. Other stringent police regulations regarding
lunatics are in force, which it seems superfluous to mention spe-
cially. However, if any inmate escapes, the party with whom the
individual lodged, besides losing all remuneration for those days
the fugitive is absent, must pay three-fourths of the expenses
incurred by recapture; the guardian of the section to which
such patient belonged being mulcted the other fourth. Each
lunatic has a book, or " livret/' as it is called, in which, besides the
name with various other particulars, all clothes supplied, payments
made, remarks of sectional or inspecting physician, and observa-
tions by official visitors, are entered; so that, from this record,
whatever is important or necessary to be known respecting any
particular patient can thus be easily ascertained.
The entire commune being now divided into four sections,
separately comprising a certain defined district, the total insane
residents hence form as many distinct divisions; each having a
head guardian, and one physician, to whom is committed the
special medical care of every inmate belonging to that section.
There is one consulting surgeon for the entire district; whilst
over all is placed an inspecting physician, who of course possesses
the chief authority in everything connected with medical treat-
ment, and professional superintendence of the whole establishment.
Four pharmaciens are likewise appointed, one of whom supplies
any medicines ordered by the physicians or surgeon; each for three
months alternately. When I visited Gheel last September, the
medical staff was constituted as follows:?viz., Dr. Bulkins, the
inspecting physician ; Drs. "Van Yitzen, Bceckmans, De Backer,
and Yerbist, sectional physicians; with M. Giroltt as consulting
surgeon; all well qualified officers for their respective appoint-
ments.
With reference to the duties of the inspecting visitor, it may be
observed, he can enter at any time he pleases, and without pre-
vious notice, every dwelling within the commune. He may cause
a patient to be produced, examine the room occupied, the bed,
and clothing ; also hear all complaints, or make whatever special
inquiries he deems necessary; infirm, dirty, epileptic, paralytic,
and helpless lunatics being considered the most worthy objects of
attention. The visitor may also order the removal of any patient
to another abode, should sufficient cause appear ; or when neglect,
cruelty, and improper treatment has been practised. Lastly,
wherever a nourricier becomes convicted of having struck any
lunatic inmate, unless it be conclusively proved that such act was
solely and legitimately in personal defence, the offender is then
stigmatized as infamous; and hence incapacitated afterwards to
receive patients, until such ban is removed.
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 219
When I inspected Gheel, the total insane population under
treatment comprized 774? persons, as previously stated. Of these,
409 were male and 365 female lunatics; the town, or first section,
being then most numerous. One-half of the whole number were
classified as capable of, and indeed actually employed in bodily
labour, a large majority of Avhom comprised females; while the
remainder were reported as idle or unable to work, the greatest
number of that category belonging to the male sex. Amongst
the total inmates, the largest proportion, or 350 cases, were
examples of mania and its varieties. Dementia came next, of
which were found 265 instances. Melancholia showed 60 cases.
Epilepsy supplied 51 instances, the males being 25, with 26
females; whilst the remainder exhibited less marked varieties of
mental disease. The 774 patients now enumerated were dis-
tributed in nearly jive hundred different dwellings; whereof
about 300 were cottages or farm-houses in the country, the rest
being residences in the town of Gheel.
With regard to the various payments received for patients dif-
ferently classed, it may be mentioned that the first division?
comprising 49 lunatics?paid from 400 to 1200 francs annually,
according to the accommodation supplied; the second?amount-
ing to 147 cases?paid 300 francs; the third?including 266
individuals?275 francs, or 75 centimes per day ; while all the
rest, or fourth class?being 312 persons?were maintained by their
nourriciers at the small sum of 238 francs per annum. These
respective amounts included everything. But, however cheap food
and lodging may still prove in " Kempen-land," the actual profit
must be almost nil, out of nine pounds ten shillings sterling; after
feeding, clothing, and lodging an adult lunatic boarder. Undoubt-
edly, in many instances, their labour is given besides, but not
invariably ; and, although industrious working inmates are more
in request than idle patients, parties must take their chance, with
reference to such contingencies.
Accompanied by a head attendant, and the inspecting phy
sician?Dr. Bulkins, who most kindly showed me everything worth
noticing?I visited numerous houses in the town, and a great
many cottages scattered over the adjoining country; in which, often
one, although most frequently two, and occasionally three insane
persons resided. That is the general system followed, with but
very few exceptions ; seeing, not more than five instances exist
throughout the entire colony, where beyond four patients are
placed with the same family, but only then for special reasons, and
after an express authorization from the committee of inspection is
obtained. Being occupied during two consecutive days in visiting
various abodes, ample opportunities were thus afforded for seeing
whatever was either interesting, important, or peculiar; and, con-
220 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
sequently, thus form some general opinion respecting the'establish-
ment. With reference to patients residing in rural dwellings, it
should first be remarked that, amongst the seventeen hamlets of
this commune?some being even like villages?in three no lunatics
are received ; and, however anxiously most householders often
desire to obtain insane boarders, throughout all the neighbouring
communes an opposite feeling is very prevalent.
. Speaking generally, the sexes are usually lodged in separate
houses. However, in regard to very aged persons, whose disease
was chronic, and were of quiet inoffensive dispositions, a man occa-
sionally lived in the same family where an insane old woman also
resided. All suicidal, dangerous, homicidal, or mischievous
insane patients are rarely if ever received as inmates at Gheel;
while, 011 the other hand, should any resident subsequently come
under these categories, they are forthwith sent home, or to an
asylum elsewhere. Again, the authorities generally place bois-
terous, idle, or agitated maniacs in remotely situated and solitary
cottages or farm-houses, which occupy the open heaths; where,
such lunatics, having no neighbours, cannot disturb any person,
or cause much annoyance. These, although excited or very noisy,
may there walk about without danger to others or themselves;
being thus placed beyond the observation of bystanders, not near
similarly afflicted fellow-creatures.
When perambulating the various hamlets visited?often through
pretty but devious pathways?we frequently noticed lunatics occu-
pied as agricultural labourers in adjoining fields ; whilst some were
quietly walking to or from neighbouring cottages, quite as tran-
quilly as ourselves. Being all well acquainted with the inspecting
physician, these parties saluted him respectfully, and often conversed
with us familiarly ; in short, they behaved like ordinary peasants,
or any rational person. We saw others sitting at the cottage doors,
and some looking out of windows; while several were amusing
themselves with children of the family, in adjoining gardens or
enclosures. In one of the public roads we met a maniac, who
lived in a cottage at some distance, then carrying an infant in liis
arms like any nurse, He seemed to take great care of his innocent
charge; and the physician remarked that such an occupation con-
stituted this lunatic's chief enjoyment. Afterwards, we encountered
another insane resident?a young man?amusing himself with
three little children, romping with them, and at the same time
taking care they did no harm. In a solitary lane, we next came up
with a patient, who was being conducted homewards to dinner by
the juvenile daughter of liishost, after labouring in an adjacent field.
In various other instances, we observed insane persons sauntering
about; and some also going towards or returning from neighbour-
ing farm-houses. In truth, had it not been from the vacant-iookinjr
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 221
countenances noticed in most cases, and occasionally that their
legs were loosely tied together by leathern thongs?so as to pre-
vent the wearers from running fast, or going to any distance?I
should scarcely have recognised many of the parties then enjoying
themselves, while breathing the pure and open air of heaven, as
real lunatics residing in the Glieelois commune.
Within the houses and cottages we inspected, many insane
residents were occupied as ordinary servants; some superin-
tending cows, churning, labouring in the barn, cooking food,
cleaning the house, rocking the cradle, and taking care of the
children; in short, employed much in the same way as they might
have been at home, or out at service. Various male patients, again,
were labouring in the gardens or fields ; others working in car-
penters' shops; also smithies, stable and farm yards; besides being
engaged in such out-door employments as are common amongst
any agricultural population;?these occupations having this very
great advantage for lunatics, that whilst undergoing physical
exertion?often so beneficial for their mental malady?they, at the
same time, are much in the open air, breathe a purer and more
salubrious atmosphere than most inmates of wards, day-rooms, or
frequently too-confined work-shops, can enjoy in modern asylums.
In several houses, we also observed female lunatics comfortably
sitting with their hostess at table knitting, sewing, making
clothes, and conversing as if equals, friends on a visit, or relatives.
Such spectacles were truly pleasing; and when looking out of
the cottage-windows near such parties, upon sometimes a pretty
flower-garden, or towards open green fields, strangers could hence
scarcely suppose, from outward appearances and surrounding
circumstances, they were then visiting the chamber of an insane
occupant, afflicted, most likely, with incurable mental aliena-
tion.
Of course, amongst the numerous lunatics distributed through-
out the cottages in which such persons are lodged, many appeared
as infirm of?body as they were weak in mind. Several seemed
very old, or quite imbecile, and utterly helpless. Some were
dwarfs?males as also females;, and one female cretin was
recognised, although, on inquiry, I understood that similar
examples of mental and physical degeneration have been lately of
rare occurrence. All clothing is supplied by or under the admi-
nistration's superintendence; and being generally of good quality,
without adopting any uniform mode of dress, it became frequently
very difficult to ascertain the demented member from among the
sons, daughters, and even master or mistress of the household,
where such parties resided. When talking to different indivi-
duals composing such family circles, I often could not distinguis
one from the other, and, therefore, had to ask my medical cice-
222 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
rone, who always most kindly answered every inquiry, " which was
the patient, or were any we then saw actually insane ?" Con-
sidering the truly small allowance received for board and lodging
of lunatic inmates living in such dwellings, their accommodation
was good, beds clean, and other appurtenances seemed better than
various sane members of these families themselves frequently
enjoyed. How the householder could make both ends meet?to
use a common phrase?without ultimate loss, appeared very pro-
blematical in many instances, considering the limited allowances
often received by such parties.
To describe every object seen, during these rural perambula-
tions, would prove both tiresome and superfluous; nevertheless, a
few sketches as specimens of the scenes noticed, and patients
then visited, may not appear altogether uninteresting. Thus, in
an enclosed garden adjoining the cottage of the mad patient in
question, an imaginary emperor?a little man?was vociferating
and bawling to troops he then believed himself passing under
review ; ordering Marshal A. and General B., &c., to manoeuvre
according to imperial command. Our approach did not much
disturb the phantoms of this visionary potentate, who merely
then followed his daily amusement. In the kitchen of another
hamlet,a schoolmaster?at one time the sage teacher of others?
was now busily but silently engaged with superintending the broth-
pot, in which the family's dinner was preparing. This man had
never spoken a single word for years ; but being harmless, thus
made himself useful. In a third cottage we found a male lunatic,
?said to be sometimes excited?zealously nursing one child on his
knee, and rocking a cradle, in which another lay asleep; while
the mistress superintended her own household duties. Lastly,
in a fourth, I could not avoid observing an old man peeling
potatoes with a large knife in his hands, but whose arms were
strapped by a leathern thong round his back, so as to prevent
any lateral movement, while both legs were restrained by hobbles.
This afflicted and often very dangerous maniac was still, in some
degree, a free agent, to rise up when he liked, to walk out?
slowly certainly, discontinue working, or, if it was more agreeable,
saunter in the garden adjoining ; but being restrained as now
described, he could do no injury to others or himself. At least,
such was the explanation then proffered to my inquiries.
In the more distant cottages, noisy and excitable patients are
commonly placed, as mentioned previously. There, any disturb-
ance or menaces have scarcely an echo. The lunatic meets 110
person; and living thus away from all neighbours, cannot create
much annoyance. Being likewise free to wander?within a cer-
tain extent?amongst broom or heather, or over the solitary
heath inhabited, a maniac thus often becomes tranquil, it is said,
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 223
from having nothing but silence or solitude around, and while
meeting thereby no opposition.
_ Within Glieel itself, the better class of patients, paying the
highest board, and generally those who are tranquil, or least excit-
able, for the most part lodge. We visited numerous insane resi-
dents, during varied urban perambulations, and were everywhere
most courteously received. In several houses which belonged to
respectable citizens, the lunatic inmate often seemed like one of
the family, if not, indeed, the member most favoured: as well
from occupying the best bed-room, as appearing also treated with
marked kindness. If frequently difficult, when visiting the
abodes of peasants, to know which person was the insane patient,
it sometimes became even less easy to ascertain a similar fact, in
various bourgeois residences. Several lunatics, well-connected,
live with hosts occupying even the best dwellings in Glieel; and
some inmates called upon seemed very comfortable. Others, again,
belonged to the second and third class of patients ; in which
cases the hosts were usually either shop-keepers, tradesmen, or
handicraft persons. Of course, their accommodation and general
treatment then resembled, to a certain extent, that in villages ;
the allowances bein^ analogous.
? ? ?
During these peregrinations, various interesting cases were met
with. Amongst others, a most lamentable illustration of insanity
attacking an entire family, for one generation, deserves being
specially recorded; both on account of its rarity, and otherwise
disastrous features. In this instance, four sons and two daughters
were all insane ; 110 other children being alive by the same
parents. I visited two of these young men, and tall, fine-looking
gentlemanly fellows they both appeared. Their brothers we did
not see, nor the two sisters, who were then living elsewhere; but
being, like the rest, equally deprived of reason. When speaking
to these unfortunate insane youths (boarded in two separate
dwellings) I was much struck with the calamitous condition to
which this stricken family was now reduced ; particularly as both
father and mother were still living, and could have no prospect
whatever of witnessing any change, but for the worse, befalling
their entire progeny. As these parties were favourably situated,
in regard to worldly wealth, with its oft much-prized enjdyments,
and understanding no trace of insanity had ever shown itself on
the side of either parent, the sad cases now quoted were therefore
highly interesting; being also, in various respects, most remark-
able. Parental bereavements like the above, consequently, become
even much more deplorable, and deserve commiseration.
When walking about the town, I met several maniacs in the
streets ; some were enjoying a promenade, others seemed as if
returning from their ordinary work, perhaps going homewards,
NO. VI.?NEW SERIES. Q
224 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
executing a commission for their employer, or otherwise em-
ployed. Such parties I only knew were patients from saluting the
inspecting physician, or on being pointed out by that gentleman.
One young man we encountered may be here specially mentioned.
He was carrying an infant in his arms (according to the reply made
to our question) home to its parents, in an adjoining street. This
statement proved correct, as we subsequently met him at his
own lodgings, after having safely deposited the juvenile burden
just named with its confiding parents, devoid of any harm or
detriment. The great fondness which is frequently exhibited,
especially by male lunatics, towards infants and children, forms
a marked feature of their conduct at Gheel. They very often
take charge of a child in the absence of its parents; will romp
with, or be amused by children's prattle; and, if excited, it is
no unfrequent result to see tranquillity restored on the approach
of such young friends. Sometimes a child will be sent to induce
a refractory inmate to return home, when at work in the fields;
and these messengers even succeed where older persons fail, or
encounter difficulties. Various apt cases of this influence might
be detailed, which are neither uninstructive, nor superfluous.
The attachments which frequently take place betwixt parties
having charge of lunatics, and the inmate committed to their
care, are both interesting and remarkable. Numerous illustra-
tions of this feature in the Gheelois character could be men-
tioned ; but the following examples will suffice, which came
under my own observation, or were communicated. When
visiting one of the houses in town, where two lunatics had
lived during many years with the same hostess, a scene took
place which deserves record, both as a genuine outburst of nature,
as also highly creditable to one of the party concerned; although
similar instances of good feeling are by no means uncommon.
After seeing the inmates and their rooms, we then had some
conversation with the mistress of this household, who now inti-
mated to the inspecting physician that she had determined to
retire wholly from business?viz., keeping a shop and boarding
lunatics, in order to pass the remainder of her declining years
in quietness, since she had saved sufficient means for her support,
and was now getting both aged and infirm. " But," said the
worthy old lady full of emotion, and actually bursting into tears,
" I am heartbroken jit the thought of parting with my two
poor afflicted friends, pointing to her boarders, " and know not
how I can bear our separation. We have lived so long together,
that to part is most painful, and I almost feel it will be impos-
sible." This was true human kindness of the highest order, and
deserving sincere respect; indeed, such amiable conduct ou"'ht to
be held up before a selfish world, as an example for imitation.
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 225
In many instances, tlie host and hostess get so attached to
their mad inmates, that they grieve when removed elsewhere,
even on recovery; but especially, if inexorable death steps for-
ward to seize his prey. Two illustrations of such attachments
recently occurred, which well deserve being now related, although
other equally interesting examples might be added ; but the fol-
lowing are sufficient. In one of these cases, the hostess had for
fifteen years carefully tended an inmate, whose friends always
paid 300 francs annually. Having become reduced in circum-
stances, they resolved only to allow 250 for the future. Dr.
then proposed to transfer this lunatic to a cheaper house, and
substitute another paying 300 francs instead. That proposition the
party peremptorily refused, with the reply that, " being so much
attached to her old, but afflicted patient, rather than make any
change, she would keep the poor maniac for nothing." In
another case, the hostess had four boarders, one of whom be-
longed to the lowest paying division, the others to a higher
class. Being an excellent person and well-known for great
humanity and attention, the relatives of one of the patients?then
under her care?wished to place another member of their family
in the same house ; also offering 200 florins annually. Having a
licence to admit only four inmates, Dr. proposed to remove
the lowest paying patient elsewhere, and so enable Mrs. to
take the new and higher remunerating boarder. Notwithstanding
the promise of double pay, she would not part with her old
patient, who had lived in the house many years, and absolutely
refused to adopt the suggested arrangement. My informant was
so much gratified with this honest and humane person, that the
Administrative Committee, on his representation, granted her a
special licence to take a fifth patient, as she had otherwise
adequate accommodation.
Similar traits of character are by no means rare amongst the
inhabitants of Campine; and observers have often remarked,
when speaking of this district, that the natives are generally of
humane dispositions, kind to each other, and industrious. They
are especially conversant with insanity, and much attached to those
who are the victims of that calamity. Having, also, been born,
educated, and reared, nay, even passed their whole existence
amongst lunatics?like the members of many previous generations
dwelling in this commune?these peculiar features seem as if
second nature, and may serve to explain what otherwise might
appear incomprehensible. The Campinois people belong ^ to
the Flemish race, and are descended originally from the Nor-
mans and ancient Teutons. Hence, the present residents possess
in some degree the qualities, bodily and mental, of both peoples.
The men do not look as if apathetic or taciturn, but are often
Q 2
226 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
keen-minded and also of quick apprehension; whilst the women,
besides possessing an inborn aptitude for managing lunatics, are
considered generally good-humoured. Having clear complexions,
with healthy, well-formed physical conformations, they are said
consequently to enjoy much repute as excellent wet-nurses
throughout Belgium.
As might be inferred from previous remarks, it is chiefly
upon the female members of a family that responsibility rests in
managing the lunatic inmates committed to their superin-
tendence. The male members of a household seldom interfere ;
unless where disturbances occur, or the insane lodger becomes
so excited as to require the aid of physical strength, to restrain
any outbreak, and so prevent dangerous consequences from en-
suing. In our visitations, both in town and to country cottages,
it was almost invariably to the female branches of a family?
whether wife or daughter?that any inquiries respecting patients
were addressed. These seemed always the presiding powers;
while their subordinate instruments were frequently children
or infants; the male members being usually passive agents,
excepting when called on as assistants, upon an emergency. To
describe their chief principles of action in a few words, one might
briefly say, the system here pursued is based upon mildness
and force. The first being personified and carried out by the
weaker sex; the other through their husbands, sons, and bro-
thers ; where that proceeding becomes necessary.
Notwithstanding these and former statements, readers may
perceive that personal coercion is still employed in the treatment
of lunatics resident at this colony. Even by the rules, a host
is permitted to apply the strait-waistcoat, leathern girdles,
hobbles, or strong trousers; and to use other kinds of physical
restraint, " which have been approved by the inspecting phy-
sician, when such means are urgently required/' But in all
these cases, immediate information must be transmitted to the
sectional physician, and receive his sanction; who forthwith
makes a report of every circumstance which had occurred to his
superior, the inspecting physician. However, should any patient
have suffered personal violence, or the unnecessary application
of bodily restraint be ever employed, the offending party will not
only then lose his or her licence, but may be .also prosecuted for
damages, and punished for such transgressions.
Compared, certainly, with former years, nay, even subsequent
to the visit of Esquirol?when it was no uncommon spectacle to
see patients wearing iron chains, walking about in the vicinity
of villages, or in the lanes and streets of Gheel?all physical re-
straint, besides being now of a much slighter description, seems,
likewise, far seldomer employed. If used, it is chiefly of the arms,
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 227
in order to prevent personal violence upon others; altliougli some-
times the lower limbs likewise, lest excited maniacs might escape
into the fields, run recklessly through the town, or even disappear
altogether. As an ordinary remedy, restraint is strongly condemned
by the medical authorities, and ought only to be applied excep-
tionally. In illustration of this important question, and to show
the exact extent of personal coercion actually in force, when I
inspected the colony, it should be stated that, amongst the total
/ (lunatics then resident, twenty could neither walk fast nor
take long stej)s, in consequence of hobbles on their ankles ; five
had both legs and arms tied more or less loosely, most of these cases
being male patients; whilst eight individuals, chiefly females, wore
a camisole, because they were clothes-destroyers and erotomaniacs.
Thus making altogether 33 examples; or one case of restraint
in nearly every 24? patients. Most of the above lunatics, however,
were either sauntering about cottage-doors, or walking slowly in
the roads and lanes. Again, others seemed sitting quietly within,
but doing nothing ; while a few were occupied in household em-
ployments, notwithstanding their being then under bodily restraint.
Disapproving of physical appliances, it must still be admitted that,
here the application of such means is virtually very different in
effect from the treatment often pursued in continental asylums.
Although restraint is not yet wholly discontinued at Glieel?
as proved by the previous faithful report of its extent and form,
observed during my recent sojourn?it cannot be denied but some
inconvenience, and even occasionally lamentable, if not fatal con-
sequences have occurred, through the great personal liberty
which most patients usually enjoy, while residents of this com-
mune. Quarrels sometimes take place in the streets ; patients
get excited by incidental causes, that cannot but occur wlieje so
much individual freedom everywhere prevails amongst the lunatic
inhabitants. The sexes are not so very rigidly kept apart, as at
ordinary institutions; whilst, in a district where nearly every
tenth inhabitant is really insane, it must be expected almost as
a natural consequence of their peculiar position, and mode of
living, that agitated and dangerous persons should be either
most strictly watched, placed in seclusion, or otherwise secured
against doing harm to others and themselves ; whereof a terrible
instance may be here quoted, which actually happened at no
distant period. A male lunatic, having taken offence at being
reproved by the then Burgomaster, because he received money
from poor people, by pretending to cure various diseases, and for
otherwise misconducting himself, threatened that chief magis-
trate with personal violence, and also said publicly, he would be
revenged. The Burgomaster, unfortunately, disregarded these
menaces, and therefore adopted no precautions to protect himseli
228 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
against harm. However, one forenoon, when he was passing along
the public street, this furious maniac darted out of an adjoining-
passage, and suddenly stabbed his victim in the back with a knife ;
whereby M got mortally wounded, and died soon afterwards.
Happily, similar instances of violence occur very rarely;
whilst illustrations of quite an opposite description might be
easily enumerated. But one case will be sufficient on the present
occasion, which shows the benefits of removing restraint, where
it had been apparently used from dire necessity. Some months
ago, an excited patient was brought to Gheel, tightly bound down
with ropes to a hand-barrow, upon which he then lay, more like
a sack of corn than a human creature ; being accompanied, be-
sides the porters, by two men as guards, to ensure safety, while
others had been required to secure him, in the manner previously
described. Very soon after arrival, this individual was freed from
all bodily ligatures, and placed with a peasant experienced in
the management of violent maniacs. The lunatic, at first so
outrageous, quickly became tranquil, through kind treatment
received from his host and hostess. He then began to assist
the family in domestic duties, and afterwards went about the
garden ; till ultimately, his docility and obedience to orders be-
came so marked, that hopes of recovery now seemed well-
founded. When passing near the abode of this but recently frantic,
and most dangerous patient, we met him tranquilly walking
along the road, led by the hand of his hostess's young child, who
had been purposely sent by her parent to a neighbouring field,
where he was at work, in order to conduct him safely home-
wards ; which the little messenger accomplished successfully.
Struck with the above instance, as also several analogous
cases, where young children took charge of lunatics, I made
especial inquiry to ascertain whether accidents did not some-
times ensue, from placing such confidence?as similar pro-
ceedings implied?in the tranquil conduct of insane persons,
should they get excited from slight causes, or unexpectedly. In
reply to these questions, I was informed that disastrous results very
rarely supervened. Frequently the reverse occurred; since most
lunatics are very fond of being in children's society, whilst their
talk often proved tranquillizing, and seemed really even to con-
tribute, if not towards their recovery, at least materially to assist
in rendering them more manageable; judging from appearances.
The chief feature characterising this colony being that of
almost universal personal freedom, in so far as locomotion is
concerned, and as the lunatics generally pass much of their time
in the open air, or out-door employments; besides, seeing no dun-
geon walls or even,fences exist to curtail their promenades, while
going about the country in bye-ways and roads, like ordinary
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 229
labourers, it therefore cannot appear singular, if attempts be
made to escape; nay, are occasionally successful. Neverthe-
less, only eleven instances of that kind occurred throughout
twelve months ending the 1 st of last September, according to a
register kept by the secretary, M. Yerelst, and of which he
kindly gave me an official extract. As the expenses of recap-
ture fall upon the housekeeper where the fugitive resided, and
who farther receives no allowance during such absence, it becomes
the interest of every person to prevent patients escaping; while
the local police, besides the gendarmerie of neighbouring com-
munes, being always on the out-look respecting runaway lunatics?
for which duty they are rewarded?actual escapes hence become
very difficult of accomplishment, as shown by the return above
quoted. Indeed, considering the great personal liberty en-
joyed by so many lunatics as 938?the entire number under
treatment at Glieel throughout last year?it cannot seem sur-
prising should escapes supervene. On the contrar}', the fact of
so few as only Eleven instances having actually taken place
during twelve months, appears even less than might be ex-
pected under ordinary existing circumstances.
Upon this point it seems of importance to refer to similar
occurrences at other establishments; as, for instance, to the
Mardville Asylum, which contained, at the period of my visit,
some years ago, 876 lunatics, and, therefore, having nearly the
same insane population as that of Gheel. Notwithstanding the
surveillance exercised at this institution, and although it is
enclosed within walls or fences, nineteen patients escaped during
the year embraced in the Report I published respecting Mard-
ville in No. XVIII. of the Psychological Journal. Analogous
facts might also be mentioned in reference to other institutions ;
and therefore, instead of being considered as any objection to
Gheel that patients may run away, the proportion even appears
less than in some modern asylums, with all their appliances to
prevent such contingencies. Rather, the wonder is, truly, that
not more than eleven lunatic patients did then take advantage of
the liberty they enjoy, and make their escape from Gheel.
Regarding the general movement of insane residents under
treatment, during the period referred to in a preceding para-
graph, namely, for one year up to the 1st of last September, the
new entries of patients amounted to 137; the number cured
were only 29 ; those transferred either to other asylums, or re-
moved by friends, prior to convalescence, were 50 altogether;
whilst 74 died. The ratio of deaths hence exceeded, by more than
double that of recoveries; which latter, if calculated according to
the number admitted, consequently gives about 22 per cent, of
actual cures. This proportion certainly appears very small; but
230 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
considering the numerous incurable cases, their long continuance,
feeble physical frames of many inmates, often advanced age, and
lastly, the utter hopelessness of ever effecting much, or even any
good, in a very large number, may account for such unsatisfac-
tory results, as also partially explain the large amount of fatal
terminations. However, respecting recently recorded mortuary
details, it may be briefly remarked, that the most frequent appa-
rent causes of death reported, were apoplexy, phthisis, epilepsy,
and general paralysis ; although many finally succumbed, in all
appearance, from old age and exhaustion; or, according to popular
phraseology, " vieillesse et marasme."
The large number of fatal cases, now enumerated, do not con-
stitute an unusual amount of mortality, when contrasted with
returns of previous years. Thus, amongst the lunatics belong-
ing to the hospice administration of Brussels, which averaged
during 1849, usually under 350, and of whom 72 were new
admissions, the cures did not exceed 5S cases ; while 32 deaths
were reported. In 1850, with an average population ranging
about 345, and of whom only 46 were recent entries, not more
than 17 recovered; whereas.25 died. Amongst which category,
it deserves being stated that 10 of the deaths were of old men
who constantly had resided in Gheel since 1803, or 47 years at
least, whilst one patriarch was on the verge of becoming a cen-
tenarian. Such facts seem conclusive evidence, not only of the
care bestowed upon lunatic inmates at that colony, but likewise,
of the advanced age which they occasionally attain. Further,
during 1851, which showed 55 new admissions, and an average
of 325 resident patients, 30 died ; while only 9 are reported to
have recovered. These figures are now quoted to prove that the
casualties observed during the past twelve months greatly re-
sembled those met with in other seasons. But better compari-
sons may be made with the actual movements of patients,
recorded during two of the above specified years, throughout the
entire colony. For example, in 1849, with a total population of
980 lunatics, the new admissions were 104, the numbers cured 75,
the deaths 82, and 11 escapes. Again, during 1850, when the
aggregate numbers had fallen to 931, the new cases were 152,
cures only 38, and G7 deaths, whilst 10 escaped. The above
statistical data?all taken from authentic? sources?consequently
show that, at this colony, last year's experience varied very little
from previous similar periods.
Among the numerous insane residents at Gheel, besides work-
men and artists of various kinds, painters, professors of languages,
also of music, schoolmasters, governesses, literary persons, and so
forth, may be frequently recognised. An interesting example of
that kind occurred manyyears ago, which deserves mention?viz.,
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 231
tliat of a celebrated violinist, who then became an inmate. This
gentleman, having still great love for his art, established musical
meetings to amuse the patients; he being leader. That step led to
the erection of a large ball?vet existing, in which the founder's
# C? . . . ? ? 1
portrait now occupies a prominent position. Ever since, similar
reunions have continued to assemble in this building, which give
much pleasure both to spectators and performers, of whom a
proportion are patients ; while many also belong to the middle
and upper classes of the general population.
Instances have occurred where patients, after they had entirely
recovered, felt so comfortable with the parties under whose roof
tlioy were placed, and with their abode, that instead of returning
home, preferred remaining as boarders with those new friends,
from whom they had experienced much kindness and attention
when insane. Many such examples might be detailed, but one
is sufficient. An insane female, after being some years resident
with a nourricier at Gheel, became convalescent. She, however,
would not depart, but remained permanently. "When asked the
reason of her unwillingness to leave, replied naively, " I am
accustomed to this worthy family, and feel happy. I have known
these two daughters of my kind friend here, ever since they were
born. I love them like my own children. I am poor, and have no
relations; therefore where could I go and be so very comfortable as
here ? So move I wont!" This was said to the narrator of the
above anecdote, after the aged speaker had resided twenty years
in the colony.
Although, as a rule, lunatic inmates are not allowed to visit any
cabaret, tranquil patients may have that permission,>f at proper
hours. Hence, it is not uncommon to see insane guests sitting at
the tables of such places of entertainment, either smoking their
pipes, amusing themselves with playing cards, or engaged at
billiards and dominoes, all the time sipping their beer; while
others again are talking together, like any ordinary frequenter of
coffee-houses, and from whom they are scarcely distinguishable; at
least by casual observers, who, similar to myself, only looked into
these apartments out of curiosity, when passing their thresholds.
Acknowledging, without reservation, various peculiar advan-
tages possessed by Gheel, as an establishment for the reception and
care of insane persons, embracing certain categories; nevertheless,
if compared with some modern asylums, in several features it seems
defective. Although not surrounded by high walls, having no
securely-locked wards, with often confined and over-crowded
dormitories, in which numerous inmates seldom breathe an uncon-
taminated atmosphere, and then rarely, if ever, associate with sane
fellow-creatures, but almost continually dwell in the often baneful
society of other lunatics?whereby they become wholly deprived of
232 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
many social enjoyments, whicli frequently prove alike advanta-
geous during the treatment of mental, as in physical maladies?
the insane colony now under review requires, nay, imperiously de-
mands, various important ameliorations for the relief of suffering-
humanity. Of these, the most essential and urgent, at present,
is an infirmary, adequately large and sufficiently commodious, for
its existing numerous lunatic population. This great desideratum
has long been acknowledged. But notwithstanding the official
reports recently made thereon, and although the subject has been
very often discussed, while authorities have strongly recommended
the establishment of so necessary an appendage to every asylum,
as the one in question, nothing by any means sufficient has yet
been accomplished towards remedying the present great defi-
ciency above specified.
A small house or cottage has, no doubt, been appropriated for
receiving new admissions, previous to placing such patients in
any permanent abode, and where one or two sick persons, on an
emergency, might be treated when labouring under physical dis-
ease, instead of remaining at their ordinary domicile. Still, the ac-
commodation supplied is altogether inadequate for that purpose ;
but especially for observing recently arrived lunatics, so as cor-
rectly to ascertain the specific character of their mental disease, pre-
vious to locating them permanently elsewhere. This objection being
even more applicable, when attacked by acute cases requiring
much personal attention, and constant medical superintendence.
An infirmary containing from fifty to sixty beds would prove
sufficiently ample for every requirement. The locality selected
ought to be central, salubrious, and in an elevated, open situa-
tion. The vicinity of St. Dympna's church has been proposed ;
and, certainly, this position possesses several recommendations.
Wherever the new infirmary may be ultimately erected, 50,000
francs would be judiciously expended on such a building, and
could not but confer great benefits on the lunatic population of
Gheel ; irrespective of important collateral advantages to its
general population, by thus holding out an additional means for
properly treating those who might be sent here as patients. To
accommodate 800 lunatics?the average ordinary number at this
colony?several millions of francs would be required to construct
two asylums, even of an ordinary description ; while a much
larger expenditure must be incurred, were these structures made
palatial, or like some which oftener seem rather built for ex-
ternal show, and to attract outward admiration, than invariably
for their interior convenience and useful accommodation.
Neither Government nor provincial ratepayers have ever ex-
pended any large sum, on purpose to procure house-room for the
numerous lunatic population resident at Gheel. The annual outlay
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 233
required from different communes is exclusively paid on account
of the care, keeping, and maintenance of their indigent insane ;
not to reimburse any expenditure on buildings. Indeed, the
allowance, which frequently averages about cf?10 per annum?
every item included?being less than that often paid at ordinary
asylums, even in Belgium, for pauper lunatics, and where
thousands of francs have been spent on buildings, there would
be true economy in the proceeding advised. Hence,it proves much
more advantageous, pecuniarily considered, to place insane
patients at Gheel; seeing neither the communes nor public treasury
are required to make any considerable outlay, as a commencement.
Whereas, such results almost invariably happen elsewhere, in refe-
rence to similar institutions. Viewed, therefore, even as a money
question, besides under various other aspects, Government should
not hesitate to build an infirmary, and also to institute other
improvements now admitted as absolutely necessary. Much has
certainly been accomplished of late years, to ameliorate the con-
dition of resident lunatics. The new system of management
adopted has already produced beneficial effects; and although
local authorities may thereby have been curtailed in their former
powers, especially with reference to patronage; whilst individual
jobbers can no longer successfully pursue their profitable vocation
as heretofore; still, many helpless patients have derived important
advantages, through several judicious changes already established.
When impartial observers reflect that about 250,000 francs
are annually paid to upwards of 450 different householders, for the
maintenance of nearly 800 insane boarders, distributed amongst
the various families just enumerated, it will be at once perceived,
of how much importance such an expenditure becomes to the en-
tire community. In truth, the large sum so received constitutes
their chief revenue ; quite as much as cotton-spinning in Man-
chester, or working in metals at Birmingham. Take away their
lunatics, and the "Gheelois commune would be utterly ruined;
unless some new employment or industry were substituted.
In a former page it was stated that Gheel, and its immediate
precincts, formed almost an oasis in the surrounding desert. In-
dubitably, the continuous residence of many hundred lunatics,
during nearly twelve centuries, has essentially contributed to-
wards rendering an arid sandy soil?naturally unproductive?into
fertile fields and fruitful gardens, notwithstanding its often cold
or ungenial climate. Well may modern authorities and natives
celebrate the fete of St. Dympna; for truly to that saint origi-
nally belongs the long-continued fame of this locality, and also
the marked improvements in its soil just mentioned. While again,
to such named influences are mainly owing whatever advantages
it now possesses over adjacent communes. Hence, much material
23-4 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
wealth has been diffused, not only amongst past generations, but
residents of more recent times. Had analogous establishments
been placed in a sterile highland moor, which originally produced
nothing but heather and grouse, or on any Sussex down, where
hitherto sheep-grazing seemed its only profitable destination,
assuredly both places would have also become, through the con-
tinued labour of lunatics, equally productive with this district of
Campine. Were such experiments tried, of course many years,
perhaps several consecutive centuries must elapse, before similar
results could be reasonably expected. Nevertheless, the conclu-
sive exemplification, described in these notes, amply shows what
may be accomplished, through the continued physical efforts of
numerous individuals congregated together; notwithstanding
they may be all victims of mental alienation.
One great and truly peculiar feature, which has, during now
many centuries, always characterized this singular colony, ought
never to be forgotten?namely, when lunatics, everywhere else,
were too often treated more like so many wild animals than as
human beings, and even frequently chained, or lying 011 straw in
dark noisome dungeons, here, the sufferers from similar mental
maladies breathed an open, more healthy atmosphere, lived gene-
rally quite free, likeother members of the family where they resided,
and in whose occupations, enjoyments, or even annoyances, they
often participated as ordinary inmates. Indeed, many never suf-
fered from any bodily coercion, unless under certain circumstances.
In fact, No restraint appeared the great maxim at Gheel; physical
confinement being the exception. Whereas, throughout the
civilized world generally, restraint?frequently of the most severe
description?was formerly almost the invariable rule, bodily
freedom proving then of exceedingly rare occurrence.
But however remarkable this ancient rural refuge, for demented
members of frail human nature, may appear, and although in
operation now during many hundred years, the locality and its
famed attributes were always, and even now still continue, very
imperfectly known, not only to an ignorant public, but even by
the medical profession, who, generally speaking, remained, unless
to a very limited extent, scarcely cognizant of Gheel's actual exis-
tence. Recently, the colony has become somewhat better under-
stood. Again, since various reforms have already been effected,
besides others now in progress or proposed; while the facility of
travelling thitherward is at present reduced to a forenoon's journey
from Brussels, with the certainty of obtaining every personal
comfort visitors could desire, when residing in Gheel; doubtless
foreign physicians will very soon become as familiar with Kcwnpen
Land, and its peculiar features, as they are now in regard to most
European districts and their peculiar institutions. Whether
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONi' OF GHEEL. 235
such extended knowledge may lead to the establishment of similar
insane colonies in neighbouring countries, at present seems pro-
blematical ; although many strong arguments might be easily
advanced in support of that proposition. This much certainly
may be said, no asylum for lunatics throughout the universe can
boast of having had such a lengthened experience as the one in
question. That assumption, at least, I firmly believe, cannot be
disproved, with any show of reason.
-Notwithstanding the prestige of great antiquity; the acknow-
ledged physical benefits so frequently produced; the freedom
which now most patients enjoy?even greater than ever ; the
almost general adoption of "no restraint" and many other
advantages?to say nothing of recent ameliorations effected, or
seriously contemplated?an opinion exists in some influential
quarters that, instead of still further improving the colony of
Gheel, it ought to be entirely broken up and discontinued. In
short, the insane inmates should henceforward be consigned to
public asylums, shut up within four stone walls, only associate
together, and never be allowed to enjoy the society of their own
fellow-men, until they also have become victims of mental
derangement. No greater and more disastrous mistake could be
committed, than to carry out such an absurd proposition. Correct
abuses ; still further improve internal discipline ; remunerate the
medical staff more liberally; make the communes pay higher
allowances for their pauper patients, so as to ensure increased
comforts to such sufferers ; supply additional means towards
promoting trades and manual employments amongst men, as also
work for women; and lastly, but still not the least essential, forth-
with establish an infirmary both for the temporary reception of
acute cases, and of those inmates who may become attacked- by
physical disease. Doing these things effectually, in my opinion,
would be the most proper course to pursue?not, certainly, by
adopting any thoughtless scheme "of destruction.
Instead of committing such an act of sheer Vandalism, insane
rural colonies should rather be established elsewhere, and thereby
take advantage of former practical knowledge?based upon the
long experience thus obtained. Other countries might even advan-
tageously imitate the example here furnished?which appears,
for many reasons, truly philanthropic?in place of always erecting
immense prison-looking buildings, or large, magnificent, palatial
residences, for pauper lunatics, which are wholly at variance with
all their previous habits, lives, or associations. Besides these rea-
sons, asylums become not only very expensive, both in construc-
tion and management, but frequently prove not the best adapted
for protecting, treating, or occupying judiciously that class ot the
population.
236 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
Nowhere in Europe is any analogous establishment to be
found?at least, within my knowledge. At Zaragossa, in Spain,
an insane colony was said to have formerly existed ; but to what
extent, or if it still receives any inmates, I am unable to procure
certain information. However, Iberti, an author of repute, when
mentioning this institution in 1791, says?" Here, lunatics have
been employed, long prior to the present period, in daily labour,
either within the hospital, or adjacent fields.'" Afterwards, the
same authority adds, " that rich patients who did not engage in
manual occupations rarely recovered/' These quotations, there-
fore, become both conclusive and interesting. Again, in the
north of Scotland also, about the middle of last century, a farmer
then obtained, it is said, considerable celebrity by the treatment
successfully pursued with insane persons, whom he took as ser-
vants and labourers, to cultivate his farm, or to pursue various
out-door manual employments. The place was, in fact, another
Gheel, although upon a very limited scale. How long this small
lunatic colony continued in operation, or with reference to its
particular features, even rumour is now silent; and the fact of
such a place having once existed seems now almost, if not wholly,
forgotten.
Indubitably, the principle then acted upon continues recog-
nised, as incontestably shown in many recently-erected county
lunatic asylums, where large farms and gardens are frequently
now attached, so as thereby to occupy patients in open-air
labour, rather than confine them in close wards, waiting-
rooms, and workshops; or even placing such parties in walled
court-yards, however spacious. Virtually, therefore, a fictitious or
rather miniature Gheel is often now appended to various public
institutions for the insane, but without possessing the peculiar
advantages characterizing that unique establishment?viz., do-
mestic association with sane persons, as likewise, the demented
living usually at large, among ordinary workpeople. Irrespective
of several drawbacks, these agricultural appliances are neverthe-
less most beneficial. Consequently, their operation should be
greatly extended, so as to become, in a higher degree, both useful
and sanative to numerous inmates.
In addition to the examples above quoted, an important appli-
cation of a similar system at the Devon County Asylum, during
the past year, deserves being mentioned. According to the
Report of that institution for 185G?drawn up by its able medi-
cal superintendent, Dr. Bucknill?" a limited number of patients
have been discharged on trial, and boarded with neighbouring
cottagers selected as trustworthy and suitable persons. In several
instances the women of these cottagcs have acquired some expe-
rience in the right management of the insane. Some of them
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 287
have been employed as occasional attendants in the wards of this
asylum ; and others, having been attendants or domestics in the
asylum, have married asylum artisans, or other persons living
near. ^ This experience has made them willing to accept, and
qualified to undertake, the charge of such inmates of their
houses. Both the patients and the persons having charge of
them feel themselves under the eye of the medical superin-
tendent, who visits them unexpectedly. The plan promises to
work well. The patients are happy, and extremely well satisfied
with the arrangement." In a recent letter with which I was
favoured from my friend Dr. Bucknill, that gentleman further
says :?" The cottage treatment of a few selected patients men-
tioned in my last Heport has fully answered my expectations.
The patients are contented and happy, and bear willing testi-
mony to the kindness and consideration of their hosts." This
forms a good commencement, and, if carried out further, will
doubtless prove equally satisfactory. Considering that the ave-
rage primary outlay, of most public lunatic asylums, ranges about
<?>200 per patient, an annual expense of nearly i?10 is thus in-
curred, before any inmate can be fed, clothed, or treated. Hence,it
appears the buildings in which the pauper insane of England are
placed, alone cost the country quite as much as lunatics of the
same class in Belgium usually do for lodging, support, and every
requisite. These are important considerations, and well deserve
the mature examination not only of ratepayers, but philanthropists.
At the same time, seeing a successful beginning has been already
made at the institution just named, such an excellent example
becomes more worthy of imitation elsewhere.
Before taking leave of the ancient and truly interesting esta-
blishment, which has formed the subject of previous remarks,
two most important questions therewith connected, at least
deserve some special observation?namely, does the residence of so
many lunatics in this commune, their free intercourse with the
general population, and the association of sane and insane per-
sons?ordinarily without restriction, influence the mental condition
of the rising generation? Again, do immoralities ever super-
vene, in consequence of the two sexes being in the habit of often
meeting each other, as if actually living in common worldly
society ? Upon both these topics, no opinion can be more valu-
able or conclusive, than that of Dr. Parigot, who resided, during
several years, as inspecting physician at Gheel, and had thus
ample opportunities for making valuable observations.
In reply to the first question?viz., whether the association of
insane persons with the general population actually produces any
injurious effect upon the mental condition of natives belonging to
this commune? Dr. Parigot very obligingly wrote me as follows.
238 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
I give his observations in the original French, so as not to weaken
their force or significance, by translation :?" Je vous dirais qu'au
premier abord, lorsqu'on voit ce qui se passe en gdneral a Gheel,
011 serait assez tentd de croire les Glieelois, si non fous, ail moins
assez excentriques. En second lieu, un Stranger, s'il s'en rap-
portait a ce que disent et racontent?lmo, les villageois et citadins
qui avoisinent Gheel; 2j0, les membres de l'administration pro-
vinciale et ceux du tribunal dont Gheel ressort?il s'en irait
convaincu que les Glieelois ont subi l'influence du contact de
leurs alidnes; car toutes les personnes qui ne sont pas de Gheel,
moitid par derision, moitie a cause des faits qui arrivent a leur
connoissance, et dont ils ont a juger, les considerent comme des
alidnds ; de la, sobriquet Gheelschc Zotten. Toutefois, mon ex-
perience n'est pas d accord avec ces donnees, et j'ai remarqud?
lino, que Gheel ne fournissait relativement pas plus d'alidnds que
les localitds voisines; et 2ll?, que les excentricitds apparentes
dependaient de causes amendes plutot a la suite des abends
(comme la somme de 2o0,000 francs qu'ils apportent a Gheel),
que par le contact des alidnds. Je m'explique ; vous savez qu'il
y a deux especes de Glieelois?l'habitant' de la ville merae, et
celui de la catnpagne de Gheel. Le premier a plus ou moins
abandonnd le travail des champs pour le commerce de detail,
ou pour la speculation, memo celle de .so charger de I'entreprise
des alienes. Le second est restd campagnard, et est devenu
avec l'aliene Tobjet de la speculation du citadin; aussi, le
paysan n'est point en question, quand on parle des Glieelois;
mais le citadin spdculatenr et faineant, grand beuveur de genievre,
est devenu difficile a conduire, assez chicaneur, entetd, et for-
tement excentrique. On ne pent pas liier non plus que cette
grande habitude du laisser faire pour les alienes 11 ait contribue
a relacher sa mani^re de voir les choses, ses conceptions, et que
sa volontd n'ait subi une certaine modification, tant sur le con-
trole de soi-meme que sur les actes; mais, cependant, tout cela
n'est pas de la folic. Au reste, vous concevez, Monsieur, que si le
principe de la contagion de la folic etait admissible, Gheel,
depuis le temps qu'il est soumis a cette influence, ne serait pas
un pea excentrique, mais, hi en foil a Her?ce qu'il n'est pas.
Au contraire, j'ai toujours admire, au milieu de bien de ddfauts,
l'immense charitd et l'amour souvent de'sinteressd des habitants
envers les alienes, par le temps qui court en vue de ce que la
soif de l'or produit dans le grand monde. Le ddsinteressement
n'est-il pas aussi de la folic ?"
With reference to the second point of inquiry?namely, do
immoralities oftener supervene amongst the insane residents of
Gheel than elsewhere ? Dr. Parigot likewise observes, in answer
to that equally important question?" La vie de famille est la
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 239
veritable et unique base du reglement de police int^rieure de
Gheel. C'est sur elle que se modele la vie des ali^n^s, et leur
morality en depend. Dans les families on ne sdpare point les
sexes; et cependant, il est infiniment rare, qu'il s'^tablisse des
rapports criminels entre les membres. Les alidnds etant, chez
les Gheelois, admis sur le pied d'enfants, qu'il faut conduire et
surveiller, j'attribue a cette surveillance intime, plus qu'a toutes
les recommendations de l'administration, de n'avoir trouvd en
sept annees que quatre cas de grossesse parmi les ali^ndes; ce-
pendant, ces dernieres sont en moyenne en nombre de 500.
Mais, ce qui ne doit point vous echapper, c'est qua Gheel peu
d alidn^s sont inoccupes, surtout les femmes valides; et que
justement, ceux dont les instincts animaux sont le plus developpds,
se trouvent dans ce dernier nombre, et seront ceux qui auront le
moins d'occasion de s'y livrer. Enfin, le nourricier considere un
pareil fait dans sa maison comme un deslionneur."
These observations being based upon extensive personal expe-
rience, must carry conviction, in reference to the points now
mooted; more especially, as Dr. Parigot's conclusions coincide
with those enunciated by other authorities, equally competent.
Although any remark of mine on such subjects would be value-
less, I would nevertheless observe that Gheel seemed a very quiet
town, considering its size. Indeed, it was certainly much more
tranquil than many other localities I could name?numbering
4000 residents. During daytime, nothing unusual occurred;
whilst at night, silence and repose reigned, apparently, every-
where supreme. Nay, an unusual quietude even prevailed when
an infantry regiment?about 1000 strong, and returning from the
camp at Beverloo?passed through Gheel; where they were bil-
letted with the bourgeois population, during one of the nights of
my sojourn there. Greater bustle and confusion would have
certainly ensued in most English or Scottish towns, by the march-
ing in one day and out the next, of so large a body of soldieis,
headed by their military band, than then prevailed. 1 he absence
of any excitement was indeed remarkable. Hence, were I to hazaid
an opinion, derived during my brief residence in Gheel, it would be
that the capital of Cainpine seemed more orderly, and less noisy,
notwithstanding 250 free lunatics dwell therein constantly, than
almost any other equally populous place possessing only sane
inhabitants, which I had ever previously visited. Such a remark,
however strange it may perhaps appear, being really no exaggera-
tion. ...
Although neither peculiar to this locality, nor uncommon, stni
as the immediate vicinity of Gheel supplies an instructive illus-
tration of what may be accomplished, in originally an unpro a
soil, by human labour even of lunatics, if applied consecutne y
NO. VL?NEW SERIES. It
240 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
its cultivation, I would specially direct attention to the district
in question; seeing, it lias thereby been changed from an almost
Siberian desert?as various environs even yet remain?into culti-
vated fields highly productive. Instead, therefore, of construct-
ing new palatial asylums, which is now often the case, in situations
where the ground proves valuable in consequence of its fertility,
public authorities should profit by the results noticed at Gheel,
and henceforward locate all future county institutions for lunatics
on moors or waste commons, in place of purchasing, sometimes at
an exorbitant price, tracts of ground already in cultivation. Of
course, the district chosen should possess ascertained salubrity.
This step is too frequently adopted because the position selected
seemed beautiful, and might, in consequence of an elegant archi-
tectural structure afterwards erected thereon, become the admira-
tion of passing travellers; and would then be pointed out as
strong financial evidence of county magistrates' liberality, besides
showing the great care they take of their pauper insane.
Intimation having been officially given to the metropolitan
county magistracy, respecting the necessity of erecting a third
public asylum, that proposition therefore supplies a good opportu-
nity for carrying into effect the principle now enunciated. If such
movement be made, few places really seem better adapted for that
purpose than Hounslow Heath. Sufficient ground could be there
easily obtained, which must doubtless become, were a large popu-
lation constantly located, much more productive than at present;
while it would supply an ample space for out-door physical labour.
However, any suggestion now mooted being only shadowed forth
for subsequent consideration, I need not further pursue the in-
quiry. Still, having witnessed very marked beneficial results, which
an analogous mode of proceeding has effected in the bleak" Kempeii
Land" of Belgium, similar consequences would most likely follow,
I really believe, were an analogous, or even a partially similar
institution established on any barren but healthy heath, within
the limits of Middlesex.
General Remarks.
Compared with various public asylums of France, Scotland,
or England, many insane establishments of Belgium are very far
inferior, in reference to the accommodation they supply. Several
old convents?never constructed for the reception of lunatics?
having been appropriated for such purposes, easily and at once
explains the marked difference which often prevails. Viewed,
however, in regard to their condition, prior to the governmental
inquiry, not many years ago, great improvements have cer-
tainly taken place since they were placed under public inspection.
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 241
The most objectionable are suppressed ; and others having under-
gone important ameliorations, it must be acknowledged, much
real good has recently accrued throughout numerous institu-
tions. Take, for illustration, a Report of the Commission of
Investigation for 184*1, wherein it is stated, "In nine establish-
ments visited, we found iron fetters and chains were used; and
in seven others, their employment was suspected ; whilst blows
and bad treatment, inflicted upon inmates of certain asylums,
were too real and too frequent."
Contrasted with this sad statement, reference may be made to
the Commissioners' Report for 1853, which observes, " The pub-
licity given to several deplorable facts previously reported has at-
tained the object proposed; various barbarous instruments, which
proved the absence of science as of humanity, are now banished to
the museums of antiquarians." Again in 1856, the same public
authorities report that, " reforms have been introduced in dif-
ferent asylums, with reference to their domestic arrangements;
important mollifications are made in others affecting the com-
forts of inmates; various buildings have assumed a more pleasing
appearance ; wards seem better furnished ; greater order pre-
vails ; services are performed with more precision, -and the sur-
veillance of patients is better understood. In fact, most Belgian
asylums have now entered on the path of decided progress."
AVlien the new building close to Ghent is completed, the advance
must, doubtless, become even more rapid; as then, assuredly,
that public establishment for the insane, besides leading to the
erection of similar asylums elsewhere, will, moreover, serve as an
excellent model for imitation throughout the whole kingdom.
Belgian lunatic institutions are generally distinguished, from
those of most European countries, in being very often exceedingly
small, and from having usually but few inmates; whereas, the
latter are large, and often very populous. Many were originally
founded by religious congregations, and even still continue under
the management of clerical personages. Some appertain to work-
houses and hospitals; whilst in a large majority, all interior ser-
vices are performed by "freres" and "sceurs" of different reli-
gious corporations; scarcely one-third having ordinary, or laical
attendants. Again, about half are administered by, or under the
authority of various directing Boards of civil hospitals ; whereas,
only one establishment?namely, the asylum for male lunatics
at Froidmont, near Tournay?belongs directly to Government;
who have delegated the management to a special commission.
At present, this small receptacle is capable of containing from 76
to 80 patients, all being of the male sex. However, as it is pro-
posed to expend upwards of 80,000 francs towards improving ana
enlarging its accommodation, very soon sufficient space w
O ? c\
R 2
242 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
supplied for receiving 150 demented inmates within this govern-
mental institution.
Respecting the dietary of insane patients?always so impor-
tant an item in their treatment?it may be here observed that,
the minimum allowance for adults in Belgian asylums should
never be less than 32? ounces of raw meat, 96 A ounces of bread,
13 ounces of butter, with 10^ pints of beer per week. These
quantities may, however, be diminished by one-sixth, in the cases
of women and young persons under fifteen years of age ; whilst
the regimen during fast-days, and for sick persons, must be
regulated by the authorities of individual establishments, accord-
ing to special regulations. The above quantities constitute but
meagre fare, truly, for grown-up human beings, and scarcely seem
sufficient. Nevertheless, the scale is much above what it often was in
former years, when competition prevailed amongst different spe-
culating parties; who then farmed out, contracted for, or traded
in lunacy. At that period, many lunatics were almost starved,
as the feeding of these unfortunate victims was often reduced, by
hard-hearted speculators, to the very lowest limit likely to main-
tain vital existence. Indeed, it is said, some were even fed exclu-
sively upon rye bread and sour milk ! During the last two years,
the Belgian labouring poor have suffered great privations, in con-
sequence of the scarcity of food : hence, admissions into asylums
were much more numerous than previously. Therefore, knowing
mental disease originates frequently through want and misery,
such contingencies, however common, could be easily explained by
the sufferers' insufficient nutriment and physical degeneration.
Small as the amount of animal food just specified may appear,
it should be still remembered that the quantity is all consumed
during five days of the week; seeing every Friday and Saturday
are " jours maigres," when a portion of fish or a few mussels
are distributed. Should these articles happen to be dear and
scarce, then eggs or some equivalent become substituted. Not-
withstanding such additions, besides occasionally potatoes, there
cannot be any question that too much bread is usually eaten,
while the proportion of annualized matter is very inadequate. The
regimen in lunatic asylums seems, however, much more nutri-
tious than inmates there confined often previously enjoyed;
among whom many, through living almost constantly on vege-
table diet, had become debilitated in body, pale and of a yel-
lowish countenance. Hence, while their spirit is thus weighed
down, or broken by mental and bodily sufferings, these influences
lead to, or facilitate, attacks of insanity in various instances.
That this picture is not overdrawn, might be conclusively proved
by numerous yet apt illustrations ; although two need only be
now quoted, since they appear conclusive. In one of the largest
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 24:3
prisons of Belgium?recently containing upwards of 1500 male
inmates?a high official authority told me that not more than
300 were fit for military service. This statement seems the more
remarkable, seeing most prisoners usually attain improved bodily
health after confinement in these well-managed State recep-
tacles. Another friend?a physician of much experience, and
formerly in the military service, but now medical inspector of
conscripts for a large district?stated also, in proof of the present
deteriorated bodily condition, both of the urban and country popu-
lation in Belgium, that within the last very few years, he had
actually rejected upwards of 7000 young men?drawn for military
duty, in consequence of their physical incapacity or degeneration ;
whilst the proportion he admitted as fit ranged much lower than
in auy previous similar period, according to his experience. These
statements deserve serious attention by Government.
Such facts speak volumes ; and even casual observers travelling
in Belgium, need only make use of their eyes, when visiting
large congregations of people assembled in workshops, and various
public establishments belonging to towns, or many humble dwell-
ings of the rural populations, to feel convinced respecting the
truth of analogous conclusions. Poorness of diet, prevalence of
scrofula?often a consequence of the former?with mental
sufferings, from misery and bodily privations, always have a
marked disastrous influence in producing insanity. Consequently,
it cannot be considered surprising, if psychal maladies are said to
have become recently more numerous. Towards which result as
admitted in the Commissioners' late Report?an education that
developes the passions, and engenders artificial wants, besides
commercial or industrial crises, wrecked fortunes, sensual life,
as also disordered habits, have all materially contributed; irre-
spective of even causing other baneful consequences.
Admitting unequivocally the importance of various improve-
ments, lately made in different Belgian institutions, one depart-
ment still imperiously demands organic changes^ namely, t le
medical staff* of these establishments. No public asylum yet
possesses a resident physician or surgeon ; and in many, the lemu-
neration is utterly inadequate for the important sei vices rendered.
Nay, at some the salary is so insignificant, that the office may be
almost considered gratuitous, since the annual pay occasionally does
iiot exceed 200 francs! That is most pitiful parsimony. There-
fore, it is no wonder if professional attendance, at such institu-
tions, is thus considered of very secondary importance. Indeed,
it has been observed, with reference to establishments so con
stituted, that the patients being thus abandoned to the so e
efforts of nature are rarely cured, and thereby often become
permanent charge to their respective communes.
24^ NOTES OX BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
Receiving sucli inadequate remuneration, there consequently
exists very small encouragement for professional men dedicating
their time, chiefly, to the study of mental diseases. Hence, very
few psychological physicians are found in Belgium ; while the me-
dical officers of many asylums, being ordinary practitioners, visit
these receptacles much the same as if attached to ordinary civil
hospitals, and often take little or no part in the direction of the
institution,properly speaking. At most insane establishments, that
duty is usually left to laical or religious directors, by whom the
medical attendant is frequently considered as only an appendage,
not the chief moving power?which he ought to be invariably?
in everything connected with the moral, physical, and medical
treatment of lunatics. This truly injurious system requires
immediate alteration. A resident physician ought always to be
appointed at every large asylum, possessing paramount authority
in his own department. He should, besides, be amply remune-
rated, so as to secure talent and experience. To do otherwise, is
very false economy. Therefore, instead of spending money lavishly
in bricks and mortar, to make future new buildings assume pala-
tial imposing forms?which cannot so cure madness, more en-
couragement should be everywhere given to fully qualified medical
men, who only should fill such responsible appointments.
Another feature characterizing several institutions, lately
visited, merits criticism and requires amendment. I now allude to
the too frequent appointment of religious " freres" or " sceurs" in
lunatic asylums, and hence the exclusion of laypersons from various
employments. For superintendents in particular departments, as
teachers, task-masters, and in several other capacities, such parties
are generally admirable assistants to the superior authorities;
whilst the devotion, especially of sceurs to their frequently irk-
some duties, is often most exemplary. But having likewise, accord-
ing to the rules of their respective orders?with which they are
classed?to perform many ceremonial and religious offices?both
early and late, besides even during night-time?much of their
attention is thereby withdrawn from the inmates, upon whom they
ought then to have been in attendance. To exemplify the effects of
these obligations, a simple fact may be here given, as an illustra-
tion. At one institution inspected, where the whole attendants?
upwards of twenty?were cassocked " freres," suddenly many we
?saw occupied with patients disappeared from the court-yards?then
perambulated?but whom I afterwards recognised in the chapel at
their devotions, amounting to fifteen in number; but wholly without
any audience! During the period thus occupied?although not
more than twelve or fifteen minutes?very few freres were noticed
elsewhere. In reality, the patients seemed left almost entirely alone,
and thus to take care of themselves. As similar movements, how-
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 245
ever, recur from six to eight times during every twenty-four hours,
even throughout the night,?botli winter and summer, these
duties assume a very serious aspect, with reference to the accumu-
lated time dedicated to such services, which are therefore not
employed for the insane residents' immediate benefit, however
otherwise to these performers themselves.
Mooting such questions certainly touches tender and debateable
ground, especially in reference to Catholic countries and practices.
Still, being particularly struck on witnessing similar proceedings,
in more than one establishment, and conscientiously believing they
entirely concerned the religious brothers so engaged,not the victims
of madness under treatment?I am now led to notice the subject,
thinking many ceremonies then performed, in whatever way or
aspect they maybe appreciated by various parties, seemed misplaced
m a lunatic asylum, and even subversive of its regular discipline.
Equally strong objections cannot be urged respecting the scaurs
de ckarite placed in female institutions. However, even then,
the time of such attendants is often too much occupied elsewhere,
rather than with patients under their charge. Therefore, it also
requires some amendment. Besides which, as both male and female
members, of all external religious orders, are affiliated to powers
beyond the asylum precincts in which they actually reside, and
"whose superior behests they must obey implicitly, such an inipe
Tiumin imperio is, I think, by no means desirable. When resident
medical officers, possessing dictatorial powers, shall be attached to
all public lunatic asylums, and especially those under the absolute
control of Government lay commissioners, doubtless the strong
objection now specified to the present system will then be mate-
rially modified ; perhaps'altogether removed.
Nevertheless, without discussing any further the above, and one
or two minor questions, but upon which hypercritics might animad-
vert, every impartial person must admit that Belgium has at present
zealously entered 011 the path of progress and imprcv ement. W hen
the new asylum at Ghent is completed, besides other analogous
institutions, which must soon follow so good an example, and 'while
men like Guislain and Ducpetiaux direct public opinion, there
cannot remain any doubt that the contrast which this countiy
will exhibit in a few years, compared with no very long bygone
period, must be altogether different from its former condition, m
reference to lunatics. Consequently, it may be fairly anticipated
that various ameliorations which have recently been accomplished
in France, and throughout the British dominions, will have soon
numerous imitators while adopting modern improvements.
Having now attempted to sketch briefly, in previous pages, ie
chief observations made during my recent visit to the un*\
-asylums of Belgium, I must here bring these Notes to a con
O ' ^
246 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
sion. Nevertheless, prior to doing so, a most pleasing duty still
remains for fulfilment?namely, to offer the narrator's best thanks
to numerous gentlemen with whom he came in contact, during his
late excursion, for the kindness and uniform civility everywhere
experienced. This is really no unmeaning expression. On the con-
trary, it enunciates what was then deeply felt, and will long he
retained in grateful remembrance. To MM. Guislain, Ducpetiaux,
Yan Hecke, Bulkins, and last, but not least, to Dr. Parigot?now
resident in Brussels, his best thanks are especially due, for the
pleasure experienced in their society, as likewise the very valuable
information he then obtained. Truly, without such advantages,
many previous remarks, which now appear in the pages of the
Psychological Journal, must have otherwise proved both barren
and uninteresting; perhaps, never been narrated.
To the Minister of Justice, his Excellency M. Nothomb, I would
further presume also to tender very sincere obligations, for his great
courtesy in giving me a special letter of introduction, with which
I became honoured; whereby, every facility was afforded to visit
asylums, prisons, and other public institutions?as that missive
stated, " dans tous les details"?or in reference to any point I
might then desire to investigate, and thereby procure authentic
information. Furnished with the above authority?a real" Open,
Sesame"?and being also supplied with a " Carte de route/' most
kindly traced by M. Ducpetiaux, who, besides being a Commis-
sioner in Lunacy, is also Inspector-General of Prisons, I thus was
most politely received at every establishment; while many doors
and documents were readily opened whenever desired.
Notwithstanding the subject may seem, perhaps, rather irre-
levantto the questions discussed in previous pages, I would observe,
in concluding my narrative, that however inferior most Belgian
lunatic asylums may really appear, in various important phases,
when contrasted with many throughout France and England, still,
in regard to prisons, as also reformatory institutions for juvenile
delinquents, or adult criminals, Belgium need not fear any com-
parison; nay, in several respects, there is even some superiority. Phi-
lanthropists, or persons taking an interest in the punishment and
reformation of criminals, should therefore visit the " Maisons de
Force"at Ghent and Yilvorde; the Penitentiaries of Liege andChar-
leroi; the reformatory prisons of St. Bernard for males, near Ant-
werp, and thatinNamur for females, since each will amply repay
minuteinspection. But no institutions, in my opinion, deserve notice
more than the Government colony at Berneem, which contained
372 girls on the day of my visit; and especially that also in the
vicinity, called Russeylede?having 430 boys and lads under its
roof. Each are admirably conducted, and confer much benefit
on the young population they contained. Apparently, the latter
PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER SCRIPTURALLY CONSIDERED. 2-i7
reformatory even surpassed Mettray, in France, which I have like-
wise seen, although now some years ago; as also various similar
juvenile establishments noticed elsewhere. These two interesting
localities being within twelve miles of Bruges, and to which the
Ghent Railway conveys passengers more than half the distance,
either are, consequently, of easy access. Hence, a journey thither
becomes an agreeable promenade, which may be accomplished
without difficulty ; and assuredly, it will amply repay any trouble,
by whomsoever undertaken. Both institutions confer great credit
011 the Belgian Government, and especially upon King Leopold,
who takes an especial interest in their prosperity. Indeed, his
Majesty had only recently visited each to see personally how
they were managed; when this condescension, of course, gave
much satisfaction to every one concerned, and all appeared highly
pleased with the royal patronage they so well deserved.
y
