Reports of American Institutions for the Insane 
=================================================

Aut. IV.?
BY S. TUNY EAKLE.
(From the American Journal of Medical Science. Edited by Isaac Hays, M.D.)
The American reader who wishes to obtain a knowledge of
insanity, its nature, its causes, and its proper treatment, without
personal observation in an hospital, can hardly do better than
procure a series of the Reports by Dr. Ray. We always shrink
from them when preparing our notices, because of the labour
inquired in the effort to do justice to both the author and our
readers, and at the same time confine ourselves within justifiable
limits.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Butler Hospital, Dec. 31, 1853. . G3 73 130
Admitted in course of the year 31 49 SO
Whole number 9-1 122 21G
Discharged, including deaths  40 45 85
Remaining December 31, 1854   54 77 131
Of those discharged, there were cured   ... 40
Died  ... 19
1. Of the Butler Hospital, for 1854.
2. Of the Bloomingdale Asylum, for 1854.
3. Of the New York State Lunatic Asylum, for 1854.
4. Of the New Jersey State Lunatic Hospital, for 1S54.
5. Of the Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane, for 1S51.
6. Of the Pennsylvania State Lunatic Hospital, for 1854.
7. Of the Maine Insane Hospital, for the years 1854 and 18o.>.
8. Of the New Hampshire Asylum for the Insane, for tlio years 18o4and 18oj.
9. Of the Vermont Asylum for the Insane, for the years 18^4 and 1800.
10. Of the Massachusetts Lunatic Hospital, Worcester, for the years ISoi and
1855. ?oro
11. Of the Boston Lunatic Asylum, for tho year 18 j?. , 1Q?,
12. Of the New York City Lunatic Asylum, for the years 1854 and 1855.
13. Of the Maryland Hospital for the Insane, for the years lboJ, 18^4, and
14. Of the Mount Hope Institution, for the years 1854 and 1855.
15. Of the Western Lunatic Asylum, Virginia, for the years 1854 and 1855.
16. Of the South Carolina Lunatic Asylum, or tho years 13u3 and ISjj.
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 2G3
The department for females has been so much crowded, that
applicants for admission have been rejected.
Patients admitted from 1818 to 1851, both inclusive . G63
Discharged, recovered 211
Died 121
The deaths are "equivalent to about 15 per cent, of the ave-
rage resident number of patients* one year with another."
"In 1850, when dysentery was very prevalent in this region,
we had our share of it; but this year we had only a few cases,
none of them being severe, and not more than three continuing
beyond the third day. With these two exceptions, and that of
an occasional influenza, we have been entirely exempt from epi-
demic disease."
" It is a noteworthy fact, that in most if not all our hospitals
the mortality has been steadily increasing of late years." We
have made no investigations in regard to that which is here
asserted.
11 Premature removals" is still one burden of complaint in
the Reports from many of the institutions. " It is one of the
disheartening experiences of our calling," says Dr. Ray, " to be
so often obliged to see a patient removed just at the moment
when it seemed as if our efforts to promote his recovery were
about to be rewarded with success, though a longer perseverance
would have been followed by no very obvious deprivations?
none, certainly, which a year or two of restored health would not
have fully repaired. Few things are more calculated to lower
our estimate of human nature than this balancing of reason,
God's greatest gift to man, vAtk a paltry sum of money. . _ .
Few of our patients who fail to recover within five or six
months are allowed to remain longer. It is concluded that
everything has been done that we can do, and that the time has
come for another experiment. And yet it appears, from one of
Esquirol's tables, that in the French hospitals less than one-half
of the recoveries occur within the first year. ... I have no
hesitation in saying that many of the incurables that form so
large a share of the inmates of our hospitals, have been made
so by the interference of well-meaning but injudicious friends."
From a very accurate exposition of the secret?if secret it may
have been?in which lies the superior advantage of hospital
over domestic treatment, we make an extract which will impart
a sufficient idea of the whole :?
" Insanity implies the existence of bodily derangement, and
therefore is a suitable object of medical treatment, which, of
* We regard this as the only accurate basis upon which to compute thcmoitality
in any public institution.
264 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
course, would be more skilfully applied by men who are
devoting their whole time and attention to this affection, than
by those who observe it only on a very limited scale. But it
also implies derangement of the ideas, hallucinations of the
senses, perversion of the moral sentiments?all which, though
the result of physical disorder, are, so far as their outward mani-
festations are concerned, in some degree under the control of
others, and by such control?in a way not very well understood
?the morbid process may be arrested. Now, it is the moral
management prevalent in the hospitals of our time which so
strongly distinguishes them from those of any former period,
and determines, in a great measure, the amount of good which
they accomplish. . . . It is one of their merits, indeed, that
this management works so easily, and substitutes so quietly its
own arrangements for the suggestions of disease, that the un-
initiated observer finds it difficult to appreciate its real value,
and thus often mistakes the character of its results. He sees the
patient taking no medicine, perhaps; calm in his discourse and
movements; readily complying with the wishes of others, and
engaging, it may be, in some form of work or amusement; and
he adopts the conclusion, which no opinion of the physician can
shake, that the patient has recovered, or, at any rate, is so much
better that he would do equally well at home, or in a private
family. He can scarcely be made to believe that what he wit-
nesses is chiefly the result of that special management peculiar
to a modern hospital for the insane?of architectural arrange-
ments which restrain without annoyance; of systematic regula-
rity in the daily routine of life; of gentle manners, judicious
firmness, vigilant, enlightened, and conscientious supervision.
Now, these qualities are not a matter of accident, nor are they
the growth of a day. They are the elaborated result of a pro-
found study of the mental constitution, both in health and
disease ; of extensive inquiry into the various arts concerned in
the erection and practical working of an extensive establishment,
and of an organization of the service best calculated to effect its
designed object."
" The peculiar restlessness of the insane, which impels them
to roam about regardless of time , and occasion, at the risk of
their own safety and the peace of society, and which finds no
sufficient restriction in the arrangements of an ordinary dwelling,
short of confinement in a small apartment, is effectually con-
trolled in an hospital; while the range of ample galleries and
airing-courts prevents that control from being oppressive and
unhealthy. Their fitful humours, their wild caprices, their im-
pulsive movements, their angry looks, are met by the steady
and straightforward will of attendants who have learned to per-
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 265
form their duty unbiassed by fear or favour. Having no object
of their own to serve, imbibing the spirit of kindness which
prevails around them, deterred from improper practices by a
vigilant supervision, and aided by suitable architectural contri-
vances, they are enabled to manage their charge with the least
possible degree of annoyance. Thus withdrawn from outward
excitements, and especially from the persons and scenes con-
nected with his mental disorder, the patient naturally becomes
calmer, his mind opens to better suggestions, and finally seeks
for repose in amusement or labour. And thus it happens that
in many cases but little more is necessary to conduct the morbid
process to a successful issue, besides giving the constitution a
iair chance to exert its restorative powers unembarrassed by
adverse influences."
In the Report of the Bloomingdale Asylum, Dr. Brown gives
the following statistics :?
Men. "Women. Total.
Patients in tlie Asylum, January 1, 1854 . . . 50 08 124
Admitted in course of the year  58 61 122
Whole number Ill 132 216
Discharged, including deaths 61 55 119
Remaining December 31, 1851   50 77 127
Of those discharged, there were cured  22 20 4S
Died 10 10 20
Causes of Death.?Old age, 6 ; exhaustive mania, 4; phthisis
pulmonalis, 3 ; general paralysis, 3 ; epilepsy, 2 ; marasmus, 2 ;
apoplexy, 1 ; disease of kidneys, 1 ; suicide, 1 ; use of opium, 1 ;
" exhaustion from a suicidal attempt previous to admission," 1.
Of the six who died from old age, the youngest was 70, and
one had reached the age of 95, preserving a remarkable degree
of intellectual activity and genial humour within a few days
of his departure.
"The insane, as a class," remarks Dr. Brown, "are unsound
alike in mind and body. They inherit tlie multiform varieties
of scrofula, and among them abound the Protean forms of ner-
vous diseases, hysteria, chorea, neuralgia, and epilepsy. Some
are victims to depraved appetites, unrestrained by an enlightened
and vigorous will, and suffer the torments of alcoholic poison,
which lias paralyzed alike their physical energies and their moral
sense. Cardiac, hepatic, renal, and uterine affections are common
among them, excite and shape their delusions, and generally
shorten their lives. Their sensations being enfeebled or per-
verted, they disregard extremes of heat and cold, and become
indifferent to danger ; but while the mind may betray no indi-
cation of pain, their bodies suffer like those of sane men.
Neglect of hygienic laws, and resistance to the regimen or habits
266 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
imposed by others for tlieir benefit, beget inevitable evils. Ob-
stinate derangements of the digestive and assimilative organs
are induced by prolonged abstinence, or excessive and unmasti-
cated food ; the circulation is languid from muscular inactivity ;
the extremities are cold and livid : slight abrasions of the skin
become alarming ulcers ; and serious visceral disease insidiously
establishes itself, too often successfully resisting medical art.
These patients become prematurely old ; their intellectual per-
ceptions and moral emotions disappear with healthy sensation ;
they sicken and die, often without an intimation of suffering, or
an expression of concern.
"On the other hand, a remarkable exemption from prevailing
epidemics is sometimes vouchsafed to these unfortunates. Thus,
while cholera prevailed to a considerable extent in the neigh-
bourhood of the Asylum during the past summer (1853), 110
instance of this disease occurred within our enclosure, and the
whole household was preserved, in an unusual degree, from all
affections of a similar character."
The long-desired improvement in the buildings of this insti-
tution has at length been accomplished by the enlargement of
the "lodges," and the introduction into them of a sj'stem of
forced ventilation, and heating by hot water. The beneficial
effects of these have soon become apparent. "Quiet and sensi-
tive patients have been effectually relieved of the annoying
presence of the disorderly and noisy, and at the same time the
latter have been permitted a degree of liberty formerly incom-
patible with the comfort of their associates."
In the means for ministering to all the physical comforts of
its patients, the Bloomingdale Asylum has now but few equals in
this country.
Dr. N. D. Benedict resigned the office of superintendent of
the New York State Lunatic Asylum in June, 1854, and was
succeeded by Dr. John P. Gray, who for some years had been
connected with the institution as assistant physician. The report
of the latter contains a large amount of interesting matter, from
which we shall extract that which appears to be of the greatest
value.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Asylum, November 30,1853 . .239 207 44G
Admitted in the course of the fiscal year . . . 101 199 390
Whole number 130 40C 830
Discharged, including deaths  201 182 3SG
Remaining November 30, 1851   22G 221 150
Of those discharged, there were cured .... 98 GG 1G1
Died '  29 3G G5
I
Causes of Death.?Phthisis pulmonalis 15, exhaustion from
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 267
acute or periodic mania 11, exhaustion of chronic mania 5, old
age and protracted mental disease 4, general paralysis 4, epi-
lepsy 4, suicide 4, erysipelas 4. apoplexy 2, hemorrhoids 2,
disease of liver 1, pneumonia 1, typhoid fever 1, chorea ], not
stated 7.
" In December last (1853), a case of smallpox occurred, which,
though isolated as much as possible, was followed by others, and
m the two months following we had twenty-three cases. By
great precautions, the disease was confined entirely to the male
department."
In the spring and summer of 1853, " the domestics engaged in
the kitchens were seized with typhoid fever. We attributed this
to the decayed state of the floors and timbers of the basement,
and the decomposing impurities beneath." These causes being
removed, there were no more cases of the disease.
One hundred and eight applicants for admission were rejected,
and fifty-one patients discharged, for the purpose of receiving
more recent and curable cases.
" During the past, as in former years, we have had many un-
happy instances of injudicious haste in bringing patients to the
asylum. One lady was admitted five days after her confinement;
another before the burial of the child whose death was the
immediate exciting cause of her disease, and many who were
far too ill to travel."
"Thirty-four patients (eleven males and twenty-three females),
have been admitted during the year with strong suicidal propen-
sities. In several of these cases the ancestors had committed
suicide, in two of them for three generations. In one male, it
was impulsive; he was also homicidal, and left home at his
own request, because he felt that the inclination to destroy his
children, whom he loved tenderly, was gradually strengthening,
while his power of resistance was growing weaker.
" All the epileptics (10) admitted, and the cases (6) of general
paralysis, had either epileptic or intemperate ancestors."
Of the 390 patients received, the disease was directly heredi-
tary in the numbers and manner shown in the subjoined table :?
Men. AVomen. Total.
From the paternal branch of the family . 30 20 50
From the maternal brauch  16 30 4G
From both paternal and maternal branches 8 9 17
Total   54 59 113
Collateral predisposition manifested in the
insanity of brothers, sistei's, or cousins .10 19 29
Numbers in which there was a family pre-
disposition   G4 7S 142
268 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
Thus, in 28'97 per cent, of the cases the disease was here-
ditary ; and in 3641 per cent, there were relatives insane. A
larger number received the predisposition from the father than
from the mother. This does not accord with the result of the
researches of Dr. Baillarger, of Paris, which showed, as has been
formerly mentioned in our notices, that, so far as the data which
he had collected were concerned, a large majority received it
from the mother.
" In one case included in the preceding table, the maternal
great-grandmother, grandmother, mother, and two aunts, and
the paternal grandfather, uncle, and two sisters, and one brother,
have been insane. In another, the maternal grandmother, two
uncles, and mother, the paternal grandfather and uncle, and two
brothers, have suffered from attacks of insanity.
Improper cases received.?Typhoid fever, 1 ; chorea, 1;
phthisis, 1 ; drunkards, 8; feigned insanity, to escape imprison-
ment, 2. Several, also, placed under the head of subacute
mania, were simply cases in which there was mental prostration
with tranquil delirium, the result of grave organic diseases. It
is well known that when the brain and heart are seriously in-
volved, there may be more or less prostration of the intellectual
faculties; and when the lungs are implicated, often a state of
exaltation not amounting to insanity. These persons were in
such a feeble bodily state that we could not refuse them, although
improper cases for admission, fearing they might die on their
return home, as some lived in distant parts of the State.
Most of them never left their beds after reception ; some died in
a few days, and others lingered for several weeks.
A patient received from one of the county poor-houses " had
been for more than a year chained to the floor of his cell, and
destitute of clothing and bedding, because his habits were
destructive and filthy. He had lain upon straw, which was
changed two or three times a week, and the person who attended
him ' always carried a cow-hide, because he always attacked
him, and he could only control him by whipping him.' This
man is now quiet and comfortable. Application has recently
been made for the return of another, who, the superintendent of
the poor states, ' has been in chains for months, and is in the
most filthy and wretched condition.'"
Dr. Smith, of the Missouri Asylum, in his lleport for 1854,
discusses the question of the propriety of establishing separate
asylums for the incurable insane, and, after giving his reasons for
condemning the plan, says :?" I rejoice in the reflection that
America has never been disgraced by one, and I trust that
period will never occur." We, also, are opposed to such special
institutions, but an asylum for incurables is not necessarily a
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 2G9
disgrace to any nation. Some of those upon tlie continent of
Europe stand, confessedly, in the foremost rank of establish-
ments for the insane, and we have seen several of them which
would not suffer in comparison with some of our asylums for
both curables and incurables. Indeed, of the fifty-six 'public
institutions for the insane which it has been our lot to visit,
the very worst, with but a single exception, is in one of the
original thirteen United States of America.
If our country has not been disgraced by an asylum erected
particularly for the incurable insane, has she not been, is she not
still disgraced by something even more objectionable ? Read the
several memorials of Miss Dix, embodying the results of her
observations of the insane and their manner of treatment in the
poor-houses, prisons, cellars, and specially-constructed cells in
several of our states ! Go to the numerous jjoor-liouses, which
have been, and still are, in effect, asylums for the incurable
insane, with all the objectionable and none of the redeeming
qualities of those to which Dr. Smith objects, and learn what is
there to be learned. Or, simply, read the above extract from the
report of Dr. Gray, and we may then ascertain whether our
course, in the treatment of those who are alienate of reason, is
such as to exempt us from reproach.
For ourselves, rather than allow the incurables to remain, as
they are this day, we would rejoice to see them collected, to-
morrow morning, into purely technical " asylums for the in-
curable." The establishments once in operation, the Argus eyes
of trustees, of the Association of Medical Superintendents of
Asylums for the Insane, of the communities in which they might
be placed, and last, though far from least, of Miss Dix, so long
as Heaven shall bless her with life and health, would watch them
with a vigilance sufficient to prevent a large proportion of the
abuses now heaped upon the unfortunate persons who would
become the inmates of them.
Patients admitted from January 1G, 1843, to Dec. 1,
1S54   4,313
Discharged, recovered 1,789
Died 511
"The Opal is still edited and published by the patients, and
its proceeds devoted to their comfort and amusement. The
profits of the last year, with the avails of a fair held by the
ladies, amounted to four hundred dollars, which has been ex-
pended for books, improvements in the greenhouse, and in
amusements. The Opal now receives about three hundred
periodicals and newspapers in exchange."
The number of patients in the New Jersey State Lunatic
Hospital, at Trenton, is as follows:?
270 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
Men. "Women. Total.
Number of patients 1st Jan., 185-1 . 98 107 205
Admitted in course of the year . . 5G G7 123
Whole number  154 174 328
Discharged, including deaths . . . 4G GO 115
Remaining at the close of the year . 108 105 213
Of those discharged, there were cured . 25 32 57
Died 11 12 23
Causes of Death. ? Consumption 4, general exhaustion 8,
dysentery 8, epilepsy 1, apoplexy 1, asphyxia 1, congestion of
the brain 1.
" During the months of August and September, a number of
cases of dysentery occurred, several of which proved fatal.
" Besides the Museum and Reading Room," remarks Dr.
Buttolph, " as a means of occupying and amusing the members
of our household, wre are now engaged in the erection of a cali-
stheneum, or exercise room, twenty by sixty feet in extent, for
the use of the female patients ; also, a ten-pin alley for the men.
Both these structures are being erected by aid of contributions
from various benevolent individuals, and will form very valuable
means of promoting both physical health and mental tranquillity."
The calistheneum is within the inclosed grounds for the women,
and its estimated cost is one thousand dollars. Messrs. Morris,
Tasker, & Morris, of Philadelphia, have contributed a "self-
regulating hot-water furnace" with which to heat it, and several
gentlemen, mostly in Newark, have given money to the amount
of 675 dollars.
The laudable benevolence of many of our fellow-citizens is
rapidly bringing some of the public establishments for the in-
sane into a proper condition in regard to the facilities for curative
treatment. As one extreme is often followed by its opposite, it
may, perhaps, ere long, become a question whether there is not
a danger that the desolation, the barrenness, and the wretched-
ness of the mad-house of the past, will be followed, in the Hos-
pital for Mental Disorders of the future, by an objectionable and
deleterious luxury.
Two additional wings to the Trenton Asylum are in progress.
The house has been so much crowded by the number of patients
during the year, that their proper classification has, at times,
been impracticable. But a small part of the report of Dr.
Buttolph is devoted to subjects which would particularly interest
our readers.
" That which the skeleton is to him whose general form it
represents, when in his prime of manhood," such must be our
notice of the report for 1854, of the Pennsylvania Hospital for
the insane.
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 271
We must fully coincide with. Dr. Kirkbride in his remarks,
that " because entire accuracy in every point may not be attained,
it can hardly be urged as an excuse for not attempting to ap-
proach it; nor is it a sound reason for omitting all statistics, that
wrong inferences and unfair comparisons have occasionally been
made from some that were not entirely reliable. ... I have
never been able to discover a sound reason why tables of care-
fully recorded facts, or even of the opinions of intelligent physi-
cians in reference to insanity, should not be just as important
and reliable as if made in regard to other diseases."
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Hospital Dec. 31, 1S53 112 123 235
Admitted in course of the year . . 178
Whole number  413 ?
Discharged, including deaths . . . 190
Remaining, December 31, 1851. . .117 10G 223
Of those discharged, there were cured . 98
Died 15 11 26
Causes of Death.?Phthisis pulmonalis G, acute mania 5,
softening of the brain 4, epilepsy 1, paralysis 1, chronic bron-
chitis 1, acute inflammation of the bowels 1, dysentery 1,
diarrhoea 1, pneumonia 1, acute dementia 1, disease of heart J,
liydrothorax ], old age 1.
" There has been little acute disease of any kind?except of
the brain?and no tendency to any of the summer or autumnal
epidemics which prevailed in many parts of the country." The
hospital lias been full throughout the year, often crowded, and as
many as fifty applicants for admission were not received.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients admitted since the opening
of the hospital   1384 1192 257G
Discharged, cured CGI 574 1235
Died   157 114 . 271
From two of the tables given in the report we derive the
following in reference to the relative proportion of the different
forms of mental disorder, and of their comparative curability :?
Admitted. Cured. Per cent.
Mania   1273 738 57.97
Melancholia  G28 324 51.58
Monomania  358 147 41.00
Dementia  30G 25 8.17
Delirium  11 1 9.09
Of the 223 cases still remaining in the hospital, some will un-
doubtedly be restored to health, modifving, somewhat, these
results.
The greater proportion of the annual reports of a public institu-
NO. VI.?NEW SERIES. T
272 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
tion for the insane, pass, in each successive year, into the hands
of a new set of readers. For this reason we have ever approved
of the plan of entering into a more or less detailed account of the
moral treatment in every report. To the constant reader this
may become monotonous, hut that effect is as nothing in com-
parison with the influence for good upon the minds of the people
in regard to the true nature of these institutions, which cannot
fail to be produced by such a course. In but few of the reports
from our hospitals is so much space customarily devoted as in
those of Dr. Kirkbride.
During nine months of the year, three entertainments in each
week are given to the patients. " One evening is now devoted
to scientific lectures, another to the exhibition of dissolving
views, with interesting explanations of the scenery or pictures
shown, and interspersed with music; and the third to music
alone." On the other evenings of the week the teachers read to
the patients in the wards. " The interest in these readings has
been increased by the introduction of some pleasant exhibitions
and music. The value of all this class of means can hardly be
properly estimated by those who have not made a systematic trial
of them, using them not, at long intervals, as a rare gratification,
but frequently, as a regular part of the treatment As a
general rule, the more varied the pursuits of the patients, the more
steadily they are kept employed in some way, the more comfort-
able they will be found to be, the better their general health and
appearance, the more easily they may be managed, the less noise
and excitement there will be in the wards, and the more efficient
and valuable will be the services of those who are en^aued hi
O O
their care. No money expended in a hospital for the insane is
better applied than when judiciously used in promoting these
various objects."
A carriage-road 011 the pleasure-grounds for the men, similar to
that on those for the women, is in progress. These roads will
liave a combined extent of a mile and three-quarters, and will be
bordered with trees through most of the distance.
The Board of Managers of the Pennsylvania Hospital for the
Insane, in view of the necessity for further accommodations, have
determined to erect another establishment upon a tract of land
containing seventy acres, immediately west of the pleasure-grounds
of the present hospital buildings, " a site that cannot be surpassed
for general adaptation and natural advantages, in a single tract,
secured from encroachments by special legislative enactments."
It is intended that it shall have " fixtures and arrangements of so
superior a kind as, with the present buildings, to put our city
(Philadelphia), in this respect, far in advance of any other 011 this
continent, and to give to those who are mentally diseased advan-
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 273
tages nowhere surpassed." The estimated cost is 250,000 dollars,
and the buildings will be commenced when 150,000 dollars shall
have been subscribed.
The report contains an elaborate memoir of Jacob G. Morris,
late a Trustee of the Institution, who was on board the steamer
" Arctic" at the time of her loss, and met, with so many others,
an untimely death. As institutions for the insane have rarely, if
ever, received such attention and sacrifice from a trustee or
manager, we should fail of justice were we to omit the following
extracts:?
"Possessed of an ample fortune, and with a truly benevolent
heart, the activity, energy, and sound sense of Jacob G. Morris,
made him a desirable manager in the charitable institutions
abounding in our city. .... He made it a rule to expend all his
income, whatever it might be ; and as his own habits were in no
way extravagant, a large portion of it was devoted to deeds of
charity He was strictly conscientious, and whatever he
believed right he carried out steadily and fearlessly, without
regard to what others might think of his course He was
elected manager of the Pennsylvania Hospital in September,
1844, and from that time took an active interest in all its depart-
ments. He was always ready to perform any services that were
assigned him He was a frequent visitor among our patients,
and was always joyfully received The slightest wish made
by a patient, especially of the gentler sex, he rarely failed to
esteem it a duty to gratify; and it was surprising what an amount
of labour he would often undergo to enable him to effect it. It
differed little with him whether it was to procure a toy for a
child, patterns or materials for ladies' fancy work, a piano for a
ward, a collection of books for the library, curiosities for the
museum, or funds for some greater undertaking; he entered on
the task with an equal zeal, and with an earnestness and hearty
good-will, which never left a doubt of success. Rarely did he
fail in anything he undertook ; and his own gratification at such
a result quite equalled that of those who were immediately
benefited.
"He placed on our walls several valuable oil-paintings, and
purchased expressly for the museum a large collection of curiosi-
ties ; besides making numerous presents of a useful or ornamental
character." .... When it was decided to erect the new hospital,
as above-mentioned, " he at once offered 1000 dollars as his first
contribution to the work, and devoted no small portion of the
little time that elapsed before his departure for Europe, in calling
attention to its importance and soliciting subscriptions in aid of
the object In every part of his travels he visited all the
institutions for the insane worthy of note, and collected every-
274 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
thing that he thought might be useful in our new undertaking.
In the very last letter I received from him, this subject was
earnestly dwelt upon, and, although anxious to be at home, he
declared his willingness to return to Europe at any time as one
of a commission to visit the best foreign institutions, defraying
his own expenses, and contributing liberally to those of his asso-
ciate." Truly, the Pennsylvania Hospital has met with a great,
it is to be feared an irreparable, loss !
The report of Dr. Curwen, of the Pennsylvania State Lunatic
Hospital, furnishes the following statistics .?
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Hospital December 31, 1853 . 99 83 182
Admitted in course of the year 93 51 141
Whole number 192 134 32G
Discharged, including deaths G5 47 112
Remaining, December 31, 1854   127 87 214
Of those discharged, there were cured  .. 29
Died  22
Causes of Death.?Exhaustion of chronic mania 10, general
paralysis 4, peritonitis 2, bilious fever 2, inflammation of brain 2,
consumption J, dysentery 1.
"In common with the surrounding section of country, our
household was visited, during the latter part of summer and
through the autumn, with intermittent and remittent fevers, in
many cases of a very obstinate form, and of a very irregular
character. The diseases were clearly attributable to an epidemic
constitution of the atmosphere, as most of those attacked were,
as far as possible, removed from the usual exciting causes of
those diseases/'
In discussing the etiology of mental disorders, Dr. Curwen
maintains that no exciting cause will produce insanity, unless the
nervous system be in a favourable condition for its development,
and that that which is often assigned as the cause in individual
cases, as, for example, the reading of the Bible, is rather the
effect of previous mental depression dependent upon the abnormal
condition of the body.
" In those who are natives of other countries, a different class
of causes, to a certain extent, acts. The disappointment of their
hopes, so fondly cherished and often so rudely crushed, the entire
change of climate and mode of life, the difficulty of obtaining
employment and support for their families, with the too frequent
resort to intoxicating drinks, all contribute their share to bring
on that condition of the system which ends in insanity; and the
natural elasticity of the system appears to be so far destroyed
that, in a large majority ot cases, it never fully regains its former
tone and vigour/'
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 275
By the report of Dr. Harlow, of the Maine State Asylum, it
appears that at that institution, on the 30th of November, 1853,
the number of
Patients was
Admitted in course of the year . .
Whole number
Discharged, including deaths
Remaining, November 30,1854 .
Of those discharged there were cured
Died
Men. Women. Total.
61 58 119
57 53 110
118 111 229
5G 58 114
G2 53 115
2G 23 49
1G 16 32
Causes of Death.?Dysentery 16; general paralysis 5;
consumption 2; old age 2; marasmus 2; serous apoplexy
1; congestion of brain 1 ; typhoid fever 1; gangrene 1;
epilepsy 1.
"About the 1st of August," says the report, "an epidemic
diarrhceal dysentery broke out in our wards, and for three
months little else than the sick and dying occupied our
attention. There was scarcely an individual connected with
the hospital family who escaped the ravages of the disease.
Officers, attendants, nurses, and assistants shared alike with the
patients in the attack. Just in the midst of the epidemic, when
it would seem the services of the superintendent and steward
were most needed, we were prostrated and unable to perform
our duties. Having no medical assistant, we were obliged to
call in a neighbouring physician to attend the patients. For-
tunately, the trustees were able to procure the valuable services
of ex-Governor Hubbard, who was formerly, for several years, a
member of their board, and who has always felt and taken a deep
interest in the hospital. He visited us daily for four weeks, and
attended upon all the sick in the house till we were able to
attend to our duties." Of ninety persons attacked by this
epidemic, seventeen, of whom sixteen were patients, and one,
a female attendant, died.
The number of patients admitted, since the first opening of
the hospital for their reception, is 1430. Discharged, 1316, of
whom 590 had recovered. Died 175.
To avoid the labour and the inconveniences attendant upon
the return of patients who, on the supposition of recovery, have
left the hospital with the formalities of a regular discharge, but
who, after a few days, either suffer a relapse or give evidence of
imperfect restoration, Dr. Harlow has adopted the plan pursued
at some of the European hospitals, of discharging all in regard
to whom he has " doubts of their fitness, on trial, for a period of
two weeks."
Of 1200 patients who have been in the hospital, 586 had
276 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
insane relatives. It is not stated whether these 1200 were
so many persons, or merely so many cases, including a con-
siderable number of re-admissions of the same person?conditions
which materially affect the percentage.
In some remarks upon the deleterious effects of a forced early
intellectual education, Dr. H. remarks that he "was most
forcibly struck, in reading an account of a class of students who
graduated at one of our New England Colleges, in 1827. It
was found that of this class, numbering twenty-three, all but two
had survived the lapse of a quarter of a century ; and it was also
found that nearly every member of the class had arrived at adult
age before entering college, thus escaping that premature excite-
ment and development of the intellect which paves the way to
mental disease, and furnishes tenants for many an early grave."
At the date of this report an additional wing for females was
in course of construction.
In the report for 1855 we are informed that the new wing is
completed, and occupied. The original design is thus finished,
and the hospital can now accommodate two hundred and fifty
patients.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Hospital, Nov. 30, 1851 ... 01 51 115*
Admitted in course of the year GO 02 128
Whole number  130 113 213
Discharged, including deaths 41 11 88
llemaining, November 30, 1855   80 00 155
Of those discharged, there were cured .... 41
Died  19
Deaths from general paralysis 5, epilepsy 3, chronic diarrhoea
3, tubercular consumption 2, congestion of the brain 3, old age,
nephritis, and typhoid fever, 3 each.
" The propensity," says Dr. Harlow," that exists in the minds
of many of the friends of our patients, to remove them from the
hospital too soon after they have been admitted, continues to bo
an evil which we should be glad to see eradicated. AVe are
happy to say, however, that the evil appears to be growing less
from year to year."
Patients admitted since the Hospital was opened . . 1559
Discharged recovered 031
Died .  193
" Owing to the two epidemics, and the great calamity by fire,
with which the hospital has been visited since its existence, the
bill of mortality is larger than (that of) some similar institutions."
* The number assigned to each sex does not correspond with that of the report
of the preceding year.
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 277
Basing liis calculation upon the results obtained by the com-
mission which took the census of the insane and the idiots in
Massachusetts, in 185-1, Dr. Harlow concludes that, in Maine,
there are 1365 lunatics and 560 idiots. "The question arises,"
he remarks, "where are all these 1365 lunatics, and what is
their condition? Some are cared for at home by their friends,
either chained or caged, if unmanageable, and some 150 are in
the hospital, while by far the largest proportion of them are at
the various Almshouses in the State, many of them caged^and
chained, because they can be kept a few cents less per week
than it costs at the hospital/' Where is that other " Maine
Law ?"
At the New Hampshire Asylum for the Insane, on the 31sfc
of May, 1853, the number of
Men. Women. Total.
Patients was  70 73 143
Admitted in the course of the year . 72 69 141
Whole number 142 142 284
Discharged, including deaths ... 67 56* 123
[Remaining, May 31st, 1S54 ... 77 84 161
Of those discharged, there were cured 34 29 63
Died 7 7 14
" During the whole year our household has enjoyed remarkable
physical health. We have been entirely exempt from epidemics
of all sorts, and acute disease has been almost unknown. Clean-
liness, regularity of life, and a most healthful location have been
the chief causes of this desirable state of things. The deaths
which have occurred, with a single exception, were of those who
for a long time were considered incurably insane, and who at
last were literally worn out by the continued and unremitting
force of their malady.
" Through the whole year our female halls have been full,
and often crowded, and our male halls at all times crowded/'
This condition " prevents a proper classification of patients, and
seriously interferes with all curative measures." Dr. Tyler there-
fore recommends that an additional wing be erected.
" We can in almost no case infallibly pronounce a person
incurably insane ; certainly the records for the year show the
recovery of some whose improvement seemed impossible, and
whose present condition, among their friends, and in perfect
health and soundness of mind, seems a miracle.
" The house is now lighted with gas, and we not only find its
use more convenient, comfortable, and cleanly than oil, but its
* These numbers are quoted from the report. But if 67 men and 56 women
were discharged, the number remaining would be 75 and 86, instead of /7
-and 84.
278 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE
brilliant light a curative means, in making our previously lialf-
lighted halls cheerful and pleasant."
Report for 1855 :
Men. Women. Total.
Patients 011 the 31st of May, 1854 . 77 84 1G1
Admitted in course of the year ... 45 40 85
Whole number   122 124 24G
Discharged, including deaths ... 50 41 91
Remaining, May 31, 1855 .... 72 83 155
Among the patients who were discharged recovered, Dr. Tyler
says there was " a man of intelligence and education who was for
nearly eleven years an inmate of this institution/'
The asylum is rapidly becoming filled with incurables. But
about one-half of the applicants for admission can be received.
The doctor recommends that an additional wing be erected. A
building for the violent patients is in progress.
From the answers to circulars sent to every city and town in
New Hampshire, and from other sources, Dr. Tyler ascertains
that there are thirty-five insane persons belonging to the State
who " are supported by their friends or guardians in hospitals in
other States; and that there are now resident in the State more
than 550 insane persons, only 155 of whom are in this asylum.
Of the remainder, many are kindly and comfortably taken care
of at home, or with friends, or at almshouses ; but others are
chained, and caged, and sadly neglected ; in filth, and exposure
to the inclemencies of the weather. Some instances of cruelty
and neglect have lately come to our knowledge, that, if known,
would startle the neighbourhoods in which they have occurred."
Whole number of patients from the opening of the Asylum 12S4
Discharged cured 547
Died US
At the Vermont Asylum for the Insane, on the 1st of
August, 1853, the number of
Men. Women. Total.
Patients was 183 189 372
Admitted in course of the year ... 77 8G 103
Whole number 2(30 275 535
Discharged, including deaths ... 72 74 146
Of whom there were recovered ... SO
Died  40
It appears that a large number of the patients at this Asylum
are employed on the farm, in the garden, and in the workshop.
Dr. Rockwell also encourages them to join in "all amusements
which require exercise of the body as well as diversion of the
mind, and especially riding, walking, playing billiards, ten-pins,
quoits, and the like." He would "rather they would play chess,
draughts, cards, and such like games than do nothing."
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 279
Men. Women. Total.
Patients, August 1st, 1854 . . . .188 201 389
Admitted in course of the year ... 78 86 164
Whole number  266 287 553
Discharged, including deaths . . . 159
llemaining, August 1st, 1855 . . . 394
Of those discharged, there were recovered 79
Died  52
Whole number of patients since the
opening of the Asylum  2393
Discharged, recovered  1127
The unusually large number of deaths during the last year, is
accounted for, in part, by the prevalence of a severe and fatal
form of dysenterj', which appeared among the patients in the
early part of summer, and continued with unabated severity
throughout that season. The number of attacks is not men-
tioned, neither is that of the cases in which it proved fatal.
Warned by the two epidemics which have been mentioned, the
directing authorities of the institution have ordered the construc-
tion of two infirmaries, one for either sex, wherewith, in the event
of a future similar invasion of disease, the invalid patients can
be isolated from the others. These apartments have been com-
menced.
The State Lunatic Hospital of Massachusetts, at Worcester,
has for several years been greatly, almost unjustifiably crowded
with inmates. It, its officers, and its patients have at length
obtained some relief. The inconvenient and unwholesome con-
dition of things has been changed for the better. Another State
Hospital has been erected at Taunton. To this, on the 7th of
April, 1854, " and on each of the five succeeding Fridays, a car
load of patients" were transferred from the hospital at Worcester.
The number thus removed was 210. No accident occurred in
this rarely-paralleled migration.. " The patients were mostly of
a very orderly class, and they were gratified with the ride. ISnot-
withstanding this great abstraction from its wards, the hospital
was left " quite full, but not crowded," and it became possible to
abandon the use of a number of cells and improperly-contrived
rooms which had long been tenanted by patients.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Hospital, Dec. 1, 1853 266 254 520
Admitted in course of the year . . .125 174 299
Whole number 391 428 819
Discharged, including deaths . . . 198 210 43S
Remaining, Nov. 30, 1854 .... 193 1SS 381
Of those discharged, there were cured 45 77 122
Died . . . 7 15 19 34
Causes of Death.?Marasmus 5 ; consumption 4 ; lung fevei 4,
2S0 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
maniacal exhaustion 7; apoplexy and palsy 3 ; epilepsy 2 ; ery-
sipelas 2; suicide, dropsy, chronic dysentery, diarrhoea, conges-
tive fever, asthma, and jaundice, 1 each.
In connexion with the causes of insanity, Dr. Chandler makes
the following remarks :?" Probably in no part of the world are
the causes of insanity more numerous and more active than
among the population of Massachusetts. Here the mind, and
body too, are often worked to the extreme point of endurance.
Here wealth and station are the results of well-directed efforts;
and the general diffusion of intelligence among the people stimu-
lates a vast many of them to compete successfully for these prizes.
But in the contest, where so many strive, not a few break down.
The results on their minds may not, perhaps, be any less dis-
astrous, whether wealth and station are obtained, or not. The
true balance of the mind is disturbed by prosperity as well as by
adversity. It is only in a sound body that the manifestations of
the mind are sane and entirely healthy. As a people, we cannot
boast of the highest standard of physical health, although we may
of general intelligence, enterprise, and hard work."
In the course of the year 1855, very important improvements
were made in this establishment. Not the least of these was
the introduction of the ajiparatus for heating by steam, and that
for ventilating by mechanical power. Relieved, by the hospital
at Taunton, of its great excess of patients, and brought by im-
provements, more nearly into conformity with the idea of the
times, this institution may still, for a long number of years, con-
tinue its career of usefulness. Indeed, it seems that Dr. Chandler
is unwilling to acknowledge that it has ever merited the impres-
sion which has been made upon the public mind in regard to it.
" Whatever," he remarks, " may have been said against this
hospital?and most of what has been said about its defects, has
been so said as an excuse to make it still, better?it lias always
afforded, and does now, with all the progress made in others, a
residence as comfortable and as cheering, and as healthful to the
patient, as any similar institution in this country."
In this expression we believe Dr. Chandler is mainly correct.
The only exception suggested relates to the hygienic condition of
the building. It can hardly be assumed that, with its compa-
ratively low ceilings, and its imperfect ventilation, it can be so
healthful, other things being equal, as some of the similar edifices
more recently erected. For the impression which has gone
abroad in regard to it, the Board of Trustees who have the
control of it are chiefly responsible. They drew the picture of its
defects; and if their painted grapes bear such a resemblance to
reality that the birds have pecked at them, truly it is not the
birds that should bear the blame. All who have visited the
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 2S1
hospital are well aware that the picture was a sketch of the shady
side alone, and that another, drawn from the sunny side, might
be made as attractive as the first was repulsive.
From its earliest years we have been a not unfrequent visitor
to this hospital, and in this place we feel bound to acknowledge
our belief, that from its origin, it has been not only well, but very
well managed. We would shun invidious distinctions?we shall
make none ; yet justice demands from us the expression, that
there is no institution in the country at which we could, at any
time, have placed a friend with greater confidence that all his
necessities would be supplied; that his comforts would be care-
fully ministered to ; that he would be shielded from abuse ; and
that his restoration would be wrought for with watchful care,
with constant assiduity, and with that skill which is the result of
a good professional knowledge, combined with practical expe-
rience.
" We avail ourselves of this occasion," write the trustees, in
their report, " to bear testimony to the fidelity and signal ability
with which Dr. Chandler has discharged the duties of his posi-
tion, and to the great success which has attended his labours
during the whole period of his superintendence."
Dr. Chandler has resigned his office, and Dr. Merrick Bemis,
for some years one of the assistant physicians of the hospital, has
been appointed as his successor.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Hospital Dec. 1,1S51 193 188 381
Admitted in the course of the year . SG 113 199
Whole number admitted in the course
of the year 279 301 5SO
Discharged, including' deaths . . . Ill 133 2-11
Remaining, Xov. 30, 1855 .... 108 1GS 330
Of those discharged, there were cured 50 59 109
Died   13 14 27
Admitted from Jan. 18,1S33, to Xov.
30, 1855   2151 2505 495G
Discharged, recovered 10S9 1195 2281
Died .  28 L 272 553
Of this aggregate number of deaths, 8/ are attributed to
marasmus; to?" consumption 67; apoplexy and palsy 59 ; ma-
niacal exhaustion 59 ; epilepsy 50 ; suicide 22 ; lung fever 22 ;
disease of the brain 21 ; disease of the heart 20 ; diarrhoea 19 )
erysipelas 17 ; old age 11; typhus fever 11 ; dysenteric fever 10;
dropsy 10 ; inflammation of the bowels 8 ; haemorrhage 6 ; cholera
morbus 5; chronic dysentery 5 ; gastric fever 5; cholera 4; mor-
tification of the limbs 3 ; from intemperance 3 ; bronchitis J;
congestive fever 3 ; hydrothorax 3; convulsions 2; asthma -,
disease of the bladder 2 ; cancer 2 ; jaundice 2 ; land scuivy ,
282 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
concussion of the brain 1 ; fright 1 ; rupture 1; pleurisy 1 ;
chorea 1."
In reference to the salubrity of the hospital, this schedule of
the mortality among almost five thousand patients, in the
course of a period but little less than twenty-three years, is well
worthy of a careful perusal. Its testimony is more reliable than
that of individual opinion ; more forcible than arguments deduced
from theories of architectural construction. The almost entire
exemption from fatal epidemics, from severe endemic fevers, and
from other acute diseases, to which it bears record, will find but
few parallels in any other institution of the kind in any quarter
of the globe.
Under the table of "Causes," we find the following re-
marks :?
" Spiritualism of the present day is of the last (moral) class of
causes. This singular mental phenomenon has for some years
engaged a part of the minds in this vicinity, and some few cases
have been brought to us, the past as well as previous years, aris-
ing, it was supposed, from investigating its phenomena, and from
believing in its supposed truthful revelations of the future state
of existence. If it was true that this process of investigation
did really open to the mind any knowledge of the world to
come, not revealed to us by the Scriptures?which many of its
votaries assert and believe?then it would be a cause calculated
in the highest degree to engage, excite, and disturb the mind.
But it has been said by those best prepared to investigate
closely, that the responses through the mediums contain no
ideas of this or the next world, that were not then, or had not
previously been, in the mind of some one present. It may be a
new faculty of the mind, but its field of operation lies this side
of the grave."
In regard to moral treatment, Dr. Chandler writes as follows :
?" We recognise the principle of giving the largest liberty, and
the greatest freedom from restraint, in each case, consistent with
the security of the individual and safety of the community. . . .
About one-half of our patients perform some kind of labour,
more or less useful. For plain work, the patients are ready and
very efficient. One day this autumn the patients, with one
hired man, dug, took off the tops, and put into the cart, 480
bushels of carrots. Some are ingenious mechanics. Two have
assisted the carpenters most of the season. One gentleman has
made all the soft soap?350 barrels a year?and some of the
bar soap, for five or six years. He has gathered the materials,
made and distributed, and attended to the economical use of it.
No one can make better soap than he. Two have made our
baskets for years, and have supplied themselves, in part, with
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 283
clothing. One female has made pantaloons and vests to supply
the demand in our family. The females make the shirts, and
knit the stockings ; they wash and mend; tliey cook, and they
help about all our domestic affairs  Whip-lash braiding
. . . is the best employment I can think of to introduce among
our patients in-doors."
The Report for the fiscal year ending with the month of No-
vember, 1852, is the latest which we have seen from the Boston
Lunatic Asylum :?
Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the beginning of the year . 100 141 211
Admitted in course of the year ... 11 11 52
Whole number Ill 152 203
Discharged, including deaths ... 31 15 19
Remaining at end of year .... 107 137 211
Of those discharged, were cured 17 5 22
Died   11 8 22
Causes of Death.?Consumption, 8 ; debility, 3 ; general
paralysis, 3; epilepsy, 2 ; chronic mania, 2; smallpox, 1 ;
"Asiatic diarrlirea," 1 ; old age, 1 ; marasmus, 1.
" It is a noticeable fact," writes Dr. Walker, " that no death
from dysentery has occurred. This disease has prevailed exten-
sively among us for several successive years, always bringing
with it great suffering and ceaseless anxiety. Early in August
it appeared in a very violent form, bringing several of our house-
hold rapidly to the verge of the grave. Fires were immediately
lighted in the furnaces morning and evening, so that when the
patients were rising and retiring a current of warm air should be
passing through the halls and bedrooms  The most un-
promising cases speedily began to amend, and at the time when
the disease usually raged the most fiercely, not a case was under
treatment."
The Report for 1851, from this institution, contained a brief
but interesting account of the case of an Irish boy, among the
patients. This account was, in whole or in part, transferred to
our notices. The Report before us states that the boy has left
the institution "giving promise of future usefulness."
New York City Lunatic Asylum, on Black well's Island :?
Men. "Women. Total.
Number of patients on the 1st of Ja-
nuary, 1S51  -32 310 512
Admitted in course of the year . . .221 2(32 186
Whole number  156 572 102S
Discharged, including deaths. . .. .211 202 473
Remaining, December 31, 1S51 . . 215 310 555
Of those discharged, there were cured .. .. 186
Died  190
284 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
Among the cases cured, there were four of delirium tremens.
Of the cases admitted, nine were improper subjects for the insti-
tution.
Causes of Death,?Cholera, 83 ; consumption, 34 ; paralysis
gendrale, 19; typhomania, 9 ; " debilitas," 9 ; epilepsy, 8 ;
congestion of brain, 7 ; dysentery, 3 ; chronic diarrhoea, 3 ; old
age, 2; typhus fever, pneumonia, erysipelas, hydrocephalus,
albuminuria, suicide by suspension, injuries of head, injuries
from fall, " submersion/' peritonitis, gastroscirrhus, pericarditis,
ascites, 1 each.
Dr. Ranney gives the following account of the cholera, by
which, as will have been perceived, nearly one-half of the morta-
lity was occasioned :?
'?'The epidemic commenced on the 22nd of July, and termi-
nated on the 22nd of August. An attendant, however, was
attacked on the lltli of September, and died in twelve hours.
Four of the other attendants had cholera of a severe form ; but
all recovered. It seemed more violent and proved more fatal
than in 1849, and nearly the same class was affected?viz., those
n whom the constitution was greatly impaired from chronic
disease, and the mind reduced to the most hopeless state. Fre-
quently, the first warning was complete collapse, characterized
by blueness of the skin, coldness of the surface, and loss of pulse.
Cramps were less common than in 1849. If diarrhoea occurred,
as a premonitory symptom, it was readily checked by medicine.
" Chronic diarrhoea has become much less frequently a cause
(of death) since the introduction of Croton water on the island."
Of the 486 patients admitted in the course of the year, only
97 were natives of the United States. Of the foreigners, 241
were from Ireland, 91 from Germany, 21 from England, and 9
from Scotland; the remainder were from various countries.
100 were supported by the Commission of Emigration, and all
these were emigrants of the preceding five years.
" A large proportion of the recent emigrants recover, the
derangement of mind being generally produced by privations on
ship-board, and the changes necessarily incident on arriving in a
strange land. Their exposures and sufferings are occasionally
very great in crossing the Atlantic, and, in a few, the aberration
of intellect has seemed to depend entirely on the want of sufficient
nourishment. A poor German boy was admitted last March, who
had just arrived in New York. His suffering from starvation
had been so great as to obliterate from his memory all know-
ledge of having crossed the ocean, and he fancied himself in his
fatherland ! He would implore me, in the strongest terms, to
allow him to go on his journey, as in a few hours he would meet
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 285
his father and mother, who were anxiously awaiting his return.
Then a change would come over him, and he would imagine
that he was detained as a culprit. He would plead his innocence
with feeling eloquence, and in the most melting terms. These
delusions were so firmly fixed that he would listen to no expla-
nation, and the only effectual quietus was the liberal and con-
stant supply of nutriment. His thirst fully equalled his appetite
for food. I subsequently learned that he was a native of the
Grand Dukedom of Baden, and that he had been seventy days
in making the voyage from Bremen to New York. In two
weeks the delusion disappeared, and he became fully conscious
of his condition. In two months his mind was perfectly
restored, when he left the asylum, as noted for excessive fat-
ness as he had jDreviously been for his emaciated and meagre
appearance."
We rejoice to learn, as we do from the report for 1855, that
one of the foulest blots which has rested upon the practical
psychiatry of our country, has at length been effaced. " The
most decided improvement ever made in this asylum," remarks
Dr. Eanney, " has been consummated the past year. I refer to
the entire removal of prisoners, not only from their immediate
connexion with the insane, but from the institution.
"From 1826 to 1847, the work of the asylum was performed,
and the principal charge of its inmates taken by persons trans-
ferred from the different penal institutions on the island. At
the commencement of the year last named, six of that class were
employed in each of the halls, and between fifty and sixty en-
gaged as domestics about the building. One-fourth of the whole
number at the asylum being convicts, the institution differed
little, in its tuotclIc, from a prison. It was urged upon the com-
mon council, ' that the same individuals who were committed in
the city as criminals, and required an armed keeper in the
penitentiarv were sent here to take charge of a class who require
the most mild and soothing treatment/ But the memorials sent,
soliciting a change in the system, produced no effect.
And be it remembered that no action was taken upon the sub-
ject until after the asylum had ceased to be one of the footballs
of partisan politics, by that worthy act of the State Legislature,
which wrested the government of the Almshouse Department of
the City of New York from the municipal authorities, and vested
it in a' Board of Governors selected in equal, or nearly equal
numbers, from the two most prominent political parties of the
da}-. The change commenced in 1850, when prisoners were re-
moved from three of the halls for patients, and has gradually
progressed to its final completion.
286 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Asylum Dec. 31, 1854 2-15 310 555
Admitted in course of the year . . 1G3 20S 371
Whole number 408 5IS 92G
Discharged, including deaths .... 170 183 353
Remaining, December 31,1855 . . 238 335 573
Of those discharged, there were cured . 200
Died  100
The disease of six patients, recorded among the cured, was
delirium tremens.
Deaths from consumption 29 ; paralysie g^ndrale 18 ; epilepsy
7 ; chronic diarrhoea 7 ; typhomania (i ; old age o ; congestion
of brain 5 ; hemiplegia 3 ; anasarca 3 ; inflammation of brain
2 ; apoplexy 2 ; typhus fever 2 ; hypertrophy of heart 2 ; pneu-
monia 2 ; bronchitis, pleurisy, hydrothorax, ascites, erysipelas,
scorbutus, and accidental drowning, 1 each.
So long as the circumstances controlling the population of this
institution shall continue such as they are at the present time,
so long must its annual records present a large bill of mortality.
It is, in fact, the receptacle of the offscourings of the civilized
world. Of the 371 patients received in 1855, onl}r 78 were
natives of the United States, while 293 were foreigners. Of the
latter, 288 were Europeans. Ireland was represented by 17S ;
the German States, including Austria and Prussia, by G8 ; Eng-
land by 19; and eight of the other nations by smaller numbers.
Some of these came with broken constitutions, many of them
under the depressing influence of disappointed hopes, many with
the typhoid effects of the voyage by sea still upon them, and some
labouring under a combinat ion of two or more of these vultures to
vitality. There are also other causes, perhaps of minor importance,
but still of sufficient magnitude to swell the sum of forces tend-
ing to a fatal issue.
The moral treatment at this institution is gradually becoming
broader, more systematic, and more effective. Musical concerts,
or parties, have been held from two to three times in each week.
" New Year's Day, the Fourth of July, Thanksgiving, and Christ-
mas, were appropriately observed. The oration delivered by one
of the inmates, on the Fourth, is a creditable production. The
reading of the Declaration of Independence, the music, and the
original ode, would compare favourably with the usual ceremonies
on similar occasions. About three hundred and fifty patients
joined in the celebration.
" One of the most pleasant and interesting of our amusements
has been the holding of ' Moot Courts.' Many could directly
participate in these, either as plaintiff, defendant, counsel, judge,
or juryman. The minor offences alone were tried by this supreme
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 287
court of Black-well's Island. The judge, noted for benevolence
and wealth, and preferring to pay the damages rather than have
any one suffer from the uncertainty of the law, gave decisions?
unlike those of the city courts?satisfactory to both parties."
The reports by Dr. Fonerden, of the Maryland Hospital for
the Insane, are very brief, limited almost exclusively to a short
account of the changes in the patients resident, and to such sub-
jects appertaining to the management of the hospital as are of
merely local interest. The statistics of those now under review,
are condensed into the subjoined table :?
Patients on the 1st of January .
Admitted in course of the year .
Whole number
Discharged, including deaths .
Remaining, December 31
Recovered
Died
1853.
I
M. I W. .Tot.
68 62130
29[ 21| 50
97i 831S0
40: 23! 63
57 60 117
8| 3 11
7i 2 9
1851.
M. W.
57 60
23 23
80 83
24 20,
56 63
10 7
5 3
Tot.
117
46
163
44
1855. ! AGGBEGATE.
119 59
17 13
8 13
W. Tot. M.
I
70: 94
189,162
63119 68
28
9l .
68,103
1211 ?|
26' 31
17' 25
W. Tot.
62130
72 166
134:296.
72175
23! 54
9: 34
Previously to the year 1855, some cases of mania ct rpotu were
received atr this institution ; but we are informed by the report
for 1850, that such cases are not enumerated in the tabular
accounts of the insane.
From the report of Dr. Stokes, Physician to the Mount
Hope Institution, near Baltimore, Ave extract the subjoined
numerical results for 1854 :?
Men. Women. Total.
Patients on the 1st of Jan., 1854 . 45 87 132
Admitted in course of the year 54 51 105
Whole number in course of the year . 98 139 237
Discharged, including deaths ... 41 48 89
Remaining January 1, 1855 5G 91 147*
Of those discharged, there were cured 19 18 37
Died 7 8 15
Causes of Death.?Acute mania, 2 ; apoplexy, 1 ; Bright s
disease, 2 ; epileptic convulsions, 2; puerperal mania, 2 ; ex-
haustive mania, 3 ; phthisis, 2 ; " gradual senile decline/' 1.
" Erysipelas and dysentery prevailed to a considerable extent
during the summer, but in no case did they prove fatal.
* All these figures are given as they are in the report, without an attempt to
harmonize them. Of men, there were 45 at the beginning of the year, and 54
admitted ; yet the total is made 98. Of the women, the two items and the aggre-
gate similarly disagree. It is stated, in general, that 41 males and 48 females
were discharged; yet, immediately afterwards, in giving the details of cures,
improvement, deaths, &c., the number of males is made 42, and that of females 47-
NO. VI.?NEW SEMES. U
288 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
" During the entire year the institution has been rather more
than comfortably filled/'
From the remarks upon "premature removals/' we make the
following extract: " Those practically familiar with the habitudes
of the insane, and the motives and influences under which they
act, know full well that many, who are violent, noisy, and out-
rageous whilst under the care of their friends, become calm and
docile when subjected to the mild but firm discipline and moral
treatment of an asylum. Such a change does not indicate a
cessation, or even (in some instances) the mitigation of disease ;
it merely shows that it is held under control by the varied in-
fluences brought to bear on it. . . . Many of our inmates who
are peaceful and contented, cheerfully occupied throughout the
day, entering with pleasure into the amusements and recreations
afforded them, or rambling at will in the grounds of the asylum,
would become unhappy and unmanageable if restored to the
exciting cause of their malady."
We proceed to the report for the year 1855 :?
Men. Women. Total.
Patients on the 1st of January ... 56 91 147
Admitted in the course of the year . . 49 46 95
"Whole number in the course of the year 105 137 242
Discharged, including deaths .... 59 61 120
Remaining, Jan. 1, 1856 ..... 46 76 122
Of those discharged, there were cured .19 7 26
Died 7 7 14
Of the patients who were discharged improved, or unimproved,
forty-six belonged to the district of Columbia, and, being sup-
ported by the national government, were transferred to the
Government Hospital for the Insane, near Washington.
Upon the subject of injudicious visits to patients, by their
friends, Dr. Stokes says: ?" It is astonishing with what a reck-
less and criminal disregard of the most earnest representations of
the injury likely to be inflicted, this course is persisted in. Thus
it is that the patients' mental health and future happiness are
often jeoparded by the indiscreet action of those most interested
in their recovery. Strange to relate, after informing them that
such a step is calculated to entail chronic insanity upon the
patient for life; that its certain effect will be to protract the
disorder, and thus increase and prolong the trouble and expense
of his maintenance, many instances have occurred during the
past year wherein they have obstinately persisted in their
insane course."
The following case is related in the observations upon epileptic
mania: " In a case now under treatment the person, whose
attacks seldom amount to spasms, or even a distortion of the
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 289
features, but in whom the loss of consciousness is complete for
the time, would really seem to possess two natures. His life
presents two decidedly distinct phases; the one embracing a
period of a week preceding or following the attacks, during which
he is suspicious, timid, apprehensive of plots to destroy him,
malicious and vindictive. He is then irritable and imperious,
violent and gloomy. In the other phase, in a manner normal,
his character manifests itself under an entirely different aspect,
exhibiting the capacities of a man in possession of good sense,
and free from all extravagance."
In four cases, the abuse of opiates is alleged as the cause of
the mental aberration. " Opium," remarks Dr. S., " is much
more used by females than by males, and there exists abundant
proof that the vicious habit of this indulgence prevails much
more extensively than is supposed. From two to four ounces of
laudanum a day is by no means an unfrequent allowance."
Among the facilities, and the adopted plans for moral treat-
ment mentioned in this report, are books, music, embroidery,
excursions, a saddle-pony, musical reunions, dancing, games, and
newspapers. In the report for 1844, it is mentioned that the
anniversaries of the Fourth of July and Christmas are appropri-
ately observed.
The report by Dr. Stribling, of the Western Lunatic Asylum,
Virginia, extends over two fiscal years :?
Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Asylum, Oct. 1, 1S53 . 217 1G0 377
Admitted in the course of two years . 90 63 153
Whole number  307 223 530
Discharged, including deaths ... 81 G1 142
Remaining, September 30th, 1855 . . 226 162 388
Of those discharged, there were cured . 32 30 62
Died    36 22 5S
Whole number of patients admitted
from July 1, 1836   801 537 1338
Discharged, cured  302 214 516
Died  186 109 295
Since the last preceding report the Asylum has been so much
crowded with patients that 141 applicants were rejected. Hence
Dr. Stribling requests the Board of Directors to " again invoke
the attention of the General Assembly to the subject of founding
another asylum for the insane," and expresses his confirmed
opinion that if another institution of the kind be determined
upon, it should be placed in that part of the State which is west
of the Alleghany mountains.
Dr. Stribling has frequently been called from his hospital
duties, by subpoena, to act as an expert in courts of law. " The
u 2
I
290 REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE.
Board of Directors, perceiving the evil likely to result therefrom
to the interests of the asylum, presented the subject, in their
report for 1843, to the legislature, and asked, 'that this officer
"be released from obligation of obeying such mandates, and that
he be allowed, as some other officers of the Commonwealth, to
give his testimony or opinion in the usual form of deposition.'
The suggestion was promptly acted upon, and a law passed to
that effect." Subsequently, upon receiving a subpoena in a
criminal case, he refused, under this law, to obey it. The
question of the constitutionality of the law, so far as relates to
criminal trials, was thereupon discussed before Judge Fulton, and
he, in the language of Dr. Stribling, " sent his officer with an
attachment to coerce my attendance. The attachment was not
executed, only because, under the advice of learned and able
counsel, I became satisfied that, in this case, at least, ' prudence
was the better part of valour/ "
Now, in our humble opinion, Dr. Stribling and his Board of
Directors were wrong in the premises. We think that no super-
intendent of an institution should be exempt from obedience
to a subpoena, in any case, either criminal or civil, in which his
opinion as an expert is important to the issue. We have few
experts of the kind. They are, almost without exception, con-
nected with the institutions for the insane. Those institutions
have, or ought to have, competent assistant physicians. Thus, we
believe that a Lw releasing the superintendents from duty before
legal tribunals, would be more seriously detrimental to the cause
of justice, and to the welfare of society, than useful to the in-
mates of the institutions over which they preside.
From the few statistics of the reports of the State Lunatic
Asylum of South Carolina, we select the following :?
1853. IS 55.
Men. Women. Total. > Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the beginning of the
year  135   174
Admitted in the course of the year 40 35 75   G2
Whole number in the course of
the year . .    210   23G
Discharged, including deaths  38   G5
Remaining at the end of the year 91 81 172 8G 85 171
Discharged cured  22   18
Died  9   31
In regard to the mortality in 1855, Dr. Trezevant says: " We
have lost 31 patients; 15 of these, from their enfeebled state,
would have died under any circumstances, but their death was
hurried on by the improper accommodations of the house, ami
REPORTS OF AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 291
the unwholesome condition of the yard. The rest suffered from
bowel complaint, then prevailing, and were the victims of our
want of proper ventilation and arrangements In dry-
seasons the mortality is about five per cent., but in wet it has
been equal to about one in three. In the present year the bowel
affections commenced with the rainy season, continued whilst it
lasted, and ceased when the earth was no longer saturated with
moisture."
We have carefully perused the reports before us, and find
therein but little which comes within the scope of our notices,
while that little is upon subjects already fully laid before our
readers. The chief burthen of the reports from this institution,
for several years past, consists of an exposition of the imperfections
of the Asylum, and the necessity of a new one. The building is
old, and imperfect in its architectural construction and arrange-
ments. Its grounds are too limited, and are immediately sur-
rounded by dwelling-houses of citizens of Columbia. It appears
that one or more of its wards are so damp as seriously to affect
the health of the inmates. The whole is so much crowded that,
-as stated in one of the reports, there are fifty patients more than
can be properly accommodated. The heating and ventilation
are bad. There are no proper arrangements of baths and water-
closets. In short, judging from the reports, the whole establish-
ment stands but as a representative of the past. It is acknowledged
as such by the Regents, the Physician, and the Superintendent.
This has been granted for years. The question, therefore, has
been?What shall be done ? We have exposition after exposi-
tion of the defects. We have suggestions for erecting additional
buildings to those which now exist. We have propositions to
erect an entirely new establishment upon the lands now occupied.
We have argument upon argument to prove that a new structure
should be erected more remote from the town. And yet the
question is?What shall be done ? There is a liberal appropria-
tion yet unexpended. Different models have been presented for
the new edifice. One of these is preferred and highly extolled
by one party, but rejected and condemned in the strongest terms
by another. And still, alas ! still the question is?What shall be
done? And the relic of the past, with "all its imperfections on
its head," continues unmolested, and its inmates rejoice in the
comforts of antiquity, because the powers that be cannot agree
upon a substitute.
