On Civilization And Insanity
============================

Art. VII.?
BY DR. F. FARIQOT,
Formerly Inspecting Physicinn to Glieel; Member of the Committee of Inspection of the
Establishments for the Insune in Belgium. (Written expressly for this Journal.)
True civilization is that which results from intellectual progress
and the practice of morality in every class of society. The
degree of science, and even of charity, with which the insane
are treated in every country is in proportion to the degree of
civilization such as we have just defined it.
But civilization may be, as certain pessimist writers pretend,
the very cause that develops this disease in our time. We do
not believe it. Professing this opinion, it remains for us to
develop, in this memoir, why statistics show, during the last ten
years, an increase in the number of the insane; why we, 011 the
contrary, believe that, in proportion as true civilization shall
advance, insanity will diminish its ravages in society; and,
lastly, amongst the means to be opposed to this disease we will
mention the treatment by free air as the best. We proceed,
therefore, to explain our ideas and our convictions upon this
subject. They are based upon the observation of facts ; the im-
prescriptible rights of the insane; the duties towards them which
arc incumbent upon us; and, lastly, 011 the various methods
which the insane have been made to undergo in those countries
where it is assumed that civilization is most advanced.
No one can deny that, the more a people is advanced the
more will its attention be directed towards the means which
education and physiology supply, to lessen, as far as practicable,
the causes of a disease so grave as to destroy reason, even for a
moment. It cannot be doubted that in this direction such a
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 339
people would strive to combat the results, especially if it thought
that the evil was spreading in the different classes of society.
"W ell, any government wishing to accomplish this important end
would naturally be led to encourage the study of a science which
treats of the diseases of the mind?diseases which might well be
more frequent at epochs like ours, when everything is bent
towards personal gratifications. Such a government would
therefore teach psychological medicine in its schools, in order
that the new generation of physicians should possess at least the
first principles ; it would encourage the attempts or innovations
which this science might initiate either to cure the curable
insane, or to ameliorate the condition of the incurable by restor-
ing them to society, by admitting them to the domestic fireside,
and especially by avoiding the construction of those vast and
costly agglomerations of lunatics, in which dementia seems in
the end to establish a pei*manent reign.
All this would certainly furnish for a model-people the suffi-
cient reason to modify what had been recognised to be defective
in any system of treating the insane. Unhappily, we should
seek in vain amongst republics or monarchies for this people wise
and foreseeing, which exists no more.
The history of humanity, unlike that civilization for which we
hope, shows us the reverse of this in ancient and modern times,
if, indeed, we except fifty years.
The state of barbarism of nations, and the coarseness of their
manners, have had for their consequence the negation of all pity
for those who suffer at the same time both in their moral and
physical constitution. It may be said that in ancient times, and
even now, there has not been, and is not yet, any perfect know-
ledge or true practice of the duty owing to the insane, as it
ought to be understood, without calculation and without any
hope of reward. Moreover, we may behold ancient peoples, when
they were organizing themselves?formed for the most part (as
we see in North America) of elements collected by chance,?
seeking at first to free themselves from everything that impor-
tunes them, and which seems to hamper them in their course :
they have few hospitals and prisons ; they are useless, for, most
frequently, they hang their criminals without trial; and woe to
him who needs public aid, for he is abandoned to his lot. Our
ancestors, too, had little pity for those who could not follow
them to battle. Ransack history: the insane are objects of
buffoonery, or burnt as being convicted of sorcery. Later?they
are abandoned, and they perish for want of care in hideous pri-
sons. At the present day, even, do they not execute maniacs
before the eyes of all the world, in spite of the protestation of
science ? When all these things are considered, it is not sur-
340 ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
prising to me that on tlie Continent the insane are held within
the jurisdiction of the Minister of Justice, but in the division of
the condemned. "
Each people has its own manner of seeing things. Excepting
the Turks, who still maltreat their insane, the Orientals add a
certain derision to the want of care. They look upon the insane
as inspired, and thus, like ourselves when we want to drive away
a beggar, they abandon them to the grace of God ! Fortunately,
there public pity and liberty are not denied them. If this is
what some uncultivated and fanatic nations still do, what is then
the charitable practice of the civilized West ? It is this: our
first feeling at the sight of a sick man who is delirious is that of
fear and disgust, and our instant resolution is to put this object
of dread out of sight. For the poor there exist closed asylums,
which too often fulfil the purpose of the ancient Oubliettes.
This is, at least, the idea formed of these establishments by the
public. But Government, which has considerably improved
them, urges the erection of closed asylums in every province,
because thus vagrancy is rendered impossible. It was in this
spirit that the French law of the 24th August, 1790, was framed.
This provides for the avoidance of the disastrous events occa-
sioned by furious lunatics left at liberty, and against the wan-
dering of mischievous and ferocious beasts ! Singular com-
bination ! This law ordered cells for the first, and cages for the
last ! Behold what prejudice ordained at the moment of a
reform which ruined so many abuses. These prejudices per-
mitted the confusion of men and brutes, and made no distinction
between the different kinds of insanity, although it is easy to
see that nine-tenths of the insane offer no kind of danger to the
common life. As for the rich insane, or those belonging to the
middle classes, speculation arose to meet the necessity of remov-
ing the patient, as well as that of ridding oneself of a turbulent
guest. Capitalists, highly honourable, I am happy to say it,
have calculated that for a certain investment it was possible to
entertain suitably and economically a large number of insane
patients at the same time, and thus to draw considerable profits
from an industry which, after all, is not of the most agreeable.
Competition has even led to the reduction of the charges, whilst
the clearness of provisions has still further diminished the profits.
Thus, we are acquainted with one of these speculators, worthy of
sympathy, who has preferred encountering losses rather than to
lessen the comforts of his patients.
In general, these are the tendencies of our age : to ameliorate
the condition, material and moral, of the secluded, but at any
rate to keep them secluded.
We propose to retrace the ameliorations, and to mention the
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 341
efforts of the men who have recently striven to lead public
opinion to better sentiments, and especially to restore to science
the position which it becomes her to occupy in the treatment of
mental alienation. We cannot conceal from ourselves that
hitherto the scientific element has counted but for little in
nearly all public or private establishments, unless it be those
governed by eminent medical men. Some distinguished men
have exclaimed against this state of things; but then they are,
according to the world, Utopians, or physicians called Narren-
doctor, Zotten-doctor, or il/acZ-doctor. As a rule, administrative
authorities and speculators trouble themselves little about psy-
chological physicians; and what an ignorant public imposes
upon them in the way of privations, they are compelled to carry
out, to the detriment of the insane.
The following dialogue will lift up a corner of the curtain :?
A Relative (to the Superintendent Proprietor).?Sir, I under-
stand that you have different prices for patients ?
The Proprietor.?Yes, Sir; but the care and the attention
paid are the same for all my inmates, excepting as to the room,
the number of dishes, and certain extras which depend upon the
scale of payment.
TIlc Relative.?Well, as my patient scarcely eats at all, I make
up my mind for the lowest scale. Besides, you tell me the care
is the same. You will be kind enough to give him all the
extras for which he may ask. We should be so pleased to have
him well treated!
The Proprietor.?Let us understand one another ; for expe-
rience has taught me that these extras are often useless when
they are paid for separately.
The Relative.?That is, give him all that is indispensably
necessaiy. Well, we beg of you to let him see no one ; this
point is very important. Our misfortune must not be known.
On this account we have even been on the point of sending him
.abroad.
The Proprietor.?Will you employ a specialist physician ?
This would be at your cost.
The Relative.?No, no ! it costs us enough as it is.
After all, at the worst, what could happen if science were
?entirely put aside ? The patient would have but little chance of
recovery; or he would soon die; or, lastly, he would fall into
the chronic state?into that twilight of reason in which the life
of a lunatic may be prolonged in the silence of a cloister, or of
a division of " quiet patients." There are proprietors who have
even written and maintained that there was no mental medicine,
and that sojourn in their asylums answered every want! Truly,
it seems hardly worth while to disturb a state of things so.
342 ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
agreeable?with which everybody seems satisfied?except the
lunatic.* But what, after all, is this unfortunate ? If he returns
into the world, cured, he has lost the consideration in which he
was held; he is exposed to slander ; and if he is slow in reco-
vering, ought he not to think himself happy in being allowed to
live amongst his fellows ? It is only a madman, a wretch who
has lost all?rank, family, and even fortune, which is sometimes
inherited whilst he still lives. Clearly it only remains for him
to create for himself a new existence?a fictitious life like that
of his companions of the insane, and a few servants more or
less pleasant. He will remain, as has been said by our respected
friend, Dr Biffi, of Milan, for long months, for long years, in the
same place ; a hundred times a day he will see the same objects
and the same scene, bounded by the inexorable wall of the en-
closure. At this price the finest apartments become unendur-
able, and the most beautiful gardens put on a frightful monotony.
Better a thousand times the last hovel of the labourer in the
open country. Fortunately there are exceptions to this cloistral
regime; there are also institutions where this weary tedium is
diminished ; but these are exclusively for the rich, and are
directed generally by the most eminent men in the medical
profession, whose reputation has attracted patients of this order.
And even these houses, if they admit too large a number of
patients, necessarily lose the particular character and the kind
of care which it belongs exclusively to the family to impart.
We cannot help saying that, if in our time a certain stage of
amelioration has been reached which some persons look upon as
the ideal of what can be accomplished, we have, nevertheless,
entered into a path quite artificial and pernicious in a therapeutic
point of view?that is, of erecting everywhere vast phalausteria of
lunatics, in which the public may rid itself, at a cheap rate, of
beings irksome to society. From the prejudice mentioned above
often proceeds the denial of justice and of medical care. There
is refused generally : ? first, the most suitable means, and often
all means, of cure ; secondly, domestic life ; thirdly, relative
liberty; fourthly, the enjoyment of private fortune in its appli-
cation to personal wants ;?all this because mental alienation is
still regarded as a stain that only oblivion or death can wipe out.
This is why it has been said with truth, that it is better to be
dead than to be struck with one of those numerous affections, of
which the whole is called insanity.
What is curious enough is, that the great nations have each of
them, more or less, pretensions to a certain superiority in power,
riches, science, and some morality, and that it is to this latent
* It is not necessary to say tli.it tlicro aro exceptions to this rule, and that they
are the more honourable becauso they are rare.
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 343
relation between the degree of civilization and of beneficence,
that we must attribute the efforts of certain German, English,
and French alienists to raise the moral worth of their country by
competitive boastings of the ameliorations that have been realized
in each. This competition is good ; but we shall have occasion
to remark how imperfect these ameliorations still are, and
especially how badly they are directed, because they end in
nothing but the satisfaction of spending enormous sums in the
erection of immense palaces, where it appears that infirm popu-
lations, continually renewed, will come, to perpetuate their sad
condition.
Yes, notwithstanding the progress of enlightenment, and the
good which it produces, it will yet be a long time before the
effects will reach the insane through the obstacles heaped up
around them by time and prejudice. Instead of the self-gratula-
tions of the time, would it not be more just that the history of
the bad treatment which the insane have had to undergo, and
which they still have to undergo, by far outweighs the catalogue
of boasted ameliorations. That long list of torments formerly
inflicted as punishments, and now, under the name of moral
treatment, contains a series of facts, of which the odious and
ridiculous aspect has been perfectly appreciated by Dr Ramaer
of Zutphen, in Holland, who has made this the subject of an
excellent article in the Nederlandscli tyclschrift voor psychiatrie.
Besides, it is not so long ago that these ameliorations have
been introduced ; and it is matter for astonishment that it is
almost at the end of the nineteenth century, that the nature of our
affective sentiments, and especially that Christian morality, had
at last reacted upon our institutions as regards the insane. For
the honour of the medical profession, this path has been opened
by physicians. In different countries, it is to Pinel, Daquin,
Samuel Tuke, Langerman, Ferrus, Chiarurgi, and in our country
to Guislain, that we owe the reform of the government of the
insane. It belongs, however, to all the world to follow in the
steps of these beneficent men?to advance in the path of progress ;
for all is not yet accomplished in the way of restitution to men
who for a long time have had no voice that could be heard in
the world.
Recently, some well-meaning persons have believed, when
they beheld religious congregations devoting themselves to the
establishment of asylums for the insane, that thus a great good
and progress would be achieved. But it must be said, because it
is the truth, that with the exception of the incurables and idiots,
this is an error. The man of the world, the mother of a family,
young people, suddenly seized with this disease, can these derive
any benefit from a medium in which nothing recals to them what
7
344 ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
they have lost ? ? a medium whose idea, whose metaphysical
aims, they are for the most part unable to understand, and in
which the wants and the aspirations of actual life are most com-
monly ignored. How much time, and how many mutual con-
cessions are necessary in these asylums, where such a variety of
natures are assembled ! No : we sincerely believe that convent-
life is the very worst for the insane as regards their recovery.
We maintain, upon ample experience, that anywhere than here
religious ideas will have more influence, and will be better re-
ceived. Besides, it is obvious that the future comfort of the
insane only depends upon the manner in which each of us shall
comprehend his duties towards them, and very little indeed
upon the moral compression and the physical continence that
can be exercised over them.
Thus, what nature and charity exact, actual civilization can-
not yet give; for it does not admit the rights of the insane, or the
obligations which these impose upon us. Our epoch is therefore
but one of transition, during which, if we seek to do good, we
must not fear to deviate from the boundaries that private
interests and the ruling egoism might counsel us to respect.
Let us then tell the truth : the reform of the government of the
insane is far from being capable of being arrested ; it is yet but
at the beginning of its work ; the public conscience has not yet
spoken ; and certain learned men, still in error, seek only for
means of restraint to obtain the cure of insanity; whilst gentle-
ness, patience, a country life, and the resources of medicine might
suffice. Actually, as Dr Eamaer proves, we have substituted for
the old methods of violence, others as cruel, but analogous to
the first. Now, without wishing in this article to enter into
therapeutics, we may say, that the question for science to deter-
mine is, whether, yes or no, isolation shall be accompanied by
physical and moral restraint ?
In the rapid review of the practice of different countries, we
shall have the opportunity of comparing the methods employed
with that followed at Gheel, a Belgian village. We shall prove
how the free air of the country, the contemplation of nature,
agricultural labour, and especially family life enjoyed amongst
good and simple country-folk, constitute a moral and natural
medication more consistent with true civilization than any other.
Peasants perform through zeal, through the traditions of ex-
ample, through necessity, perhaps, what we ought to do through
duty, and conviction of the resulting benefits. Let us hope then
that the future will solve what still causes the insane to be
excluded from the circle of humanity.
According to Reid, it was towards ] 803 that the barbarism
of ancient times began to lose its intensity in Germany ; before
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 34-5
this epocli, he says, we shut up the insane like malefactors, in
the cells discovered in old dilapidated prisons, which had long
become the habitual dwelling of owls ; or else, in order not to
hear them, we hid them in the belfries of the communal towers,
or m the cellars of houses of correction, wherever, in short, no
look of compassion could find them. At the present day, adds
Mr. Ramaer, in the memoir above cited, there exists in Germany
no public establishment whose regulations forbid the abolition of
methods of violent repression, and in which, on the other hand,
we do not find the prejudice in favour of their necessity rooted
in the mind of the superintendent. The strong arm-chair, the
rotatory apparatus, the bonds and fetters of every kind, douches,
strait-waistcoats, &c., constitute the basis of the penal code in
force. Lastly, many of these establishments are of a mixed
kind ; that is, appropriated of the reception of correctional delin-
quents as well as of the insane.
In this country philosophical and religious opinions have not
been without influence on the condition of the insane. Thus,
when transcendental metaphysics reigned in its schools, the
question of first causes, and of their influence upon the human
mind, was discussed ; it was then that Dr Heinroth?a learned
physician, be it admitted?pretended that mental diseases drew
their principle from the community between the human soul and
the Devil; which, according to him, admirably explained why
the insane are neither free nor reasonable. He believed himself
thus authorised to deliver his patients from this possession, and
for this purpose he employed correctional wards, furnished with
all the machines and engines necessary for this expurgation. He
recommended that in eacli ward should be placed four execu-
tioners for two hundred lunatics. Another physician, Licliten-
berg, pretended that blows with a stick was equally useful in the
treatment of insanity ; because the soul is then forced to cling
firmly to the positive world. Lastly, a certain Dr Piclit asserted
that two or three blows with a birch stick worked wonders in
the cure of insanity.
At the present day all Germany condemns these cruelties; and
nothing that we can say can equal the force with which this
system is repelled by alienist physicians. As to those abstract
discussions upon the question of knowing if insanity depends
upon a state of sin,?if the soul can be sick,?if the body and the
soul can be in relation with spirits or the Devil,?all these have
vanished from amongst psychiatric physicians worthy of the
name, because they are more capable of probing the wounds
produced either by the brutality of materialism, as well as the
insanity and the perversion of a mysticism that only seeks to
traffic upon humanity.
346 ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
In this vast empire the first reforms were effected by the
celebrated Langerman; they first penetrated the asylum of
Sonnenstein, in Saxony. However, it is only since 1820 that
new asylums, built according to the rules of art and the ideas of
the day (which exact a crowd of compartments and divisions?the
despair of architects and classifying physicians)?it was only then
that these asylums were erected at Schleswig, Siegburg, Heidel-
berg, Prague, Vienna, &c. The patients were divided into two
categories, the curable and incurable; lastly, in order to secure
method and tranquillity, they were further subdivided into
violent, quiet, half-quiet, dirty, idiots, and convalescents.
Thousands of plans were contrived to discover the ? of a good
classification. Every alienist physician of any repute must
even travel a long time, and visit the principal asylums of
Europe to detect the indications in all the imaginable forms of
straight lines and curves, but he will take especial care not to
visit Gheel, where the difficulty is completely overcome. How-
ever, the establishments which Ave have just cited are remark-
able for their excellent organization ; they contain schools,
libraries, gymnasia, recreationary wards, &c.
In general, German physicians practise but sparingly a system
imagined some years ago in England, by which all restraint was
abolished,?called in consequence, the"non-restraint" system.*
They pretend that this is an Utopia in an enclosed establishment,
and that no discipline is possible without material means of
repression ; not to speak of cases of acute mania and of violent
dementia, in which restraint is indispensable. It appears, in-
deed, difficult to suppose that, in a large assemblage of patients,
idiots and epileptics, all more or less irritated, from being confined,
it is possible to establish order by means of exhortations, or
by appealing to the affections of maniacs. However this may
be, all writers in our day are agreed in declaring that Germany
is the model country for medical treatment (?). We find there
registers in which are recorded the history of the affections of
each patient?the symptoms, diagnosis, prognosis; the prescrip-
tions, and daily visits of the physicians are so recorded, that the
recovery or autopsy come, so to speak, to approve or condemn
the methods pursued. It is plain that in such a manner science
may make true progress, and that the patient derives a real
benefit. What an interval between this broad spirit of exami-
nation and appreciation of things and those conditions, paltry
and discreditable, which aro sometimes associated with the
functions of alienist physicians in certain countries ! Who
would believe that there exist establishments in which the physi-
* This term indicates the negation of an evil. Free air is the affirmation of a
good.
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 347
cian is required to take charge of two or three hundred patients
for five or six hundred francs a year ! In Germany, there is for
every ayslum an adequate number of physicians to allow each
of them to institute a conscientious examination of the patients,
to study the new cases, and lastly, to keep themselves on a level
with the science they are called upon to practise. We are con-
vinced that the result is material and moral benefit for asylums
honourably conducted.
From what we have just related, it follows that in Germany,
as everywhere else, the insane were for a long time abandoned,
or, at least, much neglected. From this fact it may be concluded
that the development of civilization lias been long and slow ; and
also that it will not stop in the path of ameliorations and their
consequences. No country can count a greater number of learned
psychologists, such as Ideler, Bergman, Damerow, Guisenger,
Fleming, Roller, Tessen, Nasse, Jacobi, Droste, Laehr, Erlen-
meyer, Eulenberg, &c. &c. Private asylums have been esta-
blished for the easy classes, and in these, we may be assured, the
family life is perfectly applied to the treatment of insanity ; we
find there united all the cares and luxuries that lessen pain and
restraint; such as the asylums of MM. Tessen, at Hornheim,
of MM. Engelken, at Obernenland, and at Rockwinkel, near
Bremen ; of M. Erlenmeyer, at Bendorf, near Coblentz, &c.
If, then, the insane have had to wait a long time for amelio-
rations, they now possess them in as complete a form as the
current ideas will allow. Why did we need so many centuries
for this ? Must this delay be attributed to the ancient rudeness
of the Northern people,?to the simplicity of their manners ?
It is perhaps difficult to say, but this is how we understand it :
during the lono- series of years that peoples take to settle them-
selves in a country, during what is called their youth, in the
midst of wars or great works, which assure for them a material
and political existence, alienation is rarely produced ; movement
seems to carry off and destroy the germ of this disease ; it is
only after a long time that man has been able to apply himself
to the cultivation of his intellect, of his destiny, of the arts and
sciences; and then it appears. New Avants then arise ; the
external combat, from material that it was, becomes internal and
moral; suffering arrives, and long years elapse before the abuses
of the first institutions, founded upon force and the right of
conquest, are replaced by those which have for their foundation
reason and duty. This eternal struggle of the mind and matter
then begins, in the order and value of political and religious
institutions. Then the time comes when minds are exalted;
then the intellect is exhausted, the passions are excited, and all
this often in relation with sufferings which have induced a dege-
348 ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
neration of the organism, of the temperaments and of manners.
Then insanity breaks out; but can it be said that civilization is
the cause ? No ; it is a period of struggling that we must pass
through; it extends to the interests of humanity. It even
happens that the system of public and private education has
become so imperfect that it no longer answers to the real wants,
and only serves to prepare deceptions for those who enter the
different careers open to the activity of man. Yes ; these times;
are times of transition, which bring evils that civilization
will destroy. In result, it appears that the number of lunatics
has much increased ; but let us compare epochs with each other,
and we shall have the conviction that insanity is, after all, only
in proportion with a more numerous population more instructed,
and which demands far other things than contented it in former
times ; thenalso this disease was rare,?it remained ignored, and
received aid from no one.
Let us open history, and we shall see that the same nature,
the same country is not always able to oppose the same re-
sistance to morbific causes, physical or moral. Nations traverse
phases of development and of decay. Who shall say, therefore,
that the civilization of humanity does not advance ? We believe
that causes may act unfavourably on certain countries, especially
when the ferments of the future appear to be everywhere in
action, without accusing civilization.
As to the treatment of insanity in Germany, it was null for
centuries. Griesinger, the learned Professor of Tubingen, saj^s
in one of his works, that once within the walls of one of the
prisons devoted to lunatics, a man never came out again. For
more than thirty years this state of things has ceased; and, if it
is later that in other countries the care of these diseases has
been undertaken, this arises from the fact that with this people,
so profoundly reflective, ideas had outstripped the means of
executing reforms.
As we have said, physicians were the first who effected reform ;
we do not, however, assert that the initiative entirely depended
upon them, or that reform was solely due to their zeal. It
must be admitted that, in their epoch, reform existed in the
ideas of the mass. Every one knows that at the end of the last
century nearly all institutions were regenerated ; at this epoch
of investigation and of labour, a question so important as that of
the security of personal liberty could not be overlooked. Every-
thing was examined ; and a generous physician, the celebrated
Pinel, aided by a man not less meritorious, the administrator
Poussin, profited by the opportunity to ameliorate the lot of
those upon whom a cloistral life was imposed. The great prin-
ciple of division of labour had just been recognised as indis-
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 349
pensable in medical science, and it came to pass that the
splendid specialities we have cited above were soon brought
forth. Then insanity, that abject disease, until this period
attaching itself to that new science which these men had
created, ended by acquiring an importance of its own. In
reflecting well, it was suspected that it was possible to fall into
insanity very honourably. In fact, the amelioration of the lot
of nations often depends upon individual efforts; but it had
hitherto been forgotten. How costly, then, these efforts had been
to those predestined workers in the progress of science and the
arts. No one had related how many of these men had lost their
reason in this gigantic labour?not through pride, as we liear
the vulgar say, but as the consequence of their exertions, and
often because they had to undergo the deceptions of their con-
temporaries. How many statues have since been erected to
celebrated madmen ! Byron, convinced of this fact, asserted
that the less of folly the less from above. Well, civilization
still wants devoted men. Genius will still be unappreciated ;
excellent inventions will still lead to misery and sickness ! Are
we to say, for this, that we must remain where we are, and then
fall back ?
It is intelligible that in their first application, the Good, the
True, Liberty, may have been the cause of the loss of a crowd of
men; but Evil, under the shapes of ignorance and despotism,
have destroyed many more, and without any compensation
whatever. Progress, in her march, tries every method. The
legitimate desire of attaining truth has led to miscalculations ;
but it is no reason why human activity should stop itself, because
some men faint under the load ! Happy those who prove useful
to humanity; their mission has been fulfilled. But, after all, this
loss is but of trifling moment when compared with the advan-
tages that the future will gain from it. One day the good will
preponderate. It is in necessity that all sciences take their rise;
it is for good that all the means of Providence are legitimate,
although we cannot always follow the windings she takes to
reach her goal. Thus, to return to our subject. Psychiatry was
born, and must serve to combat those diseases which, according
to certain persons, are augmenting with our tending to civiliza-
tion?that is, towards good. It is at least a consolation in these
difficulties to think that it will yield us the secret that will dry
up the source of these diseases.
It is interesting to study what a great nation like France has
done for the cause of the insane, since the epoch of Pinel
whilst following her course towards civilization.
Very distinguished French alienists have published many
works and memoirs oil insanity. They have also described with
350 ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
care the principal public establishments of Paris and the depart-
ments. Many of these last are, according to these reports,
improved, and have become in a measure model asylums; but
they are not numerous or extensive enough to receive all the
sick. In this respect the French law of 1839 has remained a
dead letter. Colonies of lunatics would therefore be a blessing.
Here we must clearly understand the meaning of the word
civilization ; for France has always arrogated to herself the most
advanced civilization, and the belief in her own intellectual and
social pre-eminence has never ceased to prevail. One of her
celebrities, M. Guizot, has indeed affirmed in his Lectures, that
this pretension is philosophically legitimate. Every people, he
says, recognizes the charm of the social relations, the gentle-
ness of manners, the easy life, and at the same time the intel-
lectual development of the French nation ; no one disputes the
qualities which distinguish Frenchmen : but is this the kind of
civilization that is to better the lot of the insane ?* No ; for it is
easy to perceive in the works referred to above, that even in
France the alienists are obliged to submit to every kind of oppo-
sition from the Administration, from its jealousy, its bad will,
and especially from the neglect to which a crowd of lunatics are
even yet consigned. Would it be believed, for example, that
some unhappy beings are unable to reach the asylum common
to four or five departments alive ? Where is the recognition and
the practice of duty here ; and of what avail in such a case are
the superiority and the charm of social relations ?
The French Government ought to profit by the possession of
so many earnest psychological physicians ; and yet, read the pro-
grammes of her medical schools?you will not meet with a single
course in which that instruction is officially given. As for the
advantages of which M. Guizot speaks, they are really of little
importance. Moreover, they no longer belong exclusively to
any nation, and it seems to us inaccurate to pretend that in
France the individual and society have equally progressed
towards moral, intellectual, and material perfection. Every
nation strives to reach this ; let us hope that one day the com-
mon end will be attained, for it is on this triple condition that
depends the diminution of our infirmities.
Chateaubriand has said that civilization does not describe a
perfect circle, nor move in a straight line ; it is, he says, on the
earth like a ship at sea : beaten by the tempest, this ship makes
her way, regains her course, falls sometimes below the point
whence she set sail; but in the end, she meets with fair winds,
and every day makes good something on her true course ; and,
lastly, makes the port for which she was bound. Let us not be
deceived: display, luxury, the theatrical pomp of public cere-
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
351
monies, are no certain signs of civilization and happiness; they
rather hide a deep abyss when the moral element does not pro-
tect them. Truly, the material conditions of well-being are
indispensable in order to bring forth the spiritual and moral
germ implanted in us ; but nothing must be exaggerated in what
surrounds it, either in the physical or moral conditions; super-
fluity may injure as much as misery, which strangles the mind.
How many false impressions (the source of many misfortunes,
of insanity itself) have remained in the brains of those puppets
that luxury delights to fashion !
Some authors have maintained that man in his natural state
has only simple tastes, and few wants ; but that from the moment
that he civilizes himself, he acquires by this fact a mass of wants,
engendering in their turn pains which may lead to folly. Is it
then the want of the enjoyments and the riches of false civiliza-
tion which makes insanity more frequent in our time ? If that
were true, we must despair of humanity ; but this mode of
reasoning seems to us false. If man only felt those wants to
which his organs give rise, he might content himself, like animals,
with the enjoyments which they give ; but his intelligence, his
feelings, his voluntary activity, revert to him the enjoyments of
the mind and of the heart: those are the enjoyments he prefers.
If lie abuse his intellectual and moral faculties, if he exaggerate
his organic instincts, if despotism brutalize him, he certainly
creates for himself fictitious wants or shameful enjoyments, which
will alter his sensibility, or give him a sickly exaltation.- Hap-
piness, as the vulgar understand it. blunts the feelings and the
mind; and every day we see men exhausted ready to fall into
melancholy.
We might then conclude, from what precedes, that amongst
the causes which lead to insanity there are material and imma-
terial ; that they may take their origin in the social and indus-
trial relations, in the mode of instruction, in the religious
relations, and' lastly in moral error and organic degeneration.
It is then the conscience or the organism, which, primarily
attacked, react on the indissoluble link of mind and body.
Thus, for example, misery vilifies the body in order to degrade
the mind, whilst moral perversion kills the mind and heart first
before destroying the brain by dementia.
France alone still possesses, as far as we know, the glory of
having seen arise a medico-psycliological society, composed of
illustrious philosophers and physicians. This society is the
most solid guarantee that reform will continue her work in that
country. One of its members, M. Moreau (de Tours), after
having examined the colony of Gheel, has publicly announced
his desire to see a similar colony bestowed upon France. He
NO. VI.?NEW series. a a
352 ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
declares, in his medical letters, that Gheel approaches nearest to
the ideal of perfection in the treatment of the insane. The opinion
of this savant, who has made a special study of the relative
value of all the European establishments, is most precious. He
has done us the honour to repeat it in these terms:?" I say it,
and repeat it again, what I said fifteen years ago, there is no
asylum that is worth a good colony, and in every country it
is possible to colonise the insane." In 1840, M. Moreau feared
that this establishment, unique in the world, would be destroyed ;
at the present moment, administrative difficulties might bring
about that result; so that the following phrase, borrowed from
his letters upon Gheel, is still appropriate :?" If I pronounce
myself so openly in favour of the colony; if I endeavour
to preserve it from a ruin that some critics more than severe,
some unfavourable reports, have rendered imminent, I am anxious
that my sentiments, the nature of the convictions upon which
I act, should not be misunderstood. Gheel is, after all, but the
imperfect realization of a theoretical idea, for which I preserve
all my interest, all my consideration/' That also is our opinion.
To render Gheel perfect, at least as far as possible, it would be
necessary to withdraw the government of the insane from the
direction of certain mayors of villages ; it would be necessary to
concentrate the power in the hands of a chief physician and a
director. Nothing was more easy; immense heaths offered
every facility for the establishment of an infirmary out of the
reach of certain avaricious men, who for many years have traf-
ficked upon the lunatics and their nurses. Thus, a learned man,
remarkable for his works and the independence of his mind,
asserts that Gheel may be reproduced in every country. Con-
vinced of this truth, he presented to the International Congress
of Beneficence, held in 185G, at Brussels, the following propo-
sition :?" To encourage the establishment of colonies of health
for the indigent insane, asylums in free air, in which family life
should be offered, as the best curative means of insanity." The
Congress could not take up a question very secondary amongst
those which then waited and still wait for solution, such as that
of the means of subsistence, from an economico-political point of
view?of pauperism, of emigration, &c. But it received a favour-
able attention in the section, when it was necessary to vote twice
in order to adjourn it to the next Congress. In fact, this ques-
tion is more important than is imagined ; it is a question of the
liberation of a considerable number of prisoners, of substituting
a productive labour for idleness, to divert public assistance from
the erection and maintenance of those immense asylums which
England, the United States, and other countries exhibit. We
do not despair that soon free colonies, like Gheel, will bo esta-
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 353
blislied in Germany, France, Russia, and perhaps even in England:
nothing is more easy wherever there exist uncultivated lands
and sparse populations: the attempt of free colonization will
reduce to nothing all the objections which the enemies of this
system have heaped together.* Besides, it is easy to understand
how persons of good faith are in error, if they admit, without
examination, the opinion of the celebrated Esquirol, who, seeing.
nothing but the necessity of removing the insane from the scene
where they had contracted their disease, had said that a lunatic
asylum is an instrument of cure, and that in the hands of a
skilful physician it is the most powerful therapeutic agent. It
is conceivable that isolation in the country, in the midst of a
family ordered ad hoc, and under the direction of a physician
equally skilful, oilers much greater advantages.
In France, asylums have assumed forms which no longer re-
semble those gloomy prisons or hospitals, in which formerly one
drew back, in order to take in the horrible spectacle, that of fury
and disorder, produced by the amalgamation of all human miseries.
At present Bicetre, La Salpetriere, Charenton, St. Yon, Mar?-
ville, Auxerre, and under the direction of the Ferrus, Par-
chappe, Baillarger, Moreau, Girard, Benaudin, Calmeil, Lelut,
Falret, &c. &c., has become a monument erected to the relief of
sick men. We will say further, that many private asylums
approach the free establishments, which they imitate as far as
possible by the sj'stem of family life. Such are the asylums of
MM. Yoisin and Falret at Vannes ; that of M. Brierre de Bois-
mont, a learned psychologist at Paris ; that at Passy, under the
direction of Dr Blanche, &c.
In France, as in Belgium; in Germany, as in England, there
remain lacunae, that many alienists have pointed out It would
be necessary? .
1st. To encourage studies, by creating in schools of medicine,
or in the universities, chairs of psychological medicine and
cliniques for those diseases.
2nd. To assign the direction of lunatic establishments to
especial physicians, and to nominate clinical teachers in the
more important public asylums.
3rd. To make it imperative that the public and private esta-
blishments should be situated out of towns; that they should be
sufficiently extensive to offer to the insane distractions, agri-
cultural works, and gardening ; that they should be well kept,
and under the responsibility of a physician charged with the
hygienic and medical superintendence, as well as with the general
direction.
4th. To form country colonies for the insane, possessing a
* These enemies are not all disinterested in the question.
A A 2
354< ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
therapeutical centre, under the direction and inspection of an
administrative physician.
Why create chairs of psychiatry ?
Because, out of one hundred young physicians, hardly ten will
trouble themselves of their own motion about this branch of
medicine. Rarely will the remaining nine-tenths be in a posi-
tion to recognise the development of a mental disease and its
origin, although it is often only in that period that cure is pos-
sible. Hence proceed the irremediable cases that alienists are
called upon to treat at a later stage.
Why make physicians the responsible administrators ?
Why appoint physicians as clinical chiefs in the great esta-
blishments ?
Because this is the only means of keeping in the van interests
which at first sight appear distinct, but which practice soon
recognises to be intimately connected; interests which the admi-
nistrator must appreciate in a medical point of view, as well as
the clinical chief must do in their applications.
Proved men, like the chief physicians, can and ought certainly
to exercise the most absolute authority in a lunatic asylum, in
order to possess all the means of action upon mental disease ;
and the physician alone is capable of judging of the opportunity
for administrative measures relating to the insane.
Why ought all public and private lunatic establishments to bo
situated in the country ?
Because it is there only that the family life can be realised
suitably for the insane, who need air and space to act without
danger to any one, and especially to be removed from the circum-
stances which surrounded the onset of this disease. These esta-
blishments would be therapeutical centres, which would have
farms as subsidiary establishments. The rich would find these
distractions, and the poor would work in the fields.
The air of the fields, as says one of the princes of science,
Alexander von Humboldt, is the first and best therapeutical
agent. Hero are his words, extracted verbatim from his cele-
brated work, Kosmos:?"The simple contact of man with nature,
that influence of open air?or as other languages have it, in a
more beautiful expression, of free air?exert a soothing power,
they soften pain, and allay the passions, when the soul is agitated
in its utmost depths/' This true and noltlo remark of Humboldt
dispenses us from saying another word in favour of colonies,
which we maintain to be the holy ark of the cure of insanity.
Who will not be struck with the coincidence of the first reform
of the penitentiary system of the insane in France and in
England? It was in 1792 that the celebrated Quaker, Samuel
Tuke, was the first to effect a reform in a new asylum established
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 355
by him near York. The mental disease of George III. had
contributed to fix attention on the treatment of insanity. The
physicians of the King disputed amongst themselves; discus-
sions took place in the House of Commons and the House of
Lords;?all this revealed that psychological studies had made
little progress, and that the condition of the insane was most
wretched. It is impossible to picture to ourselves the barbarity
with which these last were treated.
Later, Parliament instituted several inquiries?in 1815, 1816,
and 1827?in consequence of which St. Luke's and Bethlem were
ameliorated. At length, England, after having erected admi-
rable asylums in different counties, and exhausted all the modi-
fications of the system of seclusion, about ten years back inau-
gurated a new system?that of " non-restraint"?invented, it
appears, by Dr Charlesworth, claimed by Dr Hill, but princi-
pally put in practice by Dr Conolly, formerly chief physician to
Hanwell. In this system, the object is not to aggravate the
condition of the patient by mechanical restraint. Immediately,
satirical attacks were poured forth in France against what ap-
peared prima facie an impossibility. Liberty of action, when
one is maniacal or demented; union, order, peace, amongst
maniacs or melancholies ; all detained in spite of themselves in
an asylum ! It seems, indeed, that the necessities of a closed
asylum compel us to certain small violences?to some means of
physical or moral control. As to the basis of the question, of
what importance is the form of restraint ??be it a barred or a
padded cell, handcuffs, or a strait waistcoat?that matters little.
But, according to our opinion, the good of this reform must
consist in the principle of gentleness, which must necessarily be
employed. The cares and the patience of which the insane have
been the object must also have reacted profoundly on the admi-
nistration and moral organization of the establishments when
this principle is employed. In England, it seems that alienists
are still more or less divided as to its value. The Commissioners
in Lunacy distributed a circular to all the alienist-physicians, in
order to elicit their practical opinion in a report upon the ques-
tion of the application or rejection of the "non-restraint" system
-and of "solitary confinement." In conclusion, the Commissioners
felt themselves compelled to establish that the suppression of
means of restraint was only a question of money?that is to say,
that straps and mechanical means of restraint must be replaced
by a numerous staff of attendants. They admitted, however,
with the greater number of alienists, that cellular seclusion may
be necessary during the paroxysms of mania, &c. Dr Forbes
Winslow, the editor and distinguished founder of the Psycholo-
gical Journal, opposes the somewhat too exclusive conclusions
356 ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY.
of the Commissioners. He thinks that the treatment of an insane
person ought, like that of a person not insane, not to depend
upon abstract and preconceived ideas; that we must act, accord-
ing to the medical indications, with conscientiousness, honour,
and firmness, without any other consideration than the aim of
being useful. We completely approve these ideas; they are
quite applicable to the " free-air" system, in which all the neces-
sary precautions are taken to prevent a patient from doing injury
to himself or others.
However, it cannot be denied that the principle of sequestra-
tion and of medical isolation has sometimes furnished to crime
the favourable opportunity of accomplishing its objects over the
fortunes, if not over the lives, of those who had been incarce-
rated. The " free-air" system can never lend itself to this; and
this is an immense guarantee. Be it indifference or error,
sequestration has ruined a crowd of persons whose nervous dis-
positions had by this means been rendered altogether insane. A
man who might have recovered in a few days in the country, has
ended by losing his reason behind the bars of his cell! The
treatment of the curable and incurable in the system of seclu-
sion admits but of little difference ; it is, at bottom, the peniten-
tiary system of seclusion that rules over the medical treatment.
What must we think at the present day, on seeing those endless
combinations in order to arrive at cells which resemble the large
cages of menageries, and barred beds which resemble the gridiron
of St. Lawrence,. &c.? All this is invented to subdue, to break
the spirit of the patient, who, for the most part, has but too
keen a sense of the misfortune that weighs upon him. Honour,
then, to England, which has introduced a principle which can
only lead to the " Free Air" and the " Family Life." The greater
number of those immense asylums, in her bosom and in Ame-
rica, look from afar off liko giants destined to swallow up their
populations! ,
In " non-restraint" thero remain, it is said, no more straps,
straitwaistcoats, cells. So be it; but for the convalescents,
the periodical lunatics, peaceful maniacs, the melancholic, the
weak-minded, there aro ever and always lawns, galleries, and
gardens, in which they wander ceaselessly, without finding a
friend to guide them in the night of their intelligence. How
different from what passes in the families where the lunatic is
admitted into ordinary life. The father, the mother, the child-
ren, the servants of the house surround him, take care of him,
and continually direct his feelings, his affections, his ideas.
Compare what passes in the cottage of a peasant, or in the house
of a citizen who receives a lunatic at Ghcel, were it oven a
foreigner whose language they could not understand ! Behold
ON CIVILIZATION AND INSANITY. 357
here medical isolation complete ! It is a society, small indeed,
very simple, not versed in all the artificial ceremonies of towns :
at the first they must communicate by signs; hut there is the
beneficent activity of the mind?it is life, in fact. The attention
is turned aside from bitter memories and forced to new wants.
In the end sympathy is established, and the lunatic may perhaps
again be restored to humanity.
The greater number of alienists who advocate the system of
seclusion, pretend that the patients have often no wish for
communication Avith the world; they want complete repose of
mind in certain cases, and in others the discipline of the cloister.
This may be necessary for a brief space; but then how much
greater is the peace of mind in the open air, how much more
active and more natural is the solitude of the fields, heaths, and
springs !
Before concluding, let us say, that free life for the insane has
already its defenders and partisans. All the foreign physicians
who visited Gheel have expressed their admiration of the esta-
blishment, and their regret at seeing that this ancient colony is
not yet completely organized; and especially that an infirmary,
worthy of the name, and in proportion to the number of the
insane, has not yet been constructed, although the law and the
regulations which prescribe it are more than six years old!
Dr Droste, of Osnabriick, has developed, in an article in the
journal edited by him, the mode of existence of the insane at
Gheel, their wants, the absence of organization of the medical
service, and the deplorable state of the administration. The
rectitude of mind of this writer, his frank generosity, so well
known to his numerous readers in Germany, double the value of
his approbation. Dr Moreau de Tours, of whom we have
already spoken, approves of the colony in these words: " Every-
where I have penetrated beneath the roof destined, by public
charity or by private speculation for the abode of the insane. I
have seen nothing analogous to Gheel."
In Italy, Dr Biffi, of Milan, declares that this colony is
destined to execute on a large scale a great reform in the treat-
ment of the most terrible of maladies; and that it would be folly
to think that this could be accomplished without organizing
there a medical body capable of leading the way in this im-
portant attempt. It is this experience that science and humanity
claim from so advanced a nation as Belgium.
Dr John Webster, of London, who has, more than any other
physician, engaged himself in describing the asylums of the
Continent, was much pleased with his visit to.Gheel; and his
opinion too will shortly be published in the Psychological
Journal.
358 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
Lastly, Dr Willis directs, as it appears, a " Free Air" asylum at
Great Ford, in England. Dr Jessen directs a similar house at
Hornheim, in Holstein: the patients even go to execute errands,
and walk in Kiel. MM. Falret and Yoisin possess one at
Yanvres, near Paris, which approaches nearly to what we may
regard as belonging to the system whose excellence we have
attempted to describe.
In writing these lines we have discharged a duty of conscience.
It is possible that error may have slipped in involuntarily under
our pen; but never can that pen describe the torments that we
have witnessed, and yet exist, in the cells and yards so strongly
as they have been felt!
To resume. We believe that civilization advances only when
egoism and falsehood retreat in the social world. This move-
ment is evidently going on ; if not in all countries, at least here
and there. And this progress cannot be better measured than
in the development of duty in the public conscience, especially
towards the infirm and the insane, who might be deceived almost
with impunity, if the moral sense did not everywhere interdict.
The insane, then, are the dumb victims of our unworthiness, or
the living witnesses of the doerree of our true civilization.
