Proposed Scheme to Establish A Society for the Protection and Cure of Invalids In Belgium
==========================================================================================

One of our most distinguished physicians, Doctor Parigot, has written to us
on the subject of establishing a Society, the object of which would be to organize,
on a large and original basis, the treatment of certain chronic diseases, which
often resist individual care. We think it right to place M.Parigot's views before
our readers, although we do not know whether they be capable of realization
in our country: even admitting that this should not be the case, some sug-
gestions of a practical nature may possibly arise from their perusal, aud
with this hope before us, we think they will be found worthy of attentive
consideration.
The principle of association has become in our age the solution of every
problem of general interest, and before which the efforts of individual action
sccin powerless. In spite of this recognised principle, no one has yet thought
NO. VIII.?NEW SEEIES. 3 H
820 PROPOSED SOCIETY FOR THE PROTECTION
of applying it towards the cure of those diseases which afflict humanity.
Surely an undertaking, the aim of which would be to procure every means
of cure and protection, ought to deserve our unanimous sympathy.
A powerful and extensive Society alone could unite these curative means
under one single administration; the difficulty consists in creating these
means, and causing them to operate towards the well-being of a large number
of invalids. To attain this end, an institution which might justly claim the
title of a Society for the Protection of Invalids, would, in the hrst place, unite
at fixed cpochs the most celebrated medical men of our country, to which
reunions they might invite those of Germany, England, France, Holland, and
other countries. The Socicty would thereby acquire the sympathy of the
entire mcdical world, whose general direction and scientific programme it
could follow, leaving to those immediately interested the right of selecting
those methods which they considered most suitable. At all events, there
would not be found in the establishments of the Society a patient incapable
of being benefited by the Contre-expertise plan of treatment adopted by the
learned conclave, whose knowledge woulu have been derived from various
schools.
It is desirable to notice that a locality amidst which a disease has been con-
tracted, frequently offers, from it s unhealthincss, serious impediments towards
the recovery of a patient; and also that there is nothing which assists the
mcdical treatment of a case more than a change of climate, country, and habits.
But to obtain this assistance, it is nccessary to be rich: consequently in an
exceptional position. Who can travel in tlus age, without possessing a large
fortune, so as to be ensured first-rate mcdical attendance ?
The Protecting Society could alone effect, and at little cost, those thera-
peutical migrations from the towns to the country and the sea, where it would
possess various establishments.
Should the objection be raised that such an enterprise is not of a nature to
excite the attention of capitalists, wc would answer that money has never been
wanting in this country, even for doubtful speculations, when the aim was
anything moral and noble, like that of the Protective Socicty.
Wc will not believe that the wealthy would be found wanting, should their
concurrence be required. Wc will not believe that a Society, such as we
desire to crcatc, would fail in conciliating those two powerful agents of our
century?mind and money; and in order to conciliate them, it would suffice,
011 the one hand, to realize prudently and wisely the curative suggestions of
medical science, and on the other, to administer, with wcll-considcrca cconomy,
our vast urban and rural estates, together with their industrial and agricul-
tural productions.
Since 1830, Belgium has become a great European centre. Every year,
at different periods, sections of scientific mcdical societies meet there from
every part of the old and new worlds. Brussels, Ostcnd, and Spa also rcccive
each year whole colonics of invalids, who come to seek amongst us either
health or salutary distraction. By such persons, intelligent advicc, and localities
suited to their wants, their habits, and their requirements, could not fail in
being appreciated.
Besides, the presence of learned foreigners would be of the greatest avail in
forming congresses of mcdical consultations. These consultations could be
held in the diflcrcnt establishments of the Socicty, and the practical fruit which
must follow such reunions would serve as a line of conduct to the heads of the
sanitary service. Each of them, and the patients especially, would not fail to
understand the advantages of this combination. Eor the future, hopeless cases
will be unknown, as every individual effort of mind as well as of experience
would be combined for the removal of diseases which, hitherto, a restricted
science has considered as incurable. Belgium would thus, again, bccomc the
AND CURE OF INVALIDS IN BELGIUM. 821
first to project a mission of progress in tlie midst of the great surrounding
nations, and she will have made a great step towards the solution of the
problems which arc connected with the sufferings of our humanity.
All our northern medical men prescribe generally for their patients a voyage
to Ostend, and there is no one in our age incapable of appreciating the
advantages of sea-baths in the treatment of many constitutional diseases. It
is also generally known that the influence of sea air and water is most bene-
ficial iu the strumous affections of infancy and youth. Unhappily, the season
lor baths is often too short, on the one hand, to produce a radical effect in the
cure of these affections; 011 the other, the long-continued and necessary
expense alarms many persons, who are thus deprived of a heroic, but too
expensive mode of cure.
To obviate these difficulties, it would be indispensable for the Society to con-
struct in the neighbourhood of Ostend a special establishment, which could
ensure baths at all seasons. It is unnecessary for us to enter here on technical
details : we will content ourselves simply with remarking, that men of science
have considered the undertaking as practicable, and are convinced that its
execution would not necessarily occasion an enormous outlay. Large and
elegant apartments, whose view would be only bounded by the horizon of the
sea; others less extensive, but equally comfortable; halls for gymnastic exercises;
saloons for assemblies; music; lectures, scientific as well as literary; also
covered basins, in which salt water, sufficiently heated, could be adapted to the
use of invalids and delicate persons, as also private bathing-rooms; finally,
nothing need be omitted that can contribute to the cure or relief of the
patients, cither by medical treatment directed to their bodies, or by those
pleasurable abstractions which exert their influence through the medium of the
mind: a system, in short, which would render this establishment one of the
most interesting institutions of Belgium. But there are seasons in the year
when the sea and its vicinity assume in our country a cold and melancholy
aspect?added to which, a too lengthened residence near it would end in pro-
ducing a contrary cfl'cct to the one intended. Amongst the conditions essential
to the curc of chronic diseases, will be found that ot living, either in town or
country, under a warm atmosphere. But where can we find in Belgium a mild
and unvarying climatc throughout the winter season? This question has been
amply discusscd, and partly decided by an article in the Journal de Medecine de
?Bnuelles; and it is stated that the portion of our country callcd Belgic Lor-
raine, but which the Prcnch designate Provence Beige, and which is situated
at the foot and between the acclivities of the Ardennes, oilers many localities
where the temperature is higher and milder than that of any other part of
Belgium. The cause of this difference is easily understood: these localities
are, as it were, conccaled by a curtain of mountains ; they are protected against
the north and east winds as entirely as is found to be the case with the Downs
on the southern coast of the Isle of Wight, which affords to the traveller an
artificial climate, very similar to that bordering on the Mediterranean. In the
charming valleys hid in the depths of the Ardennes, covered gardens would
complete the metamorphosis of the climate, and render the residences in these
localities very advantageous in treating affections of the lungs, diseases which
a well-understood treatment can either allay or curc. Every year we see
numbers of alllucnt persons betake themselves to distant, but warm, climates ;
oftcu they quit their families and their occupations with regret: to them, the
Society would offer at small cost, and only some hours' travelling, all that they
arc driven to seek many hundreds of miles hence.
The Protecting Society, in order to accomplish its end, would be necessitated
to purchase large and old domains in the provinces of Namur and Liege, which
arc arranged in some sort so as to accommodate persons accustomed to la vie de
chdteau. 11' the importance of external circumstances were sufficiently csti-
822 INSPECTORS OF LUNACY FOR SCOTLAND.
mated as to their effects on the minds and spirits of certain invalids, it would
be easily understood why the residences should be commodious and decorated
with elegance?why arts and sciences should be cultivated?and why, above all,
the usages of the highest society should always be observed. The Protecting
Society would offer the same advantages to less exacting patients, for whom
villas and even cottages could be adapted.
In this manner, the repose or amusements of the country, or even the occu-
pations of a rustic life, might modify, according to the necessities of each indi-
vidual, those diseases which had resisted other modes of treatment. In the
case of each patient, and whatever might be his mental or physical condition,
he would enjoy the benefit of home life, or that of retirement in the midst of
the pure country air.
With such grounds for stability, the Society could not fail of becoming the
complement of many "etablissements de saute" in Germany and England : in-
deed, nothing would be better calculated to charm convalescents, and to render
the change of country, habits, and language, mainly conducive towards their
recovery.
The Society would retain the power of erecting, in a healthy locality near
Brussels, a large institution for the education of children whose minds, whether
from disease or other causes, were imperfectly developed. Medical men and
special instructors would be placed at the head of this institution, of which
Belgium and other countries are yet deficient. Brussels ought to be the
centre of this Society. One of the large establishments near the city might be
used as the starting-point for our operations. We are convinced that success
would triumphantly demonstrate the practicability of a Society which could
combine so many material and moral advantages.
The formation of this Society would be the realization of a new idea?that of
curing en grand, by means which it would be impracticable to employ indi-
vidually. At all events, the projector can conscientiously apply to himself
those two immortal lines of Camoens, in which he changes only one single
word:?
" Yereis amor da sciencia, nao movido
De premio vil; mas alto, e quasi eterno!"
(From the Journal de l'Independence Beige.)
