Hereditary Influence, Animal and Human
========================================

{From the "Westminster Review.")
The problem of hereditary transmission, physical and moral, although one of
the most interesting of physiological problems, is also one of the most baffling.
In spite of its obscurity, it fascinates the inquirer; perhaps with all the greater
force because of its obscurity, for, as Spinoza truly says, men cease to admire
that which they fancy they understand : turn enirn vulgus rem aliqnam se satis
intclligere existimut mium ipsam von admiratur. The question of hereditary
influence has descended from antiquity encumbered with prejudices and decep-
tive facts, which seemed coercivc anil conclusive, but were in truth only one-
sided ; and encumbered still more with hypotheses formed in ignorancc of
Nature's processes. It has reached us a problem still; every scientific mind
not prepossessed by an hypothesis, nor content to disregard a mass of facts,
must pronounce the answers hitherto proposed deficient in the primary requisite
of comprehending all the phenomena. Nevertheless, answers abound. Every
cattle-breeder, who rises to the height of a theory, has his theory on this com-
plex matter, and acts upon it in the breeding of cattlc and poultry. Every
village gossip, every Mrs. Gamp, has her facts and her opinions, which, in ex-
pansive moments, she delivers with great conlidencc. Every physician has his
theory, especially with reference to the transmission of disease. Even the man
of letters is not without his generalization on the transmission of genius : " all
men of genius," ho tells you, " have had remarkable mothers;" in support of
winch generalization he counts oil' upon his fingers the illustrations whicu occur
to him, perfectly heedless of the mass of cases in which the mothers have not
been remarkable.
The various theories imply variety of interest in the question, and a practical
need for the solution. A subject at once so interesting and important may well
claim some attention from us here; and wc shall endeavour to disengage it
from all technical difficulties, so as to present it in a form intelligible to the
general reader, and to clear up many misconceptions, popular and scientific,
which at present obstruct the question. Dr. Lucas has in two bulky octavos
gathered from far and wide a mass of material, good, bad, and indifferent, with
laudable diligence, but with a want of discrimination not so laudable. He is
erudite, but lie has les defauts do sa qualite. His erudition is utterly uncritical;
? In deference to the complimentary wishes expressed l?y the writer of this abln
article, it is the intention of the Editor of the Psychological Journal to consider at
length, in a future number, the important subject of hereditary influences
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN. 385
and yet it is obvious that the sole value of the cases collected depends on their,
authenticity. It is the common error of erudite men to imagine that quantity
supplies the place of quality. They fancy themselves rich when their purses
are filled with forged notes; and so long as these notes are kept from presenta-
tion at the Bank, their delusion is untroubled. Dr. Lucas lias far too many of
these notes in his purse: the reader must take up his volumes with great
caution. Mr. Orton makes no such erudite display; but he has collected some
curious facts, both from his own experience and from the experience of other
breeders. M. Girou is one of the authorities most frequently referred to by
writers 011 this topic. To vast practical experience in cattle-breeding he adds
very considerable physiological knowledge and force of intellect.
Heritage (I'heredite), or the transmission of physical and mental qualities
from parents to offspring, is one of those general facts of Nature which lie
patent to universal observation. Children resemble their parents. Were this
law not constant, there could be no constancy of Species: the horse might
engender an elephant, the squirrel might be the progeny of a lioness, the tad-
pole of a tapir. The law, however, is constant. During thousands of years
the offspring has continued to exhibit the structure, the instincts, and all the
characteristics of the parents. Every day some one exclaims?as if the fact
surprised him?"That boy is the very image of his father!" yet no one ex-
claims, " How like that pug dog is to its parent!" Boys or pug dogs, all chil-
dren resemble their parents. We do not allude to the fact out of any abstract
predilection for truisms, but simply to marshal into due prominence an impor-
tant truth, on which the whole discussion of heritage must rest. The truth is
this : Constancy in the transmission of structure and character from parent to
offspring, is a law of Nature.
That this truth is not a truism we shall show by at once contradicting, or at
least qualifying it. The very same experience which guarantees the constancy,
also teaches, and with almost equal emphasis, that this constancy is not absolute.
Variations occur. Children sometimes do not resemble their parents; which
accounts for the exclamations of surprise when they do resemble them. Nay,
the children arc sometimes not only unlike their parents, they are, in important
characteristics, unlike their Species. We then call them Deformities or Mon-
sters, because, while their Species is distinguished by having four legs, they
themselves have six or none; while their Species possesses a complex brain,
they arc brainless, or have impcrfcct brains ; while their Species is known by
its clovcn hoofs, they have solid hoofs, and so on.* Dissemblances as great
arc observable in moral characteristics. We see animals of ordinary aptitudes
engender oll'sprin"'sometimes remarkable for their fine qualities, and sometimes
for their imbecility. The savage wolf brings forth occasionally a docile, amiable
cub; the man of genius owns a blockhcad for his son. In the same family we
observe striking differences in stature, aspect, and disposition. Brothers
brought up together in the same nursery, and under the same tutor, will differ
as much from each other as they differ lrom the first person they meet. From
Cain and Abel down to the brothers Buonaparte, the striking opposition of
characters in families has been a theme for rhetoric. Nor is this all. In cases
where the consanguinity maybe said to be so much nearer than that of ordinary
brotherhood, namely, in twins, we see the same diversity ; and this diversity is
exhibited iu those rare cases where the twins have only one body between them.
The celebrated twins ltita and Christinaf were so fused together, that they had
* Flaehsland rapporte que deux <?poux bicn Constitutes mirent au monde trois
enfans sans avant-bras ni jainbes ; d'autres dout parle Schmucker n'eurent que des
enfans munis de douzo orteils et douzo doigts. '?Lurdach, .TraittS de 1 hysioiogic,
"? 264. .. .
t See Geofiroy St. Ililaire, Philosophic Anatomiqre, vol. 11. ; and berres,
Recherches d'Anatomio Transccndante.
G8G HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
only two legs between tliem : two legs and fonr arms and two heads; yet they
were quite different in disposition. The same difference was manifested in the
celebrated Presburg twins, and in the African twins recently exhibited in
London.
It is clear, then, that offspring do not always closely resemble parents ; and
it is further clear, from the diversities in families, that they do not resemble
them in equal degrees. Two brothers may be very unlike each other, and yet
both like their parents; but the resemblance to the parents must, in this case,
be variable. So that when we lay down the rule of constancy in transmission,
we must put a rider on it, to the effect that this Constancy is not absolute, but
is accompanied by a law of Variation. It is the intervention of this law which
makes hereditary influence a problem; without it, heritage would be as absolute
as the union of acids with bases.
Some philosophers have tried to explain the law of constancy in transmis-
sion, and its independence of the law of variation, by maintaining that it is
the Spccics only, not the Individual, which is reproduced. Thus a sheep is
always and everywhere a sheep, a man a man, reproducing the specific type, but
not necessarily reproducing any individual peculiarities. All sheep resemble
cach other, and all men resemble each other, because they all belong to spceilic
types. "What does the reader say to this hypothesis? Burdach, who adopts
it,* adduces his facts: for example, a dog from whom the spleen was cxt irpatcd
reproduced dogs with perfect spleens; an otter, deprived of its fore paws,
produced six young with their legs quite perfect; in a word, "Pidce de
l'cspecc se rcproduit dans le fruit et lui donne des organcs qui manquaient au
perc ou u la mere." The hypothesis has seemed convincing to the majority of
thinkers, but it labours under one fatal objection?namely, Species cannot
reproduce itself, for Species does not exist. It is an entity, an abstract idea,
not a concrete fact. It is a fiction of the understanding, not an object existing
in Nature. The thing Species no more exists than the thing Goodness or the
thing "Whiteness. Nature only knows individuals. A collection of individuals
so closely resembling cach other as all slice]) resemble cach other, arc conve-
niently classed under one general term, named Species; but 1 his general 1 erm has
no objective existence; the abstract or typical sheep, apart from all concrete
individuals, has no existence out of our systems. Whenever an individual
sheep is born, it is the offspring of two individual sheep, whose structures and
dispositions it reproduces; it is not t lie offspring of an abstract idea; it does
not come into being at the bidding of a Type, which as a Species sits apart,
regulating ovine phenomena. The facts of dissemblance between offspring and
larents we shall explain by-and-by; they do not plead in favour 01 Species,
ccausc Spccics is a iigment of philosophy, not a fact. The sooner we disen-
I
gage our Zoology from all such lingering remains of old Metaphysics the better.
Nothing^ but dreary confusion and word-splitting can conic of our admitting
them. Think of the hot and unwise controversies respecting "transmutation
of species," which would have been spared if a clear conception of the meaning
ol Species had been steadily held before the disputants, or if the laws which
regulate^ heritage had been duly considered. In one sense, transmutation of
Species is a contradiction in terms. To ask if one spccics can produce another?
i.e., a cat produce a monkey?is to ask if the offspring do not inherit the orga-
nization ol their parents. We know they do. Wc cannot, conceive if otherwise,
lut the laws ot heritage place the dispute in something of a clearer light, for
the\ teach us that " Species" is constant, because individuals reproduce indi-
viduals closely resembling them, which is the meaning of " Species," and they
also teach us, that individuals reproduce individuals rcrying 111 stiucturc from
themsehes, which Varieties, becoming transmitted as part and parcel of the
parental inllucncc, will, in time, become so great as to constitute a difference
* I'hysioloijio, ii. 2'15.
hereditary influence, animal and human. 387
iij Species. It is in vaiii that the upholders of "fixity of Spccies" assert, that
all the varieties observed arc differences of degree only. Differences of degree
become differences of kind, when the gap is widened: ice and steam are only
differences ol degree ; but they are equivalent to differences of kind. If, there-
lore, "transmutation of Species" is absurd, "fixity of Species" is not a
whit less so. That which does not exist, can neither be transmuted nor
maintained in fixity. Only individuals exist; they resemble their parents, and
they diiler from their parents. Out of these resemblances we create Species,
out of these differences wc crcatc Varieties; we do so as conveniences of clas-
sification, and then believe in the reality of our own figments.
" Les cspeccs," said Buffon, boldly, " sont les seuls ctres dc la nature," and
thousands have firmly believed this absurdity. The very latest work published
on this subject,5* reproduces the dictum, and elaborately endeavours to demon-
strate it. "Les cspeccs sont les formes primitives de la nature. Les individus
n'en sont que des representations, des copies." This was very well for Plato;
but for a biologist of the nineteenth century to hold such language shows a
want of philosophic culture. A cursory survey of the facts should have shown
the error of the conception, if nothing else would. Facts plainly tell us that
the individual and the individual's peculiarities, not those ot the abstract Type,
are transmitted. Plutarch speaks of a family in Thebes, every member of winch
was born with the mark of a spear-head on his body; and although Plutarch
is not a good authority for such a fact, we may accept this because it belongs
to a class of well-authenticated cases. An Italian family had the same sort of
mark, and hence bore the name of La/tsada. Haller cites the case of the
Bentivoglic family, in whom a slight external tumour was transmitted from
father to son, which always swelled when the atmosphere was moist. Again,
the Roman families Nasones, and Buecones, indicate analogous peculiarities;
to which may be added the well-known "Austrian lip" and "Bourbon nose."
All the Barons de Vessiris were said to have a peculiar mark between their
shoulders; and by means of such a mark, La Tour Landry discovered the
posthumous legitimate son of the Baron de Yessins in a London shoemaker's
apprentice. Such eases might be received with an incredulous smile if they
did not belong to a series of indisputable facts noticed in the breeding of
animals. Every breeder knows that the colours of the parents are inherited,
that the spots arc repeated, such as the patch over the bull-terrier's eye, and
the white legs of a horse or cow; and Chambon* lays it down, as a principle
derived from cxpcriencc, that by choosing the parents you can produce any
spots you please. Girou noticed that his Swiss cow, white, spotted with red,
gave five calves, four of which repeated exactly the spots of their mother, the
fifth, a cow-calf, resembling the bull. And do we not all know how succcssful
our cattle breeders have been in directing the fat to those parts of the organism
where gourmandisc desires it ? Have not sheep become moving cylinders of
fat and wool, merely because fat and wool were needed ?
Still more striking arc the facts of accidents becoming hereditary. A superb
stallion, son of Is Glorieux, who came from the Pompadour stables, became
blind from disease : all his children became blind before they were three years
old. Burdach cites the ease of a woman who nearly died from haemorrhage
after blood-letting; her daughter was so sensitive, that a violent haemorrhage
would follow even a trilling scratch; she, in turn, transmitted this peculiarity
to her son. Horses marked during successive generations with red-hot iron in
the same place, transmit the visible traces of such marks to their colts. A dog
had her hinder parts paralysed for several days by a blow; six of her seven
* Cours do Physiologie Comparee, par M. Flourens, 1856. A feeble and inac-
curate book.
t Traite dc 1'Education des Moutons, i. 116-
3SS HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
pups were deformed or excessively weak in their hinder parts, and were drowned
as useless.? Treviranusf cites Blumcnbach's case of a man whose little finger
was crushed and twisted, by an accident to his right hand : his sons inherited
right hands with the little linger distorted. These cases are the more surpris-
ing, because our daily experience also tells us tliat accidental defects arc not
transmitted; for many years it has been the custom to cut the cars and tails of
terriers, and yet terrier pups do not inherit the pointed cars and short tails of
their parents; for centuries men have lost arms and less, without affecting the
limbs of our species. Although, therefore, the deformities and defects of the
parent may be inherited, in general they arc not. For our present argument it
is enough that they are so sometimes.
Idiosyncrasies assuredly belong to the individual, not to the spceics ; other-
wise they would not be idiosyncrasies. Parents with an unconquerable aversion
to animal food, have transmitted that aversion; and parents, with the horrible
propensity for human tlcsh, have transmitted the propensity to children brought
up away from them under all social restraints. Zinnncrmaun cites the case of
a whole family upon whom coffee acted like opium, while opium had no sensible
effect whatever on them; and Dr. Lucas knows a family upon whom the slightest
dose of calomel produces violent nervous tremblings. Every physician knows
how both predisposition to and absolute protection against certain specific
diseases are transmitted. In many families the teeth and hair fall out before
tlic ordinary time, no matter what hygiene be followed. Sir Henry Holland
remarks, " the frequency of blindness as an hereditary affection is well known,
whether occurring from cataract or other diseases ot the parts concerned in
vision. The most remarkable of the many examples known to me, is that ot a
family where four out of live children, otherwise healthy, became totally blind
from amaurosis about the age of twelve; the vision having. been gradually
impaired up to this time. What adds to the singularity of this case is the
existence of some family monument long prior in date, where a female ancestor
is represented with several children around her, the inscription recording that
all the number were blind.But not only arc structural peculiarities trans-
mitted, wc sec even queer tricks of manner descending to the children. The
writer had a puppy, taken from its mother at six weeks old, who although
never taught "to heg" (an accomplishment his mother had been taught), spon-
taneously took to begging for everything lie wanted, when about seven or eight
months old : lie would beg for food, beg to be let out of the room, and one day
was found opposite a rabbit-hutch begging for the rabbits. Unless we are to
suppose all these eases simple coincidences, we must admit individual heritage;
but the doctrine of probabilities will not permit us to suppose them coincident.
Let us take the idiosyncrasy of cannibalism, which may lie safely said not to
appear more than once in ten thousand human beings; if, therefore, we take
one in ten thousand as a ratio, the chances against any man manifesting the
propensity will be ten thousand to one, but the chances against his sou also
manifesting it will be?what some more learned calculator must declare.
Not the Specics, but the Individual, then, we are forced to admit, presides
over heritage; and this will help to explain many puzzling phenomena. Thus
M. Danney made experiments during ten years with rabbits, a hundred couples
being sclcctcd by him with a view to the creation of peculiarities. By always
choosing the parents "d'apres des circonstances individuellcs lixes et toujours
les mcmcs dans certaincs lignees," he succeeded in obtaining a number of mal-
formations according to his preconceived plan. And such experiments have
been repeated on dogs, pigeons, and poultry with like success. It is on this
fact of individual heritage that longevity depends. There is 110 term of life for
* Girou, p. 127. + Biologic, iii. -152.
? Medical Notes and Roflcctionn, p. 2U.
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN. 389
the "specics," only a term for the individual; a fact which sets all the specu-
lations of Cornaro, Hufeland, and Flourens at nought. There are limits which
neither the "specics" nor the individual can be said to pass; 110 man has
been known to live two hundred years ; but the number of years which each
individual^ will reach, without accident, is a term depending neither on the
''specics," nor 011 his own mode of life, but on the organization inherited
from bis parents. Temperance, sobriety, and chastity, however desirable, both
111 themselves and in their effects, will not ensure long life; intemperance,
hardship, and irregularity will not prevent a man living for a century and a
half. The facts are there to prove both propositions. Longevity is an
inheritance. Like talent, it may be cultivated; like talent, it may be per-
verted ; but it exists independent of all cultivation, and no cultivation will
create it. Some men have a talent for long life.
M. Charles Leioncourt published, in IS 12, bis Galerie des Ccntenaires, in
which may be read a curious list of examples proving the hereditary nature of
longevity. In one page we have a day-labourer dying at the age of 10S, his
father lived to 101, bis grandfather to 10S, and his daughter then living had
readied 80. In another we have a saddler whose grandfather died at 112, his
father at 113, aud lie himself at 115 ; this man, aged 113, was asked by Louis
XIV. what lie had done to so prolong life; his answer was?"Sire, since I
was fifty I have acted upon two principles ; I have shut my heart and opened
my wine-cellar." M. Lejoucourt also mentions a woman then living aged 150,
whose father died at 121, ?aud whose uncle at 113. But the most surprising
of the cases cited by Lucas is that of Jean Golembiewski, a Pole, who in 184G
was still living, aged 102, having been eighty years as common soldier, in
thirty-five campaigns under Napoleon, and having even survived the terrible
Russian campaign, in spite of five wounds, and a soldier's recklessness of life.
His father died aged 121, and his grandfather 130. Indeed, the practice of
every annuity and insurance ollicc suffices to convince us of ordinary experience
having discovered that length of life is somehow dependent 0x1 hereditary
inllucucc.
Although instincts, in the general acceptation of the term, may be said to
belong to t he species and to be transmitted with their specific type, we have
abundant evidence of the individual transmission of what are called instinctive
peculiarities, or acquired habits. Thus Girou relates the case of a sporting
dog, taken young from its mother and father, who was singularly obstinate,
and exhibited the greatest terror at every explosion of the gun, which always
excites the ardour of the species. On the owner expressing his surprise to
the gentleman from whom he received the dog, he was told that nothing was
more likely, for the dog's father had the same peculiarity. How the vicious
disposition of horses is transmitted all breeders know. A<pin, we know that
the vice of drunkenness is very apt to be inherited; and that the passion for
gambling is little less so. "A lady with whom I was very intimate," relates
Da Gama Machado, '* and who possessed great wealth, passed her nights in
gaming; she died young, from pulmonary disease. Her eldest son was equally
addicted to play, and lie also died of consumption at the same age as his
mother. His daughter inherited the same passion and the same disease."*
Other and more crapulous vices arc inherited, and arc exhibited in cases where
the early death of the parents, or the removal of the children in infancy, pre-
vents the idea of any imitation or cffect of education being the cause. That
the " thieving propensity" is transmitted from father to son, through genera-
tions, all acquainted with policc-courts know. Gallf has citcd some striking
examples; and that murder, like talent, runs in families, is too notorious to
Jieed illustrations here. Dogs taught to "point" or "set" transmit the talent.
* Thcorie des Resfsemblances, p. 154, quoted by Lucas.
f Fonctions du Cerveau, i. 207.
S90 HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
The American dogs inherit the peculiar cunning necessary to hunt the pcecarr
?without danger. P. Cuvier lias observed that young foxes, in those parts of
the country where traps are set, manifest much more prudcncc than even the
old foxes in districts where they arc less persecuted. Again, birds born in ;i
country inhabited by man inherit their alarm at his presence; but travellers
narrate that the same species encountered on uninhabited islands manifested
110 alarm, and are knocked down as easily as a gentleman in Meet-street; they
soon, however, learn to dread man, and this dread they transmit. As these
last illustrations may be relegated to the vague region of instincts, we will
confine ourselves to more individual and accidental characteristics. Thus
Girou relates how a man known to him had the habit of sleeping on his back,
"with his right leg crosscd over the left; one of his daughters showed the
same peculiarity from her birth, and constantly assumed it in her cradle, in
spite of her swathings. Ycnelte knew a woman who limped with the right
leg; her daughter was born with the same defect in her right leg. Ambrose
Pare noticed that several children who had a peculiar mode of shaking the
head, inherited it from their parents.
The inevitable conclusion from all these facts is, that parents transmit their
individual peculiarities of colour, form, longevity, idiosyncrasy, &c., to their
offspring, and that they do this not as reproducing the .species, but as repro-
ducing their own individual organizations. But now comes the difficult part
of our inquiry:?Which is the predominating influence, that of the male, or
that of the female ? If both parents join to form the child, docs one parent give-
one group of organs, and another parent another group ; or do both give all ?
"Half is his, and lialf is thine : it will be worthy of the two !"
sings the poet.; and the physiologist asks,? Which half?
Speaking of mules, Vieq-d'Azyr says, with proper caution, that " it seems
as it the exterior and the extremities were modified by the father, and that Ihc
visccra emanate from the mother." The reserve with which the great anato-
mist expresses himself has not been imitated by his successors; indeed, men
arc generally averse to uncertainties?they like a decisive opinion, a distinct
formula. Ilencc we have the very popular formula adopted by Air. Orton in
his "Lectures"?"That the male gives the external configuration, or in other
words, flic locomotive organs; while the female gives the internal, or in other
words, the vital organs;" which is generally stated with more scientific pre-
cision thus?"the male gives the" animal system, the female Ihc organic or
vegetative." Very great and authoritative names may be cited in support of
this view; and as all such formulas are the expressions of numerous facts, we
must cxpect to find their advocates powerful in facts to support them. If there
arc facts which arc equally explicit and diametrically opposed to those used a*
evidence for the theory, it is clear that the theory expresses only part of the
truth. Let us see how the case stands.
Linntcus says that the internal plant (/. e., the organs of fructification) in all
hybrids is like the female; the external (organs of vegetation), on the contrary,
resembles the male. This is, however, diametrically opposed by De Candolle,
who announces it as a general law that the organs of vegetation are given by
the female, those of fructification by the male.4* When two doctors of such
importance difler on a point like this, we may suspect that both arc right and both
are wrong; and here our suspicion is supported by the mass of facts adduced by
the experiments of M. Sagaret,j- which refute the hypothesis of Linntcus and'
the hypothesis ol l)e Candollc. What we have just indicated with regard to
plants, has been the course pursued with regard to animals: one class of
observations has seemed to prove that the father bestows the "animal systemj."
* Physiologic Vi'gotalo, p. 710.
f Pomologio PhyAiologiquo, p. 555, sq.
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN. 391
another class of observations lias seemed to prove that the mother bestows it;
and a third class has proved both theories inadequate. Quite recently General
Daumus published the result of bis long experience with Arab horses,* arguing
that, according to the testimony of the Arabs, the stallion was the most valuable
for the purposes ot breeding. Upon this, the Inspectenr des Haras, who had
traversed Asia for the express purpose of collecting evidence on the subject,
published his diametrically opposite conclusion, declaring that it was the mare
whose influence preponderated in the foal. General Daumas replied, and cited
a letter addressed to him by Abd-el-Kader, who may certainly be said to under-
stand Arab horses better than Europeans. The letter is worth reading for
its own sake; we can, however, only quote its testimony on the particular
point now under discussion. " The experience of centuries has established,"
he says, "that the essential parts of the organization, such as the bones, the
tendons, the nerves, and t lie veins, arc always derived from the stallion. The
marc may give the colour and some resemblance to her structure, but the prin-
cipal qualities are due to the stallion." This is very weighty testimony, on
which we will only for the present remark, that it merely asserts the prepon-
derance of the male influence as respccts the locomotive system; it docs
not assert that absolute independence of any female influence maintained in
the formula of Prcvost and Daumas, Lallcmand and others, which we arc
now combating. Abd-cl-Kader's statement is tantamount to that made by
Mr. Orton,?
"1 do not mean it to be inferred that either parent gives either set of organs
uninfluenced hy the other parent; but merely that the leading characteristics and
qualties of both sets of qualities are due to the male on the one side, and to the
female on the other, the opposite parent modifying them only."
This is a much more acceptable theory than the other, but it is only an
approximation to the truth. Mr. Orton's first illustration is the hybrid of the
horse and ass.
" It is known that the produce of the male ass and the mare is a mule ; but I do
not think it is equally well-known that the produce of the stallion and the female
ass is what has been denominated a liinny?yet such is the case The
mule, the produce of the ass and mare, is essentially a modified ass?the ears are
those of an ass somewhat shortened?the mane is that of an ass?the tail is that of
an ass?the skin and colour are those of an ass somewhat modified?the legs are
slender, the hoofs high, narrow, and contracted, like those of an ass. The body
and barrel are round and full, in which it differs from the ass and resembles the
mare.
This description is accurate, but?we put it interrogatively?is it always the
description of a mule, and never that of a liinny .J this latter, the produce of
the stallion and the female ass, "is essentially a modified horse?the ears like
those of a horse somewhat lengthened?the mane flowing?the tail bushy like
that of a horse?the skin is fine like that of a horse?the Ices arc stronger, and
the hoofs broad and expanded like those of a horse. The body and barrel arc flat
and narrow, in which it differs from the horse, and resembles its mother the ass."
From thcsc'facts, Mr. Orton deduces the conclusion, that the offspring of a cross
is not simply a mixture of the two parents,nor is it an animal that lias accidentally
a similitude to one or other of its parents, inasmuch as we can produce at will
cither the liinny or the mule. The reader will presently see why such a conclu-
sion cannot be accepted; and we may at once anticipate what will hereafter be
more fully explained, by saying that the differences Mr. Orton signalizes arc
easily interpreted by another theory. In point of fact, both mule and liinny
arc modified asses: in each the structure and disposition of the ass prcdouu-
* Les Chevaux do Sahara ; see also an article in the Revue des Deux Monde^,
May, 1S55, 011 Le Cheval de Guerre.
392 HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
nates; and it docs so in virtue of that greater " potency of race" which belongs
to the ass?a potency which is less effective on the hinny, becausc the superior
vigour of the stallion modifies it, according to ascertained laws.
"I would call your consideration," Mr. Orton continues, "to a very curious
circumstance pertaining to the voice of the mule and the hinny; to which my
attention was called by Mr. Lort. The mule brays, the hinny neighs. The why
and wherefore of this is a perfect mystery, until we come to apply the knowlege
afforded us by the law I have given. The male gives the locomotive organs, and
the muscles are amongst these ; the muscles are the organs which modulate the
voice of the animal; the mule has the muscular structure of its sire the ass, and
brays; the hinny has the muscular structure of its sire the horse, and neighs."
This seems decisive, until we extend our observations, and then wc find the
law altogthcr at fault. Thus the produce of a bull and a marc neither lowed
nor neighed, but uttered a shrill cry somewhat like that of the goat. The
produce of a dog and a she-wolf sometimes bark and sometimes howl, accord-
ing to Buffon; and the produce of a bitch-fox and a dog, according to Burdach,
barked like a dog, though somewhat hoarsclv, and howled like a wolf when it
was hurt. A similar remark has been made by all who have attended to cross-
breeding in birds; the hybrid of the goldfinch and the canary has the song of
the goldfinch mingled with occasional notes of the canary, which seem per-
petually about to gain the predominance. Finally, wc know how, in the
human family, a magnificent voicc is inherited from a mother as often as from
a father.
These illustrations, apart from their interest, teach us to be cautious in
generalizing from a few facts, however striking, in questions so complex as all
biological questions are. Let us, however, continue to call on Mr. Orton for
facts. He quotes a letter from Dr. George Wilson (whose opinion on any
subject will be worth hearing) to Dr. Harvey, respecting the produce of the
Manx cat and the common cat. The Manx cat has no tail, and is particularly
long in the hinder legs. " You will sec," says Dr. Wilson, " from the facts
communicated, that where the Manx cat was tlic mother, the kittens had tails
of a sort; where the Manx cat was the father, three-fourths of the kittens had
no tail." Mr. Orton also quotes a communication made to him by Mr. Gurnett
of Clithcroe:?
" From these I select thoso pertaining to the Muscovy duck and some hybrids
produced between it and the common duck. You are aware that the Muscovy
drake cxcceds in a striking degree the duck in size ; the drake weighing from 8 to
91 lbs., while the duck weighs only from 3 to 1 lbs. Hybrids produced from the
Muscovy drake and common duck followed this peculiarity of the male parent as
to the relative size of the male and female hybrids ; the male weighing lrom 5 to
G lbs., the females not half as much. On the other hand, the dilierence in the size
of the sexes when the hybrids wore the produce of the common drake and the
Muscovy duck, was not apparent."
A valuable observation, certainly. Mr. Orton adds the following of his own.
lie placed a Cochin cock with his common liens :?
'' Reasoning that if the vital organs were duo to the female, then the cross
between these birds (being externally Cochins and internally common hens) should
lay white eggs, the secretion of the egg being a vital function. You know that the
Cochin lays a chocolate-coloured egg. The half-bred did what theory said they
should do?laid white eggs ; and not only white eggs, but eggs also which, on the
evidence of myself and family, wero very inferior in taste, having lost the mellow,
buttery taste of the Cochin egg."
But lie lias recorded another curious fact respecting this same experiment,
which might have made him aware of the problematical nature of his theory,
had not his sagacity been hoodwinked by the theory:?
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN. 393
' These same half-bred birds afforded another and a very unlooked-for illustra-
tion of the position we have taken. They were all, when first hatched, like tho
Cochin cock, profusely feathered on the le^s and feet, so much so, that they had to
be marked to distinguish them from the pure bred birds. We see here that,
according' to the law, the male parent implanted its characteristics ; but what was
curious, in a few weeks, in some of the half-breeds all, and in many most, of the leg
feathers were shed. Two out of some twenty birds only retained them in any very
conspicuous degree. Now, why was this ? The cock had implanted his external
characteristics, the hen had given her vital organs. The feathers of the male wero
there; but the vital organs necessiry to their growth were not there ; and conse-
quently, after a time, tor want of nutriment, these feathers were shed."
V> c will not here enter oil the question of the growth of feathers (a very
complex matter), but, accepting his own premises, ask him, if the external
characteristics arc thus dependent on the vital organs for their growth and
development, and these vital organs are given by the female, how does the
child ever exhibit the characteristics of the male, after infancy? Of what use
is it for the male to implant his characteristics, when the female influence is
thus certain to annihilate them ?
Mr. Orton further cites the practicc of Bakewell with respect to his cele-
brated Dishley sheep. His rams might be bought or hired for a good price;
but his best ewes were sacred. These he would neither sell nor let..
As a counter-statement, let it be noted that, according to Girou, the farmers
are more particular about the bull than about the cow when they want a good
milking cow, for it is observed that the property of abundant secretion of milk
is more ccrtain to be transmitted from a bull than from a cow. We question
the fact of a bull having greater influence than the cow, believing that in each
case the property is transmitted according to dircct heritage; but that the bull
should be known to have any importance in this respect, is an evidence that
the " vital organs" arc not solely given by the female.
The result of Mr. Orton's researches proves that the male does transmit his
qualities to his descendants; as a matter of fact this must be always distinctly
remembered; but neither his researches nor those of his predecessors suffice
to prove this transmission to be absolute, in the sense required by those who
maintain that the male gives the animal and the female the vegetative organs;
as well as by those who maintain that the male influence necessarily and inva-
riably predominates in the animal, the female in the vegetative organs. Still
it is'important to know that by the pollen of flowers we can modify the tints,
and producc anv varieties of tulip, violet, or dahlia; impoitant to know that
we can also modify the plumage of birds, and the colour of animals: it^ is
important to know that the male qualities are transmissible. But for scicntific
rio-our this is not enough. Before we can establish a law ot this kind, we must
be sure that the fact is constant and admits of 110 exceptions, or only of such
apparent exceptions as may be classed under unexplained perturbations.^ Now
daily observations, 110 less than recorded eases, assure us that the law is ^cry
far irom beinfTconstant, that tlie female as unmistakcably transmits liei qualities
as the male transmits his, and that any theorist who should reverse the current
theory and declare the mother bestowed the animal system, leaving the \cgc-
tativc to the father, would be able to make a formidable ariay of facts. Let
us glance awhile at the evidence.
It is said the male gives the colour, but the female docs so likewise. ^ A
black cat and a white cat will have kittens which maybe all black, all white,
or black spotted with white, and whitc spotted with black. Every street will
furnish examples. Isidore GcoflYoy St. llilairc speaks of a case under his
observation, of a black buck and a white doc; the first produce was a black
and white fawn; the sccond a fawn entirely black, cxccpt a white spot above
the hoof.* Burdach mentions the case of a raven and a grey crow, who had a
? Diet. Classique d'llistoire Naturelle, x. 121.
394 HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
brooil of five: two black like the father; two grey like the mother; and one
mixed. The same result is observed with respect to all other qualities. But
perhaps the most decisive examples we could epiote of the twofold influence of
parents is in the singular instance recorded by Buffon. The Marquis Spontin
Beaufort had a she-wolf living in his stables with a setter dog, by whom she
had two cubs, a male and a female. The male resembled externally his father
the dog, except that his cars were pointed and his tail like that of the wolf;
the female, on the contrary, resembled her mother, the wolf, in all external
characteristics except the tail, which was the same as her father's. Here in
one case, the father gave the external characteristics, in the other the mother,
while the tail was in each ease, as it were, transposed. But the marvel of this
case does not stop here : the cubs manifested a striking difl'ercnce in disposi-
tion, in each case resembling in character, the parent it did not resemble in
appearance and in sex ; thus the male cub, which had all the appearance of a
dog, was tierce and uutaincable as the wolf; the female cub, which had all the
appearance of a wolf, was familiar, gentle, and caressing even to importunity.
Lucas records an analogous case. These hybrids are very instructive, because
the wide differences in the aspect and nature of the parents enable us to sepa-
rate, as it were, the influence of each. The wolf and the dog often breed
together; and the following observations, interesting in themselves, will suflice
to show the reader how much caution is necessary before drawing absolute
conclusions from single illustrations. Valinont Bomarc observed in the various
hybrids of wolf and dog which came under his notice at Chautilly, a striking
preponderance of the wolf over the dog; Marsch, 011 the contrary, observed in
his experience a preponderance of the dog over the wolf; Gcoffroy St. Hilairc
and Pallas found the wolf to predominate ; whereas, Marollc found the cubs
remarkable for their gentleness and dog-like instincts, only recalling the wolf
in their voracity and fondness for flesh. Girou found the preponderance to
vary; sometimes the father, sometimes the mother rc-anpearcd in the offspring.
If there were 110 other evidence, this would suffice to disprove the hypothesis
of cither parent contributing one group of organs, to the absolute exclusion of
the other parent.
The same fact of twofold influence is shown in the transmission of defor-
mities, such as extra toes, extra lingers, &c.: sometimes the male, and some-
times the female is shown to preponderate, by the offspring inheriting the
deformity of the male or the female. It is well said by Girou,* that "if
the organization of the male was the only one which passed to the child, the
child would resemble the father, as the fruit of a graft resembles the tree from
which the graft was taken, and not at all the tree 011 which it was grafted."
And what is here said of the whole organization, applies with equal force to
any one system, such as the nervous or t lie nutritive.
Moreover, if the hypothesis we arc combating be admitted?if the father
bestows the nervous system?how are we to explain the notorious inferiority
of the children of great men ? There is considerable exaggeration afloat 011
this matter, and able men have been called nullities, because they have not mani-
fested the great talent s of their fathers ; but allowing for all overstatement, the
palpable fact of the inferiority of the sons to their fathers is beyond dispute,
and has helped to foster the idea of all great men owing their genius to their
mothers, an idea which will not bear confrontation with the facts. Many men
of genius have had remarkable mothers ; and that one such instance could be
cited is sufficient to prove the error both of the hypothesis which refers the
nervous system to paternal influence, and of the hypothesis which only refers
the preponderance to the paternal influence. If the male preponderates, how is
it that Pericles, who " carried the weapons of Zeus upon his tongue," produced
nothing better than a Paralus and a Aanthippus? J low came the infamous
Lysiinachus from the austere Aristides ? llow was the weighty intellect of
* I)o la Generation, p. 113.
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN. 395
Thueydides left to be represented by an idiotic Milesias, and a stupid Ste-
phanas? Where was the great soul of Oliver Cromwell in his son Richard ?
Who were the inheritors of Henry IV. and Peter the great? What were
Shakspeare's children, and Milton's daughters ? Unless the mother prepon-
derated in these and similar instances, we are without an explanation; for it
being proved as a law of heritage, that the individual docs transmit his qualities
to his offspring, it is only 011 the supposition of Loth individuals transmitting
their organizations, and the 011c modifying the other, that such anomalies are
conceivable. When the paternal intlueuce is not counteracted, we see it
transmitted. Hence the common remark: " talent runs in families." The
proverbial phrases, "l'esprit des Mortemarts," and the " wit of the Sheridans,"
imply this transmission from father to son. Bernardo Tasso was a considerable
poet, and his son Torquato inherited his faculties heightened by the influence
of the mother. The two Herschels, the two Colmans, the Kemble family, and
the Coleridges, will at once occur to the reader; but the most striking
example known to us is that of the family which boasted Jean Sebastian Bach
us the culminating illustration of a musical genius, which, more or less, was
distributed over three hundred Bachs, the children, of course, of very various
mothers.
Here a sccptical reader may be tempted to ask, how a man of genius is ever
produced, if the child is always the repetition of his parents ? How can two
parents of ordinary capacity produce a child of extraordinary power ? The
answer must be postponed until we come to treat of secondary influences.
For the present, we content ourselves with insisting on the conclusion to which
the foregoing survey of facts has led, namely, that both parents arc always re-
presented in the offspring; and although the male influence is sometimes seen
to preponderate in one direction, and the female influence in another, yet this
direction is by no means constant, is often reversed, aud admits of no absolute
reduction to a known formula. AVe cannot say absolutely, "the male gives
such organswe cannot even say, "the male always preponderates in such
or such a direction." Both give all organs; sometimes one preponderates,
sometimes the other. In one family we sec children resembling the father,
children resembling the mother, and children resembling both.
This is the conclusion inevitable 011 a wide survey of the facts. It is equally
inevitable a priori, if we take our stand upon the evidence of embryology; and
as some readers prefer logical deductions to any massive accumulation of facts,
wc will ask tliera to consider the question from this point of view. Repro-
duction, in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, is known to naturalists under
three forms. In the first, a single cell spontaneously divides itself into two
cells. Here it is quite clear that the child reproduces the totality of the
parent. In the second form, the process called " budding" fakes place: the
child here grows out of the substance of the parent, until its development is
completed, and then it separates from the parent to live a free life. Here also
the parent is reproduced in its totality. In the third form, a higher com-
plexity of organization has led to a more complex and more special mode of
reproductiont the parent gives off from its own substance, by what may be
also considered a " budding process," a mass of cells, which as pollen "and
ovule as sperm-cells and germ-cells, unite to developo into plants or animals.
TTerp'aUin there ou^ht to be 110 doubt that the parents are reproduced; their
offsDrhur trillv may lie called " their own flesh and blood." Nor would the
doubt have ever arisen, had not the great complexity of the organisms
admitted the intervention of the Law of Variations to which all dissem-
blanccs arc due But however such interventions may baffle our inquiries, the
mind recognises at once the truth of the proposition that sperm-cell and germ-
cell arc as much to be regarded in the light of reproductions of the parents as
the cells produced by spontaneous division are to be regarded 111 the light ot
repetitions of the parent-cell.
396 HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
And here we may glance at an ingenious hypothesis which would explain
the fact of all our organs being double, by the concourse of both parents; so
that the father woidd give one half, the mother the other half, the father the
right, the mother the left side :* " Cctte idee ferait presumer que notrc corps
est double, ct que nous sommes composes de deux corps finis artistemcnt
ndosses l'un a l'autrc." The fact that all our organs arc double?some primi-
tively, others permanently?was first demonstrated by Scrrcs, who, in his very
remarkable work 011 transcendental anatomy,f has given a rapid outline of this
Lex Serriana, as Meckel calls it. In consequence of this primitive duality of
all organs (the single organs being those in the median line, and formed by
the fusion of two originally distinct organs), "l'cmbryon resulte de la reunion
de deux moities d'emuryon; 1'animal unique, si l'on peut s'exprimer ainsi, est
lc produit de deux moities d'animaux." Scrrcs would not, however, give any
countenance, we imagine, to the hypothesis of each half being furnished by
each parent; for the hypothesis is cont.radictcd by the facts of the perfect
rcsemulancc as well as perfect symmetry of each side, whereas if one parent
only gave one side, we should see realized in life the fantastic combinations
sometimes seen at masquerades, presenting us with a figure, half of which
wears the dress of a man, and half of a woman; or half of an Italian bandit,
and the other half of a good, peaceful shopkeeper.
It is now time that we should direct our attention to some of the perturbing
causes, which mask the laws of transmission from our perfect apprehension.
While proclaiming as absolute the law of individual transmission, while pro-
claiming that the parents are always reproduced in the offspring, we arc met
by the obvious fact of the offspring often exhibiting so marked a departure
from their parents, being so dilfercnt in form and disposition, that the law
seems at fault. For instance, Gall speaks of a brood of wolf-cub3 taken from
their mother and brought up together; one was as gentle as a dog, the others
retained the savageness of their species. Wc may also point to the fact of a
man of genius suddenly starting up in an ordinary family; or to a thousand
illustrative examples in which the law of individual transmission seems at
fault. To explain these would be to have mastered the whole mystery of
heritage; all that we can do is to mention some of the known perturbing
influences.
Sir Evcrardllomc mentions a striking case, which has become celebrated, of
a thorough-bred English mare, who, in the year 1816, had a mule by a quagga
?the mule bearing the unmistakcablc quagga marks. In the years 1817,
1818, and 1S23, tliis marc again foaled, and although she had not seen the
quagga sincc 1810, her three foals were all marked with the curious quagga
marks. Nor is this by any means an isolated case. Meckel observed similar
results in the crossing of a wild boar with a domestic sow ; in the first litter
several had the brown bristles of the father; and in cach of the sow's subse-
quent litters by domestic boars, some of the young ones were easily distin-
guished by their resemblance to the wild boar. Mr. Orton verified this fact
111 the cases of dogs, pigs, and poultry. Of the latter lie says: " The so-callcd
silk fowls have certain marked peculiarities?a silky, or downy plumage, a
black skin and face, black bill and mouth, black legs, and dark or even black
bones; they have, moreover, a fully-developed tuft on the head, five toes, and
are feathered 011 the legs and feet." Peculiarities such as these were invalu-
able for the experiment. lie found the produce of a silk cock with a common
white hen to be "twelve or fifteen chickens, the whole of which had the black
* Brouzct: Eaaais sur 1'Education Mt5dicinalo des Enfans. Paris, 1754.
(Quoted by Lucas.)
f Precis d'Anatomie Transcondante. Paris, 1812, p. 238. Dr. Lucas is in
error when lie attributes to Florena the conceptisn and demonstration of thin
important point. It is true Florcna himself claims it in hia last work, Cours do
Physiologic Compares, 1856.
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN. 397
skin, black mouth, anil five toes of the silk cock?his external development.
As to their plumage, I could only judge in the ease of four, the rest having died
in the downy state. Of these four, then, they have all the black skin and five
toes ol the silk cock, but, strange enough, while three of them have downy
plumage, the other has feathers."
Besides this very remarkable perturbing influence, we must also consider
the phenomenon of atavism, or anccstral intluence, in which the child manifests
striking resemblance to the grandfather or grandmother, and not to the father
or mother. The fact is familiar enough to dispense with our citing examples
How is it to be explained ? It is to be explained on the supposition that the
qualities were transmitted from the grandfather to the father, in whom they
were masked by the presence of some antagonistic or controlling influence, and
thence transmitted to the son, in whom, the antagonistic influence being with-
drawn, they manifested themselves. As Longet remarks, " S'il n'y a pas
heritage des caracteres paterncls il y a done au moins aptitude a en heriter,
dis2>osition ii les reproduirc, ct toujours ccttc transmission dc cette aptitude a
de nouvcau descendants, cliez lesquels ces inemcs caracteres se mamfestcront
tot ou tard."'3* Mr. Smith, let us say, has a remarkable aptitude for music;
but the influence of Mrs. Smith is such that tbeir children, inheriting her
imperfect car, manifest 110 musical talent whatever. These children, however,
have inherited the disposition of their father in spite of its non-manifestation;
and if, when they transmit what in them is latent, the influence of their wives
is favourable, the grandchildren may turn out to be musically gifted. In the
same way Consumption or Insanity seems to lie dormant tor a generation,
and in the next flashes out with the same fury as of old. Atavism is thus a
phenomenon always to be borne in mind as one of the many complications of
the complcx problem. Very remarkable is the atavism exhibited by some of
the lower animals, who bring forth young so utterly unlike themselves as to
have been long mistaken for different species; while these young in their turn
bring forth animals exactly like their ancestors. Here the children of one
generation alwavs resemble their grandfathers and grandmothers, and never
their fathers and mothers.f
A third causc of complication is one which we propose to call " the potency
of race or individual." Both father and mother transmit their organizations,
but they do so in unequal degrees : the more jiotent predominates ; iust as if
you mix brandy with equal amounts of water, soda water, and ginger beer, the
taste of the brandy will predominate more in the water than in the soda water,
more in the soda water than in the ginger been. .
According to Rush (quoted by Lucas), the Danes, intermarrying with women
of the East always produce children resembling the European type; but the
converse do'es not hold good when Danish women intermarry with the men of
the East. Klaproth observes the same in the mingling of the Caucasian and
Mongolian races. Girou, after five-and-twenty years' experience in the breed-
in- of sheep, found this " potency" destroy his calculations. He fancied that,
by means of his Koussillon sheep and the Merino rams, lie could sooner arrive
at the fineness of wool which distinguishes the Merino than if lie coupled the
Aveyron sheep with the Merino rams; but lie found that the Roussilion type
resisted the Merino so energetically that after a quarter of a century of suc-
cessive crossings it still reappeared, whereas the Aveyron sheep had long
ceased to be distinguishable from the Merinos. The same potency of particular
^ is noKT h Koclrcutcr U quote,i bv Burdach as havmg
fccundatcd the Aicotianapanicula/a with the po ci - ? ? . ,
hybrids thus produced were fecundated with the pollen ^
the plants resembled the N.nuiica. On reversing this experiment, he still
* Traits (le Physiologic, ii. 133. ?
+ See Stcenstiup on The Alternation of Generations ; and Owen ou Part leno-
gCllCBi8.
898 HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
found the female JV. rustica to have the preponderance; so tliat, cross the
species how lie would, the N. rustica showed most potency.
But although we thus sec that ltacc has a marked preponderance, we must
also remember that it is subject to the individual variations of vigour, health,
age, &c. Girou sums up his observations with this general remark: the oil-
spring of an old male and a young female resembles the father less than the
mother in proportion as the mother is more vigorous and the father more
decrepit; the reverse is true of the offspring of an old female and a young male.
In fact, if we consider that the offspring reproduces the organization of its
parents, and, consequently, the organization of that particular period, we see at
oncc that age, health, and general potency of organization, must be taken into
the account of complicating causes. This also will help to explain?but not
wholly explain?the great differences observable in the same family : differences
of sex, of strength, and appearance. At present, however, science can only
take note of it as a " perturbing influence."
Our survey of this great subject, brief though it has been, has enabled us to
note four general facts, which sum up the present state of knowledge, and
which must be steadily borne in mind in all inquiries into Hereditary
Influence:?
1st. Heritage is constant: it is a law of organized beings that the organiza-
tion of parents should be transmitted to their offspring.
2nd. The offspring directly represents both parents, and indirectly it repre-
sents its ancestors.
3rd. The offspring never represents its parents with absolute equality,
although it represents them in every organ. Sometimes one parent predomi-
nates in one system, sometimes in another, sometimes in all.
4th. The causes of this predominance arc various, some being connected
with "potency" of race, or individual superiority hi age, vigour, &c.; others
being, in the present state of knowledge, not recognisable.
Leaving these facts without any hypothetical explanation for (he present, let
us pass on to a consideration of the meaning of the Law of Variation, which we
have seen to be so perturbing an influence. Like produces like : that is the
Law of Constancy. But we see it producing unlike, and the variation must
have its causc. Development, whether taking place in a.simple tissue or in the
whole organism, must proximately arise from some alteration in the scries of
organic combinations. A cellular tissue would never develope into a nerve
tissue, unless some new element were introduced into its composition. A whole
dynasty of blockheads would never produec a man of genius by intermarriage
with blockheads ; the intermarriage must introduce "new blood." There is no
chance in Nature. If two parents produce a child which is unlike them both,
this child is not an accident: the unlikencss consists in the new combination
of old elements. The cipher which stood before (lie numeral, thus 01, has been
transposed, and we have 10 as the result. Nature transposes in this way. Out
of several elements of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, in tlie same proportions,
she will arrange substances so various as starch, gum, and sugar. We need
not be surprised, then, if, with elements so complex as those of an organism,
a great variety of combination is produced ; and, far from marvelling because
children sometimes arc unlike their parents, the marvel truly is that they are
ever like them.
The old theories could make nothing of these variations; they quietly ignored
them. The once dominant, and still famous, theory of the " prc-cxistcnce of
germs," which lingers in the popular expression of the "oak being contained in
the acorn," maintained that tue embryo is the animal in miniature. The early
microscopists observing the gradual appearance of the organs, jumped to the
conclusion that the organs pre-existed in the ovum, and were gradually
unfolded to view as they became larger, indeed, when we see an egg by no
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN. 399
means increased, either in size or weigh!, suddenly open, aid a full-formed
ehick emerge, the idea that the chick was pre-existent in that liquid mass
which oucc constituted the egg seems plausible enough. Swammerdam and
Malebrauche pushed this notion to its logical conclusion, and declared that not
only was the embryo a miniature of the adult, but the first created embryo of
eacli species necessarily contained within itself all the germs of the future race ;
so that each generation included all subsequent generations. This is the
lamous theorie dc Vemboitement, which was advocated even by Cuvier. That
Bonnet, Haller, and lesser men, should have been seduced by such a theory,
is not remarkable, when we consider the state of knowledge in their days; but
after C. P. AVolff, 131umenbach, and Yon Baer had utterly refuted it, and
replaced it by the sounder theory of epigenesis, to find Cuvier still giving it the
sanction of his great name is a point to be remembered in the history of
opinion. At the present day, we believe no one of any authority maintains the
theory of pre-cxistence. The microscope plainly shows us that, at first, the
embryo is not like the adult animal in any respect; the resemblance grows as
development goes 011; the presence of one organ determines the presence of
another; and, in the earlier stages, we cannot tell whether the embryo is that
of a fish, a reptile, a bird, or a mammal?much less what kind of fish, reptile,
bird, or mammal. It is the immortal honour of C. P. Wolff to have demon-
strated the great law of epigenesis,* by which the parts of an animal are made
011c after another, and out of the other; so that each organ may be considered
as a secreting organ with respcct to the others. Treviranus subsequently
adopted this idea of each organ having, as it were, a secretory function with
respcct to the others; and Mr. Paget has luminously expanded it in his mas-
terly " Lectures 011 Surgical Pathology."
When it was believed that animals pre-existed in the germs of the original
parents, the difficulty of accounting for variations, such as deformities and mal-
formations, was either ignored, referred to " Satanic agency," or eluded by the
convenient supposition that deformed germs also pre-existed. Still there were
troublesome facts not to be so got rid of. There were hybrids, for example.
No one could say that there were pre-existent germs which were half horse and
half donkey, or half wolf and half dog, or quarter wolf and three-quarters dog.
We will not, however, linger over such hypotheses, anxious as we are to
glancc at matters of more practical interest; among them, the very important
question of hereditary insanity. Every one is familiar with the fact of the
transmission of this terrible malady, but not, every one is aware of the extra-
ordinary resemblance sometimes manifested in the nature of the attacks and
their periodical rccurrcnce. Moreau relates the case of a man who, greatly
agitated by the events of the French Revolution, shut himself up in 011c
room, from which lie never stirred during ten years; his daughter, 011 reaching
the age at which he was attacked, fell into the same state, and could not be
made to quit her apartment. Esquirol tells of a lady who in her twenty-fifth
year went out of her mind after her accouchcment; her daughter was alllicted
111 the same way, at the same age, and under the same circumstances. We
cannot here afford space for more illustrations ;f the two just cited will suffice
to indicate the tragic fact, that insanity is not only transmissible, but may
suddenly manifest itself in persons .who have hitherto shown 110 predisposition
to it. The fact forccs upon every mind an awful sense of responsibility, when
a parent or guardian has to decide on permitting a marriage where the " heredi-
tary taint" exists. It is a subjcct which has recently been handled in four
* Theoria Generationis, 1795 ; and in a more popular version of the same work,
Theoria von der Generation. W e have never seen the first-named work; the
second we can commend to philosophic readers.
+ Dr. Forbes Winslow might take up this topic in his valuable Journal of Psy-
cliologicaf Medicine with good effect.
NO. VI.?NEW SERIES. D D
400 HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
fictions : in the "House of Raby," in Miss Jewsbury's "Constance Herbert,"
in Holme Lee's "Gilbert Massenger," and in Wilkie Collins's "Moncktons of
Wincot Abbey." The three first named have used it not only as a tragic
pivot, but as a moral lesson; and in so doing have taken the licence of fiction
to promulgate very absolute moral views, upon which it is our duty to make
some remarks.
These writers all assume that the transmission of the malady is inevitable,
and hcnce they insist 011 the duty of renunciation. No one with the " heredi-
tary taint" is justified in marrying. He must bear his burden; he must not
compromise for selfish enjoyments the happiness of descendants. Were the
problem really so simple as these writers make it, their moral conclusions
would be indisputable. But artists are not bound to be physiologists, and
arc assuredly bad law givers in such cases. As artists, they employ their
permitted licence in simplifying the problem of insanity to suit their stories ;
but when they transcend the limits ot art, and moralize on their selected cases,
placing them before the world as typical, they commit a serious error, and
they teach questionable doctrine, because they teach it by means of fallacious
facts. Let us be understood. If it were absolutely certain that a man whose
family had the " hereditary taint" could not escape the terrible inheritance, the
moral rule would be clear, the verdict against his marrying would be absolute.
But happily this is by 110 means the case. The law of variation here inter-
venes. Vulgar observation confirms science in declaring this inheritance of
insanity to be very uncertain. "La transmission hereditaire," says Burdach,
in summing up, " 11c s'etend, la plupart du temps, qu'a quetques enfansIn
many cases the malady is not transmitted at all. That is to say, it is so neu-
tralized by the influence of the other parent as not to manifest itself. Out of
three children, two may inherit the malady?or only one?or none. Arc all
three children to be debarred from marriage on the chance that 011c or all may
be affected? But the difficulty is further complicated. The three children,
let us say, are perfectly healthy, passing into manhood and womanhood without
once indicating any trace of the disease; suddenly, in mid-life, the disease
breaks out,?for we arc never certain of its non-appearance. Again, the
three marry, have children, and die, without manifesting any of the fatal
symptoms of the disease; yet their children may all be insane, because the law
of atavism intervenes to frustrate calculations.
With such facts before us, consider the straits into which we arc driven by
the novelist's verdict. Three perfectly sane people arc not to marry because
there is a possibility of their one day becoming insane, or of their children
inheriting the grandfather's malady. The same difficulty meets us in the case
of consumption and scrofula, two diseases equally transmissible and almost as
terrible. Arc all the families in whom the consumptive " taint" exists to be
excluded from marriage ? To say so would be to make marriage a rarity, since
few indeed among English families could be found in which no consumption
has appeared during two generations. Such difficulties the novelist eludes.
Yet in real life these difficulties must be met. For our own parts, while fully
sensible of the responsibility, we frankly confess that we should hesitate
before pronouncing against marriage, even when one of the lovers had already
exhibited unequivocal sigip of insanity or consumption. Nor is this said from
any love of paradox; it is quite serious, as the reader will admit when ho
considers that the probability of transmission to children is very uncertain, and
is entirely dependent 011 the other parent. A man with tubercles already
formed may marry one woman who shall bear him children all perfectly healthy;
whereas another woman would bear liiiu children all inevitably doomed. It is
entirely a question of organic combination; one parent's influence being neu-
tralized or fostered by the influence of another. The same is true, if we take
the case of a woman with tuberclcs marrying a healthy man.
Although everything depends 011 the constitution of the untainted parent,
HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN. 401
there is a further difficulty with human beings not felt with animals: we allude
to affection, which docs not spring up when bidden. You may pair your dogs
and cattle according to theory; human beings must pair according to far other
impulses. Nevertheless, the parent or physician who has to adjudicate in these
delicate cases, may gain some guidance from general principles. We have
seen that the predominance of one parent, mainly consists in a superior potency
which is derived from race, age, health, &e. Thus, a young man in whom the
hereditary taint is visible might fall in love with a woman some few years his
senior, who, to superiority of age, might add that of belonging to a more
vigorous race. There would be scarcely any danger in such a marriage. But
reverse the conditions?let the woman be younger, and of a less vigorous race,
and marriage would present such probabilities of danger that every means of
prevention should be employed. At the best, our judgment can be given with
great hesitation, for the laws of organic combination, on which parental inllu-
cnce depends, are as yet wholly unknown.
We must forbear entering upon the many interesting topics which the appli-
cation of the laws of heritage suggest, and conclude this paper with a glance
at the influence of these laws in the development of the human race. History
is one magnificent corollary on the laws of transmission. Were it not for
these laws, civilization would be impossible. We inherit the acquired expe-
rience of our forefathers?their tendencies, their aptitudes, their habits, their
improvements. It is because what is orgauically acquired becomes organically
transmitted, that the brain of a European is twenty or thirty cubic inches
greater than the brain of a Papuan, and that the European is born with aptitudes
of which the Papuan has not the remotest indication. Mr. Herbert Spencer,
in his very original and remarkable " Principles of Psychology," quotes the
cvidencc of Lieut. Walpolc, that "the Sandwich Islanders, in all the early
parts of their education, are exceedingly quick, but not in the higher branches;
they have excellent memories, and learn by rote with wonderful facility, but
will not exert their thinking faculty;" which, as Mr. Spenccr truly observes,
indicates that they can receive and retain simple ideas, but are incompetent to
the more complex processes of intelligence, because these have not become
organized in the race. A similar fact is noticed in the Australians and Hindoos.
Nor is this wide difference between them and the Europeans confined to the
purely ratiocinativc processes ; an analogous difference is traceable in their
moral conceptions. In the language of the Australians there arc no words answer-
ing to our terms justice, sin, guilt. They have not acquired these ideas. In all
savages the sympathetic emotions are quite rudimentary, and the horror which
moves a European at the sight of cruelty would be as incomprehensible to the
savage, as the terror which agitates a woman at the sight of a mouse. What
we observe in the development from childhood to manhood, we also observe
in the development of the human family, namely, a slow subjection of the
cgotistic to the sympathetic impulses. This has been overlooked, or not
sufficiently appreciated, in the dispute about a moral sense. One school of
thinkers has energetically denied that we arc born with any moral sense;
another school has energetically affirmed that we arc born with it. And of the
two we think the latter are nearest the truth. It is certain that we are so
organized as to be powerfully ailcctcd by actions which appeal to this " moral
sense," in a very different way from mere appeals to the intellect?the demon-
stration of abstract right and wrong will never move the mind to feel an action
to be right or wrong; were it otherwise, the keenest intellects would also be
the kindest and the iustest. What is meant by the "moral sense" is the
aptitude to be affected by actions in their moral bearings ; and it is impossible
to consider various individuals without perceiving that this aptitude m theni
varies, not according to their intellect, but according to their native tendencies
in that direction. This aptitude to be so affected is a part and parcel of the
D D 2
402 HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN,
heritage transmitted from forefathers. Just as the puppy pointer lias inherited
an aptitude to "point"?which, if it do not spontaneously manifest itself in
" pointing," renders him incomparably more apt at learning it than any other
dog?so also has the European boy inherited an aptitude for a certain moral
life, which to the Papuan would be impossible. " Hereditary transmission,"
says Mr. Spencer, displayed alike in all the plants we cultivate, in all the
animals we breed, and in the human race, applies not only to physical, but to
psychical peculiarities. It is not simply that a modilied form of constitution,
produced by new habits of life, is bequeathed to future generations; but it is,
that the modilied nervous tendencies produced by such new habits of life are
also bequeathed : and if the new habits of life become permanent, the tendencies
bccomc permanent."? As a conscqucncc of this inheritance we have what is
called national character. The Jew, whether in Poland, in Vienna, in London,
or in Paris, never altogether merges his original peculiarities in that of the
people among whom he dwells, lie can only do this by intermarriage, which
would be a mingling of his transmitted organization with that of the trans-
mitted organization of another race. This is the mystery of what is called the
" permanence of races." The Mosaic Arab preserves all the features and
moral peculiarities of his race, simply because lie is a descendant of that race,
and not a descendant of the race in whose cities he dwells. That the Jew
should preserve his J udaic character while living among Austrians or English,
is little more remarkable than that the Englishman should preserve his Anglo-
Saxon type while living among oxen and sheep ; so long as no intermarriage
takes place, no important change in the race can take place, bccausc a race is
simply the continual transmission of organisms. The Scotchman, " caught
young," as Johnson wittily said, will lose some of the superficial characteristics,
but will retain all the national peculiarities of his race; and so will the Irish-
man. "AVe know," says Mr. Spencer, "that there arc warlike, peaceful,
nomadic, maritime, hunting, commercial races?races that are independent or
slavish, active or slothful; we know that many of these, if not all, have a
common origin; and hence there can be 110 question that these varieties of
disposition have been gradually induced and established in successive genera-
tions, and have become organic." This, indeed, is evident a priori ; we have
already seen that the instincts and habits, even the trifling peculiarities of an
individual, have a tendency to bccomc transmitted; and, what is true of the
individual, is true of the raec.|
It is owing to the transmission of incidentally-acquired characters that every
f rcat movement in human affairs achieves much more than its immediate object,
t tends to cultivate the race. How could that new, unheard-of feeling for the
wives, widows, and orphans of soldiers, which so honourably distinguished the
war just closed, have ever risen, had not the sympathetic feelings of the race
been cultivated during centuries of slow evolution '< How could Englishmen
manifest their sturdy political independence, their ineradicable love of liberty,
so strikingly contrasted with the want of that feeling in other nations, had not,
our whole history been one bequeathed struggle against the encroachments of
governments? It is, however, needless to continue: wherever we look in
physiological, psychological, or sociological questions, we arc ccrtain to observe
the operation of the laws of hereditary transmission.
* Principles of Psychology, p. 520. In this work heritage, for the first time,
is made the basis of a psychological system ; and we especially recommend ;itiy
reader interested in the present article, to make himself acquainted with a treatise
111 every way so remarkable.
f M. Gosse, in a recently-published Essai sur les Deformations artificielles du
Cr/lne (Geneva, ISj/j), shows that the forms artificially impressed 011 the skull
during successive generations tend to become hereditary, and that, consequently,
we must assign less value than has been hitherto assigned to those characteristics
of distinct races which the forms of the skull have supplied.
403
STATISTICS OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
The following is a copy of a Return to an Address of the House of Com-
mons, dated May 14th, IS 16, signed, " II. Manners Sutton, Whitehall,
May 22nd, 1S1G."
Number of Persons Committed and Executed for each of the
following Offences:?
-r, . -i r. j ? During the
j During the five years ending fiye ?ars
with the last year of an inlmeSiately
Description of Offence. ; execution. following.
Committed.
1.?Cattle Stealing  144
2.?Sheep Stealing ; 1231
3.?Horse Stealing i 990
4.?Stealing in a Dwelling House . 834
5.?Forger y  29(3
6.?Coinin g  44
7.?Returning from Transportation . ? 52
S.?Letter Stealing  14
9.?Sacrilege i 33
10.?Robber y  1829
11.?Arson, and other wilful Burning 391
12.?Pirac y  52
13.?Attempts to Murder, unattended
with bodily injuries, Shooting ^ 6S7
at, Stabbing, Wounding, &c
14.?Violation, &c.
15.?Riot and Felony
16.?Other crimes
17.?Hi^h Treason .
Total
27S
215
105
81
7276
Executed. Committed.
3 119
11 I 1320
37 966
9 I 875
17 331
8 j 16
50
1 27
2 1 33
17 1579
42 183
2 4
8 1111
14 | 319
6 68
11 118
8 ! 1
196 7120
Burglary and House-
breaking . .
During five years ending
with 1S32.
Committed. Executed.
4327 46
During five years imme-
diately following.
Committed. Executed.
3734
The return is a statement of the crimes capital in 1S30 for which the punish-
ment of death has been abolished by statute, or for which it has not been
inflicted during the last five years, giving in columns the number of persons
-committed and executed for each oll'ence during five years, ending with the
* The last execution for returning from transportation was in 1S10. The
records in the Home Office do not show the executions for this offence in the five
previous years.
The capital punishment for house-breaking was abolished in 1833, and for bur-
glary (except when violence to persons is used) in 1837.?Parliamentary Paper,
.No. 354.
404 EDUCATION OF IDIOTS.
last year of an execution for it, and the commitments during the five years
immediately following.
It appears, from this table, that during a period of five years, when the
sentence of death was recorded and carried into effect in seventeen separate
kinds of offences, there were 7270 committals and 190 executions; whereas, in
the five succeeding years, in which there were no executions for any of the
aforesaid ollcnccs, the committals were 7,120, making a diminution in the num-
ber of commitments on the average of 150. Nor do these figures fully repre-
sent the case. When the punishment of death for such offences as sheep-
stealing, forgery, coining, and the like was in operation, prosecutors were
reluctant to prefer the charge; and, consequently, the number of committals
did not adequately represent the number ot offenders ; but when the capital
sentence was repealed, this objection was removed ; but, taking the figures as
they appear, it is quite clear that, contrary to the predictions and arguments of
those who still retain a preference for capital punishment, crime did not increase
when the capital punishment was abolished.
In analysing this table, two classcs of offences require remark:?1. Attempt
to murder unattended with bodily injuries, shooting at, stabbing, wounding,
&c.; and 2, violation, &c.; the numbers of which are respectively :?
Attempts to Murder, &c.
Violation
During the five years ending
with t ho lust year of ail
execution.
Commit tod.
CS7
273
Executed.
During the five years
immediately follow-
ing.
Committed.
s nil
11 319
In the former, where the committals rose to 1111, many were included which
it had been customary in the former five years to class as committed for simple
assaults, and so indicted to avoid the risk of capital conviction ; so in the latter
case, since the repeal of the capital penalty, juries convict upon the graver
charge about double the proportion in the same number of commitments, taking
the average of five years, formerly many offenders, though capitally indicted,
were convicted on the minor count, viz., "assault with intent," and in the
criminal tables were rccordrd in this latter class of offenders, thus reducing the
apparent number of commitments on the first five years on the capital charge.
This return is exceedingly interesting, and appears most completely to refute
the objections of those persons who still oppose the entire abolition of capital
punishment on the ground, as they say, that its abolition would increase crime.
