Pathology of Insanity
=======================

Art. X.?
Based on tlie Post-Mortem Examinations in Bethlehem Hospital.
BY W. CHARLES HOOD, SI.D.
Eesident Physician to Bethlehem Hospital.
The following seven reports of post-mortem examinations repre-
sent, to a great extent, the mortality in Bethlehem Hospital during
the years 1S55 and J 856, and may be considered a continuation
of similar reports previously communicated to the " Psychological
Journal," by Dr. Webster. In the present series a short medical
sketch of the patient has been added, with a view to render the
cases more interesting, and possibly more instructive, than the
bare extract from the Autopsy Book, without any clue to the
psychological character of the case or treatment of the disease
that had proved fatal.
Three of the following reports refer to criminal lunatics who
died while under confinement in Bethlehem Hospital. Hitherto
no reports have been made from this class of patients, owing to
the restriction imposed by the authorities at the Home Office; but
permission has recently been granted by the Secretary of State
for the Home Department to include in this and future autopsies,
reports of those cases of criminal lunatics who die in the hospital.
1. T. C. P., a male criminal lunatic ; resident in the hospital
nineteen years; died aged 55. Had been an idiot from child-
hood ; during his residence in the hospital his behaviour was
generally quiet and tractable, but subject to occasional paroxysms
of excitement, when he became destructive, noisy, and dirty in
his habits. These attacks lasted a few weeks, and were followed
by months of tranquillity: he was very deaf; had great difficulty
in articulation, his language being little more than a noisy jabber
of incoherent sounds. His habit of body was most obese, and
his temperament phlegmatic; his physical health was generally
good, requiring little medicine except aperients, but those of a
drastic character. On the 3rd of June, 1856, he was attacked
with erysipelas of the face and scalp, from which he died on the
13th of the same month.
Autopsy.?The skull-cap very thick, and of small dimensions;
posteriorly very broad. The brain small but well developed, of
380 PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY.
firm consistence, and the parts at the base clearly distinct. The
ophthalmic arteries were loaded with atheromatous deposit, and
the same condition, in a less degree, was observed in the basilar
artery and the other arteries at the base of the brain.
The abdominal parietes consisted chiefly of a great thickness
of fat; the intestines were loaded with fat, and the muscular
colour of the heart concealed by its being imbedded in adipose
tissue. The thoracic and abdominal viscera were all healthy,
with the exception of slight old adhesions in the anterior part of
the right pleura.
2. C. S., a male criminal lunatic, who voluntarily confessed
a murder he had perpetrated ; was tried, convicted, and acquitted
on the ground of insanity. Resident in the hospital three years,
and died of exhaustion following acute mania of one week's
duration. Previous to this attack of mania, which came on
without any observable exciting cause, he had been quiet and
inoffensive, avoiding the company of others, and refusing all
conversation with his companions. On three occasions during
the last year of his life he obstinately refused his food, until it
was considered necessary to administer it to him with the
stomach pump. To the operation he submitted without oppo-
sition, and at the next meal readily took his food.
Autopsy.?Fifty hours after death.?Body emaciated ; several
bruises and small scars over various parts ; skull-cap rather thin,
especially posteriorly; brain soft; membranes apparently healthy;
lungs, heart, kidneys, healthy. There was a tumour about the
size of a goose's egg attached to the fascia, and lying on the left
side between the internal edge of the psoas muscle and the ex-
ternal border of the left iliac artery, apparently of a cartilaginous
character.
ii. J. R, a female patient, aged fifty, died of phthisis, having
been resident in the hospital eleven months. On admission she
was suffering from mania, with delusions. Her conversation was
incoherent and rambling, frequently and abruptly commencing
singing in behalf of the rights of women and children. Her delu-
sions consisted in a belief that her inside was composed of iron
and steel, for which reason she was to be divorced from her hus-
band. During the first two months her excitement was to some
extent governable by change of room or occupation, and allowing
her to roam about the airing ground unrestricted by the company
of other patients. Subsequently she became more and more
violent, mischievous, and destructive ; her habits dirty in the
extreme ; conversation filthy; and she continued in this state
to the tlay of her death. During the early stage of her disease,
the excitement was in some measure allayed by tartarized anti-
mony, in half-grain doses three times a day ; the effect was only
PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY. 381
temporary, and no medicine of either a sedative or depressant
character afforded any permanent benefit. During the long
period of excitement she was sustained by a generous diet, without
stimulants.
Autopsy.?Nearly all the parts, both external and internal,
were in a highly anaemic state. The blood-vessels of the head,
both external and internal, were empty. The cellular tissue of
the scalp and face was infiltrated with a semi-fluid and slightly
opaque effusion. The cerebral substance generally soft, but with-
out morbid change; a little fluid in the lateral ventricles. The
left lung healthy in structure, connected to the parietal pleura by
general old and strong adhesions. The right lung presented one
adhesion only, of small extent, the rest of the surface being quite
free. It was healthy in structure, except at the posterior part of
each lobe, in which there had been inflammation, with congestion,
partial consolidation, and suppuration. The matter, thick, healthy
in appearance, and free from unpleasant smell, was collected in
small abscesses. There was one in the upper lobe, containing
about a teaspoonful of pus, and three in the lower lobe, from
which a tablespoonful flowed. The pus in each abscess had
advanced to the surface, so as to be visible by its yellow colour;
but the lung had not become adherent.
No diseased change was observed in the abdomen, from which,
as well as from the thorax, all adipose structure had disappeared.
4. B. D., a female patient, aged thirty-one; married ; duration of
attack before admission, six weeks. Died of carbuncle, having
been resident in the hospital four months. On admission, she
was suffering from acute mania, with intermittent paroxysms of
great violence. Before being brought to the hospital, her insanity
had been evinced by great and unusual irritability of temper;
violently refusing to take food, go to bed, dress or undress her-
self, remain in her room or in the house, unless forcible means
were adopted to oblige her. For the first three months after
admission there was but little change or improvement in her
symptoms. She remained on alternate days obstinate, irritable,
taciturn, and violent; was compelled to take her food with great
difficulty, and required constant attention. On other days, her
mental state appeared to undergo a perfect revolution. She
rose in the morning cheerful, good-tempered, industrious, and, to
a casual visitor, she was convalescent. During the fourth month
her mental state steadily and permanently improved, but her
physical strength sank with the exhaustion following carbuncles.
A utopsy.?Considerable general emaciation; the skull-cap
heavy; partial milky white opacity of the arachnoid over the
entire convexity of both cerebral hemispheres; slight infiltra-
tion of the pia mater; about three ounces of limpid fluid in the
382 PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY.
lateral ventricles; the foramen of Monro converted into a large
direct opening between the two cavities; the bloody points in
section of the cerebral substance numerous and large; some
ounces of dropsical fluid in the pericardium ; concentric hyper-
trophy of the left ventricle of the heart, of which the muscular
substance was firm, and the cavity small; the liver and kidneys
healthy.
5. W. C., a male criminal lunatic, acquitted, on the ground of
insanity, of the crime for which he was tried ; thirty years of age ;
of a low, melancholy temperament, dissatisfied with everybody
and everything. His occupation had been that of a sailor; his
habits of life intemperate. He suffered much from disease of the
spine, occasioned by a fall from the rigging of his ship ; his head
was not hurt at that time, nor was his mind observed to be dis-
eased until many years after ; his insanity was principally marked
by moroseness and irritability; he was dangerous to others, fre-
quently striking people without other provocation than a fancy
that they intended to annoy him. On the evening of the day of
his death, he was sitting engaged with one of his companions
playing a game of chess, when he suddenly left the table for the
closet, intimating his intention of returning immediately. A
quarter of an hour elapsed without his doing so ; and when search
was made for him, he was found hanging by his braces to the
lintel of the door;?the body was warm, but life quite extinct.
Autopsy.?The contents of the cranium healthy, except very
slight and almost doubtful partial opacity of the arachnoid, and a
few drachms of fluid in the lateral ventricles ; the left lung ad-
hering to the cavity universally, and so strongly that the sub-
stance was extremely lacerated in attempting to detach it; two
or three partial adhesions on the right side. Behind the poste-
rior mediastinum, and extending from the second to the tenth
dorsal vertebra?, there was a collection of well-formed pus in the
front of the spinal column ; it was contained in a thick sac of
irregular and sacculated surface, closely adherent to the sides of
the column. The bodies of the vertebra? at the middle of this
space were bare here and there to a small extent. This collec-
tion of matter corresponded to an angular curvature on the
posterior aspect of the affected spinal region, ascribed by
the patient to a fall from the rigging to the deck of a vessel.
In the upper part of the abdomen, the viscera, apparently
healthy, were closely adherent to each other and to the walls of
the abdomen. The convex surface of the liver adhered through-
out to the diaphragm, while its concavity was so closely con-
nected to the stomach that careful dissection would have been
required to separate them without injury. The stomach adhered
to the abdominal walls and to the colon. The upper convolu-
PATHOLOGY OF INSANITY. 383
iions of the small intestine were partially connected to the colon
and mesocolon, as well as to each other, by thin and elongated
adhesions. No other morbid appearance was observed in the
abdomen.
6. S. C., a male patient, died of phthisis, having been under
treatment in the hospital three months. This patient had been
a publican by trade, and formerly was well to do in the world;
but intemperate habits injured his business, and the consequent
loss of property caused serious mental excitement. On ad-
mission he was excited, and, if restrained, violent to any one who
came in his way. He fancied himself ill-used, and on that
-account threatened to cut his throat and make away with him-
self. His conversation was incoherent and rambling. Morphia
was given in grain doses three times in the day, but without any
beneficial effect, and after three weeks was discontinued. His
paroxysms of excitement caused deep after-depression, and his
bodily health rapidly sank, with cough, hectic, and all the
symptoms of pulmonary disease.
Autopsy.?Examination made thirty hours after death. Body
emaciated. The contents of the skull healthy ; nothing remark-
able in their appearance. In the right pleura there was about
a pint of opaque milky fluid, and the lung itself was externally
of the same colour, flattened, and much decreased in size. At
the apex were two or three vomicae containing purulent fluid; and
throughout the structure of the organ tuburcles were thickly
scattered ; the structure itself was hepatized, and appeared to
contain no air ; there was considerable long-standing adhesion.
The left lung was perfectly healthy. Liver large and healthy;
gall-bladder very distended with bile. Kidneys smaller than
natural : 011 the surface of the right one a small hard tuburcle
lying beneath the capsule, and a small cyst about the size of a
mustard-seed in the same position on the left kidney. Intestines
healthy.
7. H. G. H., a female patient, died from the exhaustion fol-
lowing acute mania; the mental disease had existed four days
previous to her admission. When brought to the hospital, she
was perfectly unconscious, and in a state of such extreme ex-
haustion, that it was necessarjr at once to place her in bed, and
employ every measure to bring about reaction. From the report
of her friends it appears she had taken little or 110 nourishment
for some days previous to the commencement of the attack. She
lingered on, just sufficiently conscious to swallow liquid nourish-
ment if placed in her mouth, but ultimately sank on the fifth
day after admission.
Autopsy.?The brain and its membranes healthy, the 'only
circumstance observed within the head being a slightly increased
NO. VI.?NEW SERIES. C C
384 HEREDITARY INFLUENCE, ANIMAL AND HUMAN.
quantity of fluid in the base of the skull after the brain had been
removed.
The heart appeared considerably larger than usual. This
depended entirely upon great distension of the right cavities with
blood. The right lung was healthy, as was also the upper lobe
of the left. The posterior lobe of the left, at its posterior aspect,
was in the congestive stage of pneumonia; on cutting through
this part and squeezing it, a small quantity of thickish puriform
fluid escaped at two or three points. The abdominal viscera
were healthy.
(To be continued.)
