Physiological Psychology
========================

Art. VIII.?
No. IV.
BY ROBERT DUNN, F.R.C.S. ENG.
Continued from No. V., p. 156.
Intellectual Consciousness.?" A scientific psychology/' says
Waitz, " should exhibit the laws according to which the life of
the human mind is evolved ; that is, it should point out the com-
mon basis upon which all mental life rests, follow the threads
by means of which all its phenomena are connected with each
other, show the germs out of which they spring, and how they
unfold themselves, into that multiplicity and richness of inner
life which are manifested in the mature man/'*
We have passed in review some of the leading phenomena of
the sensational and perceptive consciousness, and attempted to
specialize the nervous apparatus through which they are respec-
tively manifested. Wo have seen that ideation is the first stage
in our intellectual progress, and wo have glanced at its general
bearings, in relation to our composite nature, as animal, moral,
4 Vide Waitz'8 TroHpcclus to his " Lelirbuclc," quoted by Morrcll in bin
"Elements of Psychology."
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 359
and intellectual beings. But knowledge that is definite, exact,
and communicable belongs to a still higher phase of mental
development than that of intuitive feeling and perceptive ex-
perience,?of the sensational and perceptive consciousness, which
we have hitherto been considering. For in world-consciousness,
as in self-consciousness, there is an individuality, an inward or
subjective experience which is unutterable and incommunicable.
The primary intuitions of all our perceptive faculties, even in
regard to the phenomena of nature, but still more especially in
respect to our social and moral relations, are closely interwoven
with feeling, and, indeed, are often intensely felt, but on this
very account they are incommunicable; for they cannot be
articulately expressed, nor adequately conveyed by any system
of signs from one mind to another. We can only judge of the
intuitive feelings and perceptive experience of others by what
we ourselves experience. No words can convey their equivalents ;
that is, can make others feel a sensation which we feel, or ex-
perience an inward light which reveals to us the primary
elements of knowledge. There is, indeed, for the expression of
absolutely individual feelings and emotions, a universal language,
common to man and the lower animals?the language of Nature?
of inarticulate cries and of gesticulation. The interjection
comes nearest to this, but it has a certain amount of generality
about it. In the case of the unfortunate deaf-mutes, the
paramount importance of gestural language we see strikingly
exemplified. To them, in their state of isolation and normal con-
dition, left without the peculiar instruction which their situation
requires, it is everything; independent of all conventional
arrangements, and addressing itself principally, if not solely, to
the sight, it is their only mode of communication with others.
Thus, for instance, when they have beheld the raging passion of
anger in another, and seen the swollen features, the distoited
visage, the convulsed limbs; in a word, all the violence of action
visible in anger, they can only tell of this to others by imitating
the contortions and reacting the scene which they have
witnessed. There cannot, indeed, be a doubt that " our minds
are subject to a variety of feelings, and that the effects of these
are visible in the features, attitudes, and gestures. Every dis-
tinct emotion has its appropriate expression, and thus a language
altogether independent of words exists, displayed by the
countenances and actions of man. Every person is aware of
the bodily expression of fear, love, joy; and one can seldom ever
mistake or confound the language of those with that of courage,
hatred, or sorrow. Such language is immediately and in-
stinctively recognised in every state of civilization, from the
American savage to the most refined citizen. The haughty step,
360 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
the erect carriage, and disdainful look, are always sure indica-
tions of pride; in the timid gait and sidelong look fear is at
once perceived ; while agony is always too fearfully porti^ed
in the distorted looks and agonized features of severe suffering.
This language addresses itself to the sight; the deaf and dumb
therefore are able to avail themselves perfectly of its use; and
thus it possesses for them, through life, always a charm which
written languageappears rarely to acquire."*
But knowledge, to be definite, exact, and communicable to
others, must pass through the process of abstraction, and become
embodied in the forms and symbols of the understanding, in
fine, in spoken or written language. The intuitions of our per-
ceptive faculties, our idealized impressions, which have been
stored up in the memory as mental images, and reproduced as
representative ideas, after having been associated, and when
sufficiently generalized, have again to be projected out of the
mind, to be externalized, and by the imaginative faculty, ideality,
to be embodied in objective realities. But when once symbolized,
or embodied in signs, our generalized ideas are no longer mere
subjective representations ; for, being thrown into fixed and
significant types, which perform, though imperfectly, the office
of abstract ideas, they exist in the mind, altogether apart from
the region of immediate and inward experience, as independent
intellectual realities; and, as such, become distinct and intel-
ligible objects of contemplation, which can be placed at pleasure,
either within or without the consciousness of the moment. In
perception, as we have seen, ideation is effected in response to
impressions made upon us from without, by virtue of the pri-
meval harmony which exists between our perceptive faculties and
external nature; but here the mental process is reversed, for the
mind, separating itself from outward restraints, and impelled by
its own inherent intellectual activity, by ideality, it embodies
its inward images and representative ideas in objective realities.
And this objectifying of our inward or mental ideas is all im-
portant to our progress in knowledge. For, "until signs are
employed, our mental images are not held clearly apart ; they
merge, like dissolving views, into one another. Our life, in fact,
without them, would be more likeadream than a waking reality?
portions of a thousand different ideas perpetually combining
with and melting into one another. Language, on the other
hand, forms a new world, in which all our mental processes are
objectified, held clearly apart, and not only made distinct to our-
* "The Deaf and Dumb; their Position in Society, and the Principles of their
Education Considered." By W. P. Scott, M.I)., Principal of the West-of-England
Institution for the Education of the Deaf and Dumb. London. 1841.
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 361
selves, but so embodied as to be rendered likewise separate
intellectual realities to other minds as well."*
When once, however, our intellectual activity, instead of
objectifying our inward images in existing outward realities,
constructs for itself the sign, phonetic or visible, for the embodi-
ment of the intellectual idea?"the sign forthe thing signified"?
the mind reaches a still higher phase of development. For in
the construction and through the instrumentality of language
the mind rises above feeling, above perception, above all the in-
ward images of the imagination, and creating a new external world
of its own, into which it transfers the phenomena of its inner
life, it achieves the first step in the freedom of human thought.
" In language, the sign, whether spoken or written, is objective;
it appeals to the senses; it comes to us from the outward world,
and is constructed from the elements of nature around us. At the
same time, it has no natural meaning, and contains no thoughts
apart from the mind which created or uses it. Its whole
essence consists in its being the embodiment of an idea; in brief,
it is idea objectified."
Language is thus an intellectual instrument intermediate
between perception and thought, and written notional words are
the symbols or representatives of objectified ideas. All notional
words, indeed, belong to the region of representative ideas, after
these ideas have attained their most general character; and
though words cannot excite the feelings like a gesture, nor warm
the imagination like a picture, they are the indispensable
machinery in the process of generalization and abstraction.
Through them we grasp the essential elements which distinguish
one thing from another, and classify our multifarious experiences.
" In this way it is that they serve to construct the more general
outline of knowledge. Hence the wonderful power which words
possess 011 the whole process of thought; hence the capacity they
attain, after the teachings of experience have paved the way,
for expressing the very essence of the things to which they
relate ; hence, too, their use in forming a broad platform, on
"which the results of all the lower processes of mind are plainly
recorded, and from which we can commence those higher forms
of activity, which give to reason its all but infinite range and all
but omnipotent force."*
To the unfortunate, but educated deaf mutes, cut off from
" hearing the mirror of speech," and denied the gratifications
which How from the interchange of ideas through the medium
of " sweet sounds," written language is speech in visible forms,
and written words, as the symbols or representatives of objectified
ideas, are regarded by them as units, in the same way as we
* Morrell's "Psychology," p. 164. + Ibid. J Ibid.
362 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
regard letters, the various objects around them being so many-
simple objects of thought. " In the minds of the deaf mutes,
written words/' says Degenerado, " awaken the conception of
things themselves, in the same manner as they awaken in ours
the conception of sounds, with this difference, that polysyllabic
words recal to them but a single idea, while to us they record a
number of sounds at once." Nor can there exist a doubt that
our alphabetic writing, losing its phonetic character, becomes to
them truly ideographic.*
Their association, however, of ideas with written language
must necessarily give to it a very different character from that
which obtains with us, who enjoy the blessings of speech and
hearing. So universal, indeed, is the practice of associating ideas
with sound, it is not without difficulty that we can conceive the
possibility of associating written characters with ideas without
the intervention of sound. We learn to speak long before we
learn to read or write; and thus, in the natural order of things,
articulate sounds become the representatives of ideas, and written
characters the representatives or symbols of sounds. Besides,
hearing and sound are fitted to each other, and are in such inti-
mate relationship, that hearing has been aptly designated " the
mirror of speech." And thus it is, that while in articulate speech
the mental image or intellectual idea, which has been moulded
for expression in the organ of language, finds utterance by the
lips, through the agency of the volitional power, the articulate
sound?the spoken word?is reflected back, and returns again by
heaving through the ears, first to the perceptive, and thence to
intellectual consciousness.
The function of articulate speech is the exclusive prerogative
of man, and language is common to all the races of man. It is
the crowning gift of his beneficent Creator ; " for to be without
language, spoken or written, is almost to be without thought.
We must not think, in a speculative comparison of this sort, of
mere savage life ; for the rudest savages would be as much
superior to a race of beings without speech, as the most civilized
nations at this moment are, compared with the lialf-brutal
wanderers of forests and deserts, whose ferocious ignorance
seems to know little more than how to destroy or to be destroyed.
In our social intercourse, language constitutes the chief delight
giving happiness to hours, the wearying heaviness of which
must otherwise have rendered existence an insupportable burden.
In its more important character, as fixed in the imperishable
* Jerome Condon, a learned professor of Pavia, so early as the sixteenth century,
says,?" Writing is associated with speech, and speech with thought; but written
characters and ideas may he connected together without the intervention of sounds,
A3 in hieroglyphic charactcrs.?See " Journal of Education," No. C, p. 201.
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 363
records which are transmitted in uninterrupted progression from
that generation which passes away to the generation which suc-
ceeds, it gives to the individual man the product of all the
creative energies of mankind, extending even to the humblest
intellect, which can still mix itself with the illustrious dead, the
privilege which has been poetically allotted to the immortality
of genius, of being ' the citizen of every country, and the con-
temporary of every age/ "*
It is as natural for man, constituted as he is, and endowed
with the faculty of speech, when vividly affected, to give expres-
sion, and to find utterance in articulate sounds, to his feelings,
emotions, ideas, and thoughts, as it is for him voluntarily to use
his locomotive powers in progression. But the scream of alarm,
the shriek of horror, and the laugh of surprise, like the scowl of
hatred, are natural signs, and not conventional ones, like arti-
culate words. Still, thought and language are almost insepa-
rably associated, and it has been well observed?" Were a family
of men to be created by a miracle in a wilderness, they would,
if similarly endowed like ourselves, .feel the impulse of the
faculty of speech, and soon learn, in the first instance, to com-
prehend each other's gestures and cries, and other signs of
natural language, and ascend by these means to the exalted
acquisition of an artificial language, by giving, step after step,
conventional names to objects and actions, emotions and pas-
sions, generalizations and abstractions." f Thus, to the natural
language of inarticulate sounds, gestures, and actions, would be
added the conventional language of signs, until, in the fulness
of time, alphabetical writing and the invention of printing
consummated the benefits derived from the noble 'prerogative of
speech.
Gall was the first to enunciate that the cerebral seat of the
faculty of speech is in the anterior lobes of the brain ; and
since his time, as I have elsewhere observed,| a great mass of
evidence has been collected in support of his localization of the
organ.
" In ISIS, two memoirs were read before the Academie Rationale
tie Medecine de Paris?one by M. Belhonnne, ' De la Localisation de
hi Parole dans les Lobes Anterieurs du Cerveau and the other, by
M. Bouillaud, entitled ' Nouvelles ltecherches Cliniques Propres a
Demontrer que le sens du Langage Articule et le Principe co-ordina-
teur des Mouveinents do la Parole resident dans les Lobules Ante-
* Brown's Lectures on the " Philosophy of the Mind."
+ " Memoir of Dr. Spurzheim." By A. Cannichael, M. U.S.A.
t Case of Hemiplegia, with cerebral softening, and in which loss of speech was
a prominent symptom. By Robert Dunn, F.R.C.S. Bead before t ie
Medical and Chirurgical Society of London, June 25, 1S50, and pubhshe
"Lancet," Oct 22 and Nov. 2, 1850.
364 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
rieurs du Cerveau,' containing new observations made by him since the
date of his former paper, in 1839.
" The subject has undergone much discussion in France, and oppos-
ing evidence has been adduced. Andral* gives the particulars of two
cases?one, in which loss of speech was the only cephalic symptom ;
and another, where it was complicated with hemiplegia of the right
side, but the intellect was unaffected. They were both in old women,
the first eighty, and the other seventy-three years of age. In the first
case the speech was lost all at once, but not in a fit, three years before
her death. She was never known to have lost her consciousness, nor
the power of sensation or motion. Andral says?? Tout semblait nous
annoncer que l'iiitelligence avait son integrite. Dans les quatre
membres, les mouvemens 6taient libres, faciles, et la maladc sentait
bien les impressions douleureuses qu'on cherchait a foire naitre sur la
peau qui les recouvre. Lorsqu'on lui demandait si elle soutfrait de la
tete, ou si elle en avait souffert, elle repondait par uu geste negatif.
L'ou'ie, la vue, et l'odorat, s'accomplissaient comme dans l'etat normal.'
At the autopsy, in the left hemisphere there was found a small ramol-
lissement, of the size of a large pea?'Au niveau et en dehors de
l'extremite posterieure du corps strie tout-a-fait a sa pointe and in
the right hemisphere a similar ramollissement ? 'A l'union de la
moitie anterieure avec la moitie posterieure de cet hemisphere, a une
egale distance de ces bords interne et externe, ct au point de jonction
des deux tiers superieurs avec le tiers infericur de la masse nerveuse
situee du centre ovale de Vieussens.' These were the only cerebral
lesions. In the second case?' Dans tout l'cncephale, il n'y a d'altero
que le corps strie du cote gauche.' It was a soft, pulpy mass to
within three lines of its exterior surface. Andral observes?' Le siege
du ramollissement est digne de remarque; il est exactement borne a
l'un des corps stries, ce qui n'empeche pas qu'il n'y ait paralysie des
deux membres et abolition de la faculte de parler.' Other cases have
been recorded, in which the structural lesion was confined to the
corpora striata, and a few in which the middle and posterior lobes were
implicated in the disease of the striated bodies.
" But, in the consideration of this subject, it is never to be forgotten
that the perfect power of speech?that is, the power of giving utter-
ance to our thoughts and ideas in suitable and appropriate language,
depends upon the due relation between the centres of intellectual action,
and of the encephalic motor centres, through which the volitional power
is exercised. Thoughts or ideas may be moulded for expression in the
seat of intellectual action, but the due agency of the volitional power,
to give them utterance, requires the integrity of the commissural
fibres, and of the motor centres, through which the volitional impulses
of thought operate in speech. The imperfect power of articulation
which we so constantly meet with in hemiplegic patients, I have no
doubt is owing to some structural lesion in the integrity of the motor
centre oi volition; and hence does it not necessarily follow that loss
of speech or power ot utterance will aliko result from disease of the
* " Clinique M&licalo?Maladies do l'?nccphalo, Vol. v. p. 451.
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 365
anterior lobes, or of such parts of the corpora striata as are in direct
relation with them ?
" There is not, I believe, a single instance on record in whicli the
power of utterance was retained intact, however sound and healthy
the great hemispherical ganglia may have been found, where the cor-
pora striata were both diseased. The apparently conflicting evidence
which has been adduced as to the seat of the faculty of speech admits
ol a satisfactory explanation, when thus considered in relation to the
centres of intellectual action and the motor centres of volition."
I brought this view of the subject under the notice of the
Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society in a paper, " On a Case
of Hemiplegia with cerebral softening, and in which the loss of
speech was a prominent symptom," read June 25, 1850,* and I
may here reiterate, my own mind rests in the conviction, that
the amount of pathological and other evidence which has been
amassed, irresistibly establishes the position of Gall, as to the
site of the organ of the faculty of language in the anterior lobes
of the brain, and that the power of articulate speech, that is, of
giving utterance in appropriate language to our thoughts, feelings,
* The ease was that of a lady advanced in years, who had suffered from three
attacks of apoplexy. The first occurred in October, 1844, seemed "congestive" in
its character, and passed away without any other permanent consequences than
this, that she continually used one word for another, not applying appropriate
names to the things or persons she desired to signify. The second attack, in May,
1847, left her permanently liemiplegic on the right side, the power of voluntary
motion being completely abolished, and but little sensibility being preserved, though
reflex movements could be excited, in the lower extremity, by tickling the sole of
the foot. For the remainder of her life she remained altogether incapable of speech,
not being able to say yes or no in reply to a simple question, and never getting
beyond the utterance of the monosyllable dat?dat; yet all her senses were intact;
the motions of the tongue were free, and there teas no difficulty of .deglutition. She
did not seem to have lost any of her intellectual powers ; but her emotional sen-
sibility was rather increased. Her general health continued good up to the time of
the last fatal seizure, which occurred in April, 1850, without any premonitory
symptoms. . ,
At the post-mortem examination, the upper two-thirds of the anterior lobe of the
left hemisphere was found to be in a state of complete destruction, with colourless
softening; while the middle and posterior lobes were sound and healthy. The
right hemisphere was healthy ; but the greatest change was in the ganglionic
masses, at their base, and in the commissural structure. The upper half of the
corpus striatum on the left side was destroyed by softening; the optic thalamus
was shrunken to less than half its natural size, its upper surface being greatly
?wasted; while, on the right side, a small and recent apoplectic clot was seen on
the upper and anterior surface of the corpus striatum, the whole of the upper half
of which was in a state of ramollisscment; while on the outer surface of the thalamus
also were noticed some indications of white softening. The corpus callosum was
destroyed, except at its anterior and inferior reflexion, and the anterior commissure
and fornix were gone. Microscopic examination of the softened parts presented
an abundance of compound cells and of fatty matter in the capillaries. In this
case it is quite evident that, with the disorganization of the left anterior lobe, its
functional j>ower was entirely abolished; and though the right hemisphere was
healthy, and there is every evidence, from the history of the case, that it main-
tained and exercised its functional power as a centre of intellectual action, still ie
volitional agency was wanting to give utterance to the passing thought, lor
corpus striatum on the same side was not in its integrity.
366 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY.
and emotions, requires the integrity of the corpora striata, and
their commissural fibres, as the motor channels, through which
the vjill or volitional power operates in speech. A striking
and instructive illustration was presented, in the young woman's
case to which I have so frequently alluded, of the dependance
of the power of utterance in articulate speech upon the due
relation between the centres of intellectual action and of the
motor centres, through which the will operates in speech. In
her case, the perfect integrity of the corpora striata was abun-
dantly manifest, for they were in the full play of their functional
power, as motor centres, but she was speechless so long as the
perceptive and intellectual faculties were in abeyance. Ideas,
indeed, are the pabula of thought, and articulate speech is the
interpreter and minister of thought. As we are now constituted,
our thoughts are invariably clothed and find utterance in speech;
but without ideation, without mental images and representative
ideas, there could be 110 thoughts; and without thought language
would cease. But thought there may be, and in the case of the
unfortunate\and uninstructed deaf mutes, thought there is, inde-
pendent of,"and without language. Nay, without speech, man,
by virtue of his perceptive organs, and intellectual faculties, can
observe objects, and mentally arrange, associate, and form them
into groups. He can judge of their properties and qualities,?
compare them, and even deduce inferences ;?but how weak and
incomplete are these processes of thought when language is
wanting ! Without language the mighty triumphs which science
has achieved over nature would have been impossible ; and with-
out the machinery of words, how limited and contracted would
be the process of generalization and abstraction ! Language
implies a train of thinking. We reproduce in speech the mutual
relations of objects, the relations of our thoughts to objects, and,
the order and relation of our thoughts themselves. Words, as
we have seen, are purely conventional; they have 110 natural
meaning of their own, and contain 110 thoughts apart from the
the mind, which created and uses them.
They are, in fact, the final expressions of that mental process
as well as the depository of its final results, consummated
through the instrumentality of the faculty of language, by which
knowledge becomes definite, exact, and communicable, and
through which the mind, elevated above the region of mere
ideation, increases in intellectual activity and rises to a higher
phase of development?that of thought and reason. Logic ex-
pounds the laws of thought and the art of reasoning. But, as
the instrument of thought and reasoning, the value and im-
portance of language cannot be overrated. For language implies a
train of thinking;?it is the circulating medium of our thoughts
PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. 367
the minister of thought and its interpreter. Words are the
materials of thought. For our mental images, reproduced in
the memory as representative, ideas or conceptions, when em-
bodied in the conventional symbols of words, become fixed and
definite objects of thought, and such they are to all who use
them. Nay, according to Leibnitz, words are sometimes more
than the signs or symbols of thought?tliey become thoughts.
Such are his symbolical cognitions or conceptions. Among all
the races of man, the instinctive impulse is irresistible to give
utterance in articulate sounds to his feelings, emotions, and
thoughts; and not only to fix upon articulate sounds, or names,
as the representatives of his intuitive cognitions or conceptions
of things, but also to find expressions for the different qualities
and states of things. From such beginnings, "to all the uses
and powers of articulate sounds and artificial language, how
exalted is the ascent ! how immense the efficacy and enjoy-
ment possessed by man! the intercommunion of minds in social
or scientific converse?the force and perspicacity of argument
advanced to such a degree by general terms and intellectual
abstractions?the strains of poetry, inculcating piety, magna-
nimity, and virtue?the thunders of eloquence, commanding the
destinies of nations, and involving in its splendid career the
interests both of time and eternity/'*
The constructive faculty of language in continuous speech,
involving, as it does, the power of combining words together, so
as to express the mutual relations of objects?the relations of
our thoughts to objects, and the order and relation of our
thoughts themselves, thus enables us, through our reasoning and
reflecting faculties, to judge explicitly of these relations, and to
frame a method by which our judgments may be articulately
expressed. And in this way it is that continuous speech be-
comes moulded, step by step, into a complete organ ol thought,
and that "a sentence or proposition in language answeis to a
complete thought in psychology. By a complete thought, in the
sphere of the understanding, is meant, a distinct act of com-
parison between two terms, in ivhich we apprehend the rela-
tionship that exists between them. All logical or formal thought
answers to this explanation; and the mental activity, by which
we compare terms, find out their exact agreement or disagree-
ment, give expression to this in propositions, and deduce other
popositions from them, is that which, par excellence, bears the
title of The Understanding."*!"
* Carmichael, ante cit. t MorreU's "Psychology."
(To Ic continued).
NO. VL?NEW SERIES. B B
