Notes on Belgian Lunatic Asylums, Including the Insane Colony of Gheel
=======================================================================

50
\ r
Art. IV.?
By John Webster, M.D., F.Il.S.,
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, a Governor of Bcthlem Hospital, &c.
Preface.
Having communicated in former numbers of the Psychological
Journal various observations collected during several recent
visits made to French and Scottish Lunatic Asylums, I am
induced, by the notice they then received, again to resume a
traveller's pen, in order to describe cursorily the present condition
of different Belgian institutions inspected during last autumn ;
including particularly, the insane colony of Glieel, which seems
not only the most remarkable, but is actually the oldest existing
establishment for maniacs throughout Europe. Previous how-
ever to entering upon such tasks, one or two general remarks
respecting the lunacy laws of the country just named, it is hoped
may not prove inappropriate, or be thought altogether super-
fluous.
Like England and France, considerable alterations have been
made, of late years, in the laws affecting lunatics, as also regard-
ing the administration of Asylums in Belgium. The most
important measure recently passed being the Legislative Act,
dated 18th June, 1850 ; according to which, questions connected
with lunacy institutions, and the management of patients attacked
by mental disease, are now regulated. That enactment was fol-
lowed, 011 the 1st of May, 1851, by an ordonnance of King
Leopold, containing general and organic rules to explain more
fully the previous law, and its practical application. In order to
give British readers some idea of these new regulations, it may
be briefly stated that, no person can either open, or at present
direct, any institution in Belgium destined for the treatment ot
lunatics, without first obtaining the authorization of Government;
whilst a similar permission must also be procured, for the con-
tinuance of all hitherto existing insane establishments.
Every house in which, not only several, but even one lunatic re-
sides not being a relative of the individual under whoso care
such person is placed, or unless with the curator, tutor, or provi-
sional administrator?is considered an insane institution. Before
granting a licence to receive lunatic patients into any building,
it is required ?lurst, that the situation be salubrious, the locality
well aired, ot sufficient extent, and have convenient interior
arrangements. Second, that the sexes are separately lodged,
and classified according to the nature or requirements of their
NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 51
respective mental maladies. Third, that medical and sanatory
officers be attached to each establishment, with sufficient accom-
modation for the wants and condition of the inmates; and, Fourth,
that the permanent deputation, appointed for such purposes,
must renew, every three years, their approval of every professional
attendant. This body, or " College," as it is now denominated,
may also modify the medical staff, order the dismissal of any
official, in cases of grave negligence ; or should he have omitted
to perforin duties legally required. An appeal may, however,
be made to the King against such sentence.
According to other regulations also in force, no insane person
can be at present received into an asylum, excepting as follows :
?First, upon the written petition of the tutor of an interdicted
party, accompanied by a resolution passed in the " Conseil de
Farnille" for that purpose; but in cases where interdiction has
not yet been pronounced, the provisional administrator must
petition. Second, on the demand of a local authority empowered
to grant domiciliary assistance to pauper lunatics. Third, in
virtue of the decision by a local judge, according to the 95th
article of the communal law Fourth, in execution of an order
at the suit of a public ministerial officer. Fifth, upon petition
of any person interested in the patient; but specifying the
nature of their intimacy, the particulars of the alleged case, and
any degree of relationship, or affinity, which exists betwixt
the applicant and lunatic. All these documents being further
countersigned by the commune Burgomaster, where such insane
persons are found, or reside. Lastly, upon a decision of the per-
manent deputation appointed by the Provincial Council. In
urgent cases, however, this order may, nevertheless, be made by
the Governor alone ; but, in all such examples, every fact must
be reported to the Council, at their meeting next ensuing.
In each of the preceding modes, excepting that first named,
a medical certificate must be likewise produced, describing the
party's mental condition, whom it is proposed to place under
treatment, as also every particular symptom characterizing the
actual disease. This document should neither bear an older date
than fifteen days, nor be signed by any medical officer of the
establishment, to which the patient is consigned. However, in
very urgent cases, the usual medical certificate may be dispensed
with at the moment of admission ; but its delivery is imperatively
required within twenty-four hours subsequently.
Not later than one day after the patient's reception into an
asylum, the chief officer must notify every such admission?-
!? To the provincial governor. 2. The King's procureur of t e
arrondissement. 3. The cantonal judge of the peace. 4*. I he
burgomaster of the commune ; and, 5. To the committee o in
E 2
52 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
spection. Besides these necessary formalities, the same official
authority should intimate to the Procureur of the arrondissement,
where the patient previously resided, the individual's admission ;
so that, through the local officers, he may inform the relatives
or friends of that circumstance. A similar procedure being also
adopted in cases of sequestration.
^No lunatic can he sequestrated in his own domicile, neither in
the house of a relative, nor of any person who may occupy that
responsible position, unless the mental condition of such insane
patient be certified by two medical practitioners, legally qualified.
One being appointed by the party's family, or the persons most
interested, the other by a cantonal judge of the peace, who
must satisfy himself, through personal examination, respecting
the lunatic s actual condition. Besides which, he is required to
renew his visits at least every three months. Independent of
these periodical inspections, that magistrate ought further to
leceive, every quarter, a fresh certificate from the family physi-
cian, reporting the patient's state, during the whole term of
sequestration. Moreover, he may also order at any time another
practitioner to visit the lunatic, whenever that proceeding seems
necessary, or is considered expedient.
Every lunatic establishment, or temporary asylum, is visited by
official persons specially delegated by Government for that pur-
pose ; or by the permanent committees of inspection appointed to
carry into eftect the recent regulations respecting lunacy. Each
asylum, and the patients they contain, must bo inspected at
east once, as follows : ? 1. Every half-year by the Burgomaster
o t le commune. 2. Every three months by the Procureur of the
arrondissement; and 3. Annually by the provincial Governor, or by
one member of the permanent deputation of the provincial
couna named by the governor. Temporary asylums, or pro-
mnnfV . ei^0tfi n 8' aro a,so inspected onco evory three
Rif7 i i? liro0II)astc*r of the commune in which it is
offi ? 1 !e cantonal judge of the peace, besides the
official persons previously specified
sex renl|tation8, when the aggregato inmates of each
mUents^vi-f ? * only two divisions of
of the simo Unf* 1 agitated lunatics. Should the number
four sections <ii ?,nount to "J01"0 than fifty, there must then bo
idiots, including dirty^Sntf- ;.,a8itated; and f"rious:
Whenovpr oi?lw r llents, and, fourth, convalescents.
then all dean and moro than hundred patients,
from the d^yT^M idiolf ? T ?? Pkce<l
categories. For every ten nation* constitute two distinct-
indispensable, unless undJr ,1 r' T? 8e?lu8,on 0(3,1 ,H deemed
particular circumstances; whilst
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 53
private patients ought always to be kept apart from pauper
inmates. Lastly, neither class must ever be mixed with
boarders, not insane.
Each asylum should have a medical officer; and "where two or
more are attached, one is denominated the chief physician. If
the house contains beyond one hundred patients, there ought
to be an assistant physician, or one medical pupil, resident within
the institution, or in its vicinity; by either of whom, all the
patients should be visited daily. The medical staff, their emolu-
ments, and attributes, are submitted every three years, during
the month of November, to the permanent committee of the pro-
vincial council for consideration and approval; who may also
make whatever changes they deem requisite. When the director
of an asylum, whether public or private, undertakes to support
the inmates, as also to superintend such an establishment, he must
first obtain a special authority from the permanent deputation.
Again, for every ten patients, there ought to be one attendant.
Lastly. 110 person can erect a new asylum without the sanction of
Government, or even make important changes in an old establish-
ment, unless under a similar authority; and then only after plans
of the proposed alterations have been forwarded for examination
and approval.
With reference to medical certificates required, prior to the
admission of patients into an asylum, it is expressly enacted that
the parties signing such documents shall specify when the disease
commenced, its nature, duration, and essential characteristic
symptoms; whether the patient had undergone any previous
treatment, and, generally, every other circumstance with which
the medical officer should be made cognizant. In addition to
this report, the certifying practitioner is expected to forward a
sealed communication indicating the cause, known or presumed,
of the inmate's malady, and if any relative has ever been affected
with mental disease. When these certificates refer to indigent
persons, they must be granted gratuitously, by the medical
officers of the poor belonging to the particular locality, where
such insane patients may reside, even casually.
Numerous other points, besides those now mentioned, are also
specifically alluded to, in the legislative enactments just quoted ;
but, being of secondary importance, the subject need not be pur-
sued further. My object, at present, being only to speak gene-
rally of the system which prevails in Belgium with reference to
lunatics, and the organization of asylums, not certainly to tire
readers by any lengthened legal disquisition ; believing that pro-
ceeding would seem both misplaced and supererogatory to t ie
chief purpose proposed for discussion in this communication.
Nevertheless, before adverting particularly to the institutions
1
54; NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
recently visited, it is important as a preliminary to remark that
the special inspection of every lunatic asylum?whether provi-
sional or permanent, as also temporary depots lor the insane,
during their transference from one district to another is contii e<
in each arrondissement to a committee, consisting of five, seven,
or nine members, including the district Commissary, who si s
officially. All are nominated by the King, while the ha is
renewed every two years ; but retiring members may >e re
appointed immediately. These Committees select their own
secretary, the Commissary being always chairman, and having a
casting vote in cases of equality. That officer alone summons t le
committee, names the hour, their place ot meeting, and, in case
he cannot attend himself, appoints a substitute to preside. n
short, the above government official is the moving power o
this local board of inspection. It corresponds diieet y wit \ t 10
Minister of Justice at Brussels; and the united committee is
required to visit, at least once yearly, every lunatic asylum situated
within their own particular jurisdiction. Besides these annua
visits of the entire local committee, individual members ni.us
arrange a rota amongst themselves, so that each insane establis 1-
ment shall be officially inspected, not seldomer than eveiy two
months. Such inspections must not be mere formalities, as they
embrace many important questions of inquiry and examination,
which are specifically enumerated in the new code ot lunacy
regulations already quoted.
Finally, but independent of these local committees of exami-
nation, and in conformity with the Legislative Act, dated 18th
June, 1850, a general commission has been instituted, whose
duty is to inspect every asylum in Belgium, and report respect-
ing their actual condition. These Commissioners are appointed
by royal decree, and receive instructions from the Minister of
Justice, to whom each are responsible ; their salaries and all
expenses incurred being included in the budget ot that depart-
ment rlhe present commission comprises three members viz.,
M. liid. Ducpetiaux, also Inspector of prisons; Dr Joseph
Guislain, well known throughout Europe for his great reputa-
tion ; and M. D. Sauveur, also medical Inspector at the liome
Office ; with M. N. Oudant, as secretary. In addition to visitng
officially asylums, and taking special cognizance ot everything
connected with lunacy, it is also one of the chief functions of
these gentlemen to present, annually, a detailed statement regard-
ing the insane establishments placed under their surveillance,
which is first communicated to the Legislative Chambers by the
Minister of Justice, and afterwards printed. The last Report
issued is that for 1855, which amply merits perusal, as au ablo
and instructive public document.
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 55
According to that ministerial paper, the total number of recep-
tacles tor lunatics, whether public or private, amounted to fifty-
one last December. Of thesi, seventeen were appropriated to
patients of both sexes; fifteen to male, and nineteen to female
inmates, exclusively. Again, thirty-two of the above admitted
both pauper and private patients ; five only indigents; and
fourteen received none but members of the middle, or those be-
longing to the upper classes of society.
Many of the above enumerated institutions are of limited ex-
tent : since only eighr. contain from 1U0 to 150 inmates; whilst the
population of not more than six actually exceed 200 patients.
The largest establishment at present is JSt. Julien, in Bruges?if
the insane colony of Gheel be excluded ; which latter locality can-
not be classified comparatively,?seeing, the lunatics congre-
gated in that district are distributed both in numerous private
houses of the town, and amongst neighbouring villages, as 1 shall
' O O O O '
more particularly notice in the subsequent part of this com-
munication.
Speaking generally, Belgium does not possess asylums placed
upon the same footing as in France, and in many other European
countries?where the direction, and also the management, are con-
fided to agents appointed and paid by Government. In this part
of the Continent, the institutions for lunatics, at present open, be-
long either to hospitals, private individuals, or religious associa-
tions ; who adminster them at their own risk and expense. These
peculiar circumstances have created difficulties in carrying out
some of the Commissioners' late recommendations, made with a
view to improvements ; and may in part explain why several old
institutions still remain nearly in the same ' deplorable condi-
tion" they exhibited, when the Commissioners, about three years
ago, made their first official inspection, after being appointed by
Government.
Throughout Belgium, whose present population verges on
4,520,000 inhabitants, there were very recently 4907 recognised
lunatics, ?which hence gives a ratio of one insane patient to
every 1)20 persons ; the proportion being, however, greatest in
urban, and least in rural communes. The latest statistical cal-
culation made, with reference to this point, shows that in most
towns, the amount reached to one lunatic for every 470 residents,
whereas, only one insane person was found amongst so many as
1368 inhabitants of rural districts. In regard to sex, thejnales
preponderated ; their number being 2Go0?whilst only 22/ 7 were
females : thus giving a difference of 1.3'50 per cent., or nearly one-
seventh more male than female lunatics. This fact is interesting,
since it proves, notwithstanding the greater tendency consideied
to prevail, in most countries, of females to mental diseases, m
?36 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
Belgium, generally, the predisposition seems strongest^ amongst
the?male part of its population. Of the 4,907 lunatics a >o\e
enumerated, 1,220 were classed as private patients, or pensioners ,
the rest being indigents, About one-third were deemed cura e
cases ; the remainder comprised incurables. .
By way of giving an outline of 'the general movement w lie l
characterized the insane population under treatment, during one
year, in all the asylums of Belgium, that ot 1854 may be quo ec as
instructive. During the period above named, 1309 new pa len s
are reported to have been then admitted, ot whom 402 were c is
charged cured, being exactly 30 per cent, on the admissions,
whilst 421 died; which, therefore, makes the mortality ainoun
to more than 32 per cent., and greater than the actual recoveries,
when similarly calculated. This result cannot be reckoner as y
any means satisfactory, and it also becomes certainly ( i cu o
explanation. Amongst the 1309 new patients receivec in o ie
different establishments, 1142 were cases who had never een
previously insane, whilst 1G7 were reported relapses, mB
making nearly one-eighth of the entire number.
Although impartial observers acknowledge that numerous ame
liorations still require to be accomplished, in various e gian ,nb
tutions for the insane,?both private and public, it is no ie e. .
true, many important and useful improvements have )cen e ec ec
since the permanent commission ol inspection wastiist appoin^ ci.
These public authorities state in their last Repoit, amours o lcr
facts which are gratifying, that "'1 hanks to the changes mac e m
the insane establishment of the Cellito I1 re res at Antweip ,
h'ospice at Duffel; the asylum for males in Louvain ; that ot i cnin ,
St. Nicolas, in East Flanders; Strop, near Ghent; as also it
institution of Uccle and Evere, in the environs ot Brussels, u.
number of inmates have increased in a proportion moie ot ess
remarkable. On the contrary, those receptacles for lunatics
which do not yet supply all desirable guarantees ot their gooc
condition, will be inevitably abandoned." The parties hero
alluded to must soon comprehend their real interest; so that, in
accordance with the dictates of humanity, beside future mate-
rial prosperity, they will bo compelled to introduce those reforms
the new laws prescribe, and which are likewise imperatively re-
quired for the physical comfort of many afflicted inmates, now
confined in several unlicensed establishments.
Unlike most other European capitals, Brussels possesses no
public asylum for the permanent reception of lunatics; there be-
ing only a small provisional depot attached to the civil hospital ot
St. John, which is more like a prison than an insane receptacle,
and where mad patients are temporarily confined, previous to
their transference to other establishments; generally to Qheel or
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 0/
Bruges. When I visited this temporary domicile, it contained
only ten inmates; some of whom had been merely placed within
its precincts, prior to removal elsewhere. Indeed, only a few
days afterwards, I recognised two of these identical patients at
the provisional infirmary of Gheel, where they had been sent,
preparatory to being placed with some authorized resident in
that commune.
Indubitably, ample accommodation may be found, for insane
members of the middle and upper classes, in the private
" maisons de sante," near Brussels. For instance, in that of
. penaeyer-Dupont, at Evere, containing, on an average, fifty-
six inmates; or at the larger institution belonging to M. Vander-
kindere, having upwards of eighty patients, which occupies an
elevated, salubrious position, not far from the capital. Here, the
general aspect, means of treating insane patients, and also various
modern appliances, seemed very satisfactory when I visited
the establishment. Again, should parties feel desirous of send-
ing their relatives to new scenes or more distant localities, then,
the excellent " inaison de santd," at Ans et Glain, near Li&ge,
the property of M. Abry, and whose son-in-law is the resident
physician, may be selected. The latter institution now specified
occupies an admirable position, possesses an extensive yet
beautiful prospect over the neighbouring city, as also the fertile
valley of the Aleuse; and having personally examined this precinct
and buildings?then containing sixty-five patients?I can speak
favourably of its several capabilities. Notwithstanding such varied
means for treating demented persons?not victims of poverty in
addition to their mental diseases?still, the absolute want of n large
public asylum for indigent lunatics, in such a populous locality
as the metropolitan district, is remarkable ; particularly when
readers remember that in the arrondissement of Brussels, con-
taming a population of about 415,000, there are nearly GOO
insane persons reputed natives, most ot whom now occupy
asylums in other provinces. So great a desideratum requires
some speedy remedy, for the sake of humanity, altogether irre-
spective of other equally potent considerations.
Although the superior Administrative Board of existing Brus-
sels Charitable Institutions have not yet come to any determina-
tion respecting this deficient accommodation for lunatics within
their own jurisdiction, that question has not been overlookec.
Indeed, various members of Council, the Inspectors of lunatics,
and also the Provincial Governor, it is said, seem fully impresse
with the great importance of constructing an asylum of t le rs
rank, for receiving indigent patients, which shall in future o via ?
any necessity of sending their insane poor elsewhere. ie ca^?
urgent; anil however great might be the preliminary cxp^n
58 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
which such an establishment must entail upon the Biussels
hospital administration, it ultimately would prove mos >ene
ficial, and relieve the city from all opprobrium of icing now
obliged to solicit admission for their necessitous insane pa len s
into the asylums of other districts. This deficiency oug i o
be supplied, whereby the metropolitan province of la an
shall no longer remain without having a public asylum, supp y
ing adequate accommodation for the insane pool born on is
soil; and who, therefore, possess the strongest claims o par
ticipate in the benefits which such an establishment wou c
disseminate. . ,
Considering the limited extent of Belgium, the aggrt ga c
asylums for the insane it contains are much ?0,e. numerous
than in almost any other European country, l he insti u ions
are, however, generally of small size ; nay, many have on y rom
ten to thirty inmates. The largest numbers are locatei in as
and West Flanders ; the chief places being Ghent and luges, or
in the immediate vicinity of these towns. Ot course, this re mar
does not apply to the insane colony ot Gheel, which is si ua c
in the eastern part of the province of Antwerp, not tar rom i s
frontier towards the Rhine, and contains more lunatic pa ion s
than any other district; but the inmates are there vuy' i 1 er
ently placed, being lodged with cottagers, peasants, am o lers
not congregated together in a confined public asylum.
The above facts, and recent investigations respecting 10 n\ini
her of lunatics under treatment in ^ different insane os a > is
ments, besides those which still remain with relatives, piove la
mental diseases are by no means of un frequent occurrence
throughout Belgium; and, if compared with neighbouring king-
doms, they appear even more numerous, 'lhe ratio, as alieai y
stated, amounts to one lunatic in every 920 inhabitants ; w nc 1,
therefore, constitutes a higher proportion than in France, Ger-
many, or England. The causes of this marked frequency ot
insanity amongst Belgians, not being one of the objects proposed
in these notes, 1 consequently only allude to the question, tiom
considering it of much interest, and deserving farther discussion.
Nevertheless, hereditary tendency to mental disease, the preva-
lence of scrofula amongst the lower classes, their poor innutritious
diet, frequently more vegetable than animal, weakened physical
frames?too often caused by hard work, and privations in the
labouring population?with the mixed or mongrel races which
seem to characterize many natives of this country, must exert
considerable influence, unquestionably. These peculiar features
certainly attracted my special observation, when recently travel-
ling through Belgium. In its large prisons?many of which wore
inspected, in mendicity, or poor-houses, lunatic asylums, the
churches?where crowded congregations then often assembled,?
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF G1IEEL. 59
at railway stations, and in market-places this occurred. Indeed,
wherever numerous bodies of spectators got collected together,
even casual observers could not avoid noticing the diversity of
race, and outward physical aspect, which the populace around
then supplied for ethnological meditation. The dark hair and
swarthy features of Spain ; the blue eyes, light auburn locks,
and true Saxon countenances ; the complexion, gait, and manner
of genuine natives of France; and, lastly, the more staid,
phlegmatic mental and bodily characteristics of Dutchmen, might
be everywhere easily distinguished. In short, throughout 110
country of Europe, which I have ever visited, was the same
difference of peoples so peculiarly observable, as seemed to
prevail in the places under discussion.
Before describing the several public asylums which form the
subject of subsequent remarks, it may be premised, with reference
generally to Belgian establishments for the insane that, amongst
the fifty-one asylums now open, three-fourths are situated in
towns, or their immediate environs; while only about one-fourth
occupy rural communes. From this cause, their precincts are
often of very limited extent; and, consequently, such institutions
become badly adapted for the treatment of lunatics. This remark
particularly applies to Ghent, and likewise to Bruges; although
to the latter city, less strongly. However, as in these districts
the largest public asylums are situated, they therefore will form the
chief subject of future observations. To notice small establish-
ments, which contain very few inmates, would prove superfluous;
consequently, I will at once proceed to describe the two rather
extensive institutions for lunatics, located in the ancient and once
powerful capital of West Flanders?namely, Bruges.
Preliminary, however, to commencing that undertaking, it
seems desirable to give some outline of the features which most
Belgian asylums exhibited very recently, in order to contrast
their former state with the present No authority in reference
to such matters can be considered so truly unexceptionable, and
less liable to express exaggerated or unjust condemnation of the
public asylums in Belgium, than a native of that kingdom; since
his feelings would be naturally inclined to take an opposite direc-
tion. A more trustworthy and also impartial judge cannot there-
fore be found, or one better able to speak upon tfie subject with
weight, than AL Guislain, who says, in his first lecture, " Sur les
Phonopathies," published 18-32, "Lunatics in Belgium remain
forgotten in sombre prisons. They resemble merchandize amongst
speculators, who make them an object of infamous traffic, like
animals from the farm-yard, fit only to be bought and sold, as
horses or swine. Much talk has certainly taken place during
the last thirty years ; but so little has yet been accomplished that
our afflicted maniacs have been only turned round in a \ icious
GO NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
circle of selfish and fatal administrative influences. To show
that asylums are now improved, I commence with those a
Bruges.
In this formerly opulent city, and, several centuries ago, a
great emporium of trade, with upwards of 150,000 in ><i >1 an
but now reduced to less than one-third of that num jer, w 1 .
its commerce is almost annihilated?there are at prcsen
extensive institutions for treating lunatics namely, ? 11 >
and St. Dominick. Having visited botli asylums early as k p
tember, I therefore propose giving a brief account ot t le insp
tion then undertaken. c , mnct
1. St. Julien Asylum.?This institution is one ot the most
ancient establishments for receiving lunatics, thioug ion
gium. It is situated in a wide, airy street, neai tierai 1 j
station, close to the Porta Santa?one of the gates o rug
and closely adjoining its ramparts. Being originally a com en ,
buildings are old, and some appeared not well adaptet or l
present purpose. Still, considerable improvements in ie in i
arrangements having been since effected, it is muc i 'csor e ,.
by patients of both sexes. According to tradition, us y
formed a hostelry for pilgrims, so early as the seven i c y ?
but it was not till about A.P. 1500, that insane pusons
received within its precincts for protection anil ti catmen .
taclied to the present lunatic institution ol St. Julien, am
the same superintendence, two other?although muc i srn.i
?establishments, are also opened tor the treatment o perso
afflicted with mental disease. One is that ot St. Anne, si ua t i
in a healthy and agreeable district near Court ray ; the o lei
being the Convent of Cortenbergh, lyiug between Brusse s am
Louvain, in a very picturesque locality, celebrated for salu >n y.
This house has been recently rebuilt, according to the appiovt <
principles of modern architecture; but, being intended sole \
for the accommodation of female patients ot tho upper and
middle classes, the number received is therefore very limited.
Having thus three separate establishments?all under the same
superior direction?the relatives of private patients may there-
fore secure, if considered advisable, a change of residence, so
that those who wish can then pass the winter ill town, and
summer in the country.
When I visited St Julien?early last September, the total
population of the chief institution, situated in Bruges, amounted
to 310 lunatics; of whom 166 were male and 144 female inmates.
Of these, half were tranquil patients, seventy-live agitated,
thirty-eight epileptics, thirty idiots, and twelve wero then con-
sidered convalescents. Amongst the whole, thirty were classified
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GIIEEL. 61
as dirty persons ; the sexes being nearly equal, in reference to
that, particular feature. No female lunatic appeared in camisole,
or undergoing any kind of bodily restraint whatever. However,
one male patient was temporarily confined by a strait-waistcoat,
whilst two men and one woman were in seclusion cells; all three
being much agitated and very violent. The general population
seemed tranquil, considering the number of inmates congregated
in different divisions. Many females occupied themselves in lace-
making, domestic employments, and in preparing or mending
clothes for residents. A large number of male patients were
engaged in agricultural work on the adjoining farm, which
amounts to twenty acres, belonging to this institution ; as like-
wise in the garden attached to the building for private male
pensioners. These pay a larger sum for board than the indigent
residents, and varies from 500 to 2500 francs annually ; whereas,
the allowance received from communes, for pauper patients,
amounts to only 75 centimes per diem?that is, 273 francs, or
11Z. annually ; which truly seems a very low remuneration for
such inmates?feeding, lodging, and clothing included.
Being in most parts an ancient structure, this asylum is not
conveniently arranged. Theapartments are too crowded in several
instances, and its buildings being sometimes very close together,
there seemed not sufficient separation of several wards occupied
by the different sexes. Nevertheless, much has been done to
remedy existing defects; and considerable improvements are
also in contemplation. The patients' court-yards are four in
number, some being, however, rather limited ; and there are,
besides, three small gardens for inmates taking open-air exercise,
with another of greater magnitude for pensioners, whose number
amounted to forty-eight, comprising twenty-two females, and
twenty-six male lunatics. Of these, several were, I understood,
natives of Great Britain. Indeed, one was pointed out who had
only recently arrived from the north of England.
Two physicians and one surgeon are attached to the St Julien
Asylum, one of whom pays daily visits, or oftener, if necessary ;
but there is no resident medical ofhcer. The chief authority
and director is M. le Canon Maes, who has a lease of his pre-
sent premises from the Mendicity Depot of Bruges. That
reverend gentleman may be therefore considered the pioprietor.
Ho is principal manager, takes all pecuniary risk upon himself,
and must be at whatever expenses either improvements or alter-
ations may entail. Those now essential are certainly considerable,
in order to meet the requirements of constituted public authori-
ties ; and, consequently, to render the interior more in unison with
the present ideas entertained, regarding what seems proper treat-
ment for lunatics.
62 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
Having been only provisionally licensed until the 1st of last
April, on condition that various important changes, admitted by
impartial parties as urgently required, were effected in its in-
ternal arrangements, this institution remains at present without
legal sanction ; and will continue, till the Committee of Inspec-
tion's suggestions are completed. Different propositions were made
to arrive at a satisfactory solution, but, hitherto, every effort has
proved unsuccessful. As the Communal Council of Bruges have
not yet sanctioned any of the plans proposed, and as the admi-
nistrators of hospital property, the Inspectors of lunatics, besides
the parties interested pecuniarily in this establishment, all enter-
tain very different opinions with reference to the questions in
dispute, some time may yet elapse ere matters shall be arranged
satisfactorily. This dilemma is much to be regretted, since the
hospital of St. Julien has long been known as a useful institu-
tion ; and if properly reorganized, whilst various admitted defects
were removed, it would doubtless confer most useful benefits
upon those unfortunate persons, for whose individual advan-
tage it is destined. The anomalous position, in which this insti-
tution is now placed, forms the subject of a special notice in the
Committee of Inspection's last Report, who think it cannot
much longer exist as at present. The ameliorations demanded
must be carried out efficiently, or the establishment will be shut
up and suppressed.
During the past year fifty-two new patients were admitted,
thirty-two being male, and twenty female lunatics; twenty-
seven left the asylum cured, of whom nine were male and eigh-
teen female inmates, and thirty-three died ; the male patients in
that category being twenty-one in number, with only twelve
females. These figures hence show that insanity oftener affected
male persons applying for relief at this institution, and fewer
were discharged cured; whilst the proportion of deaths ranged
higher amongst that sex, than those recorded in female patients.
Such results, however, become less remarkable when it is known
that two-thirds of the inmates were classed as incurable lunatics ;
and in about one-third only was a slight hope entertained of ever
doing much good, still less gave any prospect of recovery. In
fact, the mental diseases of many being of long standing, their
favourable termination consequently appeared utterly hopeless.
2. St. Dominiclc Asylum?This institution?like the former,
also an ancient convent is situated in one of the streets of Bruges,
and has been now appropriated for the treatment of insane
patients upwards of half a century. Since 18Ml, the asylum has
received considerable augmentations, in reference to accom-
modation ; and, at the same time, various ameliorations have
been effected m its interior arrangements. Nevertheless, from
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GIIEEL. 63
the buildings being defective?some of which appeared rather an-
cient?and although several new constructions have been recently
erected, this establishment is not considered well adapted as a resi-
dence for private patients. Hence, the proprietors, who are five in
number, have lately leased a chateau named " St. Michel," with a
garden and farm of about 100 acres attached. This " maison de
sant^" is nearly two miles from Bruges, on the Court-ray road,
and had, when 1 visited it, twenty-nine male pensioners, as also
twenty convalescent patients of the indigent class, sent from the
town establishment to labour in the fields; which work often
materially promotes their ultimate recovery. The central asylum
likewise receives, according to an arrangement with the Depart-
ment of Justice, lunatics accused of crimes, and those who have
been convicted by ordinary courts of law, or sent from various
prisons. This criminal category forms a separate section, and
quite distinct from other inmates ; whilst such parties are placed
in courts or cells specially constructed, to prevent escape.
When I inspected St. Dominick, the population comprised 330
persons, consisting of J 82 male, and 118 female lunatics; amongst
the latter sex eighteen being pensioner patients, belonging to the
upper and middle classes. Besides these numbers, twenty-nine
insane men, paying from oOO up to 3000 francs annually, with
twenty indigent lunatics, occupied in agricultural labour, as pre-
viously stated, were then lodged at St. Michel's ; so that the
total inmates of the united establishments under discussion,
amounted to 37!) individuals. In the town department, the
patients are divided into live categories; viz., 1st, convalescent;
2nd, tranquil lunatics; 3rd, agitated; 4th, turbulent; and 5th,
idiots, with dirty inmates. The same classification being adopted
in both sexes throughout.
Again in reference to the nature of their mental maladies, ac-
cording to information supplied to my inquiries, it appears twenty-
one were epileptics, ten being mules and ten females; twenty-
eight men and twenty-six women were classed as dirty patients ;
thirty males and twenty-eight females as agitated ; whilst only
two male and one female inmates were said to be paralytic. I he
remainder being all reported tranquil lunatics ; a large propor-
tion of whom consisted, as elsewhere, of chronic cases, aud con-
sidered incurable. The buildings comprised twelve court-yards,
six being appropriated for male, and six for female residents , the
agitated, and those requiring more surveillance than the rest,
occupying very properly the central portion.
Some dormitories contained forty beds, others only fifteen,
but all appeared clean, and also comfortable: particularly,
when it is remembered the inmates were chiefly of the pauper
class. The sleeping chambers for dirty patients were uniformly
64 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
single-bedded, well ventilated, entirely free from any offensive
odour, and seemed really much better than I have occasionally
observed in other countries, for that class of lunatics. The general
aspect of the asylum appeared most satisfactory : both male and
female residents being also neatly and properly clothed; whilst the
physical health of all was reported particularly good. No female
amongst the entire population being sick or in bed ; and only one
male invalid, slightly indisposed from bodily disease, occupied the
infirmary, along with a soldier, almost convalescent, from an attack
of intermittent fever he had caught when in garrison at Newport;
where that malady proved, as usual, very prevalent during the
recent summer, and of which he had become the victim, besides
labouring under severe mental disease. Five female patients
were confined in camisoles?but free, and walking about in the
agitated court-yard ; another being in temporary seclusion. No
male lunatic was in anyway physically restrained, although two ex-
cited maniacs occupied seclusion cells, having become very excited
and violent. However, this proceeding would not likely be of
long continuance, and merely till they got more tranquil. If not
entirely abolished, restraint is now as little employed as possible ;
the general opinions respecting camisoles, and their utility, beiug
much the same in this country as in France. Further, in the cases
now mentioned, the strait-waiscoat was not tightly, but loosely
put on : a.great object being, apparently, to prevent the patient
from injuring either others or themselves; and chiefly to confine
such parties' hands, so as thus to disable them from tearing their
clothes, or so forth. Notwithstanding the number of agitated
patients, the appearance of the entire population seemed that of
quietude. The females everywhere were certainly more noisy
and talkative, than the male inmates. But comparing this estab-
lishment with analogous collections of insane residents through-
out France, there prevailed much less violence and excitement
than I have often observed in that country, when visiting similar
institutions.
Occupying and amusing the lunatics always constitute a prin-
cipal object in the treatment pursued. Many male patients are
consequently employed as tailors, weavers, spinners, and in other
employments; besides numbers also in tho gardens, or at agricul-
tural labour. One interesting and peculiar feature deserves how-
ever special notice?namely, the numerous former patients who
have now become assistants, or " aides infirmiers," in the different
wards: of whom, not less than thirty male lunatics of this
description are so inscribed, according to a recent statement.
Amongst female patients, the same system is pursued ; henco, not
less than sixteen were also registered as assistants, on their own
side of the institution.
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEIiL. Go
Numbers were likewise engaged in the laundry, knitting
stockings, making clothes, for other patients, as also in the
kitchen; whilst all the bread consumed in this large establish-
ment being made on the premises, the bakehouse therefore forms
no inconsiderable means of employment to inmates. According to
present opinions entertained by the executive authorities of this
asylum, physical labour, as a means of distraction, exercises often
most beneficial influences upon the mental condition of lunatics; ,
consequently, it is always very zealously promoted. Neverthe-
less, no person is ever forced to labour, either through moral or
physical restraint; that object being always attempted by the aid
of example, or the desire of gain in those who are induced to work,
and by granting small favours, with additional indulgences to the
most industrious. Amusements and recreations are likewise assi-
duously promoted. Card-playing, draughts, dominoes, billiards,
and gymnastics being very often resorted to as favourite sources
of enjoyment.
The medical staff of this asylum consists of a chief physician,
Dr Van Hecke?well known as an experienced practitioner,
resident in Bruges,?with two' assistant physicians, and one con-
sulting surgeon ; while the lay officials comprise a director and
secretary, besides an almoner. By way of conveying some defi-
nite idea of the number of persons employed, and hence actually
required in- managing such an extensive establishment as that
of St. Dominick?containing always upwards of 300 lunatic
inmates?it may be interesting to mention that, on the male side,
besides the chief overseer, there are constantly twelve attendants,
of whom nine superintend the workshops and garden, with six as-
sistants,and six sub-assistants; irrespective of various convalescent
patients, who also give their services in different departments.
On the female side, in addition to the lady-superior, who over-
looks all the others, there are thirteen religious sisters of the
order of St. Dominick. These superintend the different wards,
one in each, as also the clothing department, the kitchen, the
laundry, the work-rooms, and dining-hall. The above sisters have,
besides four head domestics, an unlimited number of female
servants, taken from convalescent patients, upon a similar plan
to that pursued in the male department. Not being permitted,
by superior authority, to have " sceurs and fr^res rcligieux " in
the same institution, all the attendants on indigent male patients
consist of laymen. However, at the succursal asylum of St. Michel,
where only male inmates are admitted, six religious brothers,
with four lay-domestics, placed under the superintendence of a
clergj'man, manage the establishment; whilst a physician?Dr.
Beckman?living in the neighbourhood, takes charge of all
medical treatment and professional surveillance.
NO. V.? NEW SERIES. F
66 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
In order to obtain well qualified lay-attendants, and in suffi-
cient number, when convalescent patients exhibit an aptitude, or
express any wish to become regular domestics in this asylum,
rather than leave, such parties are first placed on the list of can-
didates ; when they obtain a particular dress, assigned by way of
distinction. After fully proving their fitness for office, and so soon
as a vacancy occurs, they are then installed as effective attendants.
The above system has hitherto answered admirably; most of the
present male servants employed at St. Dominick having been
formerly patients. It is hence specially mentioned as worthy of
trial, and if approved, for adoption elsewhere; since nothing is
confessedly more difficult than to obtain good attendants oil
the insane; whereas, the result here has proved quite otherwise.
One feature at this institution also deserves special mention,
?namely, the excellent medical register at present kept of all
cases admitted. Such proceeding, certainly, is only in accordance
with the recent law; but as similar documents seemed not inva-
riably forthcoming elsewhere, and, I fear, do not always even
exist in the form required, more credit is therefore due to Dr.
Van Hecke, for the manner in which these valuable memoranda
are officially preserved. I looked over several, and found records of
symptoms, and treatmeht; besides post-mortem, reports, which
were most interesting. This repertorium of facts is already large:
and doubtless will every year become more valuable to the prac-
tical physician, as likewise to zealous psychological pathologists.
Although not of much apparent significance, nevertheless, as it
shows the great attention paid, even to minute matters of detail,
a very recent improvement, or rather an important addition, which
has been made to the male wards of St. Dominick, deserves
being specially mentioned. Spittoons are now placed in such
apartments, particularly those occupied by dirty patients. In this
country, where almost every man and boy, nay, even women,
seem slaves to that degrading, filthy custom, and health-destroying
?both of body and mind?abomination, Tobacco-smohiny,
these appendages become absolutely essential throughout any
inhabited dwelling, whether for sane people or maniacs. There-
fore, irrespective of sanatory considerations, as most lunatics, by
thus placing such saliva recipients within easy reach, may be
taught to usm them, instead of soiling floors or walls with their
offensive spittings, internal discipline thereby becomes materially
promoted. I am no advocate of smoking; on the contrary, would
strongly condemn such an unseemly habit?or vice, more
correctly speaking?from believing it proves both injurious to the
mental faculties, and inimical to the physical powers of many
votaries. Nevertheless, if mankind will obstinately use this dele-
terious weed, assuredly the most excusable proselytes are lunatics.
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 67
Therefore, spittoons ought always to he placed in every similar
institution where smoking is permitted.
During the past year, 100 new patients were admitted into
both establishments ; sixty-one being male, and thirty-nine fe-
male lunatics. The total cures amounted to forty-four cases, of
whom thirty-three were male, and eleven female inmates; while
thirty-six deaths were recorded, twenty-three being of male, and
thirteen female residents. It thus appears that the ratio of
recoveries wasforty-four, and the deaths thirty-six per cent.; when
both results be calculated, according to actual admissions. > More
fatal cases occurred during June, October, and February, than
throughout any other months of last year; whereas, the fewest
happened in May, August, and December. The total number of
persons who passed through the infirmary in the course of twelve
months, from being attacked by bodily disease, was seventy-nine,
of whom thirty-six died, as already stated, and thirty-eight reco-
vered; thereby leaving five patients inmates of that department
on the 1st of January; thus showing that physical disease pre-
vailed here much more frequently throughout the former, than
during the present season.
Having stated in a previous paragraph that the strait-waistcoat
and personal restraint are not yet entirely laid aside at the St.
Dominick Asylum, it may be now mentioned as instructive, and
also further to illustrate the above important question, bearing
upon the treatment of lunatics, that in this institution, where
usually about fourteen to every 100 inmates appear agitated
patients, the cases are but rare for which the medical officer feels
obliged to institute coercive measures; seeing, cellular isolation
generally proves sufficient. When bodily restraint is actually
used, the camisole, or leathern bracelet, are the only means em-
ployed ; and then chiefly in suicidal persons, and excited eroto-
maniacs. With reference to the application of physical coercion,
such as those just mentioned, it was reported by Dr Van Hecke,
that amongst 377 lunatics under treatment, during the entire year,
eighteen male and twenty-four female patients were subjected to
cellular repression ; which, therefore, represents a totality of
fifty-four days. Further, eight men and ten women were confined
by strait-waistcoats; whilst twelve male and sixteen female
lunatics temporarily wore leathern bracelets. Lastly, eleven pa-
tients had been put in camisole, during two to four days con-
secutively, besides seven others for a much longer period. These
authentic and official reports, showing the actual employment of
personal restraint at this asylum, would be considered excessive
in England, or altogether unnecessary, if not reprehensible.
Still, it should be remembered that, throughout various con-
tinental countries, the application of camisoles, in furious or
F 2
G8 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
dangerous maniacs, becomes not only justified by several con-
scientious and experienced practitioners, but then even strongly
defended from being, according to their opinion, both beneficial
in repressive results under the above circumstances, and likewise
proves often humane in its judicious application.
Ghent.
Another district where numerous lunatics are at present con-
gregated, in different asylums, is the ancient city whose name has
been given above. Within this populous locality?now designated
the modern Manchester of Belgium?having upwards of 100,000
inhabitants, but formerly nearly double that amount, and de-
serving special notice by travellers on account of its historical
reminiscences, valuable pictures, and venerable buildings, there are,
besides two large public establishments for lunatics of each sex, the
Hospice of "St. Jean de Dieu"?although actually of very limited
extent; next, two small asylums attached to the great and little
Bdguinage; then, the " Maison de Santd" for females in Rue
d'Assaut; and, lastly, that known as the " Strop," which is situated
011 a rising ground, not very far from one of the gates of Ghent,
but where only male patients belonging to the middle and upper
classes are received. These seven establishments generally con-
tain about (130 insane residents, upon an average; the majority
being female lunatics.
Before adverting to different institutions in Ghent, besides the
fact that, a greater number of female compared with male lunatics
are enumerated, it is important to add as an authentic observa-
tion that, mental diseases seem exceedingly common amongst its
general population. Thus, M. Guislain says, there is one lunatic
to every 302 inhabitants, which constitutes, therefore, an enormous
?proportion ; indeed,much greater than in either Germany, France,
or England, and altogether unique. Without attempting now to
explain this remarkable circumstance, however singular it appears,
I at once proceed to consider?
1. The Asylum for Males.?This public institution is situated
almost in the centre of Ghent, having a sluggish canal on one side
and adjoining a broad street of considerable traffic on the other.
It is quite close to the " Hotel de Flandre," where I happened to
take up my quarters. As the principal entrance can be only
approached by a narrow lane, visitors may hence easily pass its
antique gateway unobserved ; which actually happened to myself,
when first endeavouring to find the venerable-looking porta!
whereby I gained admittance. The building now appropriated
for receiving male indigent lunatics was an ancient Alexieu
convent, constructed some centuries ago. This seems proved by
its very old chapel, where the insane residents still assemble for
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. G9
divine worship, and which really deserves inspection by anti-
quarians, or any curious archa3ological amateur.
This entire property belongs to the city: and in everything
appertaining to its administration, is represented by a Commis-
sion of the Civil Hospitals. Having been condemned by com-
petent authorities, and likewise by public opinion, as wholly unfit
for the reception of lunatics, any opinion in reference to many
defects seems, therefore, supererogatory. However, I would only
further remark, after quoting an observation of one of its own able
officers, who says in a recent publication, " The whole structure
offers an accumulation of arrangements the most deplorable/'
that whenever the truly magnificent institution for male patients,
now erecting near the Bruges gate, in one of the city faubourgs,
is completed, this antiquated building will be closed as a lunatic
asylum, and appropriated for other purposes ; one of which, report
states, being a barrack for lodging the local fire brigade. But
happen what may, the sooner every insane resident now confined
within the precincts of this venerable convent gets removed to the
new asylum, so much the better ; as, then, all sombre recollections
of this melancholy abode will at least have become matters of
history, if they be not forgotten, by the present generation.
Being only kept open as an asylum until the new institu-
tion is ready to receive its present inmates, to make any remarks
regarding the accommodation now supplied appears out of place
and superfluous; therefore, without adverting to such questions, I
would observe that, at the period of my visit to this receptacle,
the total insane male lunatics amounted to 260 ; amongst whom
30 were epileptics, 21 agitated, and 16 dirty patients. All were in-
digents, excepting 45, who paid a moderate board; but even these
did not, however, belong to the superior classes of society; every '
inmate of that category being now placed at the " Maison de
Santd" of Strop, which is, although separate, still under the same
management. The general health of residents was reported, on
the whole, as satisfactory. Not more than twelve patients were
sick in bed, whose physical diseases seemed of a mild description,
and none suffered from any serious malady. One lunatic was in
camisole, while another wore leather gloves, to prevent him tear-
ing his own clothes. These were the only persons under bodily
restraint; hence, speaking generally, the whole establishment ex-
hibited a tranquil aspect, including the quarter appropriated to
agitated and furious patients.
.Respecting the causes of insanity in patients recently admitted,
moral influences were reported the most frequent. Drunken-
ness being likewise often assigned. Dissipation, with misconduct,
produced madness in several instances; and lastly, hereditary
predisposition seemed to have existed in about one-third the
70 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
total admissions. This transmissibility of mental diseases was,
however, proved to prevail, in a greater ratio, from father to son,
than from mother to her male offspring; thereby showing that,
here as elsewhere, insanity oftener descended through the same
sex than the opposite. Indeed, it was confidently said, grand-
fathers more likely transmit mental complaints than the grand-
mother to descendants.
In one of the court-yards visited, about twenty idiot boys were
assembled, who seemed, on our entering, going through mili-
tary evolutions, under the directions of a fugle-man. This occu-
pation was encouraged both for physical exercise, as also to
endeavour, if possible, to excite their mental faculties by making
them keep the step when marching, and further to awaken atten-
tion, during various bodily manoeuvres. Afterwards, the poor little
fellows cheerfully sung a hymn, then performed some gymnastic
exercises: and, notwithstanding the darkened state of their intel-
lects, besides being confined in this small area, which constituted
almost the sole outer world they knew, they appeared healthy,
looked contented, and even happy, in spite of many mental, as
likewise material, privations.
Another commendable feature should likewise be here men-
tioned?namely, that music, both vocal and instrumental, is much
cultivated in this abode of affliction. The reverend almoner
zealously promotes such sources of gratification, in which he is
greatly aided by the assistant physician; besides various frh'es
belonging to the establishment, who are often performers. These
musical reunions are, however, encouraged more as recreations
than like any scholastic instruction. A worthy frbre plays on the
piano, another on a bass fiddle, the clarionet, and so forth, whilst
others, and patients, join in chorus. The evening previous to my
visit, one of these much-appreciated musical parties had assembled,
whereof ample evidence appeared in the large hall, into which I
was shown next morning, prior to visiting the various dormitories;
since various musical instruments, and other appurtenances used,
during the fete, were still remaining in that apartment.
During the past year, sixty-two new patients were admitted,
nineteen discharged cured, and twenty-eight died : which results
show that, the proportion of deaths was even more numerous than
actual recoveries. Amongst the cases terminating fatally, fifteen
were reported as labouring under dementia, six had general
paralysis, four were examples of mania, and the remaining threo
died from less defined varieties of mental disease. With regard to
seasons, in reference to admissions, cures, and deaths, according
to the experience of past years, it appears that, more patients
were usually admitted during warm weather; as, for instance, in
the months of May, June, and July. The largest number of cures
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GIIEEL. Vl
being reported within six months after the patients' admission ;
whilst the deaths proved most numerous during the cold, or first
months of each year. Again, respecting suicides, it may be men-
tioned as highly interesting that, from 1816 to 1852 inclusive, only
eight cases of self-murder occurred among the whole male lunatics
of this establishment. Such results may be partly explained by
the fact that, great vigilance is constantly exercised, on the at-
tendants' part, towards suspected suicidal patients, who are never
left alone, but always associate with the other inmates. During
day-time, that class of maniacs remain constantly under surveil-
lance ; and at night they sleep always in a dormitory surrounded
by other lunatics, capable of watching over their conduct. Lastly,
in the worst cases of that description, one religious brother belong-
ing to this establishment occupies a bed adjoining the suspected
individual, so as to notice every suspicious movement, and thus
be ready for any emergency which may supervene.
The medical staff consists of one physician?the eminent M.
Guislain?a consulting surgeon, and an assistant physician; but
none of these officers reside on the premises. However, when
the patients are removed to the new Asylum, a resident physician
will be installed. The whole attendants are male persons ; and
consist of twenty-two religious brothers, four domestics, with four
assistants : thus making, altogether, thirty individuals to super-
intend 2(50 lunatics?viz., one to every nine patients. Over
these, a resident director presides, who is a clergyman, and takes
the chief management. There is, besides, an almoner; the entire
establishment being administered under the supreme direction
of the City Hospital Commission. That body has constantly
endeavoured, it is only just to observe on the present occasion, to
do everything in their power to diminish the admitted insalu-
brity of this locality; and have, further, seldom been deterred
from making any reasonable sacrifice to attain that result, or to
promote the comfort of residents; whilst the zeal and talent of
M. Guislain appear constantly exerted towards promoting other
objects equally benevolent.
2. Asylum for Females.?The establishment which now
comes under review is situated not far from the ancient Asylum
for male patients just described. It lies in the same quarter of
Ghent, being close to the street and canal already mentioned?
having only intervening the large buildings, at present occupied
as the College of Jesuits. According to an inscription still visible
on a stone placed over the antiquated gateway, the year 1605 is
stated to be the date of its foundation. The present structure was
erected by the magistracy of Ghent, upon ground formerly consti-
tuting part of the ancient ramparts, but which now forms almost
the centre of the modern city,
72 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
Being surrounded by streets, many private houses, besides
public buildings, and Laving a large factory close to its very
ontrance?the noise of whose revolving machinery never ceases
during day-time?the outward condition of this Asylum seems by
no means favourable. In the interior, with reference to the actual
number of its inmates, sufficient space appears wanting for the
existing population. Hence, it is only through various ingenious
combinations, carried forward by the constant zeal of managing au-
thorities, that this institution has been made convenient, or able to
contain comfortably its numerous residents under treatment.
Like the establishment for males, it receives lunatics of the in-
digent classes belonging to Ghent; and likewise, by special per-
mission, patients from other districts. The property belongs to
the Civil Hospitals' Commission, and is managed under their
administration. Although greatly superior to the male depart-
ment in many attributes, nevertheless, impartial observers can-
not but agree in the expressed opinion of several officials, that a
time not distant must arrive, when some new locality will have
to be chosen, and another structure erected, for the reception ot
indigent females; much of the same description as the building
now in course of construction for pauper male lunatics. In the
meantime, however, this institution continues to render impor-
tant services to suffering humanity, being distinguished by the
order, as also cleanliness everywhere prevalent, besides the caro
and attention exhibited towards patients, lo carry out these
important objects more effectually, the administration propose to
add an adjoining house to the present accommodation ; so that
several further ameliorations may be accomplished, which cannot
be now fully realized, in consequence oi the limited space pos-
sessed, and from other existing inconveniences.
When perambulating the different dormitories, court-yards,
and other appurtenances of this Asylum, although some appeared
rather of a limited extent?owing to the nature ot its ancient
buildings, and confined interior precincts?the cleanliness, excel-
lent ventilation, general tranquillity, and good order which pre-
vailed throughout, were very gratifying to behold. Much atten-
tion appeared given to keep the various wards always thoroughly
ventilated. This becamo the moro necessary, although it was
attended with greater difficulty in effecting, seeing apparatus hail
to be applied to an anciently constructed domicile like the present.
^1. Guislain has especially undertaken this very responsible
task; and, judging from various effects already produced, by tho
machinery employed for that purpose, as likewise the absenco oi
all unpleasant odours, when passing through different apartments
at an early hour, visitors might conclude on such evidence that
these hygienic operations have proved successful. Consequently,
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 7o
critics may fairly say tliat one step in advance had been rr.ade
towards solving the much disputed problem?Can efficient ven-
tilation be ever really accomplished ?
Throughout, the wards looked very clean, the inmates tranquil,
well clothed, and apparently contented. In one apartment I
saw about 120 patients at work, many being then engaged in
lace-making, which seemed to me of much better quality, if not
finer, than that made by ordinary sane persons. Indeed, report
states, the article manufactured in this establishment is highly
esteemed, from its unusual cleanness and beautiful texture;
these qualities being particularly noticed in a lace veil lately
presented to H.11.H. the Duchess of Brabant. Subsequently, a
large party were noticed at dinner, who then conducted themselves
quietly, the same as ordinary persons, and really behaved very like
rational creatures. In another apartment, upwards of a dozen
young females?all idiots or imbeciles?were assembled at their
singing-lesson, under the tuition of a zealous "sister." These
poor girls sung delightfully, accompanied by their teacher on
the piano, which made quite a musical treat; and as several
juvenile performers were blind or dumb, while their execution
hence seemed more surprising, this unexpected performance by
intellectually bedimmed and unfortunate fellow-creatures caused
us greater gratification. Many inmates seemed helpless from
physical infirmities; but, considering their previous position in the
external world, they now lived comparatively more comfortable.
The number of resident lunatics under treatment, on the day
of my visit, amounted to 26i) altogether, of whom 201 were
considered incurables, and twenty-five as doubtful, in reference
to any prospect of ultimate recovery ; the remainder being
classed as curable or recent cases. The agitated patients were
reported at fifty; the epileptics comprised forty-seven examples ;
whilst the dirty furnished thirty instances. No person was
under restraint of any kind whatever, nor in seclusion. Indeed,
it may be added that, physical coercion in any form is very
seldom employed at this establishment; the great objects con-
stantly kept in view being to amuse and occupy the inmates,
whereby tranquillity becomes promoted, at the same time that
such means tend to improve their mental condition.
About half the entire population are usually engaged in some
kind of employment Many zealously spend hours in lace-
making?the common occupation of females in this part of Flan-
ders. Numbers work as mantua-makers; others in the laundry,
and at wool-picking; besides a large proportion who attend to
household and domestic duties; as, also, knitting stockings, or
in making and mending clothes ; of which the amount annually
accomplished is considerable. It must however be added, that M.
74 NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
Guislain does not consider the quantity of work done as always
an unerring criterion of its utility. He even objects to any
excessive development of physical labour in confined apartments,
or close workshops, as thus imparting to the establishment an
aspect of being a factory, a prison, or like ordinary depots of men-
dicity. Further, M. Guislain thinks, unless the occupation chosen
is carried out with discernment and caution, it may aggravate a
lunatic's malady ; whilst bodily labour which is severe, fatiguing,
or too long continued, may do much harm; nay, even render the
mental disease incurable.
During the past year seventy-seven new patieuts were ad-
mitted, and sixteen discharged cured, the deaths reported being
thirty-two ; thereby showing that recoveries were few, and fatal
cases numerous. Amongst the latter, nine were cases of demen-
tia, seven melancholia, and four general paralysis ; the rest being
mania and other varieties. Viewed with reference to the chief
pathological phenomena observed, chest diseases were most
numerous, affections of the abdominal viscera followed next,
whilst the cerebral and nervous system supplied the fewest fatal
illustrations.
Somewhat analogous to the experience observed amongst male
patients, in reference to particular causes producing insanity, it
may be also said that, moral influences were frequently reported,
of which anxiety, chagrin, family misfortunes, devotion, and reli-
gious exaltation, seemed the most common ; whereas the abuse of
intoxicating liquors was very rarely observed. On the other
hand, affections of the sexual organs, and disordered catamenia,
not unfrequently appeared to have been a marked exciting cause
of mental disease amongst female inmates.
Similar to the asylum for males, the medical staff at this insti-
tution consists of one attending physician, M. Guislain?its pre-
siding genius?one consulting surgeon, and Dr Vermeulen, the
assistant physician ; all being non-resident. Besides tho " Sceur
Supdrieure " there are also thirty-one Sisters of Charity ; of whom
one is secretary, another music-mistress, while others are teachers
of various departments, and chief superintendents; as also in other
capacities, throughout different wards. To these, ten lay-female
servants, with seven assistants, must be added ; thus making
altogether forty-eight actual attendants for 261) patients, or one
to every six lunatic inmates.
Irrespective of tho ordinary officials now enumerated, usually
three male domestics belong to this establishment, who act as
porters, messengers, and in out-door employments. Such appen-
dages become absolutely necessary, when readers are informed,
Ao "sceur religieuse" attached to the institution ever goes
beyond its threshold; that being contrary to her sacred vows.
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. lO
To these estimable females external society is closed for ever.
Niglit and day must be wholly spent in assisting afflicted fellow-
creatures. They sleep constantly on straw, and are devoid of all
toilet luxuries; frequently fast, and pass much time in prayer,
both late and early, at all seasons; yea, even when others are
sound asleep. In truth, their whole existence seems a life of
devotion and virtual self-sacrifice, which they here dedicate
entirely to alleviate the sufferings of those insane persons who
have come under surveillance. With reference to such sisters,
one important feature should be further stated?viz., all rise regu-
larly at 3"o0 A.M., notwithstanding they were previously out of
bed to assist at early religious duties in chapel, and although
perhaps called up during night-time, to visit patients on emer-
gencies. Many of the above enthusiastically unselfish ladies are
persons of family, who have retired from the outer world with
its varied allurements, so as to employ their mental energies and
physical strength in attending upon the sick and unfortunate,
without any prospect of fee or reward, on this side the grave.
Nay, " scours" of the class described will frequently undergo pri-
vations, in order to assist others when required; and some will
also contentedly injure present health, or peril life, in the great
cause of benevolence, while aiding frail humanity.
Adjoining this establishment, but quite distinct in respect of
all domestic arrangements, yet still under the same board of
management, a " Maison de Sante" is attached, which has an
entrance in the adjacent " Rue d'Assaut." This female precinct
is exclusively appropriated for the reception of private insane
patients, who pay from GOO to 3000 francs annually. The house
in which they lodge is a large, commodious, and well-furnished
mansion, having in front one small, although rather pretty garden.
When I visited this department the number of inmates amounted
to sixty lunatics, with fourteen Sisters of Charity, seven female
servants, and two assistants. Thus making, altogether, eighty-two
persons living within its enclosure; and hence, giving the propor-
tion of one sane to nearly every three insane residents. M. Guis-
lain is superintending physician, while the same assistant also
officiates who is attached to the asylum for indigents.
3. The Strop " Maison de Saute."?Another establishment
must likewise be noticed, although briefly, in connexion with the
institutions for insane patients, located in or near Ghent, and to
which M. Guislain is the attending physician, besides being further
under the same directing management as the preceding. This
asylum occupies an elevation not far from one of the city gates,
is well ventilated, and has been constructed in an apparently salu-
brious locality. When I visited the institution, various build-
ings were in course of construction, including a new kitchen, and
7G NOTES ON BELGIAN LUNATIC ASYLUMS,
dormitory for dirty patients, in order thereby to afford additional
accommodation. There is also a rather pretty garden attached.
Still, to my apprehension, the whole enclosure then seemed too
limited in extent for its present large population. Fifty patients
were under treatment, all being of the upper and middle classes
of society. The payments for board vary from GOO to 3000
francs annually; but sometimes beyond that sum, and even up to
6000 is paid, when any inmate requires a "fr&re" as his exclu-
sive attendant, with also one or two apartments.
The head authority, or chief manager of this establishment is
a clergyman, designated " Le ph*e supfrieur." Besides having
several lay-servants, for menial occupations, he has also under
his direction twenty "frh'cs religieux," attached to an order
whose denomination has escaped my remembrance. These offi-
cials overlook the various departments, and perform different
assigned duties. In fact, they constitute the only attendants upon
the patients ; no female being ever permitted to remain within the
forbidden precincts?to them?of this " sanctum insanoram."
Moreover, unless in reference to medical treatment, with its chief
direction, the whole internal management and discipline of this in-
stitution remains specially subjected to clerical superintendence.
During the past year, sixteen new patients were admitted, and
seven discharged cured, while six deaths were reported. Hence,
here as elsewhere, the ratio of recoveries proved small, and that
ol deaths large; when their several proportions are calculated
according to the number of admissions.
4. The New Asylum.?Before taking leave of Ghent, and its
insane establishments, some brief remarks respecting the largo
public asylum now constructing for indigent male lunatics, will
neither seem out of place nor uninteresting. The locality chosen
is situated at a short distance beyond the Bruges-gate, and
occupies an agreeable, open position, not overlooked by any other
buildings ; while otherwise it appears well selected for the pur-
pose proposed. The structure is palatial-looking, has the form ot
a horse-shoe, rises two stories high, with various collateral appen-
dages; and lastly, an elegant chapel will occupy its centre. The
original plan and general programme was traced by M. Ouislain ;
wholesales being an eminent physician and zealous cultivator
o science, is likewise an excellent practical engineer and archi-
tect. Hie execution and final completion of the entire building
las been entrusted to M. Pauli, well known in Belgium as a man
ot talent; and may be, it is confidently expected, ready for the
^?V0l\ ? l^ien^s about eighteen months hence, or early in
o , w len t leie will exist altogether accommodation for 300
insane residents.
Ihe erection of this public institution virtually constitutes a
INCLUDING THE INSANE COLONY OF GHEEL. 77
new era in Belgium, witli reference to the management of luna-
tics; being the first receptacle of the kind in this country ex-
pressly constructed for their reception. It is likewise an eloquent
manifestation of the great progress which has recently taken place
in public opinion, respecting the objects to be kept constantly in
view, wherever insane persons are brought together, for the pur-
pose of treatment and protection. The new building, when
finished, must further serve as a model for other establishments
of the same description, which cannot fail to be constructed,
before any long period elapses, in various Belgian provinces, now
wholly devoid of such accommodation. Lastly, it is likely to
become one of the most remarkable institutions throughout
Europe, appropriated solely as an asylum for the insane.
The hospital administration of Ghent and general Government
have both contributed towards the expenses incurred, which must
amount to nearly a million of francs, before the whole structure is
finished. But the money will be well expended, although hyper-
critics may likely say that too much has been laid out on its
external embellishments, ^ornamented turret-looking chimneys,
and minutely indented cornices. Such parties ought, however,
to recollect that, being the first public asylum erected under
government sanction, if it attracts more attention and discussion,
even upon similar points, so much the better. Nay, should de-
tractors object" to place paupers in palaces," which might be most
justly said, occurs in the present instance, other provinces can
avoid committing a similar error, in regard to future analogous
establishments, by attending chiefly to internal arrangements.
Judging from the portion already finished, the entire construc-
tion will certainly prove very fine and imposing. The dormito-
ries are not too large, or intended to contain so many inmates,
as numerous similar apartments often seen on the Continent.
They are lofty, spacious, and properly ventilated; having win-
dows of greater magnitude than ordinary. Nowhere, unless at
the new asylum of Auxerre, in France, have the sleeping rooms
pleased me so much as those I noticed at this institution. Indeed,
altogether, they appeared of a very superior description.
Amongst many excellences which characterize its general
features, in my opinion, the court intended for agitated patients
is an exception, from not seeming well adapted for the purpose
proposed. Being placed outside the round portion of this horse-
shoe-figured building, it wilt thus be more difficult to exercise
constant surveillance over numerous excited inmates, than in
square enclosures. A greater number of attendants will hence
be required ; while one, at least, must always station himself near
the central concave part of the outer encircling wall, in order to
overlook, at the same time, as large a portion as possible of this
78 PHILOSOPHICAL MEDICINE.
really extensive enclosure. Still, that arrangement cannot re-
move the above objection; consequently, either more assistants
will become necessary, or the space now intended for one must
ultimately form two divisions.
Irrespective, however, of so very minor a fault in detail, and,
perhaps, some other objections equally unimportant, there is yet
no question regarding the undoubted superiority of this new
construction, in every essential feature, over all previous asylums,
appropriated for receiving lunatic patients, throughout Belgium.
It cannot otherwise prove than of inestimable value to the
afflicted insane poor of that country, and reflects great credit on
the Government who promoted, as also those provinces con-
tributing towards raising such an elegant structure. But to no
person whatever will honour be more deservedly due than to M.
Guislain?the original projector, who continues most zealous in
his endeavours to ensure its perfectand final completicn. Hjnce,
the edifice should be named L'Asile Guislain."
(To be conti med.)
